BACKGROUND
during the different phases of the life cycle of mycorrhizal fungi several morphological, genetic and metabolic modifications are induced in both symbiotic partners  <cit> . it is well known that morphological modifications of some fungal species are determined by deep cytoskeleton network modifications. the cytoskeleton is involved in cytoplasm distribution and reorganization, contributes to the cell shape definition and plays a key role in cell motility and mitosis in several organisms. in filamentous fungi cytoskeleton reorganization controls the continuous deposition of glycoprotein and lipid material assigned to the membrane and cell wall synthesis, making polarized apical growth possible  <cit> . changes in cytoskeleton reorganization have been observed in symbioses between different fungal species and specific host plant species   <cit> .

little is known regarding these molecular processes in fungi belonging to the genus tuber. investigations carried out in the last decade have led to the identification of several genes and proteins mainly involved in the hyphal membrane and cell wall development, such as chitin synthase, protein kinase c, cell cycle regulator p <dig> and phospholipase a <dig>  <cit> . further studies performed on the interacting in vitro model tuber borchii-tilia americana, where the two partners exchange molecular signals without physical contact, have allowed us to identify genes involved in polarized apical growth and host tissue infection  <cit> . however, very limited information is available on the signaling pathways that regulate cytoskeleton reorganization during the truffle life cycle. in a previous work we showed that t. borchii cdc <dig> is involved in the polarized growth and that it has a fundamental role in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . cdc <dig>  together with rac and rho, belongs to the rho family of small gtp binding proteins. rho gtpases are involved primarily in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, hence in all cell processes linked to morphological modifications, such as cytokinesis, cell motility, vacuole trafficking, secretion and apoptosis in all eukaryotes, and more recently it has been shown that they are also upstream of complex signaling pathways that modulate gene expression and cell growth  <cit> .

rho gtpases function as tightly regulated molecular switches. the cycling between the gtp-bound  and the gdp bound  state is regulated by three classes of proteins. guanine nucleotide exchange factors  stimulate the gtp-gdp exchange reaction, whereas gtpase-activating proteins  stimulate the intrinsic gtpase activity. gdp-dissociation inhibitors  constitute an additional regulatory element. rhogdis were initially named after their ability to inhibit the spontaneous dissociation of bound guanine nucleotide  from their partner gtpases. they have been regarded mostly as housekeeping regulators that distribute rho proteins equally to any membrane. recent in vitro studies have revealed how their modularity allows them to function both in the cytoplasm and at the membrane interfaces. by interacting with rhogdi binding proteins, by phosphorylation or upon alterations in the lipid composition of membranes they can actively contribute to the delivery of rho proteins to specific subcellular membranes and signaling pathways  <cit> . several proteins, named displacement factors, have been shown to interact with rhogdis and modulate their activity in that they have the ability, upon over-expression, to decrease the amount of soluble rho-rhogdi complexes and to increase the amount of gtp-bound rho proteins  <cit> . candidate displacement factors are proteins of the ezrin/radixin/moesin family, the tyrosine kinase etk and the p <dig> neurotropin receptor that have been described to induce the release of rhoa from rhogdi  <cit> .

rhogdi proteins are widespread among eukaryotes. significant deepening in the functional knowledge of rhogdis has been achieved in mammals and in dictyostelium discoideum, in many cases through generation of knockout strains. in mammals the rhogdi family comprises three members: the ubiquitously expressed archetypal rhogdiα   <cit> ; rhogdiβ , which has hematopoietic tissue-specific expression  <cit> , and rhogdiγ , which is membrane-anchored through an amphipatic helix  <cit> . disruption of gdi <dig>  one of the two rhogdi homologs of d. discoideum, has allowed detailed functional analyses at the cellular level, uncovering a central role in the regulation of rho signaling and consequently actin reorganization  <cit> . while the role of rho gtpases in polar growth in fungi is well established, little is known about the roles of rhogdi proteins in this kingdom. in s. cerevisiae the ability of rdi <dig>  the only rhogdi homolog, to remove cdc <dig> from the plasma membrane is not essential for cell growth, but overexpression results in increased sequestering of cdc <dig> in the cytoplasm and growth arrest  <cit> . rdi <dig> is essentially a cytoplasmic protein that localizes to the plasma membrane at the tips of small-sized buds and the mother-bud neck region  <cit> . recent studies showed that the interaction of rdi <dig> with cdc <dig> was enhanced at sites of polarized cell growth during the cell cycle, like incipient bud sites, tips and sides of small- and medium-sized buds, and the mother-bud neck region  <cit> .

in order to improve the knowledge on the complex molecular mechanisms responsible for the morphological changes during tuber life cycle, we have undertaken the characterization of the gene encoding a rhogdi homolog in tuber borchii vittad. the tbgdi gene is expressed at higher levels in the presence of the symbiotic host or root exudates. in yeast two-hybrid and translocation assays tbrhogdi was found to interact with tbcdc <dig>  because s. cerevisiae was not suitable as a surrogate model for functional studies, the cellular role of tbrhogdi was addressed in heterologous complementation experiments in the model organism d. discoideum where the roles of rho signaling pathways are well established  <cit> .

RESULTS
cloning and sequence analysis of tuber borchii rhogdi
a previously identified cdna fragment encoding a rhogdi homolog of t. borchii  <cit>  was used as a probe to screen a cdna library of t. borchii vegetative mycelium and  <dig> positive clones were isolated. the longest clone,  <dig> bp in length, was entirely sequenced and shown to contain an orf of  <dig> bp encoding a protein of  <dig> amino acids with an estimated molecular mass of  <dig>  da . the gene, named tbgdi, showed the highest homology with rhogdi of neosartorya fischeri. a  <dig> bp long 5' untranslated region , and a 3'-utr of  <dig> bp were present. in southern analyses the tbgdi dna probe detected two bands in each ecori and scai digest, suggesting that tbgdi is a two-copy gene . digestion with bamhi yielded only one band, but the more intense signal leads us to conclude that the restriction fragment contains both the two copies of the tbgdi gene and that the two copies lie rather close each other. alternatively one can assume that bamhi generates two co-migrating fragments, each containing a copy of the tbgdi gene, but since bamhi cuts rather infrequently in the t. borchii genome, the first explanation appears more convincing.

the whole tbgdi genomic sequence was subsequently obtained using two pairs of primers designed at the 3' and 5' ends of tbgdi cdna and genomic dna from mycelium as a target. the comparison between the genomic and cdna sequences allowed us to identify five introns in the coding region, of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> base pairs, respectively. in addition a  <dig> bp long intron was detected in the 5'-utr region. all the introns showed 5' and 3' consensus splicing sites typical of filamentous fungi  <cit>  . upstream from the atg start codon we identified an adenine in - <dig> position  in agreement with the consensus kozak sequence  <cit> .

the amino acid sequence comparison with diverse rhogdi proteins  recognized the two functional domains characteristic of this protein family as revealed by biochemical and structural studies: a short n-terminal regulatory domain  linked by residues 56– <dig> to a c-terminal domain with β-barrel structure   <cit> . the c-terminal domain has an immunoglobulin-like fold that contains a hydrophobic pocket for insertion of the isoprenyl moiety of the rho gtpase. the non-polar residues that form this pocket are conserved in tbrhogdi , particularly the "hydrophobic triad" constituted by l <dig>  f <dig> and w <dig> of bovine rhogdi, corresponding to l <dig>  f <dig> and w <dig> of tbrhogdi . this triad is critical for the formation of the binding site for the distal isoprene unit. most residues involved in the formation of an acidic patch at the hydrophobic pocket are also present in tbrhogdi . these residues interact with the polybasic region at the c-terminus of the rho gtpases. the deduced amino acid sequence of tbrhogdi also shows that most residues involved in interactions with rho-gtpases  are also conserved in tbrhogdi.

a phylogenetic tree shows the position of tbrhogdi in the context of a broad sample of rhogdi proteins from other fungal species and representative members of animal, plant and amoebozoan rhogdi proteins . from the tree it becomes evident that rhogdis from different phyla group in distinct clusters. tbrhogdi clearly groups with all other fungal rhogdis, and is found in a cluster with sequences from ascomycetes, clearly separated from the basidiomycetes c. neoformans and u. maydis. consequently, similarity of tbrhogdi to fungal rhogdis was high , and similarity to rhogdis from other phyla ranged between 49% and 57% .

expression analyses by real time pcr: a comparison between tbgdi and tbcdc42
in order to evaluate tbgdi expression in the vegetative mycelium in the absence  or presence of the symbiotic host , and in the presence of volatile organic compounds from root exudates  we set up a quantitative real time pcr assay. we designed a suitable primer pair with a high melting temperature encompassing a splice junction to prevent genomic amplification; hence non-specific products were not generated. the average ct values for tbgdi were normalized against average ct values for the 18s rrna. the expression differences in the three tissues were extrapolated using the Δct average of the driver as a calibrator. in the presence of the plant , the fungus expressed a  <dig> -fold increased amount of tbgdi mrna while the stimulated samples  showed an expression slightly below four-fold that of the control samples  . the differences among the Δct medians of the analyzed samples were statistically significant . these expression results were compared with those previously reported for tbcdc <dig>  <cit> , in order to highlight the tight link between the two proteins. for both genes a higher expression in the presence of the plant and of root exudates was observed, although the increase of tbcdc <dig> in the tsa samples was more pronounced than that of tbgdi.

interaction of tbrhogdi with rho gtpases
to date only one cdc <dig> homolog has been described in t. borchii  <cit> . we therefore investigated whether tbrhogdi is able to interact with tbcdc <dig> using a yeast two-hybrid approach. for reasons that are explained below, we extended our analysis to several rhogtpases of d. discoideum  and human  as well as to s. cerevisiae cdc <dig> . we observed a strong interaction of tbrhogdi with tbcdc <dig>  additionally, tbrhogdi interacted with human cdc <dig>  but not with rac <dig> or rhoa. surprisingly, tbrhogdi did not show interaction with s. cerevisiae cdc <dig> in the yeast two-hybrid analysis. when dictyostelium rho gtpses were examined, we observed good interaction with rac <dig> isoforms, but not with several other rho gtpases. we verified the interaction of tbrhogdi with tbcdc <dig> using a translocation assay with recombinant his-tagged tbrhogdi . this assay tests the ability of a rhogdi to solubilize a prenylated rho gtpase from a membrane preparation, an activity that is characteristic of rhogdis.

complementation of a dictyostelium rhogdi null strain with diverse rhogdis
the slow growth of t. borchii and the paucity of genetics tools available make studies at the molecular level very difficult in this organism. the absence of interaction of tbrhogdi with yeast cdc <dig> in spite of the overall higher similarity of tbrhogdi to other fungal orthologs precluded the use of s. cerevisiae for functional studies. when overexpressed, the yeast rhogdi brings about a reduction in the growth rate, and the same effect has been reported when mammalian rhogdi is introduced into yeast  <cit> . in agreement with the yeast two-hybrid data, we observed that tbrhogdi is unable to cause growth inhibition when expressed in s. cerevisiae .

in order to gain insight into the role of tbrhogdi, we switched to the genetically tractable model organism dictyostelium discoideum. in this organism deletion of the gene encoding a typical rhogdi results in low growth and accumulation of multinucleate cells as well as in an altered f-actin polymerization response upon camp stimulation. these defects can be reverted by re-expression of the ablated protein  <cit> . we used this gdi1- strain to investigate whether expression of tbrhogdi could restore the defects observed in these cells. for comparison, we included in this study two mammalian rhogdi proteins, bovine rhogdi and human lygdi.

we first investigated the ability of the two mammalian rhogdi proteins to interact with d. discoideum rhogtpases in the two-hybrid assay. in these experiments lygdi was found to interact with rac1a/1b/1c and racb . our attempts to use bovine rhogdi as prey for the two-hybrid analysis were not successful, presumably because this protein interferes with the rho signaling system of yeast  <cit> . we therefore used translocation assays with purified bacterially expressed his-tagged rhogdi and observed clear interaction with rac1a and racb, weak interaction with race and no interaction with racf <dig>  a pattern similar to that of d. discoideum gdi <dig> .

we then introduced gfp fusions of tbrhogdi, rhogdi and lygdi into the gdi1- strain. each rescue strain expressed the corresponding fusion protein of the expected size. expression levels were comparable to those of the strain re-expressing d. discoideum gdi <dig>  which in turn were similar to the endogenous levels . expression of bovine rhogdi  resulted in a complete reversion of the growth and cytokinesis defects characteristic of gdi1- cells . by contrast, expression of tbrhogdi or lygdi  did not revert the growth defect . the cytokinesis defect was restored only partially after expression of tbrhogdi, whereas lygdi had no effect . the failure of tbrhogdi and lygdi to restore the growth and cytokinesis defects cannot be explained by non-uniform expression levels of the fusion proteins in the cell populations because we observed giant multinucleate cells displaying higher than average fluorescence levels.

upon camp stimulation fast and highly transient changes in the f-actin content take place in d. discoideum cells that correlate with changes in cell behaviour  <cit> . five seconds after stimulation a  <dig> -fold increase in the amount of f-actin was observed in the wild type strain that decreased rapidly to basal levels after  <dig> seconds. a second much lower peak followed immediately and lasted until approximately  <dig> seconds. this response is in part dependent on rhogdi, because gdi1- cells showed a significantly lower increase in the first f-actin peak , whereas the second peak was not altered . again, expression of bovine rhogdi, but not of tbrhogdi or lygdi resulted in a reversion of the actin polymerization response. interestingly, tbrhogdi had a negative effect in the actin polymerization response of the gdi- cells, with a reduced and slightly prolonged first peak and an abolished second peak .

discussion
in this study we focused on the role of rhogdi during the pre-symbiotic phase and its interaction with the small gtpase cdc <dig>  in this phase, with the culture system used here, the fungal hyphae grow gathering along the roots and start branching, suggesting that the mycelium is able to respond to molecular messengers secreted by the plant. among the messenger signal molecules, volatile organic compounds secreted by the host plant roots may play a fundamental role, as showed by gene expression analyses performed on tsa samples  <cit> . we hypothesize that the molecules present in the root exudates activate chemotactic and morphogenetic processes in fungal hyphae. in analogy to what happens in pathogenic fungi during an infection event  <cit> , communication events with its host plants can occur also in t. borchii, leading in both partners to a coordinated program of gene expression, probably activated by a map kinase cascade controlled by cdc <dig>  in fact, cdc <dig>  recently characterized also in t. borchii  <cit>  has, like other rho-like proteins, a key role in signal transduction pathways that regulate gene expression and consequently represents one of the main modulators of cytoskeleton reorganization during polar growth  <cit> .

gene expression analyses showed that tbgdi expresses almost two-fold as much when the host plant is present and four-fold when root exudates are added to the medium, and this behavior correlated with that of tbcdc <dig>  an increased expression of both genes in the presence of the host plant and/or of root exudates induces the fungus to prepare itself to the development of mycorrhizal symbiosis, making it to get physically closer to the plant roots through the prime of branching events and polar growth. the similar pattern of expression of both genes might reflect their strict functional link: the small gtpase tbcdc <dig> is modulated by tbrhogdi, which would extract tbcdc <dig> from the cell membranes and sequester it in the cytoplasm. an increase of mycelium growing and branching during the pre-symbiosis phase is supported also by the evidence that several genes differentially expressed in this step, like syntaxin binding protein, aspartic protease and centractin-like protein  <cit> , are involved in vescicular transport and cell wall construction, events indispensable for cell growing.

rhogdi proteins are fairly conserved among eukaryotes. the high degree of conservation and the numerous crystallographic structures available in the swiss-prot database allowed to deduce the virtual three-dimensional structure of tbrhogdi and verify the three-dimensional shape of the predicted domains . the predicted three-dimensional structure revealed the presence of active sites matching those of rhogdi in other eukaryotes, mainly fungi. the slight amino acidic differences observed are unlikely to cause any gross functional changes, but might explain the restricted pattern of interactions with rho gtpases observed in this study. we hypothesized that tbrhogdi may have the same functions that it has in other organisms, more specifically fungi. to date functional studies are difficult in tuber cells due to the slow growth and the absence of tools to generate genetically modified strains. the experience gathered from previous studies on agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation of ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes such as suillus bovinus  <cit>  and hebeloma cylindrosporum  <cit>  has only recently been applied to tuber  <cit> , but unfortunately this technology is not yet widespread. to address the role of tbrhogdi we have made use of genetically tractable model organisms in which rho signaling is well studied: d. discoideum  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae  <cit> . as revealed in the yeast two-hybrid experiments, it appears that tbrhogdi is tailored to interact preferentially with cdc <dig> but displays an exquisite specificity, as it did not interact with the yeast ortholog, thus precluding the use of this organism for further studies.

d. discoideum belongs to the amoebozoa and undergoes a characteristic life cycle that alternates a single cell stage as free living amoeba with a multicellular stage that ends with the formation of a fruiting body. the formation of the multicellular structure requires the establishment of cell polarity and the migration towards an aggregation center, a process in which rho signaling plays a key role in orchestrating the remodeling of the cytoskeleton  <cit> . taking advantage of the genetic tractability of d. discoideum, we performed heterologous complementation experiments. tbrhogdi, bovine rhogdi <dig> and human lygdi were introduced successfully in a d. discoideum strain lacking gdi <dig>  we observed that only bovine rhogdi <dig>  which displays a nearly identical pattern of specificity towards rho gtpases like the d. discoideum homolog, was able to fully revert the cytokinesis, growth and actin polymerization defects of the gdi1- strain. interestingly, lygdi, despite of having a spectrum of interactions not very divergent from that of rhogdi <dig>  failed to compensate the functions of the d. discoideum gdi <dig>  a possible explanation for this failure is the lower affinity for binding to cdc <dig> and probably other mammalian rho gtpases reported for lygdi  <cit>  that might extend to the dictyostelium rho gtpases. in agreement with the restricted pattern of interaction with the set of rho gtpases from d. discoideum, tbrhogdi was unable to revert any of the phenotypes of the gdi1- strain. leaving aside the possibility that tbrhogdi does not display the sufficient affinity for dictyostelium rac <dig>  the missing interaction with racb could also contribute to the absent compensation, as racb is also required for an efficient actin polymerization response  <cit> . interestingly, tbrhogdi had a negative effect on the actin polymerization response, which can mean that still tbrhogdi is able to interact with other signaling components apart from rho gtpases. this observation is in accord with the recent recognition of several binding partners that modulate the activity of rhogdi, the so-called displacement factors  <cit> , that could be sequestered by tbrhogdi resulting in altered signaling to the cytoskeleton.

CONCLUSIONS
t. borchii expresses a functional rhogdi homolog that appears to be tailored to interact specifically with tbcdc <dig>  the specificity of tbrhogdi actions was underscored by its inability to elicit a growth defect in s. cerevisiae or to compensate the loss of a d. discoideum rhogdi. our results represent a starting point to understand, yet in the pre-infection phase, the mechanisms that lead to the development of ectomycorrhiza in t. borchii. further studies will allow better understanding the role of tbrhogdi in the organization of the complex network of events underlying symbiosis instauration. the future availability of tuber knock out strains might improve our knowledge of the cell signaling at the basis of cytoskeleton reorganization of this ectomycorrhizal fungus, which might in turn lead to improvements in the production of mycorrhized plant seedlings used in timberland extension programs and fruit body production.

