BACKGROUND
intracellular signaling activated by the wnt family of secreted cysteine-rich glycoproteins is crucial for embryonic development, stem cell self-renewal and adult homeostasis  <cit> . more recently, dysregulation of wnt signaling has been linked to a range of human diseases, especially cancer  <cit> . for instance, canonical wnt/β-catenin signaling is aberrantly activated in greater than 70% of colorectal cancers, promoting cancer cell proliferation, survival and migration  <cit> . accordingly, the wnt/β-catenin pathway has gained recognition as an enticing molecular target for cancer therapeutics  <cit> . in this signaling cascade, β-catenin plays a pivotal role as a transcriptional coactivator  <cit> . in the absence of a wnt ligand, cytoplasmic β-catenin becomes phosphorylated by casein kinase  <dig>  and glycogen synthase kinase  <dig>  in a complex containing the tumor suppressors axin and adenomatous polyposis coli , and is targeted for ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation  <cit> . wnt binding to the seven transmembrane frizzled  receptors and the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein  co-receptors, lrp <dig> and lrp <dig>  triggers recruitment of axin to the plasma membrane, resulting in inhibition of β-catenin phosphorylation and degradation  <cit> . as a consequence, β-catenin accumulates in the cytoplasm and then translocates into the nucleus where it forms a complex with the t-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer factor  family of transcription factors, leading to activation of target genes  <cit> .

we previously reported a β-catenin antagonist chibby   <cit> . the human cby protein is composed of  <dig> amino acids, and is highly conserved throughout evolution. cby physically interacts with the c-terminal activation domain of β-catenin. our recent crystal structural studies for a full-length β-catenin suggest that cby binds to the helix c located at the c-terminal end of the central armadillo repeat region of β-catenin  <cit> . cby functions as a repressor of β-catenin by competing with tcf/lef factors for β-catenin binding. reduction of cby protein levels in drosophila melanogaster embryos by rna interference  results in hyperactivation of this pathway  <cit> , underscoring the biological importance of cby's function. using in vitro cell culture models, we demonstrated that cby facilitates adipocyte and cardiomyocyte differentiation of pluripotent stem cells through inhibition of β-catenin signaling  <cit> . more recently, we isolated 14-3- <dig> adaptor proteins as novel cby-binding partners  <cit> . upon phosphorylation of cby serine  <dig> by akt kinase, cby and 14-3- <dig> form a stable trimolecular complex with β-catenin, and cooperate to promote cytoplasmic localization of β-catenin, leading to down-regulation of β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation. therefore, we proposed a new model in which inhibition of β-catenin signaling by cby involves at least two distinct molecular mechanisms, i.e. competing with tcf/lef transcription factors for binding to β-catenin in the nucleus  <cit> , and facilitating nuclear export of β-catenin via interaction with 14-3- <dig>  following phosphorylation of cby serine  <dig> by akt  <cit> .

through comparison of cby protein sequences across species, we noted that cby contains a conserved putative coiled-coil motif in its c-terminal region  <cit> . in a later study, hidaka et al. performed a yeast two-hybrid screen using full-length human cby as bait, and pulled out cby itself  <cit> . their subsequent deletion analysis indicated that the c-terminal region of human cby protein encompassing the coiled-coil domain  is prerequisite for its self-association. however, the nature of cby homooligomers and specific amino acid residues responsible for cby self-assembly has remained to be elucidated.

in the present study, we report that cby forms a stable homodimer via its c-terminal leucine zipper coiled-coil domain. using a variety of cby point mutants generated by site-directed mutagenesis, we found that four leucine residues in the c-terminal heptad-repeat region are responsible for cby homodimerization. we also show that cby mutants defective in homodimer formation are capable of both binding to β-catenin and antagonizing its signaling activity. more importantly, we provide evidence that cby homodimerization is necessary for its efficient binding to the nuclear import receptor importin-α and subsequent nuclear import.

RESULTS
cby forms a stable oligomer
cby has been shown to interact with itself using the conventional yeast two-hybrid system  <cit> . in order to confirm and further extend this observation, we examined whether cby forms a complex with itself in mammalian cultured cells by coimmunoprecipitation experiments . cell lysates from human embryonic kidney  293t cells co-transfected with myc- and flag-tagged cby expression constructs were immunoprecipitated with anti-myc antibody and analyzed by western blotting using anti-flag antibody. a specific interaction was reproducibly observed between the cby proteins .

next, split synthetic renilla luciferase  assays  <cit>  were employed as an independent means to verify the cby-cby interaction. to this end, cby or negative control gfp was fused in-frame to the n-terminal portion of hrluc  or to the c-terminal portion of hrluc . physical interactions between fusion proteins would bring the n-terminal and c-terminal portions of hrluc together and restore its activity. the constructs were transfected into hek293t cells in various combinations and hrluc activities were measured. as shown in figure 1b, co-transfection of empty vectors  or cby- and gfp-hrluc fusion plasmids  produced only a basal level of hrluc activity. in contrast, robust hrluc activity was observed when cby-rn and cby-rc were coexpressed. we also utilized a cell-permeable substrate for renilla luciferase  to detect protein-protein interactions in live cells in real time. figure 1c demonstrates that transient co-transfection of cby-rn and cby-rc expression vectors into hek293t cells resulted in a high luminescence value, whereas either vector in combination with an empty plasmid  generated only low background luminescence. interactions between cby and the well-established basic leucine zipper  coiled-coil transcription factors, jun and fos, were also tested using the viviren live cell substrate. no marked luminescence was detected when cby-rn and fos-rc or jun-rn and cby-rc were coexpressed in hek293t cells, compared to that of jun-fos and cby-cby interactions, suggesting that the cby-cby interaction is specific.

furthermore, we examined the stability of the cby oligomer . flag-cby and ha-cby expression plasmids were co-transfected into hek293t cells, and cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-ha antibody. the immunoprecipitates were then exposed to increasing concentrations of nacl or urea as indicated, resolved by sds-page, and analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-flag antibody. essentially, a similar amount of flag-cby was detected in the presence of up to  <dig> m nacl or  <dig> m urea. these results indicate that the cby oligomer is highly stable and that both electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions may contribute to the stability of the cby complex.

cby is present as a homodimer
to gain insights into the oligomeric nature of cby, we performed gel filtration chromatography. his-tagged cby was purified from stable hek293t cells using nickel beads and applied to a superdex  <dig> column. following fractionation, each fraction was examined by immunoblotting using anti-cby antibody. as shown in figure 2a, cby eluted as a broad single peak centered at fraction  <dig>  corresponding to a molecular weight of about  <dig> kda. since the molecular weight of a his-cby monomer is  <dig> kda, we estimated that cby is most likely to be present as a homodimer.

as an independent means, we conducted glutaraldehyde cross-linking analysis. for this purpose, his-tagged cby was transiently expressed in hek293t cells, and purified using nickel beads. the purified cby protein was then incubated in the presence or absence of glutaraldehyde for  <dig> or  <dig> min, and the cross-linked proteins were resolved by sds-page, followed by western blot analysis with anti-cby antibody . as expected, in the absence of glutaraldehyde, his-cby had an apparent monomer molecular weight of  <dig> kda. on the other hand, after incubating with glutaraldehyde, his-cby migrated slower at a higher molecular weight of approximately  <dig> kda. similar results were also observed using dimethyl suberimidate , another cross-linking reagent that contains a longer spacer arm . all together, these results suggest that cby predominantly exists as a homodimer.

cby harbors a putative leucine zipper coiled-coil motif in its c-terminal region
in our previous study  <cit> , through inspection of the cby protein sequence, we noted the presence of a putative coiled-coil motif in its c-terminal region. coiled coils are a supercoiled bundle of α-helices known to mediate protein oligomerization  <cit> . further analysis of the human cby amino acid sequence using the coils program  <cit>  predicted a high probability of an α-helical coiled-coil structure extending from amino acids  <dig> to  <dig> . visual examination of this segment revealed four leucine residues that appear at every seventh position , characteristic of a leucine zipper coiled-coil motif  <cit> . the sequence alignment of the cby coiled-coil domain across species shows that these four leucines are perfectly conserved in vertebrate cby homologues. on the contrary, only the first two leucine residues  are conserved in fruit fly d. melanogaster cby. nonetheless, the corresponding region of d. melanogaster cby was also predicted to form a coiled-coil structure by the coils program , signifying the functional importance of this domain. as depicted in figure 3c, the coiled-coil domain of human cby comprises four consecutive heptad repeats with amino acid positions labeled as a-g. helical wheel projection of this region illustrates that the d positions are lined with leucine residues , as typically observed in bzip transcription factors  <cit> . the a and d positions are occupied generally by hydrophobic residues that interact with each other to form a hydrophobic core, while residues in the other positions are often surface-exposed  <cit> . some of these exposed amino acid residues in the heptad repeats of cby might directly contact β-catenin as the β-catenin-binding domain of cby resides in its c-terminal half  <cit> . collectively, these observations raise the possibility that the four heptad leucines may play an essential role in mediating cby homodimerization.

cby self-interaction is mediated by the conserved leucine residues within the c-terminal heptad-repeat motif
to test the hypothesis that the four leucine residues in the c-terminal coiled-coil motif  are critical for cby self-assembly, we performed site-directed mutagenesis to substitute each leucine for an alanine in all possible combinations. these mutations would not be expected to disrupt the α-helical structure of cby, but the shorter alanine side chain would not be able to mediate a leucine zipper-mediated stable coiled-coil configuration. upon overexpression of n-terminally flag-tagged proteins in hek293t cells, all cby mutants were detected at appreciable levels by western blotting using anti-flag antibody . next, the cby mutants were evaluated for their ability to form a complex with wild-type cby  by coimmunoprecipitation assays . individual flag-tagged cby mutant was coexpressed with ha-tagged cbywt in hek293t cells, and cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-ha antibody and subjected to western blot analysis with anti-flag antibody. cby single-point mutants were all able to interact with cbywt although reduced interactions were noted for cbyl84a. remarkably, cby mutants carrying alanine substitutions for two or more out of the four leucine residues completely abolished their interaction with cbywt. to validate these data, we carried out split hrluc assays for self-associations between cby point mutants . coexpression of cbywt-hrluc fusion proteins in hek293t cells yielded high rluc activity. consistent with the coimmunoprecipitation experiments, reduced, yet significant rluc activities were observed for cby single-point mutants, whereas all cby double mutants or the quadruple mutant  displayed only marginal rluc activities.

to investigate if cby mutants incapable of self-interaction are compromised in homodimer formation, we performed glutaraldehyde cross-linking experiments. as shown in figure  <dig>  cbywt migrated as a dimer  but cbyl77a/l91a and cby4a migrated as a monomer  in sds-page. these data clearly highlight the functional importance of the heptad leucine residues in mediating cby homodimerization.

cby self-association is not required for its interaction with β-catenin and inhibition of β-catenin-dependent transcriptional activation
cby physically interacts with the c-terminal activation domain of β-catenin, and inhibits β-catenin-dependent gene activation  <cit> . we took advantage of cby dimerization-deficient mutants to examine whether the homodimer formation of cby is a prerequisite for controlling β-catenin signaling. first, we assessed binding of cby mutants to β-catenin using in vitro pull-down assays . bacterially expressed and purified maltose-binding protein  or mbp-cbywt, l77a, l91a, l77a/l91a or 4a was incubated with his-tagged β-catenin c-terminal region  and pulled down with amylose beads. the bound proteins were then resolved by sds-page and analyzed by immunoblotting using anti-β-catenin antibody. intriguingly, all the cby point mutants tested, including the ones defective in homodimerization , efficiently bound to β-catenin. next, we performed tcf/lef luciferase reporter  assays  <cit>  in hek293t cells using the cby mutants. transfection of stabilized β-catenin activated topflash activity near 25-fold . co-transfection of cbywt potently repressed β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation in a dose-dependent manner. in agreement with the coimmunoprecipitation data, all the cby point mutants inhibited topflash activation by β-catenin to an extent similar to that of cbywt. in all cases, no or little changes were observed with the control reporter fopflash carrying mutated tcf/lef-binding sites. taken together, these results suggest that the monomeric form of cby is sufficient for binding to β-catenin and for inhibiting β-catenin signaling activity.

cby homodimerization ensures its efficient nuclear entry
our recent studies indicate that cby harbors a functional nuclear localization signal  at the c-terminal end and a nuclear export signal  in the n-terminal region, and constitutively shuttles between the nucleus and cytoplasm  <cit>  . worthy of note, it has been reported that dimerization is a prerequisite process for the nuclear import of stat, srebp <dig> and viral ie <dig> transcription factors  <cit> .

to begin to understand the biological significance of cby homooligomerization, we assessed the subcellular localization of cby mutants. in contrast to the diffuse cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution of n-terminally tagged cbywt   <cit>  and untagged cbywt , we noted that c-terminally tagged cbywt  shows almost complete nuclear localization , most likely due to a conformational change that exposes the normally buried c-terminal nls. notably, the dimerization-deficient mutant cbyl77a/l91a-flag exhibited increased cytoplasmic staining, while both cbyl77a-flag and cbyl91a-flag mutants capable of self-interaction displayed predominant nuclear localization . to confirm these results, we next evaluated the intracellular localization of n-terminally flag-tagged cby protein . consistent with our previous observation  <cit> , when expressed in cos <dig> cells, flag-cbywt primarily localized to the cytoplasm or both the nucleus and cytoplasm, especially in cells with high levels of cby expression . this cellular localization pattern of flag-cbywt is essentially the same as that of untagged protein . in contrast, flag-cbyl77a/l91a defective in dimer formation showed a subtle yet significant shift towards cytoplasmic localization. this trend became more apparent when cells were treated with leptomycin b , a potent inhibitor of the nuclear export receptor crm <dig>  <cit> . following lmb treatment, flag-cbywt was mostly nuclear but a significant fraction of flag-cbyl77a/l91a was found in the cytoplasmic compartment . a similar trend was observed with c-terminally flag-tagged cby proteins . these findings suggest that homodimer formation of cby is required for its efficient nuclear import.

our recent data indicate that the c-terminal classical nls of cby physically interacts with the nuclear import receptor importin-α . in the classical nuclear import pathway, importin-α plays a pivotal role by directly binding to nls-containing proteins, linking them to importin-β  <cit> . importin-β in turn docks the ternary import complex at the nuclear pore complex  and facilitates its translocation into the nucleus. in order to explore the molecular basis underlying the nuclear import defect of cby homodimer mutants, we investigated interactions between cby mutants and importin-α <dig> using in vitro binding assays. bacterially produced mbp or mbp-cby was incubated with gst-importin-α <dig> and pulled down using amylose resin. after extensive washing, the bound proteins were separated on sds-page and immunoblotted with anti-gst antibody. as shown in figure 7d, the cby single point mutants l77a and l91a bound to importin-α <dig> albeit with a slightly reduced affinity in comparison with cbywt. on the other hand, the dimerization-defective cbyl77a/l91a exhibited a marked reduction in its ability to interact with importin-α <dig>  collectively, our results suggest that cby homodimerization is a prerequisite for its efficient interaction with importin-α and subsequent nuclear translocation.

discussion
the canonical wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway is essential for numerous cellular processes during embryonic development, tissue homeostasis and tumorigenesis. upon wnt stimulation, β-catenin, the key downstream component of this pathway, enters the nucleus and acts as a transcriptional coactivator to up-regulate target gene expression. cby is an evolutionarily conserved protein that directly binds to the c-terminal activation domain of β-catenin and antagonizes its signaling activity  <cit> . cby has been shown to interact with itself through its c-terminal region using yeast two-hybrid assays  <cit> . however, the molecular basis for the cby-cby interaction has remained largely uncharacterized to date.

here we provide evidence that cby forms a homodimer via the leucine zipper coiled-coil motif in its c-terminal region. the cby complex is highly stable even in the presence of  <dig> m nacl or  <dig> m urea . we found that the four leucine residues in the d position of the helical wheel diagram  are crucial for mediating cby self-association. alanine mutagenesis of two or more leucines completely abolishes the cby-cby interaction . furthermore, our data indicate that the cby-cby interaction is not obligatory both for binding to β-catenin and for suppressing its signaling activity . instead, homodimerization of cby is a prerequisite process for its efficient binding to importin-α and nuclear import .

α-helical coiled-coil motifs are versatile domains that mediate numerous protein-protein interactions  <cit> . the c-terminal coiled-coil motif of cby is evolutionarily conserved from fly to human, implying the biological importance of this domain. consistent with the presence of the α-helical coiled-coil structure, circular dichroism  studies showed that cby protein has a high α-helical content  <cit> . our cross-linking and gel filtration experiments suggest that cby predominantly forms a dimer . however, it is also possible that cby exists in a larger oligomeric state under certain conditions as shown for other coiled-coil proteins  <cit> . in order to gain further insights into the molecular basis and functional significance of the cby-cby interaction, it would be of great interest to determine the three-dimensional structure of the cby complex. however, so far, cby protein is insoluble and forms inclusion bodies when expressed using bacterial as well as baculoviral expression systems , thereby impeding further structural and biochemical analyses. we found that the aggregation of cby protein is mainly caused by the c-terminal coiled-coil domain since the n-terminal half of the protein is highly soluble in e. coli .

our recent data suggest that cby harbors functional nls and nes motifs, and constantly cycles between the nucleus and cytoplasm. thus, it appears that cby intracellular localization at steady state is determined by a dynamic balance between its nuclear import and export. in this respect, cby homodimerization represents a crucial step for its efficient binding to importin-α and subsequent nuclear import. it is noteworthy that dimer formation has been shown to be the key regulatory event controlling the nuclear entry of stat, srebp <dig> and viral ie <dig> transcription factors  <cit> . nuclear import of stats is mediated by importin-α family members  <cit> , but that of srebp <dig> depends on importin-β  <cit> . interestingly, binding of importin-α <dig> to stat dimers strictly requires two intact nls elements, one in each stat monomer  <cit> . we therefore envision that the assembly of cby into dimers creates a fully functional nls perhaps by juxtaposing the nls of each monomer, allowing its efficient binding to importin-α and subsequent nuclear import. alternatively, cby oligomerization may induce a conformational change that unmasks the nls.

our results clearly show that cby mutants deficient in self-interaction are capable of efficiently binding to β-catenin, leading to repression of its signaling activity to a similar extent as wild-type cby , despite the fact that these cby mutants are predominantly cytoplasmic . however, this is in agreement with our model in which cby inhibits β-catenin signaling through two distinct molecular mechanisms  <cit> : 1) in the nucleus, cby competes with tcf/lef transcription factors for binding to β-catenin; 2) cby sequesters β-catenin in the cytoplasm in collaboration with 14-3- <dig> proteins. thus, we speculate that monomeric cby suppresses β-catenin signaling by trapping β-catenin within the cytoplasmic compartment. alternatively, a small portion of nuclear cby might be sufficient to repress β-catenin-mediated transcriptional activation since dimerization-deficient cby mutants are able to enter the nucleus, albeit at a reduced rate .

it is possible that the cby-cby interaction is of importance in certain biological contexts other than β-catenin signaling. for example, cby has been shown to interact with thyroid cancer- <dig>   <cit>  and polycystin- <dig>   <cit> . tc- <dig> was initially identified as a gene whose expression was elevated in thyroid cancers  <cit> . more recently, tc- <dig> was shown to interact with cby and stimulate β-catenin signaling presumably by displacing cby from β-catenin  <cit> . however, its precise functions are not yet completely understood. pc- <dig> is another known binding partner of cby  <cit> . the pdk- <dig> gene, encoding pc- <dig>  is mutated in patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease  <cit> . a previous report showed that cby associates with pc- <dig> and regulates its subcellular distribution  <cit> . hence, cby appears to exert multiple biological functions. whether cby self-association is involved in controlling the activity of tc- <dig> and pc- <dig> awaits further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we demonstrated that cby forms a stable dimer through its c-terminal coiled-coil motif, which consists of a heptad repeat of four conserved leucine residues. our extensive mutational analysis clearly shows that these leucines are critical for cby dimerization. in addition, our results indicate that the cby self-interaction is dispensable for inhibition of β-catenin signaling but is required for cby nuclear import.

