BACKGROUND
in vitro regeneration is a common research tool and important method for plant propagation. it is also essential for most forms of genetic transformation, which require the regeneration of single transgenic cells into non-chimeric organisms  <cit> . both embryogenic and organogenic regeneration pathways are widely employed, with the system of choice varying among species and research or propagation goal.

organogenesis systems are more widely applied than embryogenic systems, particularly in dicotyledenous plants, because the explants and in vitro conditions are less complex and more robust. during organogenesis, explants are generally subjected to four sequential stages: direct or indirect callus induction, adventitious shoot  formation, adventitious root  formation, and micropropagation using axillary or apical meristem containing tissues based on either shoot or root cuttings.

about a half century ago, the developmental fates of in vitro explants were shown to be largely controlled by the balance of cytokinin and auxin  <cit> . when cytokinin is high relative to auxin, shoots are induced; when the reverse is true, roots are induced. when both hormones are present, but usually with dominance of auxin, undifferentiated growth of callus usually occurs. although there has been a great deal of progress in identification of key genes that regulate embryogenesis and organogenesis  <cit> , as well as genome scale studies of in vitro regeneration  <cit> , the studies have focused on only a few species and specific regeneration systems.

array studies of regeneration in arabidopsis have focused on indirect regeneration via root explants rather than shoot explants  <cit> , and used the affymetrix ath <dig> genechip which represents  <dig>  genes. root explants were pre-incubated on callus induction medium  for a few days, and then transferred to a cytokinin-rich shoot induction medium , an auxin-rich root induction medium , or fresh cim, respectively. nearly half  of probe sets exhibited regulated expression profiles  across the time points of sampling. during early shoot development,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were specifically up-regulated and down-regulated, respectively. in rice, a monocot, somatic embryos regenerated from cell culture were used to induce shoots. by comparing gene expression at  <dig> days on sim with somatic embryos using a 70-mer oligonucleotide microarray containing  <dig>  probe sets,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were up-or down-regulated, respectively  <cit> .

the genus populus has emerged as a model system for plant and tree biology  <cit> . its utility is likely to expand as a result of the publication of a complete genome of populus trichocarpa  produced by the usa department of energy joint genome institute  <cit> . the value of poplar as a model tree results from its modest sized genome, facile transformation of selected genotypes, high capacity for in vitro propagation, rapid growth, extensive natural diversity, many natural and bred interspecific hybrids, and diverse environmental and economic values  <cit> . its natural ability for vegetative regeneration, even from mature tissues, and its amenability to organogenic regeneration and transformation in vitro, has motivated a large number of studies of the biology and management of regeneration systems  <cit> .

microarrays have successfully identified many of the genes and regulatory factors related to specific physiological states in poplar. wood formation has been intensively studied using microarrays. for example, changes in gene expression induced by gibberellic acid  in the developing xylem was studied using a cdna-based microarry analysis  <cit> . by comparing gene expression among stem micro-sections, the roles of many genes in xylem, phloem, and cambium development were characterized  <cit> . subsequent to the completion of the poplar genome, two commercial oligonucleotide genome-scale microarrays were designed. one was produced by nimblegen and another by affymetrix. in stm-homolog over-expressing poplars,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were identified as up- or down-regulated by two-fold or greater, respectively, using a nimblegen platform  <cit> . in a genome-wide expression analysis using the nimblegen microarray platform, of auxin/indole-3-acetic acid  and auxin response factor  in populus , the genes in a subgroup of aux/iaa showed differential expression among different tissue types  <cit> .

the goal of this study was to characterize the changes in gene expression that accompany dedifferentiation and organogenic regeneration in populus, and compare them to results from arabidopsis and other species. characterization of the regulatory networks from poplar--with its distinct in vitro system and phylogeny compared to the other species studied to date--should give new insights into the conserved mechanisms for maintenance and regulation of plant stem cells. we conducted a genome-scale transcriptome analysis using the affymetrix poplar genome genechip. it monitors more than  <dig>  transcripts based on poplar genome and est sequences. in this report, we describe the identities and biological roles of more than  <dig>  unique regulated genes observed over five stages of regeneration.

RESULTS
we studied gene expression during dedifferentiation and regeneration of shoots via organogenesis. similar in vitro methods are widely using in the regeneration and transformation of populus and many other plant species. two biological replicates were used for each of five time points from pre-induction to shoot regeneration, and the rnas hybridized to genome-scale arrays.

callus and shoot development during regeneration
to determine the time points for taking tissue samples during in vitro shoot organogenesis, we carried out a preliminary regeneration experiment where  <dig> to  <dig> mm internodal stem segments  were placed on auxin-rich cim in dark for  <dig> days, then transferred them to cytokinin-rich sim following our optimized transformation protocol . no obvious morphological changes occurred during the first three days on cim . the explants began to form callus at the two ends starting at  <dig> days on cim, and the size of callus continued to grow . individual or multiple shoot buds emerged from callus beginning from  <dig> days on sim. shoots were observed in approximately 10% of explants by  <dig> days on sim , and the percentage grew to around 20% at  <dig> days on sim. based on the above observations, explants were collected at  <dig> days both on cim and sim to detect early genetic regulation of callus induction and shoot induction, respectively. for the  <dig> day sample from sim, only explants that had visible emerging shoots were chosen in an effort to ensure that transcriptional changes related to shoot regeneration could be detected.

quality assessment of array data
we inspected graphical images of the raw hybridization intensity for each of the  <dig> arrays, and found no severe spatial artifacts  that would likely prevent accurate estimation of transcript expression levels over the  <dig> randomly located probes per transcript  <cit> . the affymetrix quality report files  -- which consist of average backgrounds, scaling factors, percentages of presence, internal controls, poly-a controls, and hybridization controls -- indicated that no significant flaws were detected . approximately  <dig>  transcripts out of over  <dig>  had detectable expression for at least one time point. the squared correlations between the two biological replicates ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for each sample time .

identification of differentially expressed genes
the number of differentially expressed genes identified by limma  was  <dig> , of which  <dig>  had expression levels above those flagged as absent or marginal in the affymetrix data quality reports at the stages when they are regulated. these  <dig>  genes were considered in further analyses.

when expression at each stage was compared to that prior to regeneration , we found up to  <dig>  genes were up-regulated, and up to  <dig>  genes were down-regulated. the largest number of regulated genes was identified at the earliest stage of callogenesis, though morphological changes were not yet visible at this time point. when comparing the expression at each time point with that of the previous time point, the difference among the numbers of differentially expressed genes declined nearly an order of magnitude with sequential time points . in contrast to the thousands of regulated genes during early callogenesis, there were only  <dig> and  <dig> genes up- and down-regulated, respectively, during the early stages of shoot induction.

gene ontology categorization of differentially expressed genes
to identify the over-represented molecular functions and biological processes at each stage, we categorized the groups of the up-or down-regulated genes at each stage by their gene ontology  class . due to incompleteness of poplar go annotations and the conservation of gene families between poplar and arabidopsis, we used the arabidopsis matches of the identified differentially expressed poplar gene as surrogates for go categorization. we used normalized frequencies  to test if a functional class was over-represented; when the normalized frequency of a functional class was larger than  <dig>  this functional class was presumed to be over-represented in a group of genes.

most of the go biological process categories classes had similar numbers of genes that were up- and down-regulated . however, at the onset of callogenesis--where the large majority of regulated genes were detected--there was a preponderance of up-regulated genes for the go cellular components related to ribosome, cytosol, mitochondria, cell, wall, and endoplasmic reticulum functions. in contrast, there was strong down-regulation for chloroplast and plastid functions. for go molecular function categories, a preponderance of up-regulation during the start of callogenesis was observed for structural molecule activity, nucleotide binding, and nucleic acid binding.

the arabidopsis homologs of the identified differentially expressed poplar gene were used for go categorization. the percentage of each functional class in the poplar genome is assumed to equal to that in arabidopsis.

clustering of differentially expressed genes
to identify genes with similar expression patterns during regeneration, we clustered the  <dig>  genes identified by limma that had expression levels above those flagged as absent or marginal in the affymetrix data quality reports. at least five major clusters were visible . prior to callus induction, about half of the regulated genes were strongly expressed, but most of these were shut down or repressed immediately and permanently upon callogenesis . only small numbers of genes formed the next three clades. one group included genes that were very weakly expressed prior to callogenesis, activated during late callogenesis, then sequentially shut down as shoot induction proceeded . another group's genes were strongly expressed then largely shut down throughout the rest of regeneration ; others were mostly turned off, further reduced in expression during initial callogenesis, then activated late in callogenesis and subsequently turned off during shoot induction . finally, a very large group of genes had very weak expression prior to regeneration, were activated rapidly and strongly during early callogenesis, then were largely down-regulated for the remainder of regeneration . there did not appear to be a cluster of genes that were specifically up-regulated during shoot induction.

clustering of differentially expressed transcriptional factors
we found that  <dig> transcriptional factors  distributed in  <dig> families were differentially expressed . transcription factors involved in auxin signaling are among the most abundant regulated transcription factor families. approximately 70% of aux/iaa and 40% of arf genes were up- or down-regulated during at least one stage. other abundant families--involving at least 40% of its members--included the srs, tlp, ccaat-hap <dig>  grf, and c2c2-dof families.

the jgi gene model ids were downloaded from the database of poplar transcription factors  and were searched against the list of the differentially expressed genes identified by limma. the list is ranked by the percentage of the total number of each transcription factor class in poplar. the total number of regulated transcription factors were corrected for redundancy among the array probes; the number of up-or down-regulated transcription factors at each stage were not corrected for redundancy .

when only transcription factors were considered in cluster analysis, several distinct clusters emerged, but were somewhat different in their patterns from the full gene list . similar to the complete gene list, prior to callus induction more than half of the regulated genes were strongly expressed, but mostly shut down or repressed immediately and permanently upon callogenesis . a small group of genes were also expressed prior to callogenesis and then shut down, but then were mostly reactivated during later stages of shoot induction . another small group of genes were largely unexpressed prior to callus induction, but then strongly up-regulated during early callogenesis and then largely deactivated again thereafter . a large heterogeneous group had genes that were variably, but generally weakly, expressed prior to callus induction, but then reactivated at various times in callus and shoot induction . finally, a small group of genes were conspicuously and strongly expressed during late callogenesis, but weakly and variably expressed at other stages . as with the full gene set, there does not appear to be a cluster of genes that are specifically up-regulated during shoot induction.

auxin, cytokinin, and cell-cycle associated genes
two f-box genes were differentially regulated upon callus induction, and are closely related to arabidopsis tir <dig>  . after the early callus induction stage, their expression stabilized for the remainder of the regeneration period. a number of f-box genes are thought to take part in auxin signaling  <cit> . twenty-three aux/iaas and fifteen arfs were differentially expressed during at least one stage . the majority of both classes of genes were down-regulated at the onset of callus induction and throughout subsequent regeneration, but specific groups of aux/iaa genes were then up-regulated late in callus and during shoot development, or up-regulated during early callus induction and then down-regulated thereafter .

a number of genes that take part in cytokinin signaling were regulated during regeneration . key components of the cytokinin signaling and reception pathways include receptor kinases, phosphotransfer proteins, and various response regulators  <cit> . a putative cytokinin receptor histidine kinase gene was down-regulated upon callus induction. three differentially expressed histidine phosphotransfer genes were down-regulated during callus induction, then up-regulated during subsequent growth and shoot regeneration. all three a-type response regulator genes were up- then down-regulated during callus development, then strongly up-regulated during shoot induction. only one of two b-type response regulator genes was substantially down-regulated upon callus induction.

cell cycle genes are of obvious importance for regeneration, as slow growing explant tissues must be reactivated to grow rapidly during callus and shoot development. the cell cycle genes showed complex patterns of regulation, some being up- and others down-regulated at various points in regeneration . a group was rapidly up-regulated, then mostly down-regulated after callus induction. another group was not up-regulated until late in callus induction, but then was also mostly reduced in expression during shoot induction; some of these genes, however, did reactivate later in shoot induction. a third major group was strongly expressed prior to callus induction, then showed diverse patterns of reduced expression in subsequent stages.

comparison of regulated genes to arabidopsis and rice
to identify genes whose function in regeneration is conserved among plant families, we compared our results to those of a similar microarray experiment in arabidopsis  <cit>  . they reported changes in expression after four days on cim to pre-induction root tissues, and found  <dig>  up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated genes at an fdr of  <dig> . our comparison revealed that 16% to 22% of down-regulated genes were in common, and  <dig> to 27% of up-regulated genes were in common, depending on the direction of comparison . thus, approximately  <dig>  genes were conserved in their basic roles among the two species. of these genes approximately 8% were transcription factors. the largest go classes of genes that were common and up-regulated include those related to cell growth, such as ribosome expression and dna/rna metabolism . by far the largest common down-regulated class was genes related to plastid development .

by using data on shoot regeneration from rice  <cit> and arabidopsis  <cit> , were able to compare up-regulated genes among all three species. of approximately  <dig> genes from each species, only  <dig> were common among all three . there were more than 10-fold fewer genes in common between poplar and rice than there were between poplar and arabidopsis. among the  <dig> common genes, three are putative oxidoreductases with an nad-binding domain.

discussion
although some spatial variation in variability in hybridization intensity was visible on our arrays, we found that they gave a high degree of precision for estimates of gene expression. for example,  <dig>  genes  were flagged "present" for the both biological replicates prior to callus induction . based on variance between biological replications after normalization and exclusion of any genes flagged "non-present" for one of the biological replicates, the mean, standard deviation, and coefficient of variation of signal intensity over biological replicates was  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> %, respectively. the mean standard error over biological replicates was  <dig>  . thus, the precision in our estimates of approximately 2% is very small in relation to the large changes of gene expression observed, which often exceeded several hundred percent.

from the sequential comparisons of regulated genes, we found that there was a massive reorganization of gene expression shortly after the start of callus induction, but before visible changes in explant morphology were obvious. changes in gene regulation after this point were far smaller, and decreased over time. surprisingly, there were no substantial changes in gene expression observed after transfer to shoot induction medium. it may also reflect the observation that even after callus induction there was some meristematic activity observed in a number of explants, including the production of root initials. this may have coincided with a large and complex set of alterations in gene expression that are not substantially or simultaneously reset with the increase in cytokinin provided by the sim medium.

the changes in go categories reflect the large reorganization that tissues are undergoing during regeneration. genes related to mitochondria, cell wall, er, cell organization, and biogenesis were highly up-regulated during callus induction. this is a likely consequence of increased protein synthesis to support cell division and wall formation during callus induction. in contrast, chloroplast/plastid genes are strongly down-regulated gene during callus induction, which likely corresponds to the transition from autotrophy to heterotrophy at this developmental transition. it also likely reflects the suppressive effect of callus development in the dark in our regeneration system on light regulated, photosynthesis associated genes.

two f-box proteins were regulated during regeneration. tir <dig> and other three auxin f-box proteins have been suggested as auxin receptors involved in the regulation of auxin-responsive genes  <cit> . auxin binds to tir <dig> that is contained in scf-like complex , which promotes the interaction between tir <dig> and aux/iaas  were up-regulated around the time of callus induction. among the four genes that were down-regulated during callus induction, estext_fgenesh4_pg.c_lg_v <dig> was identified as a cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor  <cit> .

myb proteins are a large group of transcription factors that have a wide variety of roles in development. for example, expression of many myb genes is correlated with secondary wall formation, both in arabidopsis and poplar  <cit> . during regeneration, we found that  <dig>  showed regulated expression, and the number of down-regulated mybs were roughly double the number of up-regulated mybs at any stage. not surprisingly, it appears that many mybs play important roles in organogenesis.

the catalogs of regulated genes we have identified provide candidates for further analysis of their roles in in vitro development, and for modifying development for better control of regeneration. for example, many new gene family members and unknown genes could be characterized biochemically or via reverse genetic screens such as with rnai or overexpression to identify their roles in control of regeneration. induced expression of genes that appear to regulate cell cycle such as the cyclins, or of transcription factors that are associated with dedifferentiation such as some of the mybs, might be useful for promoting regeneration of transgenic plants  <cit> . microarray analysis of transgenic plants with these misexpressed genes would also provide insight into the regulatory networks in which they play a part. the modest level of conservation of the regulated gene sets between poplar and arabidopsis, and the low level of conservation between poplar and rice, are not surprising given the considerably larger phylogenetic distance between rice, a monocot, and poplar and arabidopsis, two dicots. most important, however, is the likelihood that organogenesis in poplar was based on redifferention from shoot explants, whereas root explants were employed in arabidopsis; and in rice, the distinctive embryogenic regeneration pathway was studied. these results suggest that transcriptome studies of a number of species and regeneration systems are needed in order to more fully understand--and thus to more rationally modify--the diverse in vitro regeneration pathways important to plant biology and biotechnology.

CONCLUSIONS
the major transcriptional events in regulation of in vitro organogenesis in poplar occurred during the early stages of dedifferentiation. nearly  <dig>  genes were differentially expression during the onset of callus induction. a much smaller number of differentially expressed genes were detected at subsequent regeneration stages. a total of  <dig> transcription factors that were distributed in  <dig> gene families were differentially regulated. genes involved in auxin signaling, cytokinin signaling, and secondary meristem regulation  were among the most abundantly regulated classes of transcription factors. genes related to auxin signaling were highly regulated during regeneration. two auxin f-box receptors, and more than a dozen aux/iaas and arfs, showed differential expression. differential expression of genes associated with cytokinin signaling included regulation of cytokinin histidine kinase receptors, two phosphotransfer proteins, and a-, b-type, and pseudo response regulators. most of the identified cell cycle genes were up-regulated during callus induction. substantial components of the regulatory circuits were conserved between arabidopsis and poplar during callus induction, though different explants  were employed. approximately one-fourth of the regulated genes in arabidopsis were shared with poplar.

