BACKGROUND
for many years gender allocation of offspring in mammals, including humans, has been regarded as a matter of chance, depending on whether an x- or a y- chromosome-bearing spermatozoon reaches the oocyte first. since an equal number of x- and y- spermatozoa are produced during spermatogenesis  <cit> , and fertilization is a random event, it stands to reason that in each generation equal numbers of males and females should be born. evidence from the field and laboratory challenges this classic dogma and suggests that some kind of adaptive control of offspring gender may exist in mammals  <cit> . evidence for this ability exists in many invertebrates and some avian species are able to adjust their progeny sex ratio predictably in response to environmental conditions  <cit> . numerous factors such as population density, resource availability , season, mother’s age, levels of hormones, time of insemination and stress are known to influence the sex ratio in mammals . however, the biological mechanism through which mammals can bias the offspring ratio is still unknown.

several hypothetical mechanisms have been proposed to explain sex ratio skewing in mammals. on the male side, any shift from the expected 1: <dig> sex ratio among offspring has been related to intrinsic differences in sperm motility, viability and fertilization ability of the two gametes types  <cit> . on the female side, the condition of the reproductive tract and the penetrability of the oocyte’s zona pellucida, which varies according to the timing of insemination relative to ovulation, have been suggested to influence differentially the ability of x- or y-spermatozoa to fertilize oocytes  <cit> . once fertilization has occurred, the milieu of the oviduct, and subsequently the environment of the uterus, may affect the developmental rates of xx-embryos and xy-embryos  <cit> .

given that the female investment in the offspring is considerably larger than that of the male, it is more probable that a mechanism to bias the offspring sex ratio is operated by the mother  <cit> . furthermore, it is more likely that such a hypothetical mechanism would operate in the oviduct immediately before, or at the time of, fertilization because it is less costly to females than other suggested mechanisms acting later during pregnancy  <cit> . the mammalian oviduct is the venue for important reproductive events such as sperm and oocyte transport, sperm binding and release, fertilization and early-embryonic development  <cit> . in addition, the oviduct is implicated in the selection of spermatozoa, being capable of distinguishing between good and poor sperm quality  <cit> .

here, we address the question of whether the female may distinguish between the presence of x and y-spermatozoa in the oviduct before fertilization occurs. we tested this possibility by examining whether the presence of the x- and y-spermatozoa elicit different transcriptomic responses within the oviduct. to test our hypothesis we used an in vivo pig model that directly compared the oviduct containing y-spermatozoa to the contralateral oviduct from the same animal, but containing x-spermatozoa . the advantages of this model were: 1) that minimize the confounding factors known to bias the sex ratio  <cit>  since both oviducts analyzed were from the same animal and therefore were under the same nutritional, health and hormonal environment, and 2) that avoid the possibility that oocytes could mask the oviductal responses towards x- and y-spermatozoa, because only sows showing multiple pre-ovulatory follicles were selected for this study. it has previously been reported that, like spermatozoa, oocytes elicit distinct proteomic alterations  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
schematic representation of the experimental design. sows were subjected to laparoscopic surgery. to prevent x- and y-spermatozoa migration between oviducts, both uterine horns were cut using titanium staples. then, one oviduct was inseminated with x-spermatozoa and the contralateral oviduct was inseminated with y-spermatozoa  from the same animal. twenty-four hours following laparoscopic insemination, oviductal tissues containing x- and y-sperm samples were collected from each side of the reproductive tract in all animals.



our study add a complete new layer of competition to the mating game, since up to date most studies of offspring sex ratio are based on epidemiological studies, showing a traditional maternal dominance or lately a male influence in specific species. we open up a new perspective in “the battle of the sexes”, suggesting that this battle starts in the oviduct and providing the first molecular evidence of a sex-specific sperm recognition system in the oviduct.

RESULTS
our work showed that the presence of x- and y-spermatozoa did indeed elicit different transcriptomic responses within the oviduct . around 2% of transcripts  were consistently altered  in the oviduct in the presence of y-chromosome-bearing spermatozoa compared to the presence of x-chromosome-bearing spermatozoa . from these  <dig> transcripts,  <dig> transcripts  were down-regulated and  <dig> transcripts  were up-regulated when the y- chromosome-bearing spermatozoa was present in the oviduct. a complete list of the transcripts altered in the oviduct inseminated with y- chromosome bearing spermatozoa compared to x -chromosome bearing spermatozoa is presented in the additional file  <dig> figure  <dig> 
the presence of y-spermatozoa elicited different transcriptome response within the oviduct when compared to x-spermatozoa. a: cluster heat map analysis of the transcriptional profiles obtained from oviductal samples inseminated with x-spermatozoa and y-spermatozoa. each row represents a different gene, and each column displays gene expressions at different samples . data values displayed as yellow and blue represent elevated and reduced expression, respectively. b: a volcano plot depicting significant changes in gene expression between oviductal samples inseminated with y-spermatozoa and x-spermatozoa. each of the  <dig> -oligonucleotide probes is represented by a dot in the graph. the x-axis represents the fold change and the y-axis represents the statistical significance . transcripts showing significant differences in gene expression  are above the broken line.



to obtain a biologically meaningful overview of the altered transcripts in the presence of y-chromosome-bearing spermatozoa compared to x-chromosome-bearing spermatozoa, genes differently expressed were organized into different categories and subcategories according to kegg database hierarchy. the functional categories with higher number of genes were: signal transduction, immune system, digestive system and endocrine system. the pathways in which these altered transcripts were involved with are presented in table  <dig>  interestingly, a higher number of genes involved in signal transduction and immune system were up-regulated  in the presence of y-chromosome bearing spermatozoa when compared to x- chromosome-bearing spermatozoa. other interesting subcategories with high numbers of transcripts involved were: nervous system, cell growth and death, cell communication, signalling molecules and interaction, folding, sorting and degradation and transport and catabolism. the results of all data pathways classification are available in additional file  <dig> table  <dig> 
pathways and altered genes involved in signal transduction, immune system, digestive system and endocrine system



environmental information processing

organismal systems

endocrine system


our data provide the first evidence to show how spermatozoa carrying the y- or x-chromosome can modulate the oviductal response by activating specific signalling pathways in a gender specific manner. these data imply that the female reproductive tract recognizes the presence of x- or y-chromosome-bearing spermatozoa in the oviduct before fertilization occurs. on this basis, we hypothesize that a sex-specific sperm recognition system exists in the female reproductive tract. furthermore, we propose that this sperm recognition system can modulate the gender selection of the offspring. our hypothesis challenges two long-held assumptions: 1) on the female side, that the reproductive tract is a passive participant in sperm selection  <cit>  and 2) on the male side, that there are no differences in morphology, metabolic activity or functional abilities of x and y sperm that could be used by the female tract to recognize the two types of sperm  <cit> .

recent research has tended to suggest that the female tract is an active participant in the sperm selection process  <cit> . furthermore, the oviduct is emerging as a chief protagonist in the sperm selection process, facilitating/or inhibiting sperm transport and allowing only selected sperm to reach the oocyte. this poses the question of whether spermatozoa are pilots or merely passengers in the sperm journey to the oocyte. it is estimated that from the approximately  <dig> billions of spermatozoa deposited into the female reproductive tract after insemination, only around 1000– <dig> spermatozoa enter the oviduct in the pig and bind to the oviductal cell surface  <cit> . once in the oviduct the spermatozoa are subjected to several further selection processes before being able to interact with oocytes. this oviductal selection process seems to be based on the intrinsic integrity and information content of the sperm dna or/and based on more subtle properties that reflect the individual spermatozoon  <cit> . thus, we speculate that the oviduct could also differentiate between x and y-spermatozoa.

researchers have for many years investigated the differences in size, shape, motility or differentially expressed proteins between x- and y-spermatozoa  and no conclusive findings have emerged, aside from the very small  <dig> -4% difference in genetic material . this small difference in dna content, due to the arm of the x chromosome that is not present on the y, is tightly packaged in a semi-crystalline form inside the spermatozoon  <cit>  and does not seem to be accessible for evaluation by external systems in the laboratory. our new findings open the possibility that the oviductal recognition of x- and y-spermatozoa may be intimately related to currently unknown differences in morphology or metabolism of x- versus y-bearing sperm. recently researchers have identified different topographic characteristics on the head of x- and y-spermatozoa, viewed on a nanometric scale using atomic force microscopy  <cit> . another study has pointed to differentially expressed proteins between bull x- and y-spermatozoa involved in energy metabolism, stress resistance and cell defence  <cit> . chen and colleagues  <cit>  even suggested that there could be differences in the way that energy is produced and varied vulnerabilities to environmental changes between x- and y-spermatozoa. it is known, for example that different metabolic rate is related to dissimilar production of ros  <cit> . thus, we speculate that the different sperm metabolism identified by chen and colleagues  <cit>  could lead to the release of distinct amount of ros substances or diverse ros metabolites to the oviduct by each type of spermatozoa. to investigate this we measured sperm motility between x and y-sperm samples , sperm viability  and intracellular ros generation . as our analyses did not reveal any differences we conclude that the oviduct’s ability to differentiate between the two types of spermatozoa must be based on other mechanisms. nevertheless, our data demonstrated that the specific oviductal response to each type of sperm was not as a result of a higher number of dead sperm in one type of sperm sample compared to the other or a higher percentage of sperm damage by the flow sorting method and therefore a higher production of ros.

immunological strategies to gender selection have also been proposed since the finding of a family of gene products encoded in, or controlled by, the y chromosome that is only present on male’s cell surfaces  <cit> . this idea, that sex selection in mammals occurs through a specific immune response, is in line with our results. bioinformatics analysis of our microarray data showed that genes involved in signal transduction and immune-related genes were the most representative of the altered genes in this study . moreover, a higher number of genes involved in these pathways were up-regulated  in the presence of y spermatozoa when compared to x spermatozoa . particularly interesting was the fact that the immune system seems to be involved in the recognition of x and y spermatozoa within the oviduct. it is logical to assume that the immune system plays a key role in ensuring tolerance to spermatozoa in the maternal tract. under normal circumstances, when the maternal tract is exposed to pathogens or a non-self-entity, the immune system responds in an aggressive manner. however the spermatozoon, which is a non-pathogenic “foreign invader” to be destroyed , is accepted in the maternal tract and is guided to the oocyte. we suggest that the immune system might act as a molecular screening process in the oviduct that allows only preferred x- or y-spermatozoa to reach the oocyte. interferon regulatory factor  <dig>  and chemokine  ligand  <dig> , which are involved in the immune system as signalling molecules were further confirmed using qpcr . irf <dig> is associated with specific families of pattern recognition receptors such as toll-like receptors , rig-i-like receptors  and cytosolic dna-sensing pathway  <cit> . all of these pathways are responsible for detecting microbial pathogens or foreign dna from invading microbes or host cells and may also participate in the recognition between x and y sperm. the current data further corroborated and confirmed our previous report showing a distinct response of oviduct to spermatozoa of unsorted ejaculates  <cit> . however, due to the limited sample size, the results presented here should be interpreted with caution. our future experiments would be directed towards increasing the sample size of the study as well as establishing an in vitro based system for understanding the mechanism mediating this process.figure  <dig> 
transcripts modulated by x-spermatozoa and y-spermatozoa in the oviduct organized into functional categories. transcripts differentially expressed in oviductal samples inseminated with x-spermatozoa compared to y-spermatozoa organized into functional categories on the basis kegg pathway database.
validation of the microarray results by qpcr analysis. ccl <dig>  ligand 8) and irf <dig>  expression values  in oviductal samples inseminated with x-spermatozoa compared to oviductal samples inseminated with y-spermatozoa. the expression of both transcripts in the oviductal samples inseminated with y-spermatozoa was significantly different from that of the oviductal samples inseminated with y-spermatozoa .



CONCLUSIONS
the present investigation demonstrates for the first time, distinct alterations of oviductal gene expression in response to x and y spermatozoa. these changes imply that the oviduct is able to distinguish between x and y-spermatozoa and thereby fine-tune its physiology and gene expression in response. we propose that the oviduct functions as a biological sensor that screens the spermatozoa, allowing only a preferred cohort to proceed. our findings point to the existence of a sex-specific-sperm recognition system in the oviduct that alerts the mother to the presence of the x or y-spermatozoa, thereby expanding currently proposed hypotheses that influence sex ratio populations.

