BACKGROUND
species of the drosophila obscura group  are mostly inhabitants of temperate forest throughout the holarctic region, with some can adapted into high-elevation temperate-like habitats in the afrotropical, neotropical and oriental regions. some of these species  have served as favorable models for evolutionary biology since the influential works of dobzhansky and his colleagues in the 1930's  <cit> . the whole-genome sequence of d. pseudoobscura was determined following d. melanogaster. comparisons between the two species have shed new light on drosophila genome evolution  <cit> . in addition, in the past two decades, increasing number of evolutionary studies have been conducted in a historical background of the obscura species group on varied subjects, e.g., evolution of genome size  <cit> , evolution of karyotype and p elements  <cit> , origin and evolution of drosophila y chromosome  <cit>  and genetics of morphological evolution  <cit> .

since the 1950's, a number of studies have been conducted to reconstruct phylogeny of the obscura group via a variety of approaches  <cit> . recent molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit>  clearly support the monophyly of the obscura species group and recover several well-supported lineages, for example, the affinis, pseudoobscura, and subobscura subgroups, the d. ambigua triad , give essential support to the monophyletic origin of the new world species, i.e., those of the affinis and pseudoobscura subgroups. in spite of this, the relationship among the old world obscura, subobscura, microlabis, and sinobscura subgroups, and their relationship to the new world clade are still poorly resolved. this phylogenetic predicament was partially ascribed to the "rapid radiation" history of the obscura group  <cit> . an alternative hypothesis to explain the lack of resolution at the base of this phylogeny is a bias in taxon sampling. for example, none of the previous phylogenetic studies has dealt with the obscura group as a whole: different studies employed different set of taxa, with species from the afrotropical region  and oriental region  have rarely been investigated  <cit> , probably due to the difficulty in collecting and/or culturing these poorly known taxa.

in the present study, nucleotide sequences  from six loci  of  <dig> d. obscura group species and  <dig> d. melanogaster group species  are used to reconstruct the phylogeny of the obscura species group. phylogenetic analyses are also performed based on translated amino acid sequences . we then estimate the divergence times in the obscura group, and statistically test the previously proposed "rapid radiation" hypothesis  <cit> . finally, the evolutionary history of the obscura group is discussed.

* stocks from the bowling green stock center, with missing stock numbers.

RESULTS
summary of the dna sequences
the alignment of the six gene regions spanned  <dig>  nucleotide or  <dig>  amino acid positions . table  <dig> gives accession numbers for the nucleotide sequences, either cited from genbank  <cit>  or newly determined for this study.

* ashburner, unpublished data.

a plot of nucleotide substitution saturation is shown in figure  <dig>  for the mitochondrial sequences, the transition/transversion  ratio in 1st+2nd codon positions  ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , with the average of  <dig> ; and the ratio in the 3rd codon position  ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , with the average of  <dig> . this suggests strong saturation in the 3rd codon positions between distantly related species. for the adh gene, the ti/tv ratio in 1st+2nd codon positions  ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  ; the ratio in the 3rd codon positions ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . slight decrease of ti/tv is found in the 3rd codon positions with increase of pairwise distance.

pairwise partition homogeneity test 
incongruence between data partitions indicates that the two partitions compared have had different histories or that one of them violate the assumptions of the phylogenetic method  <cit> . the pht is currently implemented with only parsimony, which assuming small number of actual sequence changes per site. higher p values obtained by six-parameter weighting may indicates that, the six-parameter parsimony method fits the nt data better by accounting for the effect of multiple hits , thus reduces the incongruence in several pairwise comparisons.

phylogenetic analyses with nt data
results of analyses with nt data using the maximum parsimony , maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference  methods are shown in figure  <dig>  these analyses lend strong support to the monophyly of the obscura group, recover the same set of major lineages in this group, including the affinis, pseudoobscura, subobscura and sinobscura subgroups, the d. ambigua triad , and the d. dianensis/d. subsilvestris, d. bifasciata/d. imaii and d. limingi/d. tsukubaensis lineages, each supported with high bootstrap value  or posterior probability . all the trees strongly support the sister relationship between the affinis and pseudoobscura subgroups . they completely agree with each other with respect to relationship within each of the major lineages. the branching orders within the pseudoobscura and subobscura subgroups are largely consistent with those of previous studies. the order within the sinobscura subgroup is also suggested by data of morphology  <cit>  or interspecific reproductive isolation .

the mp tree deduced with the un-weighted method  clusters the d. ambigua triad with the sinobscura subgroup, while puts the d. dianensis/d. subsilvestris pair outside this cluster. however, the mp tree deduced with the six-parameter weighting method , the ml tree  and the bayesian tree  congruously suggest a cluster of the d. ambigua triad and the d. dianensis/d. subsilvestris pair. this cluster  forms a larger cluster with the sinobscura subgroup . however, the supports for these relationships are also low.

d. microlabis, as the single representative of the microlabis subgroup, is placed at the basal position in the uwmp and 6pmp trees. however, this species is clustered with the subobscura subgroup in the ml tree  and bayesian tree . the uwmp, 6pmp and bayesian trees suggest weakly  a close relationship between the obscura-sinobscura cluster and the new world clade. however, the ml tree clusters all the old world species into a large group with weak support .

phylogenetic analyses with aa data set
the bayesian trees of aa data recover the same relationships within each of the major lineages as those of the nt data, except for that they suggest a branching order of ) in the d. ambigua triad, and that the tree inferred with the poisson model clusters the kunming  strain of d. hubeiensis with d. sinobscura, instead of its conspecific hubei  strain. however, all these relationships are very weakly supported.

divergence times in the obscura species group
the divergence times are estimated on a given tree – a ml tree constructed with the concatenated mitochondrial sequences. this tree is selected as a representative phylogenetic hypothesis of the obscura group based on the foregoing results. the results of time estimation are shown as a linearized form of the ml tree . in light of the upper bound  of the calibration time interval for the obscura-melanogaster divergence, the estimated time span for the major radiation of the obscura group is ~ <dig> – <dig>  mya, indicating that by the mid-miocene time , almost all the current major lineages of the obscura group had come into being. even in light of the calibration point of  <dig> mya, at least half of the major lineages are estimated to have originated by the mid-miocene time. the splitting between the d. ambigua triad and the d. dianensis/d. subsilvestris pair  falls close to the major radiation of the obscura group, and the splitting between d. limingi and d. tsukubaensis  appears to be rather old. the sinobscura subgroup began to diversify  from about the mid-pliocene time.

our estimate for the origin of the microlabis-subobscura clade  falls close to previous estimation based on mutation distance of  <dig> genes   <cit> ; the estimate for the splitting between the affinis-pseudoobscura clade and the obscura-sinobscura cluster  is clearly older than the previous one based on adh sequences   <cit> , and the estimate for the d. pseudoobscura-d. miranda divergence  differs greatly from the estimate based on mutation distances   <cit> . this is mainly due to that 1) our estimates is not directly based on pairwise distances, but on a given tree with branch lengths; 2) we use different calibration point from those studies  <cit> .

statistic test of the temporal pattern of evolutionary diversity
to test the temporal pattern of the evolution of the obscura group, an empirical tree of  <dig> obscura group species  is constructed under an assumption of molecular clock, therefore all the terminal taxa on this tree are shown as contemporaneous. the cumulative frequency distribution  of the branching times  along this tree is plotted . an "expected" cfd for 27-taxa trees is provided as contrast. this expected cfd, available from wollenberg et al  <cit> , is the average of five hundred 27-taxa trees generated by computer simulation under null model of stochastic speciation/extinction. the comparison between the empirical and average cfds with the kolmogorov-smirnov  test  <cit>  results a k-s d value of  <dig> . the p value associated with this d value is very low , therefore rejected the null hypothesis  <cit> , indicating that the branching pattern in the kitsch tree differs from the expected stochastic timing of speciation/extinction  <cit> . it is clearly seen that the cfd of the kitsch tree begins to deflect upwards from the average cfd at a relative early stage of the branching process, suggesting an ancient cluster of branching events during the evolutionary history of the obscura group.

discussion
phylogenetic relationship in the obscura group
phylogeny of the obscura species group is investigated with dense taxon-sampling from the old world, especially the oriental region, using both nucleotide and translated amino acid sequences of multiple loci. the results corroborate some previously well-recognized relationships, and shed some new light on the evolutionary history of the obscura group, especially the relationship among major lineages.

the mp trees of nt data suggest with low confidence that d. microlabis alone, as a long-branch taxon, represents the first branch in the obscura group. however, it was strongly suggested in the ml tree  and bayesian trees  that d. microlabis forms a monophyletic group with the subobscura subgroup. a suspicion arises whether the basal position of d. microlabis is true, or an artifact due to long-branch attraction  by those outgroups? as demonstrated by anderson and swofford  <cit> , if this relationship is true, mp method is prone to positively recover it, thus seems to perform as good as, or even better than ml method. otherwise, ml will outperform mp by recovering the true relationship. as shown by some studies with empirical data and/or computer simulation  <cit> , model-based methods  can be relatively robust against branch-length differences, even against model violation. therefore, it is very likely that the basal relationship of d. microlabis alone in the mp trees is an artifact due to lba, while the ml and bayesian trees suggest the true relationship between the microlabis and subobscura subgroups.

the bayesian trees with aa data  support with high confidences a basal position of the microlabis-subobscura clade in the obscura group. this relationship is also suggested by previous cladistic analyses  <cit> . in some previous studies lacking any representative of the microlabis subgroup  <cit> , the subobscura subgroup alone was placed as basal to the rest in the obscura group. moreover, comparison of more than  <dig> morphological characters among obscura group species  suggests that d. subobscura  differs more from the other eurasian species than the latter differ from each other  <cit> .

the monophyly of the obscura cluster is also suggested by morphological data: in the obscura group, d. dianensis, d. subsilvestris and d. obscura are the only species characterized by pale spots on several abdominal tergites in female  <cit> , and large, somewhat quadrate 10th sternite in male  <cit> . in the present study, the obscura cluster appears to be most closely related to the sinobscura subgroup, while the remainder species of the obscura subgroup, i.e., the d. limingi/d. tsukubaensis pair and d. bifasciata/d. imaii pair, appear to have diverged earlier. based on these evidences, we propose here a revised notion of the obscura subgroup, i.e., the cluster of the five species d. ambigua, d. obscura, d. tristis, d. dianensis and d. subsilvestris.

consistent with some previous study  <cit> , the present study clusters the palearctic d. helvetica with the nearctic d. affinis with strong support, clearly indicating its adscription to the affinis subgroup. morphologically, d. helvetica possesses some diagnostic characters pertained to the affinis subgroup, e.g., very small distal sex-comb,  <dig> rows of acrostichal setulae. some morphological similarities between d. helvetica and d. tolteca, a member of the affinis subgroup, are also found  <cit> . given the old world origin of the obscura group  <cit>  and the monophyletic nature of the affinis-pseudoobscura clade, d. helvetica undoubtedly represents a refluence of the new world element back into the old world.

it was demonstrated that bayesian posterior probability can overestimate the true probability of node confidences if substitution model used for phylogenetic analysis is oversimplified  <cit> , and/or if concatenated sequences data are used  <cit> . in the 6pmp and ml trees of nt data, the bp supports for the obscura cluster are relatively low, and so are the bp supports for the obscura-sinobscura cluster. however, the corresponding pp values in the bayesian tree of nt data seem to be excessively high. also in the analyses with aa data, a remarkable discrepancy between bp and pp is found for the large clade consisting of the affinis, pseudoobscura, sinobscura, and obscura subgroups. in our bayesian analysis with nt data, partition-specific models are used. the bayesian analyses of aa data with simple  and comprehensive  models yield comparable pp supports for the above relationships. therefore, the great discrepancy between bp and pp may be partially due to our using of concatenated sequences. on the other hand, it was shown that bp in ml analyses is generally a conservative estimate of statistical confidence  <cit> , and that compared to the bp in ml analyses, bp in mp analyses shows lower correlation with bayesian pp  <cit> .

the effect of taxon sampling on phylogenetic accuracy has been addressed by a number of studies  <cit> , most of which favor addition of taxa, especially for breaking up long branches to improve information about state of internal nodes and rate at individual sites  <cit> . in the present study, adding of a number of old world taxa enables us to trace some additional, ancient branching events, resulted in some largely congruent basal relationship in the obscura group, e.g., the close relationship between the d. ambigua triad and the d. dianensis/d. subsilvestris pair, that between the obscura cluster and the sinobscura subgroup, and the sister relationship between the microlabis and subobscura subgroups. the obscura group is presently known for  <dig> described and at least  <dig> undescribed species. future studies with denser taxon sampling and larger number of characters  are desirable to fully resolve the basal relationship in this group.

temporal pattern of evolution
throckmorton's  <cit>  study with data of palegeography and fossil record has proposed that the founder of the obscura group arose and existed for short time before its expanding with the temperate forest. the temperate forest was proposed to began to spread in northern hemisphere with decreasing of temperature by about 10~15°c in oligocene  <cit> . however, according to our time estimation , the old world diversification of the obscura group began well after the origin of this group. by the mid-miocene time, at least half of the current major lineages had come into being, indicating a more or less rapid major radiation of the obscura group. this is also suggested by the results of statistical test of temporal pattern , and reflected by the short internal branches in the phylogenetic trees . on the other hand, obvious nucleotide substitution saturation  and base composition bias have been observed in the mitochondrial loci. all these results lend supports to the previous proposal  <cit>  that either the rapid radiation, or the special evolutionary dynamics of the mtdna in the obscura group may account for the phylogenetic predicament concerning the obscura group.

biogeography and history of adaptive radiation
two major patterns during the evolution of the family drosophilidae have been proposed by throckmorton  <cit>  based on morphological and biogeographical data: 1) the primary tropical disjunction involving species groups, subgenera and genera; and 2) the temperate-forest disjunction involving species subgroups and species, represented typically by the obscura species group. due to lacking of data about drosophilid faunas from either the afrotropical or the oriental region, the disjunction pattern of the obscura group within the old world was thought to be not clear  <cit> . however, the pattern is now much more clearly seen: there are about  <dig> species  are restricted to or mainly distributed in europe/the afrotropical region; and at least  <dig> species  restricted to east/southeast asia. among the eurasian species of the obscura group, at least  <dig> are restricted or mainly distributed in the oriental region, with the southmost records from the mt. kinabalu of malaysia. this clearly indicates a thorough adaptation of the group into high-elevation temperate-like habitats in the oriental region, a pattern parallel to those in the afrotropical and neotropical regions  <cit> .

our time estimation for the major radiation of the obscura group is overlapped largely to the hypothetical time span of the developing of temperate forest in northern hemisphere   <cit> . it was proposed based on biogeographical data that, from the mid-tertiary times, the temperate drosophilid faunas developed and spread with the temperate forest, until the time of the temperate-forest disjunction in mid miocene age  <cit> . it is very likely that the fragmentation of the temperate forest had enforced the old world diversification, and that the gradual desertification of the asia interior onset from the early miocene epoch  <cit>  played important role in enforcing the disjunction of the temperate forest and thus the east-west disjunction of the obscura group within the old world.

the cooling of the climate in the qinghai-tibet area of south asia resulted from the uplift of the qinghai-tibet plateau in the tertiary period was thought to provide favorable conditions for the palearctic insect fauna to invade southwards  <cit> . it is reasonable to presume that changing of climate might have also facilitated the adaptation of the founders of the oriental elements of the obscura group into south asia. probably the intensified uplift of the plateau in late pliocene  <cit>  has accelerated these elements  to spread around, giving rise to the current species in south china, india and malaysia.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our phylogenetic study suggests that, the obscura group began to diversify rapidly in the old world before invaded into the new world. among the old world lineages, the microlabis and subobscura subgroups form a monophyletic group basal to the rest of the obscura group. our results corroborate the finding by the previous studies that the traditional obscura group is paraphyletic, with some of its members  forming a monophyletic cluster, which appears to be most closely related to the sinobscura subgroup.

