BACKGROUND
it is common for traits to vary across the geographical range of a species, and this is frequently linked to adaptation to the local environment. latitudinal clines, which correlate with environmental conditions such as temperature, uv radiation, humidity, and pathogen abundance, present an ideal system for studying local adaptation . for example, it is common to find across many species that body size is smaller nearer the tropics, and this is associated with increases in environmental temperature  <cit> . direct evidence that such clines are driven by adaptation has come from reciprocal transplant experiments showing reduced fitness at different latitudes  <cit>  and from an understanding of the function of the phenotypic differences in different environments. more indirectly, evidence for adaptation comes from the observation that the same latitudinal patterns evolve repeatedly either in nature  <cit>  or in laboratory conditions that mimic latitudinal differences such as temperature  <cit> .

in drosophila melanogaster there is clinal variation of phenotypic traits along the east coasts of australia and the united states  <cit> . despite these areas having only been colonized in the past few hundred years, in many cases parallel clines occur on the two continents. typically tropical populations have smaller bodies, greater resistance to high temperature, reduced tolerance of low temperature and lack the ability to enter reproductive diapause in the winter  <cit> . the clear link of these phenotypes to changes in climate, together with the fact that they occur across multiple continents, suggests that these clines are a product of local adaptation that is maintained by spatially varying selection  <cit> . in some cases the genetic basis if these phenotypic differences is known, and the polymorphism has been found to vary clinally. for example, a single amino acid change in the couch potato gene is associated with reproductive diapause and shows clinal variation that closely mirrors changes in the trait  <cit> .

the advent of new sequencing and genotyping technologies has allowed the search for clinal variation to be extended to the entire d. melanogaster genome  <cit> . this resulted in large numbers of clinally varying snps being discovered, and the finding that parallel clines were commonly found in the us and australia suggested that many different genes across the genome might be involved in local adaptation  <cit> . however, recent analyses suggest that clinal patterns may instead result from demographic processes  <cit> . both australian and us populations of d. melanogaster have been founded from both african and european populations, with african flies contributing primarily to populations nearest the tropics on both continents  <cit> . therefore, much of the clinal variation in genetic markers may simply reflect admixture between european and african flies and not local adaptation, and parallel clines of genetic variants alone cannot be taken as evidence of local adaptation  <cit> .

a small number of studies have investigated geographical variation in gene expression in d. melanogaster. when populations of d. melanogaster from maine usa and panama were compared, numerous genes were found to be differentially expressed  <cit> . d. simulans populations collected from the same locations also showed differences in gene expression, and these frequently involved the same genes changing in expression in the same direction  <cit> . the observation that the same patterns have arisen in parallel in the two species strongly suggests that these differences in gene expression are in part driven by spatially varying selection pressures  <cit> . in australia transcriptional differences have been identified using microarrays between northern and southern australia  <cit> . when flies from tropical and temperate regions of australia are reared at both hot and cold temperatures, there is an excess of genes that are downregulated at the temperature that is most unlike the flies’ natural environment  <cit> . the genes showing these patterns were clustered in small groups, which suggests some of the changes may be due to chromatin regulation  <cit> . this observation that plasticity in gene expression is linked to environmental variation suggests that this variation is in part an adaptation to maintain correct levels of gene expression when flies colonized regions with different temperatures  <cit> .

selection on gene expression has long been argued to be the major source of evolutionary change  <cit> , and therefore may be important to local adaptation. local adaptation via changes in gene expression has recently been demonstrated to be more common than by amino acid substitutions in humans  <cit> . modification of expression can occur via cis-regulatory elements , which are physically linked to the genes whose expression they control, or trans-acting elements, which are physically distant. cres tend to influence one or a few gene targets, often in specific tissues or at specific times, whereas trans factors can control the expression of many genes. this means that the modification of cres during evolution may result in fewer pleiotropic changes than changes to trans acting factors  <cit> . therefore, it is expected that cres are an important source of local adaptation, as they allow the fine-tuned alteration of gene expression with fewer associated fitness costs  <cit> .

the effects of cis and trans-acting polymorphisms can be distinguished by measuring the relative expression of the two alleles of a gene within a single individual  <cit> . polymorphisms acting in trans are expected to alter the expression of the two alleles equally, while cis-acting polymorphisms will result in the expression of the alleles on the two chromosomes differing. this allele-specific expression  can be detected by measuring the relative abundance of snps in rnaseq reads, with deviations from a 50: <dig> ratio indicating ase . such analyses must be undertaken with care, as rnaseq reads are less likely to map to a reference genome when snps cause mismatches to the reference genome, generating false signals of ase  <cit> . these problems have been overcome in a variety of ways, allowing cis-regulatory variation to be studied on a genome-wide scale.

to study latitudinal variation in gene expression, we used  <dig> isofemale lines from two australian and two united states populations, chosen to represent temperate and tropical or sub-tropical environments from each continent . we genetically cloned a haploid genome from each line, and then crossed these genomes to the strain of d. melanogaster that was sequenced to produce the standard reference genome  <cit>  . local adaptation to pathogens is common in natural populations  <cit> , and in drosophila latitudinally differentiated genomic regions are enriched for genes involved in the immune response  <cit>  and some tropical populations have higher resistance to infection than temperate populations  <cit> . to increase the amount of sequence data from immunity genes, we inoculated the progeny of the cross with a cocktail of heat-killed micrococcus luteus  and escherichia coli  bacteria to upregulate genes involved in the immune response. these bacteria were chosen as they activate the toll and imd pathways, which are the two main immune signaling pathways of drosophila  <cit> . we then measured both total gene expression and allele-specific gene expression  using rna-seq.fig.  <dig> parallel differences in total gene expression between temperate and tropical populations in australia and the united states. a temperate  and tropical or sub-tropical  populations were sampled from victoria and queensland in australia  and maine and florida in the united states . b mean per gene log <dig> fold expression differences between tropical and temperate populations were estimated separately for each continent. genes that are significantly differentially expressed on either continent  are shown in black, and the number of significant points in each quadrant is shown in the corner. warmer colours indicate a greater density of superimposed points. c go term enrichment was performed on genes that showed evidence for parallel differences between latitudes on both continents . significant biological process categories are shown horizontally and genes in those categories vertically . red in the bottom bar indicates genes upregulated in tropical populations and blue indicates genes upregulated in temperate populations. the map was created using the r package maps





RESULTS
parallel differences in gene expression between tropical and temperate populations on different continents
we find evidence of reciprocal latitudinal differences in gene expression in the united states and australia . we tested for latitudinal differences in expression by looking for an excess of genes that had significantly different expression levels between latitudes in at least one continent and that tended towards the same direction on both continents . in the united states  <dig> of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed between the temperate and sub-tropical populations with a genome-wide false discovery rate of 20% . of these, in 83% of cases  the direction of expression was the same between the temperate and tropical populations in australia, reflecting an excess of genes with the same direction of change on both continents . if only the  <dig> genes with a false discovery rate of 5% in the us are considered, then in 90% of cases the direction of expression was the same between the temperate and tropical populations in australia . furthermore, the relative expression of genes in our temperate and sub-tropical populations in the united states was positively correlated with published microarray data comparing europe with africa  <cit>  . this pattern was largely driven by genes upregulated in tropical compared to temperate populations. when the reciprocal analysis was done, we found far fewer genes were significantly differentially expressed between latitudes in australia .

the genes with parallel latitudinal differences in expression are enriched for certain functional categories . this includes the immune response, including antimicrobial peptides , a thioester-containing protein , two prophenoloxidases , and two lectins  . these immunity genes are all more highly expressed in the tropics. we also find higher expression in tropical populations of genes involved in pesticide resistance , melanisation and pigmentation , oxidation-reduction reactions , metabolism , cuticle formation , and reproduction .

variation in cis-regulatory elements alters gene expression
gene expression can be affected by variation in cis-regulatory elements, which will affect expression in an allele-specific manner, or trans-acting factors, which will affect both alleles equally  <cit> . because cis-regulatory variation causes allele-specific differences in expression , it can be detected by testing whether rna-seq reads originating from the two alleles deviate from the expected 1: <dig> ratio  <cit> . for each gene, we took the sequence reads that contained a snp and counted the numbers that came from the reference genome and fly line sampled from the wild  <cit> . as we have biological replicates of 12- <dig> genotypes for each gene we analysed , we can detect heterogeneity in ase using a generalized linear mixed model that accounts for any non-genetic variation in the ratio of reads from the two alleles, such as might arise during the sequencing process. of the  <dig> genes that met our coverage requirements,  <dig>  had significant ase with a genome-wide false discovery rate of 20% .

using our estimates of ase, we divided the alleles of each gene into high and low expression groups . as expected, we found a strong correlation between ase and total gene expression, which was measured separately using the total number of reads mapping to each gene  <cit>  . in 85% of cases, lines carrying the high expression allele had higher total gene expression than lines carrying the low expression allele . we also found that the allele that was more frequent in the population  usually had higher expression than the less frequent minor allele . of the  <dig> genes with a minor allele frequency below 30% in the population, 76%  had higher expression of the major allele. this may suggest the presence of low frequency slightly deleterious mutations reducing gene expression, as might be expected if new mutations reduce gene expression more often than they increase it.fig.  <dig> identifying high and low expression alleles. two genes with allele specific expression  are shown. ase was detected as significant variation in the ratio of sequence reads from wild alleles sampled from natural populations and the reference allele across the different fly genotypes. the lines were divided into those with high and low expression alleles using a grouping approach with maximum likelihood . the group with the mean log <dig> ratio closest to  <dig> was assumed to have the cis-regulatory element  allele found in the reference genome. note that in a the reference genome has the low expression allele , and in c it has the high expression allele . panels b and d show the total expression of lines carrying the high and low expression alleles


fig.  <dig> effect on total expression and population frequency of cis-regulatory polymorphisms. a ase, measured as the imbalance in expression of high versus low alleles, has a phenotypic effect on total expression. the relative total expression of each gene in lines containing the high versus low ase alleles was estimated as the log <dig> ratio of the mean cpm  of the high and low allele groups. ase was estimated as the difference between the high and low expression groups in the mean log <dig> wild-allele-read-count/reference-allele-read-count ratio . b the major ase allele tends to have higher total expression than the minor allele . in b only genes where the minor allele had a frequency of less than 30% are analysed. in all cases, genes were considered to have ase at an fdr <  <dig> 




parallel differences in cis-regulatory elements between tropical and temperate populations on different continents
as was the case for total expression, we found reciprocal latitudinal differences in ase in the united states and australia . the genes that show parallel patterns of latitudinal ase variation include those involved in the immune response, cold acclimation, circadian rhythm, starvation response, lipid uptake and uv radiation response . for example, we find that in  photolyase, which repairs uv-induced dna damage  <cit> , a cre associated with high expression has higher frequencies in both tropical populations .fig.  <dig> latitudinal correlations in allele-specific expression. a the difference in ase between tropical and temperate populations is significantly correlated between australia and the united states . b genes with latitudinal differentiation in total gene expression are enriched for ase, with 41% of these genes showing evidence for ase compared with 17% of genes without latitudinal differentiation . c ase differences between latitudes are correlated with total expression differences between latitudes for genes with significant ase  and for the subset of those genes that also had significant latitudinal differentiation in total gene expression . genes were considered to have significant ase at fdr <  <dig> , and were considered to have latitudinal differentiation in total gene expression if the latitudes significantly differed at a p <  <dig>  on one or both continents and if the direction of change was the same on both continents




the reciprocal latitudinal differences in total gene expression in australia and the united states can in part be explained by cre variation. we found that genes were twice as likely to have significant ase if they also had parallel latitudinal differences in total gene expression . this enrichment was not driven by differences in power between genes with and without latitudinal differences in total expression, as down-sampling to correct for this yielded similar results . across all genes with ase, the difference between tropical and temperate populations in ase and total expression tends to go in the same direction in both australia  and the united states . this pattern holds if the analysis is restricted to just those genes with significant latitudinal differences in total gene expression, although it is only significant in australia . together, these results demonstrate that the frequency of cre polymorphisms vary in response to latitude and in similar ways across the two continents.

our method for detecting ase  <cit>  aims to minimize the effects of mapping bias, which occurs when alleles more similar to the reference genome are more likely to map, leading to false detection of ase. briefly, we minimized this bias by mapping first to the reference genome and then to a genome updated to include snps found in the first round of mapping  <cit> . in addition, we only used snps in a high quality snp database  <cit>  for measuring ase. because all our fly lines were crossed to the reference genome strain we can detect the effect of mapping biases  <cit> . we found that the average proportion of reads from the reference genome allele was  <dig> % and  <dig> of  <dig> lines have above 50% reference alleles, suggesting a small bias remains. however, we could rule out mapping bias as a confounding factor by repeating all our analyses separately using just genes that were biased towards or away from the reference genome  . inversions, which are thought to suppress recombination between locally adapted alleles, vary in frequency along latitudes in d. melanogaster, and the inp inversion is thought to carry genes associated with adaptation to latitude  <cit> . we find no evidence that genes that are latitudinally differentiated in total expression are clustered within inversions or chromosome arms , nor that latitudinal correlations in ase are driven by particular regions of the genome .

discussion
we have found that changes in gene expression and allele specific expression in drosophila from recently colonized temperate and tropical or sub-tropical regions in the northern and southern hemispheres are correlated. a key question is whether these differences reflect demography or local adaptation. if these differences were already present in ancestral african and european populations, unequal colonization by these founding populations may have contributed to or produced the observed differences in australia and the united states populations. indeed, tropical populations in both australia and the united states have a greater proportion of african ancestry  <cit> . however, it is also plausible that selection has been important in establishing some of the parallel clines, as it is known that within australia gene expression in tropical and temperate populations respond differently to changes in a temperature in a way that suggests there has been local adaptation to maintain gene expression at different temperatures. additional evidence that selection can play a role in establishing latitudinal clines in gene expression comes from the observation that parallel clines exist in d. melanogaster and d. simulans  <cit> . furthermore, it is clear that there is parallel local adaptation to latitude in phenotypic traits on both continents and it is likely that gene expression differences contribute to these differences.

the functional categories of genes that have parallel clines in expression are compatible with these differences arising due to local adaptation, regardless of whether selection was acting in the ancestral european and african populations, or in australia and the united states. for example, immune response genes are more highly expressed in the tropics, which is consistent with previous observations of higher resistance to infection in some tropical drosophila populations  <cit>  and increased pathogen diversity closer to the equator in other species  <cit> . similarly, we found differences in genes involved in pigmentation, the repair of uv damage to dna, detoxification pathways and reproduction. it is possible that these contribute to latitudinal clines in traits like reproductive rate and pigmentation that are thought to be local adaptations. similar patterns are also seen in humans, where a recent meta-analysis has shown that expression of genes involved in the immune response, uv radiation response, and diabetes pathways are correlated with latitude  <cit> .

unexpectedly, we found far greater latitudinal differences in total gene expression in the us than in australia. this difference may be explained by the larger climatic difference between the populations in the united states  as compared with australia  resulting in larger differences in gene expression. alternatively, it could be the result of different colonization processes on the two continents – for example australia and the united states may have been colonized from different populations.

CONCLUSIONS
we have found extensive latitudinal differences in gene expression which are correlated with cis-regulatory differences between the same populations. many of the genes involved have functions that may be important in adaptation to local environmental conditions. a challenge for the future is to disentangle any effects of selection from demography, and to determine whether any selection has acted in recently colonized new world populations or the old world populations from where these came. one approach is to show the adaptive significance of individual genes we identified – for example, does increased expression of  photolyase result in reduced dna damage in tropical populations? alternatively, genome-wide approaches could be taken such as examining changes in ase at different temperatures, showing parallel changes in situations where population admixture is not a problem , or attempting to disentangle selection and demography analytically.

