BACKGROUND
the chemical communication, as well as the mating behaviour, of bed bugs  has received increased attention in recent years as bed bug infestations have increased worldwide. the occurrence of alarm pheromones has been known since the  <dig> s  <cit>  but, in the light of traumatic insemination , new discoveries concerning the usage of alarm pheromones by bed bugs are changing the common view that alarm pheromones are used as a predator defence system only  <cit> .

all developmental stages and both sexes of c. lectularius are obligate blood-feeders and they form large aggregations within close proximity of their human host. bed bugs remain hidden inside their refuge where they mate, moult and oviposit until their next nocturnal blood meal on the resting host  <cit> . mating is exclusively traumatic, with the male piercing a secondary genital opening in the female with its lanceolate paramere and ejaculating directly into the abdominal cavity  <cit> . mating occurs throughout the adults' life and hence polygamous mating is common  <cit> . multiple mating injuries have been shown to be costly for females, probably due to increased immunological threat  <cit> , and lead to a reduced life span  <cit> .

mating is closely associated with blood feeding and male attention is directed to any large, newly blood-fed bed bugs  <cit> . hence, males display characteristic mounting behaviour when presented to an engorged individual regardless of sex  <cit> . if the mounted mate is a male or a large nymph, the males respond by a quick dismount and mating does not occur  <cit> . this suggests a lack of long-distance sex identification signals and that identification occurs after mounting  <cit> .

it is well established that stressed bed bugs of all stages and sexes release an alarm pheromone, causing the dispersal of conspecifics  <cit> . however, the alarm pheromone has a dual function in bed bugs, where a mounted male responds by releasing alarm pheromone to prevent homosexual mating  <cit> , in addition to adopting specific behaviours  <cit> . in contrast, females do not release alarm pheromone when mounted by a male  <cit> . the alarm pheromone is produced by glands located between the first and second pairs of legs on the methatorax of adults and dorsally on the nymph abdomen  <cit> . the alarm pheromone is composed of -2-hexenal and -2-octenal  <cit> , both of which are detected by olfactory receptor neurons  housed in smooth peg sensilla on the adult antenna  <cit> . female and male bed bugs produce different ratios of the two aldehydes, with both sexes releasing a larger amount of -2-hexenal than nymphs  <cit> . in addition to the aldehydes, last nymphal stages also produce two oxygenated aldehydes, 4-oxo--2-hexenal and 4-oxo--2-octenal . the behavioural role of these nymph-specific compounds, or the significance of the reversed ratio of the two aldehydes, has not yet been established.

we hypothesize that the nymph-emitted compounds are used by nymphs as an identification signal, which deters mate-seeking males. after establishing that male bed bugs are able to detect these compounds, using single sensillum recordings, we predict that by removing the possibility for nymphs to emit their pheromone, nymphs would experience a higher rate of mating than non-manipulated nymphs. in addition, the addition of the major nymph-specific compound 4-oxo--2-hexenal, as well as a reversed ratio of the two aldehydes would result in mating disruption of adult bed bugs.

RESULTS
male mounting interest to nymphs
males did not distinguish between nymphs and females of similar size as they mounted females  and nymphs  equally often, with a mean frequency of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . in contrast, males spent significantly more time in mounting position on females  than on nymphs . mounting of females resulted in  <dig> % mating with sperm transfer, whereas no mating with sperm transfer was observed in mounted nymphs .

removal of nymph alarm pheromone
males mounted females, pheromone silenced, sham-treated and non-manipulated nymphs equally often . however,  <dig> % of the females and  <dig> % of the nymphs with blocked dorsal abdominal glands were mated and received sperm. no mating, or sperm transfer, was observed in the control and sham-treated nymph groups . the percentage of mating with females  and silenced nymphs  did not differ , but was significantly higher than when mating with nymphs, which were able to release alarm pheromone, that is control  and sham-treated nymphs .

single sensillum recordings
stimulation with a nymphal bed bug head space extract elicited a significant response of orns housed in both grooved- and smooth-peg sensilla . no response was observed in trichoid sensilla , and no sexual dimorphism was observed in the responses between males and females.

the four nymph-emitted compounds, -2-hexenal, -2-octenal, 4-oxo--2-hexenal and 4-oxo--2-octenal, elicited dose-dependent responses in orns of smooth peg sensilla. however, only -2-hexenal and -2-octenal elicited significant responses at the lowest concentrations tested , compared to control . olfactory receptor neurons housed in grooved peg sensilla were specifically tuned to 4-oxo--2-hexenal and 4-oxo--2-octenal . 4-oxo--2-hexenal elicited a dose-dependent excitatory response, with significant responses observed at 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> concentrations compared to control. in contrast, 4-oxo--2-octenal elicited inhibitory dose-dependent responses, with significant responses observed only at 10- <dig> and 10- <dig> concentrations . in light of these results, -2-hexenal, -2-octenal and 4-oxo--2-hexenal seem to be biologically relevant signals, and the following behavioural experiment was conducted using these compounds.

addition of alarm pheromone
transforming the females into silenced females by blocking their metathoracic glands did not affect male mounting behaviour . however, stimulation with alarm pheromone onto a male/female pair induced different numbers of matings, depending on the compounds and ratios used . a pair-wise comparison revealed that the male percentage of mating decreased significantly after stimulation with 4-oxo--2-hexenal  and with -hexenal: -octenal at the nymph-specific ratio of 2: <dig>  compared to control . in contrast, stimulation with -hexenal: -octenal at the female and male ratio of 5: <dig> and 1: <dig>  respectively , did not affect the percentage of mating:  <dig> %  and  <dig> % , respectively, compared to control .

discussion
this study demonstrates that the alarm pheromone produced by the dorsal abdominal glands of c. lectularius nymphs is detected by males and acts as a protection against traumatic extragenital insemination.

male bed bugs mount any moving object of the size of a fed female bed bug  <cit>  without discrimination of sex  <cit> , developmental stage  or even species  <cit>  prior to physical contact  <cit> . these observations are corroborated by our study in which males mounted blood-fed females and nymphs with the same frequency . however, when in physical contact, the male usually responds by a quick dismount when the mounted individual is a male  <cit>  or a nymph . by mating with a mistaken individual, the male wastes energy and sperm, and thereby decreases his reproductive success. the possible cost for the mounted individual may be mechanical damage such as gut perforation and the increased risk of infection by pathogens  <cit> . females have physiological and anatomical adaptations, such as the spermalege, which reduces these fitness costs imposed during mating  <cit> . however, even for females, traumatic insemination carries a measurable fitness cost  <cit> , which may be higher for males  <cit>  and nymphs who lack such adaptations. it is therefore crucial for the nymphs to state their identity to males in order to avoid traumatic extragenital insemination. this statement is strengthened by our observation of silenced nymphs, which were unable to emit their alarm pheromone, and hence were mated . to confirm the hypothesis that nymphs state their identity via their alarm pheromone, we tried to disrupt the mating of silenced females by adding alarm pheromone signals that are associated with nymph emission. we found that both -2-hexenal:-2-octenal in a nymph-specific ratio  and 4-oxo--2-hexenal, which all elicit orn responses at biologically relevant concentrations, are sufficient to deter males from copulating with the manipulated female . in contrast, the female and male specific ratio of the two aldehydes did not elicit dismounting . this non-repulsive effect of the alarm pheromone emitted by adults may be linked, as mentioned by  <cit> , to the dual interpretation of this blend in relation to the amount emitted. indeed, males, in addition to releasing alarm pheromone while mounted  <cit> , adopt specific behaviours of non-acceptance by bending their abdomen and shaking their body in order to escape piercing .

CONCLUSIONS
the unusual mating behaviour of the bed bug, with traumatic insemination, gives new insights to their chemical communication systems. like males avoiding homosexual mistakes  <cit> , nymphs also emit an alarm pheromone to avoid being chosen as partner. by further analysing the alarm pheromone ratios and content, we find that a specific ratio of aldehyde compounds, characteristic of nymphs, are sufficient to avoid mating, but we also conclude that 4-oxo--2-hexenal produced specifically by the nymphs is detected by specific sensilla on the male antennae and may contribute on its own to a repellent effect on males. this double effect may give a stronger protection to the nymphs against mating and piercing mistakes. the chemical communication system of the bed bugs is only just unfolding, and further analyses on longevity costs to nymphs as well as males who have been pierced is a high priority to fully understand the picture of traumatic insemination.

