BACKGROUND
diffusion-weighted imaging  is sensitive for the early detection of ischemic tissue injury due to stroke, with changes being visible as early as 11 min post-onset  <cit> . greater understanding of the temporal evolution of dwi under conditions of ischemia and revascularization is important for accurate diagnosis and management of stroke patients. serial mri studies performed in experimental rat stroke models have shown that the spatiotemporal progression of tissue injury after focal ischemia is heterogeneous and differs between animals that revascularize and those that do not  <cit> . however, because rodents have intrinsically different stroke evolution patterns than primates  <cit> , serial studies using gyrencephalic primates may potentially provide more representative insight into human stroke  <cit> . a previous study on post-stroke changes in t <dig> and diffusion tensor imaging  found that lesion evolution after permanent and transient stroke in cynomologous macaques is more consistent with changes observed in human stroke patients, compared to rodent stroke models  <cit> . in that study, differences in lesion evolution were investigated using volumetric analysis that may introduce bias from regional tissue averaging, potentially obscuring local temporal variations in lesion development  <cit> .

several studies have demonstrated that voxel-based cluster analysis can provide improved insights into the local characteristics of regional tissue changes after stroke . iterative self-organizing data analysis  circumvents the need for substantial user-interaction and a priori specification of the number of clusters by dynamically determining the optimal number of clusters  <cit> . isodata has been used to create tissue signatures that correlated with lesions on radiological outcomes in human stroke and to histological outcome in lissencephalic rodent stroke models  <cit> . yet, the utility of isodata for investigating gyrencephalic non-human primate stroke models for which histological tissue outcome can confirm tissue injury or recovery remains unexamined. this study, therefore, investigated the evolutionary changes of diffusion and t <dig> mri indices after stroke in cynomologous macaques using a modified isodata analysis. the first aim of this study was to identify unique temporal mri patterns in the acute, subacute, and chronic stages after stroke by combining multiple mri measures on a voxel-wise basis. the second aim focused on characterizing spatial and temporal differences in t <dig> and dti parameters between macaques with transient versus permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion . the final aim of this study was to compare the mri-determined tissue signatures with histopathology.

RESULTS
stroke model
analysis was conducted on two macaques with permanent mcao  and two macaques with 3-h transient mcao . for three animals , spatially and temporally adjusted isodata  was used to combine serial dti and t <dig> data from approximately 1 h , 2 h , 3 h , 24 h , 72 h , 144 h , and 240 h  after stroke onset. for the fourth animal  isodata cluster analysis included mri up till 144 h, since t <dig> maps at 240 h were unavailable. for “chronic” lesion volumes, the 17-day  t <dig> maps were used except for one animal  that died before the 17-day time-point; in that case the 10 days data was used instead.

tissue classifications
in the permanent mcao group, 48 % of the voxels with abnormal tissue signature were assigned to the core tissue class. 41 % of the voxels were initially normal but became abnormal by 17 days . recovery and edema areas comprised  <dig> and 7 % respectively of the abnormal signature voxels. for the transient mcao group, the majority of voxels were assigned to the edema tissue class , while the core tissue class was smaller . percentage-wise, there were more growth voxels in the permanent  than in the transient mcao group  , whereas recovery voxels made up a larger percentage of the transient mcao group  .

isodata-based tissue signatures
figure  <dig> shows examples of tissue lesions as measured with adc and t <dig> across time for the four mcao brains. figure  <dig> shows the measured lesion volumes across time from all brains. overlap  between the spatially and temporally adjusted isodata  identified lesions and ‘maximal lesion’ roi was significantly different depending on the input mri-parameters used. highest dsi was obtained with a combination of adc, fa, and t <dig>  . therefore combined adc, fa, and t2-based st-isodata was subsequently used with the minimum number of voxels within a cluster , the minimum inter-cluster distance , and the maximum allowed intra-cluster dispersion  set to  <dig>   <dig>  ±  <dig> , and  <dig>  ±  <dig> , respectively. this resulted in 12– <dig> clusters that were identified for each brain. subsequent coefficient of variance  pruning with a threshold of  <dig> , the threshold with highest overlap between st-isodata identified lesions and ‘maximal lesion’ roi , reduced the number of identified clusters to 2– <dig> per brain. the resulting normalized ipsilateral clusters were pooled across brains, creating six signatures with ranges 1– <dig> , 6– <dig> , 26– <dig> , 36– <dig> , 46– <dig> , or 56– <dig> . no cluster values ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> or  <dig> to  <dig> were observed and therefore signatures were not generated encompassing these cluster values. signature n was consistent with unaffected tissue while the other five indicated varying degrees of tissue abnormality corresponding to histologically-identified affected tissue areas at 30 days. figure  <dig> shows examples of acute  and 240 h mri datasets  from brains with permanent mcao  and brains with 3-h transient mcao  along with resultant signatures.fig.  <dig> tissue lesion development over five different timepoints in the four macaque brains. coronal slices of the brains of permanent  and 3 h transient mcao macaques . 3 h post onset adc  maps are shown followed by  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  day t <dig> maps illustrating tissue lesion progression over time 

fig.  <dig> temporal change in abnormal tissue lesion volumes compared with st-isodata calculated abnormal tissue signature volumes. abnormal tissue lesion volumes  and st-isodata assigned abnormal tissue signature volumes  in the four macaques. largest tissue lesion volumes represented regions of ‘maximal lesion’ and were used for parameter optimization of st-isodata. pmcao <dig> died before 408 h follow-up, the 240 h was used as follow-up instead. tmcao <dig> 240 h t <dig> was not available

table  <dig> overlap of abnormal st-isodata tissue volumes and ‘maximal lesion’ volumes measured using dice’s similarity index

adc, t2
adc, fa, t2
the combination of adc, fa, and t <dig> as input for st-isodata clustering resulted in highest overlap  between st-isodata calculated abnormal tissue volumes and ‘maximal lesion’ volumes. therefore this combination was used for st-isodata analysis


dsi dice’s similarity index

* p <  <dig>  versus fa, ** p <  <dig>  versus fa

fig.  <dig> example of coronal brain slices from macaques after permanent or 3 h transient mcao. quantitative adc, fa, and t <dig> maps at 1 h after stroke induction , and 240 h follow-up t <dig> maps  of animals with permanent  or 3 h transient mcao  are shown. for each animal the quantitative maps from 1 h up to 240 h after mcao were combined using a st-isodata approach resulting in five abnormal signatures , that were consistent with regions of affected tissue on lfb-stained histological sections 



the five identified abnormal signatures showed differences in the temporal evolution of relative adc , fa  and t <dig>   . decreased acute radc were observed for signature ii, iv, and v , with largest radc decrease for signature ii and particularly v . decreased radc were followed by a sharp increase in radc in the first 24 h for signature iv, whereas for signature ii radc further decreased . for signatures ii and iii, radc was reduced for at least 24 h before slowly increasing towards normal values . in the chronic phase, signatures i and iv showed a slow decrease, whereas signature v exhibited a progressive increase in radc . decreased values in acute rfa were only observed for signature v . all signatures showed a decreasing trend in rfa up until  <dig> h. after  <dig> h, rfa started to normalize in signatures i and iv. for signatures i and iv, rt <dig> increased until  <dig> h, after which a gradual decrease was observed. signature iii displayed progressive increase in rt <dig>  until stabilizing at 72 h. the rate of increase in rt <dig> after 3 h was greater for signature iv compared to the other signatures , except for signature v. for signatures ii and v, rt <dig> progressively increased across all time-points. however, rt <dig> values at 240 h differed statistically significantly from normal tissue only for signature v .fig.  <dig> temporal change in radc, rfa, and rt <dig> of st-isodata assigned tissue signatures. plots of mean radc , rfa , and rt <dig>  as a function of time after stroke induction. st-isodata identified one normal  and five abnormal signatures  that evolved differently from each other . 



the distribution of signatures differed between permanent and transient mcao groups . the permanent mcao group was primarily composed of signatures ii and iii while the transient mcao group consisted mostly of signatures iv and v. for both transient  and permanent mcao  groups, the distribution of the six st-isodata signatures differed between the four tissue classes  . in one brain , signature i was found almost exclusively within areas of edema , with some voxels in regions of growth  and recovery  . signature iv was found in permanent but particularly in 3-h transient mcao brains , in the latter predominantly in regions of edema , and to lesser extent in regions of core  , growth   and recovery  .fig.  <dig> temporal tissue signature distributions. percentage distribution of the temporal tissue signatures over the four tissue classifications  and the four tissue classes over the five abnormal signatures . in the permanent mcao group , tissue classes consisted predominantly of signatures ii and iii, particularly depicting core and growth types. signature v was found only in the transient mcao group . in this group the most prevalent signature across all tissue classes was iv. the edema type made up 99 % of signature i and 46 % of signature iv in the transient mcao group, but only 20 % of signature iv for the permanent group 



histological features
hematoxylin and eosin , luxol fast blue  and myelin basic protein -stained brain sections from all cases were analyzed with particular attention given to regions identified by signatures i through v. lesion characteristics from each available signature area from the four brains are summarized in table  <dig>  histopathological alterations in the brain included extensive necrosis with brain tissue loss and cavitation; axonal swelling; astrogliosis; edema and spongiosis; vascular proliferation; and the presence of activated and foamy microglia/macrophages  with phagocytized necrotic debris. in the permanent mcao brains, signature ii was primarily found in gray matter  areas  and corresponded to the most severe lesions with areas of extensive necrosis, tissue loss, dead neurons, and gitter cells . signature iii was detected solely in permanent mcao brains in areas of white matter   and gray-white matter junctions . these regions showed areas of neuronal injury with features of degenerating neurons and axons, but absence of gitter cells. parietal temporal wm was also affected in signatures iv and v defined volumes. signature iv corresponded to a prominent border region between infarcted and surviving tissue with vascular proliferation, spongiosis, and astrogliosis. these histological changes were found in both permanent and transient mcao brains. astrogliosis along with some neuronal mineralization and edema were also observed in signature i, present in only one transient mcao brain .table  <dig> histological characteristics of the st-isodata abnormal tissue signatures within the brains of the four macaques


na not applicable

fig.  <dig> comparison of st-isodata designated abnormal tissue signatures with histology. h&e stained brain sections from animals with permanent  or 3-h transient  mcao. insets display the  <dig> h t <dig> mri with overlays of signatures i , ii , iii , iv , and v , and a squared box indicating the area of the microscopic fields. in permanent mcao, most severe tissue injury was observed in signature ii regions  that corresponded with severe tissue necrosis and loss, sheets of activated, vacuolated microglia/macrophages  and some remaining vasculature. neuronal and glial injury and degeneration in the peri-lesional brain regions corresponded with signature iii, and included degenerated axons  and hypereosinophilia of dying neurons . in transient mcao signature i  corresponded with areas with peri-lesional neuronal mineralization  and astrogliosis evidenced by the presence of numerous, large eosinophilic gemistocytes . signature iv  corresponded with brain regions with vascular proliferation, spongiosis, and marked astrogliosis. signature v  corresponded with brain regions with necrosis and infiltration of gitter cells. the border region between signatures iv and v is displayed in lower magnification in ii.d . original magnification × <dig> 



discussion
in this study, t <dig> and diffusion  mri indices acquired at acute, subacute, and chronic stages after stroke were combined on a voxel-wise basis to identify unique spatiotemporal mri profiles, and to determine differences in stroke evolution after permanent or transient mcao in non-human primates. the st-isodata approach identified six distinct tissue signatures, with one signature consistent with non-ischemic normal tissue. the five other  signatures showed substantial differences from this normal signature. these abnormal signatures exhibited differences in tissue class distribution and temporal profile depending on duration of occlusion  and level of neuronal damage.

despite its general use, the utility of single acute mri parameters like t <dig> or adc for the prediction of tissue infarction are still being debated . as we have demonstrated, using a single mri parameter such as adc cannot reliably identify irreversibly damaged “core” tissue, since tissue with decreased adc may “recover” at subsequent timepoints as a result of early reperfusion. the merits of using multiparametric mri measures on a voxel-wise basis have been previously illustrated in rodent  <cit>  and in human studies  <cit> . yet, previous histological validation of multiparametric mri-based algorithms was primarily based on lissencephalic rodent models  <cit>  for which translation of findings to human subjects are not straightforward  <cit> . therefore recent guidelines recommend further validation using higher order animals, e.g. non-human primates as employed in this study, to improve insights based on increased anatomic similarity with human brains  <cit> .

variations in temporal evolution of signatures classified as abnormal may inform on varying degrees of neuronal damage . increased or decreased acute fa values may be associated with different levels of cell swelling in white or gray matter structures  <cit> . alternatively, these fa alterations may reflect initially preserved cytoarchitecture or increased extracellular space tortuosity as a result of cytotoxic edema  that gradually decayed as ischemia progressed towards tissue necrosis   <cit> . regions of relatively acutely increased fa were observed in areas of cortical gray matter while decreased fa were primarily observed in temporal and parietal white matter regions. future studies should extensively examine differences in gray and white matter fa evolution after ischemia. the differences in adc pseudo-normalization and increased t <dig> may have been accelerated by reperfusion. reperfusion may reinstate energy metabolism and ion-pump function effecting permanent or transient reversal of adc  <cit> . alternatively flow restoration may aggravate blood–brain-barrier disruption resulting in vasogenic edema  <cit> . subsequent renormalization of t <dig>  in the more chronic stages may most likely be associated with resolution of edema  <cit> . however, it may also highlight areas with delayed tissue damage  <cit>  or more likely  long-term tissue remodeling. regions that exhibited increased fa in chronic stages were also associated with glial scar tissue. at early time-points, these same regions typically showed reduced fa values, most likely as a result of early edema from reperfusion. as edema resolved, these reduced fa values renormalized, ultimately increasing to values above normal tissue, consistent with findings reported in chronic rodent stroke models .

cluster analysis may be affected by the quality of the underlying data. biologically induced deformations  or imaging induced distortions  may contribute to an increased number of  clusters that may negatively influence subsequent analysis  <cit> . in this study several pruning steps—including spatial contiguity constraints, cov analysis, and advanced  linear registration—were employed to reduce these potential artifacts. however, despite these efforts not all artifacts could be resolved and therefore signature analysis was restricted to the ipsilateral parenchyma only. it may be furthermore argued that cov pruning and the “intra-dataset” signature merging steps may oversimplify or obscure additional tissue profiles. nevertheless, we identified biologically interpretable mri signatures that corresponded with specific features of tissue damage as verified with histology and showed highest overlap between isodata-segmented abnormal tissue regions and the manually-defined ‘maximal lesion’ regions. our study was furthermore limited by retrospective analysis of a small cohort of animals precluding generalization of specific mri tissue signatures heralding histological tissue damage. however, the scope of the current retrospective study is to analyze the mri data with regard to size and characterization of lesions. future prospective studies should investigate histopathological changes in individual brains to assess the predictive value of these mri tissue signatures for infarct evolution and to compare these changes with pre-specified cellular markers  that could further inform about the potential origin of the observed diverse mri signals. abnormal cluster regions from brains with relatively large lesions  corresponded better with ‘maximal lesion’ regions than those with smaller lesions  and possibly dominated clustering results. subtle temporal changes that may occur with smaller tissue lesions may as a result be obscured. another limitation is the relatively large field-of-view and low spatial-resolution that was used as a result of performing these studies on clinical large bore scanners. future studies using mri systems with higher gradient strengths and specialized head coils would allow for acquisitions with higher spatial resolution  <cit> . diffusion measures, and hence cluster results, may also be improved with additional number of gradient directions. in the future, multiparametric mri analysis should be validated on larger cohorts of animals to establish robust categories of tissue signatures. this may open opportunities for improved insights regarding treatment-induced changes and provide an additional tool for optimizing the translation of experimentally obtained findings to human stroke applications.

CONCLUSIONS
this study highlighted the applicability and potential of multiparametric mri-based algorithms to identify ischemic tissue sub-types and to further characterize tissue progression after stroke in gyrencephalic brains. despite the limited number of animals included in this study, the spatio-temporal assessment of mri parameters enabled us to distinguish distinct tissue evolution patterns that represented specific histological outcome.

