BACKGROUND
increasingly, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease  is recognized as a public health problem in the medical community
 <cit> . nafld represents a spectrum of liver disease from steatosis to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis  and cirrhosis
 <cit> . nafld is frequently associated with visceral obesity, dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance and type- <dig> diabetes mellitus 
 <cit> . nafld may represent another component of the metabolic syndrome
 <cit> , which is a highly atherogenic condition. in particular, prospective studies suggest that nafld is linked to increased morbidity and mortality from cardiovascular disease 
 <cit> . nafld could signify a substantial risk of cardiovascular events. hepatic steatosis probably contributes to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis
 <cit> . cross-sectional studies have shown that nafld is associated with increased carotid artery intima-media thickness 
 <cit> , which is a marker of early atherosclerosis
 <cit> .

as observed in humans, nafld is associated strongly with obesity, t2dm, and dysplipidemia in experimental animals
 <cit> . models in which rodents are fed diets with an excess of calories or in which rodents become obese because of genetic deficiencies or resistance to a satiety factor have been developed for nafld and atherosclerosis research
 <cit> . high-frequency ultrasound has proven to be a useful tool for monitoring and assessing disease progression and pharmacological effects in small animals
 <cit> .

ultrasound is an essentially subjective method for the diagnosis of liver diseases and carotid atherosclerosis, and its validity as an imaging method for evaluation of the liver has been described extensively for humans
 <cit> . several studies have also used ultrasonography to evaluate liver diseases in rodents
 <cit> . lessa et al.
 <cit>  and lee et al.
 <cit>  compared histopathological findings to ultrasonographic b-mode quantitative findings in ccl4- and ethanol-induced fatty liver disease and cirrhosis. matsuhashi et al.
 <cit>  and layer et al.
 <cit>  correlated histology with analyses of the speed and texture of ultrasound in the liver, respectively. in addition, several studies have used ultrasonography to evaluate atherosclerosis in rodents
 <cit> , but there are few reports on carotid imt in rodents. studies comparing carotid imt among rats with steatosis and steatohepatitis are lacking. the relationship between fatty liver diseases and carotid atherosclerosis in rodents is incompletely understood. there is a paucity of data regarding the correlation between carotid imt and changes in hepatic pathology in rats with nafld.

the purpose of the present study was to determine the reliability of findings using high-frequency ultrasonic diagnostic equipment in the assessment of a rodent model of hepatic disease and early atherosclerosis induced by a high-fat diet in comparison with histological results. we attempted to assess carotid imt in the follow-up in high-fat diet-induced nafld rats and ascertain if the degree of hepatic pathological changes was associated with carotid imt.

we concluded that ultrasound imaging in the diagnosis of fatty liver disease and early atherosclerosis in rats is feasible and efficient, and that carotid imt increased significantly in nash rats but not in steatotic rats. a significant correlation between the imt of the carotid arteries with hepatic inflammation score were shown in nash rats. this method for non-invasive diagnosis is especially relevant in the research of the pathogenesis and therapy of nafld and atherosclerosis using rodent models or genetically deficient models.

RESULTS
hepatic ultrasound images in rats with nafld induced by a high-fat diet
all animals were examined by ultrasound before the rats were killed on the 8th, 12th and 16th week of induction of a high-fat diet. healthy rats showed homogeneous liver parenchyma, with medium-level echogenicity and a regular liver surface. liver echogenicity was lower in comparison to the right renal cortex, a finding that contrasts with results seen in humans. fatty liver disease in rats was characterized by homogeneous and diffusely increased echogenicity  equal or greater to the right renal cortex, reduced visualization of the diaphragm and of small peripheral vessels, and by no changes in the liver surface , as described in humans
 <cit> . the increase in liver echogenicity compared with the echogenicity in the right renal cortex had a sensitivity of 90%  for the detection of fatty liver disease. parameters such as an increased anteroposterior diameter of the liver and blunt edge of the liver were represented by changes in liver echogenicity, suggesting that hepatomegaly was also a prominent feature in nafld rats.

evaluation of portal hypertension is also important for assessment of the severity of liver diseases. in the high-fat diet groups for  <dig>   <dig> and 16 weeks, the portal vein became wider and tortuous during the development of hepatic disease when compared with the control group. we analyzed the diameter of the portal vein among rats from 8-, 12- and 16-week high-fat diet groups with rats from the control group. the results were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm, respectively. portal-vein diameter was significantly different when comparing rats from 12- and 16-week high-fat diet groups with control rats , suggesting mild portal hypertension. we also compared the velocity and quantity of the portal vein among rats from 8-, 12- and 16-week high-fat diet groups with rats from the control group. there were no significant differences among the groups evaluated, suggesting that mild portal hypertension did not lead to prominent hemodynamic changes in nafld rats. we also compared the index of spleen volume among rats from 8-, 12- and 16-week high-fat diet groups with rats from the control group. there were no significant differences among the groups assessed, indicating that splenomegaly was not a prominent feature in nash rats.

hepatic histological analyses in rats with nafld induced by a high-fat diet
histology was used as the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of fatty liver disease and for the comparison with ultrasound results. the liver index of the high-fat groups was significantly more than that of the control group , as described previously in rats
 <cit> , suggesting that hepatomegaly was a prominent feature in nafld rats. rats in the control group showed a normal architecture with hepatocytes arranged in plates aligned to sinusoids converging to centrolobular veins. high-fat groups showed alterations in the liver parenchyma that correlated with the time of induction of injury. the prevalence of fatty liver disease among the  <dig> rats in the high-lipid groups was 100%. after 8 weeks of a high-fat diet , half of the animals presented with mild steatosis, and the other half showed mild-to-moderate steatosis without fibrous septa. after 12 weeks and 16 weeks , all animals showed moderate-to-marked steatosis. apart from steatosis, ballooning degeneration, piecemeal necrosis, inflammation infiltrates, and early fibrosis were also observed in rats induced by a 12- and 16-week high-fat diet, respectively . these changes were more prominent in the 16-week high-fat group. after 16 weeks, the animals showed minimal focal pericellular and perivenular fibrosis, as well as formation of fat granulomas even though liver parenchymal architecture was preserved, but no animals in the high-lipid groups presented with cirrhosis. h&e slides were analyzed using a semi-quantitative score for steatosis and inflammation, respectively. the degree of steatosis seen in the high-fat diet groups showed significant differences compared with the control groups . the 12- and 16-week groups had a significantly higher inflammation scores than those of the control groups . microscopic evaluation showed indications of simple steatosis in rats induced by an 8-week high-fat diet. more importantly, histological analyses demonstrated that a high-fat diet for 12 weeks and 16 weeks could induce steatohepatitis  in rats .

hepatic lesions in rats with nash induced by a high-fat diet
in comparison with the rats in the control group, serum levels of alt, ast, tc, ldl and glu increased in the high-fat diets groups as time progressed . moreover, these results were of greater severity at  <dig> and 16 weeks. insulin levels and the homair index in the high-fat diet groups for  <dig> weeks were increased by about 60% and 90%, respectively, when compared with the control group. these data suggested insulin resistance in nash rats induced by a 16-week high-fat diet.

homa
ir
data are mean ± sd, for  <dig> animals per group. *p <  <dig>  vs control. the control in table imply the control group  of 16 weeks. alt, alanine aminotransferase; ast, aspartate aminotransferase; glu, blood glucose; tg, triglyceride; tc, total cholesterol; hdl-c, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; ldl-c, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; homair, homeostasis model assessment insulin resistance index.

arterial lesions in rats with nash induced by a high-fat diet
among diagnostic imaging methods, ultrasound is considered to be ideal for the study of atherosclerosis
 <cit> . to detect vascular lesions in rats with nafld induced by a high-fat diet, imt and hemodynamic parameters was measured longitudinally in the carotid artery and aorta, respectively. imt values for the carotid artery and abdominal aorta were remarkably different  . the lowest values were in the controls, intermediate values in rats at 8 weeks, and the highest levels in those with nash . the diameters of the carotid artery and abdominal aorta in the nash groups were smaller than those in the control group, but the difference was not significant . we also assessed the hemodynamic parameters of the carotid artery and aorta among rats with steatosis and steatohepatitis. for rats at 8 weeks, there was a decreased trend in the end-diastolic velocity and systolic peak velocity of the carotid artery and aorta, but these values were not significantly different compared with those of the control group. the end-diastolic velocity and systolic peak velocity of the carotid artery and aorta in the nash groups were significantly smaller than those in the control group  . these results suggested that early atherosclerosis may be present in nash rats.h&e staining showed very mild intimal thickening, few foam cells in the intima and slight hyperplasia of the media of the carotid artery and aorta in the nash groups. plaques in the aortic intima were not observed by h&e staining or by macroscopic observation. this also demonstrated that vascular lesions were mild at the early stage of atherosclerosis . the results of histopathological evaluation were consistent with ultrasonographic findings.

correlation between ultrasound findings and the histological diagnosis
figure 
 <dig> shows the parameters associated with carotid imt in bivariate analyses. a significant correlation between the imt of the carotid artery with hepatic steatosis score , hepatic inflammation score  and the systolic peak velocity of the carotid artery  were shown in the nash groups, whereas the end-diastolic velocity of the carotid artery was not . these data suggested that steatosis and steatohepatitis were associated with carotid atherosclerosis.

discussion
nafld is the “hepatic expression” of the metabolic syndrome
 <cit> . nafld patients are expected to have a higher risk of vascular disease and coronary heart disease because of the underlying metabolic disorder
 <cit> . follow-up mortality rates of nafld patients with coronary heart disease were found to be equal to those attributable to cirrhosis
 <cit> . the severity of histopathological features in nafld is strongly associated with early carotid atherosclerosis, insulin resistance, and the metabolic syndrome
 <cit> .

preclinical small-animal studies are a key part of medical and biological research. a rodent model of liver disease is the most commonly used model in preclinical studies
 <cit> . we focused our attention in a rodent model of high lipid diet-induced nafld. we demonstrated that rats with access to a high-fat diet ad libitum for 8 weeks showed simple fatty-liver changes, and rats with access to this diet for 12 weeks and 16 weeks showed nash changes  in addition to steatosis along with other alterations in biochemical parameters. especially in rats treated for 16 weeks, nash severity was higher. this finding also illustrated that pathological changes in nash rats was relatively long before the appearance of cirrhosis. levels of ast, alt, tc, ldl, glu, and insulin as well as the homair index increased remarkably in the 12- and 16-week groups. thus, the histopathological and biochemical findings of the present study showed that a high-fat diet-induced model of nash with insulin resistance in rats mimicked human nash with respect to morphological and biological characteristics. this observation was in agreement with findings from studies of nash patients
 <cit>  and an animal model of nash induced by a high-fat diets
 <cit> . more importantly, there was a significant correlation between carotid imt and histology inflammation scores and steatosis scores in the livers of the nash groups. to our knowledge, this is the first report of carotid imt values among rats with nafld in longitudinal studies.

it is well known that ultrasound is essentially a subjective diagnostic method, and its validity for liver evaluation has been described extensively for humans
 <cit> , dogs
 <cit>  and cats
 <cit> . high-frequency ultrasound has also been used in murine models of cvd
 <cit> . however, dynamic changes in hepatic histology and carotid imt in rats with nafld or atherosclerosis using ultrasound have not been reported. our ultrasound results showed that fatty liver disease in rats was characterized by homogeneous and diffusely increased echogenicity . increases in liver echogenicity may be due to fatty infiltration and/or steatohepatitis, thereby changing the relationship between echogenicity in the liver and right renal cortex
 <cit> . our ultrasound findings were also comparable with histopathological changes in rats with access to a high-fat diet ad libitum for  <dig>   <dig> and 16 weeks. portal hypertension is an important indicator of the severity of liver diseases and one of its most important signs is widening of the portal vein
 <cit> . portal-vein diameter was significantly higher in rats with steatohepatitis in comparison with the control group , thereby suggesting mild portal hypertension. however, there were no significant differences in the velocity and quantity of the portal vein among the three groups assessed, suggesting that mild portal hypertension did not lead to prominent changes in hemodynamics in nafld rats.

importantly, we demonstrated increases in the imt values of the carotid artery and the aorta before plaque appearance using a high-frequency ultrasound method. increased carotid imt is a reflection of atherosclerotic burden and a predictor of subsequent events
 <cit> . measurement of carotid imt is being employed increasingly frequently in clinical trials to assess the harmful effects of risk factors on vessel walls as well as the effect of treating risk factors that cause a reduction or prevent progression of imt
 <cit> . a change in the carotid imt was a risk factor for atherosclerosis in patients with nafld, and the diagnosis of nafld was an independent predictor of increased imt
 <cit> . nafld patients showed greater carotid atherosclerosis with a higher mean imt and higher prevalence of plaque formation. hence, imt is marker of early generalized atherosclerosis
 <cit> . comparison of carotid imt using a rat model has not been carried out previously. hence, we investigated if vascular injury occurred in high lipid diet-induced nafld rats. we demonstrated an increased imt of the carotid artery and the aorta after administration of a high-fat diet for 12 weeks and 16 weeks. functional and histopathological features in the carotid artery and aorta demonstrated changes in imt values before the appearance of plaques. assessment of the hemodynamic parameters of the carotid artery and the aorta among rats showed decreases in end-diastolic velocity and systolic peak velocity in the carotid artery and the aorta of rats in the 12 weeks and 16 weeks groups, respectively. this finding illustrated that vessel function had been reduced, including an increase in vascular resistance as well as a reduction in compliance and resilience in the nash groups. these changes may be associated with an increase in arterial imt in rats with nash. we also demonstrated that a significant negative correlation between the carotid imt with the systolic peak velocity of the carotid artery. it also demonstrated that functional disorders of vessel walls occurred in the early phase of atherosclerosis, and that rats with nash had a greater prevalence of early atherosclerosis than controls. histological change in arteries also supported a finding of early mild atherosclerosis. interestingly, a significant positive correlation between ultrasonographic measurements in the carotid artery with the hepatic inflammation score and steatosis score was shown in the nash groups, respectively. hence, we demonstrated that nash is a risk factor for early atherosclerosis in a rat model of nash. this is the first report detailing percutaneous ultrasound of the carotid artery using a non-invasive, high-resolution system combined with an experimental model of nash in rats to evaluate early atherosclerosis.

usually, inducing atherosclerosis in normal rats and mice using a high-lipid diet is difficult because  rodents must be treated for a long time and  complex traits for atherosclerosis are influenced by genetic variation and by the type of diet the rodents are fed. hence, transgenic and mutant strains of mice with specific deficits or inducible atherosclerosis models are also often applied for atherosclerosis studies. so in this case, the development of a non-invasive modality for small-animal imaging is important for evaluating disease progression and pharmacological effects. ultrasound is one of a useful method to longitudinal research on the same animal and to reduce requirements for animal sacrifice . we applied b-mode  and pulsed-wave doppler mode to assess fatty livers, thickening of vascular walls and blood-flow velocity. we demonstrated that increased imt and decreased hemodynamic functions of the carotid artery in response to high fat diet-induced nash in rats could be used to visualize by employing a high-frequency ultrasound scanner. nafld models in rats are suitable to obtain ultrasound images, and can be applied to evaluate early atherosclerosis using imt measurements. high-frequency ultrasound can be a powerful tool to monitor nafld and atherosclerosis progress in vivo, and could lead to longitudinal research on the same animal, shortened observation times, and reduced requirements for animal killing. of course, further studies including the use of a higher-frequency ultrasound biomicroscopy or targeted molecular imaging technologies in assessment of real-time changes in vessel wall before the development of advanced atherosclerotic plaques for transgenic and mutant strains of rodents with specific deficits or inducible nash are warranted to evaluate early pathophysiologic changes and reveal risk for future development of severe disease.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that early atherosclerosis in nafld could be induced by a high-fat diet. increases in the imt values of the aorta and carotid artery in rats with nash occurred before the appearance of plaques. the present study is the first to show that a significant correlation between the imt of the carotid artery and hepatic inflammation score in rats with nash can be induced by a high-fat diet.

