BACKGROUND
pre-mrna splicing in eukaryotes removes introns and joins exons together. it is catalyzed by the splicesome that is a large ribonucleoprotein complex with several hundred proteins and five small nuclear rnas  <cit> . the recognition of splice sites requires multiple rna binding proteins to bind to various splicing signals in pre-mrnas. genes can choose different sets of splice sites to produce multiple transcript isoforms, which further increases the complexity of splicing regulation. in eukaryotes, besides some short consensus sequence elements around the 5' splice site , the 3' splice site , the branch point, and the polypyrimidine tract, the splicing process needs other splicing regulatory elements  such as splicing enhancers or silencers  <cit> . in addition, pre-mrna secondary structures also play an important role in splicing regulation  <cit> .

it has been reported that local rna secondary structures affect splice site selection through experimental observations from individual genes  <cit> . with the growing amount of genomic data and tools available, more genome-wide studies were carried out to support the hypothesis that pre-mrna secondary structures are involved in the splicing process. for example, patterson et al.  <cit>  reported that the splice site prediction can be improved by adding the localized pre-mrna secondary structure information to the conventional sequence-based approaches. hiller et al.  <cit>  found that some experimentally verified splicing enhancers and silencers near splice sites are significantly enriched in the single-stranded regions of the local secondary structures. conserved secondary structures in drosophila genomes were identified and they may modulate splicing regulation through long distance interactions  <cit> . shepard et al.  <cit>  discovered that stable and conserved pre-mrna secondary structures around splice sites may promote alternative splicing to a large extent. all of these results indicate that the secondary structure of pre-mrna is part of the mrna splicing code  <cit> .

in this work, we first confirmed that for internal exons, structures around alternative splice sites are significantly more stable than those around constitutive and skipped splice sites in multiple species. more importantly, we found that these splice sites have distinct gc content. the gc content differences can remarkably explain these stability differences because gc content is positively associated with structural stability and sites with thermodynamic advantages tend to be gc enriched. we also found that splice site of the first exon in humans and mice tends to be more stable, no matter whether it is an alternative splice site or a constitutive splice site, because the promoter regions are generally gc enriched  <cit> . in addition, splice sites of long exons tend to be gc-enriched and hence more stable in the structural level. tissue-specific alternative splice sites in humans are also gc-enriched, which indicates the functional consequence of the gc effect. we further show that regions around splice sites are gc enriched as compared to regions far away or decoy splice site regions, which suggests a selection pressure on splice site regions to form stable secondary structures. by contrast, the nucleotide-order effect to the structural stability around splice sites is insignificant. all these support that gc may be an important factor in splicing through forming stable secondary structures.

RESULTS
difference of pre-mrna secondary structures between alternative, constitutive, and skipped splice sites
it has been reported that stable rna secondary structures are associated with alternative splicing events  <cit> . we first examined the stability of rna secondary structures near exon-intron junctions in humans. specifically, we assembled alternative splice sites from internal exons with multiple splice sites, constitutive splice sites from internal constitutive exons, and skipped splice sites from cassette exons . since pre-mrna sequences favor local structures rather than global ones in vivo  <cit> ,  <dig> nucleotides were added up- and down-stream of each splice site to predict the secondary structure by the free energy minimization program rnafold  <cit> . the structural stability distribution in humans is plotted in figure  <dig>  at the donor sites , the average minimum free energy of alternative splice sites was - <dig>  kcals/mol, significantly lower than those of constitutive and skipped splice sites: - <dig>  and - <dig>  kcals/mol respectively . similarly, at the acceptor sites , the average free energy around alternative splice sites was - <dig>  kcals/mol, compared with - <dig>  and - <dig>  kcals/mol for constitutive and skipped splice sites . the comparison demonstrates that for internal exons, alternative splice sites favor more stable secondary structures than constitutive and skipped splice sites, which is consistent with the results in  <cit> . in order to test whether this thermodynamic advantage of alternative splice sites might have existed from ancient times, we generalized our structure stability comparison in several other species as well. for all of the species that we have tested , a significant enrichment of stable structures was observed in alternative splice sites except that the difference between mouse alternative donor sites and constitutive donor sites was small . due to the incompleteness of transcript annotations, it was difficult to distinguish alternative splice sites from the constitutive and skipped ones with high confidence in many other species.

difference of gc content between alternative, constitutive, and skipped splice sites and its association with the stability of pre-mrna secondary structure
in the exploration of other differences between different splice sites, we found that alternative splice sites tend to be gc enriched. for example, at the donor sites of the human genome, the average gc percentage was  <dig>  for alternative 5'ss, which was significantly higher than  <dig>  and  <dig>  for constitutive and skipped splice sites . at the acceptor sites, the gc content of alternative 3'ss was also significantly higher than that of constitutive or skipped splice sites:  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  respectively . results were similar when a 61-nt instead of the 141-nt sequence window was used for each splice site .

we then studied the relationship between the structural difference and the gc difference between alternative splice sites and constitutive or skipped splice sites. linear regression was performed to reveal that the gc content difference can explain the stability variations among these splice sites remarkably. specifically, the gc content was negatively correlated with the predicted minimum free energy of the sequence . in other words, gc content was positively correlated with stability. such significant correlations were observed for each splice site category, and for both the donor and acceptor sites . we further found that the overall gc content, no matter if it is intronic or exonic, contributes to the correlation with the energy significantly . the fitted regression lines between the gc content and the energy were similar in different splice site categories. it indicates that alternative, constitutive, and skipped splices sites have similar structural stability given the same gc content. similar results were observed in nematodes, fruit flies, and mice . the regression lines of nematodes and fruit flies were slightly different from those of humans and mice, possibly due to the biological differences between these organisms. in the rnafold program, we set different temperature parameters to reflect their different body temperatures. we repeated the free energy analysis in nematodes and fruit flies by setting the same temperature parameter as that in humans and mice, and still observed regression lines different from those in humans and mice, indicating that such differences were not simply due to the different temperature settings . to further demonstrate that the gc content difference can explain the stability variations between alternative and constitutive or skipped splice sites, we compared alternative splice sites with constitutive and skipped splice sites with similar gc content in humans . no significant energy difference was observed among these splice sites given the same gc content , indicating that the gc percentage of the junction sequence is the major factor to explain the distinct potentials to form stable structures among alternative, constitutive, and skipped splice sites.

since structural stability was significantly associated with the gc percentage in junction sequences, it is possible that long-range gc enrichment patterns, instead of the local gc variation, would result in the genome-wide thermodynamic advantages in alternatively spliced sites. for example, if alternative splice sites were more frequently selected in high gc isochors, the junction sequences therein would be significantly biased to more stable base pairings compared with the constitutive and skipped splice sites. to clarify these two factors, pairwise free energy comparisons were performed with strict distance control to ensure similar gc background but allowing local gc variations. across the human genome, we only selected the alternative splice sites with at least one constitutive splice site within a distance of  <dig> bp. the alternative splice sites and the nearby constitutive splice sites shared similar gc background, but had local variations. pairwise energy comparison of these two groups still suggested slight yet significant enrichment of more stable structures in alternatively spliced sites . similar results were also observed in the comparison between alternative and skipped splice sites , further confirming the contribution of local gc variations to stabilize mrna secondary structures.

splice sites of the first exons or long exons are gc enriched and hence more stable in humans and mice
it is well known that human promoter regions are enriched in gc  <cit> . we suspect that splice sites near transcript start sites may form more stable structures compared with those in internal regions. to test our hypothesis, a list of constitutively and alternatively spliced donor sites of the first exons was generated and structures were predicted by the rnafold program . note that for studies in other places of this paper, only splice sites of internal exons were considered. as expected, both alternative  and constitutive splice sites  near the transcription start sites preferentially formed more stable structures than the middle ones . however, in contrast with the splice sites of the middle exons, for the first exons, alternative splice sites displayed less stable structures than constitutive splice sites . as expected, the gc content of these alternative splices was lower than that of the constitutive splice sites . the results indicate that the intervention of rna secondary structures in splicing may vary upon regions and it depends on gc content.

shepard et al.  <cit>  found that long exons tended to have more stable structures around splice sites. similarly, we observed a significant bias in long exons  toward more stable structures in humans . more importantly, this difference can also be explained by the gc difference. specifically, the gc content of the splice sites around long exons was higher compared with that around short exons  . hence, these results suggest that pre-mrna secondary structures may play different roles in the splicing of exons with different lengths, depending on the gc content.

similar results for the first exons and long exons were obtained for mice. however, in nematodes or fruit flies, since promoter regions were not gc-enriched  <cit> , the splice sites near the promoter regions did not exhibit more stable structures. besides, no obvious bias toward more stable structures has been observed in long exons of nematodes or flies.

tissue-specific alternative splice sites are gc enriched
to investigate the consequence of the gc effect, we focused on tissue-specific alternative splicing events that are more likely to be functional. similar to the criteria in  <cit> , splicing events with a proportionality change of at least  <dig> percent and a corresponding p-value less than  <dig>  in any of the  <dig> human tissues were considered as tissue-specific events. a total of  <dig>  alternative donor sites and  <dig>  alternative acceptor sites were claimed as "tissue-specific alternative splice sites" . we observed a significant bias of these functional splice sites to be gc-enriched, and thus to form more stable structures than other splice sites . for example, at the donor sites, the average energy for the tissue-specific alternative splice sites was - <dig>  kcals/mol. it increased to - <dig>  kcals/mol for the non-tissue-specific alternative splice sites . this stability difference can also be explained by the gc content difference . similar results were also observed at the acceptor site.

selection on gc content around splice sites
we have shown that gc content was strongly correlated with structural stability. we next investigated whether gc is specifically enriched around splice sites so that the formed stable structures can be involved in the splicing process. all the nucleotide sequences were aligned according to the exon-intron junction, and the average gc percentage across multiple sequences was calculated for each relative position. at the donor sites, in both exonic and intronic regions, the gc content around the splice sites was higher than that far away from the splice sites . at the acceptor sites, the exonic regions around the junctions were also enriched with gc. however, no significant gc enrichment was observed for the flanking introns around the acceptor sites, possibly due to the polypyrimidine track around these regions. in addition, we used the decoy splice sites  <cit>  as controls . for these decoy splice sites, the gc content was almost uniformly distributed and there was no enrichment around the decoy splice sites. for each real splice site, we chose the closest decoy splice site as a control. therefore, the real splice sites and the decoy splice sites shared the same gc background, but had local gc variation. in general, the real splice sites had higher gc content than the nearby decoy splices sites , hence the real splice sites formed more stable structures . the difference between real splice sites and decoy splice sites could also be related to the higher gc content in the whole real exon region besides the splice site region. then we calculated the gc content for the 50-bp exonic region near the real splice site, and then normalized it by the average gc percentage of the exon . the gc content around the decoy splice sites was also normalized by their nearby 100-bp regions. after the normalization, the higher gc content due to exons was removed and we still observed gc enrichment in real splice sites compared with decoy splice sites . thus, gc participates in both the exon formation and the splicing process. in addition, we found that the stability difference between real splice sites and decoy sites was larger for alternative splice sites than that for constitutive or skipped splice sites . all these results indicate that real splice sites tends to be gc enriched, especially around alternative splice sites.

gc effect is more dominant than the nucleotide-order effect
it has been reported that native mrna sequences usually demonstrate lower minimum free energies as compared to permuted control sequences  <cit> . in this work, we focused on regions near the splice sites and compared the gc effect with the nucleotide-order effect. it is also known that the dinucleotide frequency affects the predicted free energy significantly due to the algorithm used in the rnafold program, and the difference between native sequences and permuted sequences diminished if the dinucleotide frequency was fixed  <cit> . therefore, in our analysis, both permutations keeping the first order nucleotide frequencies and permutations keeping the second order nucleotide frequencies were used. as shown in figure  <dig>  the gc percentage was correlated with the structure stability for all native and permuted sequences. compared with the first order permuted sequences , the native sequences  showed more stable structures . nevertheless, when the dinucluetide frequencies were fixed, the energies of the permuted controls were similar to those of the native sequences, suggesting insignificant nucleotide-order effect with fixed dinucleotides frequencies. in addition, the difference between native and the first order permuted sequences increased with the gc content. for example, the mean energy change was - <dig>  for the gc number around  <dig> and it was - <dig>  for the gc number around  <dig> at the constitutive donor sites. furthermore, the gc effect was more dominant than the first-order-nucleotide effect. in figure  <dig>  there are four gc number groups and the average gc number difference between adjacent groups is  <dig>  the native sequences always showed less stable structures than the first order permuted sequences in adjacent groups that contain larger gc content . for example, the native sequences with the gc number 49- <dig> were less stable than the first order permuted sequences with the gc number 59- <dig>  thus, the difference caused by the nucleotide-order effect  was smaller than that caused by the gc difference .

discussion
in this paper, we studied gc content around splice sites in terms of its effect on the splice site usage and the stability of pre-mrna secondary structures in multiple species. for middle exons, alternative splice sites were more enriched with gc than constitutive and skipped splice sites, and hence exhibited stronger potential to form stable secondary structures . more importantly, we showed that the gc content was the major factor to account for the structural stability discrepancy. given the same gc content, the predicted free energy is similar no matter whether it is alternative splice sites or other splice sites . we also notice that although the structural topology predicted from rnafold has already been proved to demonstrate significantly high correlations with the experimental results in yeast  <cit> , it is still possible that the estimated secondary structure may be different from that in vivo for the species we tested. in addition, it is still unclear whether rna tertiary structure is also a common mechanism to regulate splicing  <cit> . advanced experimental technologies are in need to better predict rna structures.

several possible regulation mechanisms can be proposed for our genome-wide structural stability observations. first, mrna secondary structures may mediate the splicing process via affecting the motif recognition rate to facilitate or prevent the binding of splicing regulators. it has been reported that splicing regulators have different rna structural topology preferences  <cit> . the stable stem regions  in alternative splice sites might mask some key motifs and thus repress the site recognition. second, long exons exhibit pronounced gc enrichment and hence more stable structures, indicating that rna secondary structures may be actively involved in the splicing event via long distance mediations to bring the distal signals together  <cit> . third, the gc-enriched sequences around the first donor sites indicate that the role of stable rna secondary structures in splicing may vary across regions. it has been reported that splicing near the promoter region enhances transcription  <cit> . our discovered stable secondary structures around the promoter regions may contribute to the interaction between splicing and transcription via serving as stable binding platforms of the transcription/splicing regulators. furthermore, increasing evidence shows that in the beginning of the transcription process, the polymerase ii may fall into some paused status, or even go forward and backward from time to time. theoretical computations demonstrate that the stable hairpins in the nascent rna is beneficial for the backtracking of polymerase ii  <cit> , which explain our discovery about the more stable structures of the first donor sites.

it is well known that the structure prediction software, such as rnafold and mfold, executes the pre-mrna secondary structure calculation under simplified conditions, probably resulting in inappropriate minimum free energy predictions. besides, the folding of nascent mrna sequences may change frequently in different biological environments  <cit> . we therefore performed studies on functional alternative splice sites . these sites also tended to be gc-enriched, further suggesting the functional consequence of gc content in splicing.

sequences around splice sites were more gc enriched compared to either the positions far away from the splice sites or nearby decoy splice sites, indicating the selection pressure on splice site regions to form stable structures. we also investigated whether additional factors exist to affect the structural stability. permutation analysis reveals only limited nucleotide-order effect in the native sequence to keep a favorable context with larger thermodynamic advantages . thus, the stability variation introduced by gc was more dominant that that caused by the nucleotide order.

in order to check whether the regulation role of gc content in splicing is a universal phenomenon in multiple species, we extended our work on humans to nematodes, fruit files, and mice. the results of energy vs. gc were further summarized in a table . in spite of the lower quality of the splicing event lists due to the incompleteness of the gene annotation compared to humans, we also observed the enrichment of stable structures in alternatively spliced sites as well as slightly different yet still statistically significant correlations between the gc percentage and the free energy in all these species. thus, the involvement of gc content in the splicing regulation process might have been in existence from ancient times.

CONCLUSIONS
all together, our results show that gc content around splice sites may play an important role in splicing regulation by forming stable secondary structures. through the selection of gc enriched sequences, exons with alternative splice sites can maintain stable pre-mrna structures to promote alternative splicing. this gc effect is more dominant than the nucleotide-order effect. on the other hand, constitutive exons and cassette exons are not enriched with stable structures. it indicates that that the pre-mrna structure is part of, but not the whole of, the splicing code. we expect to investigate the biological significance in details when related experimental data become available in the future.

