BACKGROUND
dna methylation frequently occurs in mammalian dna at the  <dig> position of cytosine in cpg dinucleotides. it has been estimated that over 70% of cytosines of cpg dinucleotides are methylated in the human genome. cpg dinucleotides are under-represented in the genome and methylated cpg dinucleotides predominantly occur within repetitive elements  <cit> . however, there are cpg rich regions of the genome which generally remain unmethylated  <cit> . these cpg rich regions are known as cpg islands and are frequently located in the promoter or the first exon regions of approximately 60% of all genes  <cit> . the unmethylated status of cpg islands is thought to be a prerequisite state to maintain the linked gene in an active transcribed and transcriptional permissive state.

differential methylation hybridisation  is one of several techniques for examining cpg island methylation at a genome-wide scale that has been applied to the identification of aberrantly methylated gene promoters in various cancers  <cit> . nouzova et al <cit>  modified the original method by using digestion with a methylation-dependent enzyme, mcrbc. this enzyme only cleaves methylated cpg dna sequences. within-sample comparison is applied after competitive hybridisation with mcrbc digested dna and undigested  dna labelled with cy <dig> and cy <dig>  if a locus is unmethylated the signal intensities of cy <dig> and cy <dig> are equivalent, while if methylated the cy5/cy <dig>  ratio is greater than one. however, no common reference is generally used in the modified dmh method, and the unequal representation of methylated and unmethylated sequences due to competitive hybridisation may reduce sensitivity and specificity to detect differential methylation.

currently, significance analysis of microarrays   <cit>  and prediction analysis for microarrays   <cit>  are commonly applied in dna methylation analysis. based on the change in hybridisation relative to the standard deviation of repeated measurements, sam assigns each gene a score that is an extension of the t-statistic. for significant genes with a score over a certain threshold, sam uses permutations to estimate the false discovery rate . it has been implemented in many studies of gene expression data  <cit>  as well as dmh data, e.g. wei et al.  <cit>  applied sam to find the differential methylation of cpg island loci between ovarian caner patient groups with short and long progression-free survival . however, sam assumes that the microarray data conform to approximate normality and symmetry, leading to the loss of power in the analysis of dmh data that are inherently skewed due to the biological features of dna methylation in cancer and competitive hybridisation on dmh arrays .

in the modified dmh method, the ratios of raw signal intensities  greater than  <dig> reflect the various methylation levels  <cit> . a ratio cut-off is generally used to identify the hypermethylated loci  <cit> . however, this is an arbitrary value and does not necessarily accurately reflect the various sources of variation in the experiment. it is therefore desirable to develop an algorithm to more objectively assess the methylation status of loci from dmh data.

pam is a nearest centroid shrinkage method that identifies those genes that discriminate best between classes. this technique shrinks the class gene centroid towards the overall centroid by a "threshold" amount after standardizing each gene by its within class standard deviation. the "threshold" is identified by cross-validation. this approach was applied in the study by wei et al.  <cit>  and showed certain power in the identification of differentially methylated loci, but pam is designed for class prediction rather than class comparison. although the class predictor used in pam can reflect the difference between classes, a large number of loci actually differentially methylated between the classes are excluded to improve the accuracy of prediction.

although normalisation has become a standard procedure for the study of microarray data and is necessary for sam and pam analysis, unbalanced shifts in methylation status between class samples in dmh limit the use of between-class normalisation which assumes the changes are roughly symmetric. thus, the differential methylation can be masked by the over-correction of normalisation and it would be preferable to use a method of analysis that does not require normalisation of the data.

since pam and sam may have limitations for analysing dmh data, we have developed an alternative approach based on the specific features and known biological properties of the arrays used for dmh analysis. the algorithm is named as methylation linear discriminant analysis  and has been applied to identify a set of loci differentially methylated between ovarian cisplatin sensitive and resistant cancer cell lines.

RESULTS
outline of mlda
in this study, we have developed a novel approach, named mlda, for analysing cpg island microarray hybridisation data that allows the identification of differentially methylated loci. mlda was programmed in r  and the package is available at cran  <cit> . this approach uses three relatively simple linear regression models. the first one is constructed by the log-transformed signal intensities of unmethylated features and used as the reference for unmethylation . the second one is the intermediate model constructed through the point corresponding to the  <dig> -quantiles residual below the first linear regression line . the features with a standardised residual less than  <dig> from this intermediate model are used to generate the third model which is used as the reference for methylation . the log likelihood ratio of a locus being methylated is then proportional to the difference between the squared standardised residual from the methylated line and that from the unmethylated line. the log likelihood threshold of zero then provides a more rational basis for distinguishing between methylated and unmethylated loci than a robust undigested/digested ratio of  <dig> , as it takes into account the observed variability in the experiment.

in our approach the consistency and inconsistency rates of log likelihood ratios on dye-swapped/duplicate arrays are used to determine methylation and unmethylation cut-offs, which keep the consistency rate  relatively high  and the inconsistency rate  low . each loci is assigned a score based on the cut-offs using the weighted methylation scoring scheme. the feature consistently identified as methylated candidates on dye-swapped/duplicate arrays are scored as 1; similarly unmethylated features are scored as -1; the rest of the feature are assigned a weighted score corresponding to their location on the plot of log-likelihood ratios .

the averaged score for each locus is calculated in each sample class  and plotted against each other. a robust regression model is then fitted to these data. the standardised residuals from the robust regression model are assumed to follow a normal distribution n. the outliers of the standardised residuals are identified as the differentially methylated loci between the class samples.

dmh dataset
mlda was applied to identify the cgis differentially methylated from dmh data derived from sensitive a <dig> derivatives  and isogenically matched, resistant lines  <cit>  derived by multiple exposures to cytotoxic levels of cisplatin and which are 2– <dig> fold resistant to cisplatin in clonogenic assays . after background correction, the log-transformed digested and undigested intensities of the  <dig> microarray probes show three approximately parallel linear patterns . the first pattern  represents the unmethylated sequences. the second pattern represents either hemi-methylated sequences or the unmethylated sequences cross-hybridised with the methylated ones on the panel. the third pattern represents the methylated sequences in target dna. the methylated and unmethylated loci in target dna can be characterised by a linear regression model for each pattern. as previously mentioned, normalisation may not be appropriate for dmh data, so the log ratios of signal intensities in two classes of samples are not at the same level . normalisation is not required for mlda as the determination of the methylation score is based on the data within each experiment.

mitochondrial dna is unmethylated  <cit> , therefore, the signal intensities of both channels of microarray probes for mitochondrial sequences are expected to be equal. however, a bi-modal distribution is observed in the log-transformed fluorescence ratios  of  <dig> mitochondrial sequences. the first peak represents the unmethylated mitochondrial sequences and the second lower peak is assumed to be the mitochondrial sequences cross-hybridised with other methylated sequences on the panel. thus, we selected  <dig> of  <dig> mitochondrial sequences that were consistently unmethylated through all the cell lines and used them as the unmethylation reference in target dna.

the parameters of those two models in all  <dig> cell lines were estimated . the slope of the unmethylated regression line constructed by  <dig> mitochondrial sequences is indeed close to  <dig>  after computing the log-likelihood ratios, the methylation and unmethylation cut-offs and associated irs and crs were determined from the dye-swapped array pairs . as shown in figure  <dig>  ir tends to rise with the increase of cr slowly, but starts to increase dramatically when the cr goes above 140%, at which point ir is generally about 1%. we have therefore used cr > 140% and ir < 1% as the criteria for determining the methylation and unmethylation cut-offs. each locus was scored using the weighted scoring scheme based on those cut-offs. the averaged scores in  <dig> cisplatin-sensitive cell lines and  <dig> cisplatin-resistant cell lines were used to construct a robust regression model. figure 6a shows that the standardised residuals  from the robust regression model roughly follow a normal distribution. the positive and negative outliers are determined as described in method section.

ds: dye swap

σ: standard deviation

r2: coefficient of determination

finally,  <dig> loci were identified as candidates differentially methylated between a <dig> sensitive and these resistant cell lines . noticeably,  <dig> of  <dig> loci  were hypermethylated, but only  <dig> loci  lost methylation in the resistant cell lines . this is consistent with the unbalanced shift in dmh data and indicates cisplatin treatment of cells selects preferentially for hypermethylation of loci, rather than hypomethylation in these tumor cells.

validation of differential methylation
to confirm the differential methylation of loci identified in this study, we experimentally tested the methylation of  <dig> loci by methylation-specific pcr  and/or pyrosequencing of bisulphite modified dna  <cit>  in sensitive a <dig> derivatives and cisplatin resistant derivatives. twenty-three out of the  <dig> loci have been confirmed as differentially methylated . it should be noted that msp and pyrosequencing only examine methylation at a limited number of cpg sites of the sequence present on the dmh analysis. it is possible that the loci which were not confirmed as differentially methylated are methylated at other cpg sites which are detected by dmh but not targeted by msp and/or pyrosequencing primers and so  <dig> out of  <dig> loci confirmed as differentially methylated is a minimum estimation.

to compare the results from mlda, sam and pam, we analysed the dmh dataset by all three methods. mlda identified  <dig> loci , sam identified  <dig> loci , and pam found  <dig> hypermethylated loci  in the resistant cell lines. twenty-four loci identified by all three methods are listed in table  <dig> 

nd: not done. yes: validated. no: not validated

mlda rank*: the rank of standardised residuals to the robust regression line constructed by the averaged sensitive scores against averaged resistant scores

gene symbol**: only the gene of which transcription start site  is within  <dig> kb span of the loci

cgi***: cpg island defined by gardiner-garden and frommer  <cit> .

discussion
hypermethylation of promoter cpg islands is strongly correlated to transcriptional gene silencing and epigenetic maintenance of the silenced state and is a potential rich source of biomarkers of cancer. differential methylation hybridisation  is one technique used for genome-wide dna methylation analysis. the study of such microarray data sets should ideally account for the specific biological features of dna methylation and the non-symmetrical distribution of the ratios of unmethylated and methylated sequences hybridised on the array. we have therefore developed a novel algorithm tailored to this type of data, methylation linear discriminant analysis . mlda utilises log likelihood ratios representing the relative probability that loci are methylated instead of log ratios of signal intensities used in previous studies  <cit> . validation of 23/ <dig> identified loci using independent methods of methylation analysis shows that mlda can robustly identify differential methylated loci between ovarian cancer sensitive and resistant cell lines without requiring the data to be normalised.

although a log likelihood ratio above zero means that the locus tends to be methylated, we did not use zero as the cut-off to determine the number of methylated and unmethylated sequences, as the existence of cross-hybridisation and measurement errors in the dmh assay makes this unreliable. to increase the precision of the methylation classification, we used the inconsistency  and consistency  rates between the dye-swap arrays to determine likelihood ratio cut-offs for methylation and unmethylation and assigned each locus a methylation score based on the position relative to these cut-offs. as shown in figure  <dig>  not all cell lines can reach the point that cr is around 140% and ir is about 1%. ir and cr need to be carefully selected as the methylation scores of loci are consequently influenced by the change of ir and cr. we also observed a lower cr  and a higher ir  in another cpg island array using dmh , therefore, further examination of what factors influence the achievable cr and ir rates may improve the utility of the mlda approach.

data on methylation status for  <dig> mitochondrial derived sequences were available in this study. mitochondrial sequences would be expected to be unmethylated. we used  <dig> mitochondrial sequences to construct unmethylated linear model at the beginning of the study, and indeed,  <dig> of  <dig> mitochondrial loci were defined as unmethylated and  <dig> loci being of uncertain methylation status by mlda. however, three mitochondrial loci were identified as hypermethylated candidates in the resistant ovarian carcinoma cell lines by both mlda and sam. one explanation of this discrepancy is that all these three loci have more than one blat hit indicating the existence of homology with nuclear dna sequences, raising the possibility of hybridisation with these nuclear dna sequences which may be differentially methylated. as shown in figure 2a, the loci in the middle pattern represent either hemi-methylated sequences or the unmethylated sequences cross-hybridised with the methylated ones on the panel. no specific allowance is made for these intermediate points in analysis by sam and pam, whereas mlda attempts specifically to down-weight these points in the identification of the methylation regression line. by giving a lower weighted score   to those loci, mlda reduces the influence of cross-hybridisation among this group of sequences. of course cross-hybridisation may also occur in the loci in the other two patterns , but it is not possible for any mathematical approach to identify this.

the misclassification error of mlda based on the methylation score is much lower than that for either sam or pam based on the log ratios, indicating the potential of mlda methylation scores to be used as a reliable discriminator between classes of samples.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a novel method, named mlda, for genome-wide dna methylation studies. mlda can transform the signal intensities to log-likelihood ratios through three linear regression models. using this approach mlda allows determination of the methylation status of a locus based on dye-swapped/duplicate arrays. the method has been applied to assess the methylation status of each locus and identified  <dig> loci that exhibit differential methylation between a <dig> sensitive and resistant cell lines. a minimum of  <dig> out of  <dig> loci have been confirmed by independent methods as differentially methylated.

