BACKGROUND
the rate and manner of evolutionary change has long been a matter of keen interest to biologists  <cit> . kimura provided theoretical underpinnings to molecular evolution by relating rates of sequence substitution, population parameters and mutation rates  <cit> . thus, kimura's neutral theory  <cit>  predicts that mutations having no fitness effect will become fixed in a population at a rate equal to the mutation rate. such neutral mutations therefore provide a standard for measuring the action of natural selection: regions changing more slowly than neutral ones are inferred to be experiencing purifying selection , those changing more rapidly, adaptive evolution. while the relative contributions of genetic drift, adaptive evolution and purifying selection to population differentiation are still debated,  <cit> , there is general agreement that the patterns of selection vary both across species as well as among genes in the same species  <cit> .

regarding interspecific variation, lynch and conery  <cit>  argue that much of the variation in genome structure and content between species can be attributed to differences in their effective population sizes . small effective population sizes limit the efficiency of purifying selection and allow the occasional fixation of mildly deleterious mutations. while some cross-taxa surveys have reported patterns consistent with this hypothesis  <cit> , others have found that if one allows for reasonably frequent directional selection there is only a weak relationship between ne and selective constraint  <cit> .

the second type of variation in selective constraint, that between genetic loci in the same population, has also been studied  <cit> . in particular, considerable effort has gone into identifying factors that predict the selection acting on a particular gene. one critical variable is expression level: mammalian genes expressed in many tissues show stronger selective constraints than do those expressed in only a few tissues  <cit> . likewise, in yeast, a high expression level is the primary predictor of strong purifying selection acting on a gene  <cit> , likely because the selective cost of protein misfolding is especially large for highly translated proteins  <cit> .

this association is also in keeping with wagner's theoretical analyses showing that gene expression is selectively costly in yeast  <cit> . however, as he notes, the fitness cost of mis-expression is likely to be very different in multicellular organisms  <cit> .

the influence of other factors on selective constraint is also debated, with the evidence primarily coming from studies in yeast  <cit> . the topic is confounded by the intercorrelation of many of these predictors  <cit> . thus, some researchers report a significant correlation between the fitness cost of gene knockouts and those genes' selective constraint  <cit> , while others have questioned this association  <cit> . there is similar debate regarding whether the position of a gene or protein in an interaction network influences selective constraint.

recall that in these networks genes or proteins are nodes; relationships, such as protein interactions or shared metabolites, are represented as edges between nodes. researchers have studied the association between selective constraint and measures such as node degree  and betweenness centrality . significant associations between node importance and selective constraint have been found in regulatory  <cit> , protein interaction  <cit> , coexpression  <cit> , and metabolic networks  <cit> . however, at least for protein interaction networks, this association seems to be at best quite weak  <cit> .

here we explore to what degree these patterns of constraint extend to mammals. given the difference in lifestyle and effective population size between humans and yeast, we hypothesized that mammals would have evolved in a manner similar to drosophila  <cit> , where there is a significant association between enzyme centrality and evolutionary constraint. we asked whether a gene's position in the human metabolic network  predicts the strength of the purifying selection acting on it. some previous analyses have calculated the protein divergence between two species, using their common divergence to control for the mutation rate  <cit> . however, only sampling two sequences offers somewhat limited resolution in the estimation of selective constraint. here we follow greenberg, stockwell and clark  <cit>  by estimating the selective constraint acting on each human enzyme by comparing it to its orthologs from seven other eutherian genomes . we find that genes encoding metabolic proteins evolve significantly more slowly than other genes. among those metabolic genes, the encoded protein's cellular compartment is predictive of selective constraint. we also find a weak, though statistically significant, negative correlation between the betweenness of an enzyme in the metabolic network and constraint.

RESULTS
orthology identification
to infer selective constraints for the set of annotated human genes, we identified their orthologs in seven other mammalian genomes using an approach that combines sequence similarity and gene order information . we found  <dig>  human genes with at least one ortholog in these genomes. among those genes, we identified  <dig>  sets of orthologs with between  <dig> and  <dig> members. of the  <dig>  genes annotated by duarte et al.  <cit>  as belonging to the metabolic network,  <dig>  are in this ortholog set . a greater percentage of genes in the metabolic network fell into our set of orthologs than did genes from the genome at large .

metabolic and nonmetabolic genes differ in selective constraint
the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions  for each set of orthologous genes was estimated by maximum likelihood using paml  <dig>  . this ratio can be interpreted as a measure of selective constraint: values near  <dig> indicate strong purifying selection, while values greater than  <dig>  suggest directional selection.

we hypothesized that metabolic genes would also be under stronger selective constraint than the average non-metabolic gene, so we performed three statistical tests of this hypothesis. first, using a mann-whitney u-test , we rejected the null hypothesis that the median ω among metabolic genes is no smaller than that of non-metabolic genes . next, we performed a similar test for unequal mean ω values between the two groups. given that neither distribution in figure 2a appears normal, we adopted a bootstrapping approach, drawing  <dig> , <dig> samples of size n =  <dig>  from the set of non-metabolic genes  and calculating these samples' means. in no case was the mean value of ω from the bootstrapped samples as small as the observed mean value for metabolic genes . we also drew  <dig>  samples of sizes n =  <dig>  and of n =  <dig>  and calculated the difference in their means. the absolute differences in the mean values was never as large as that observed between the metabolic and non-metabolic genes .

finally, we performed a more general analysis of the distributions of ω in the two gene sets. to do so, we first fit eight common distributions, the normal, gamma, exponential, cauchy, log-normal, logistic, weibull, and extreme value distributions, to the overall set of ω values. we then assessed the quality of the fit of each distribution to the data by analyzing the linear correlation between the ranked data and a q-q plot . out of the eight distributions, three, the weibull, gamma and exponential provide a visually good fit to the ω values . for these three distributions, we compared a null model where all genes shared the same distribution parameters to an alternative where the metabolic and non-metabolic genes were allowed to have distinct parameter values for that same distribution. using a likelihood ratio test, we found that we could reject the null model of identical distributions of ω for the metabolic and non-metabolic genes for all three distributions . collectively, these three analyses allow us to firmly conclude that metabolic genes are under greater selective constraint than are arbitrary orthologous genes from these genomes.

a. pearson's r is the linear correlation of the data to the quartiles, based on the maximum likelihood inferred parameters for each family of distributions.

b. k is the number of free parameters in the distribution.

c. likelihood ratio test: lrt =  <dig> *  - .

d. distributed χ <dig> 

e. likelihood ratio test only performed for the best distributional fits.

cellular compartments differ in the selective constraint acting on their enzymes
we next investigated whether an enzyme's tolerance for amino acid substitutions depends on its subcellular localization. this analysis is somewhat less straightforward than it might appear both because some reactions  occur in multiple compartments and because some reactions have multiple isoenzymes. as a result, different cellular compartments can contain the same enzyme. however, the set of overlapping enzymes is in general small and thus unlikely to weaken the power of our analysis significantly . for clarity, we defined proteins involved in transport reactions to be their own distinct category: such reactions have their reactants and products in different compartments.

the mean value of ω varies from  <dig>  in the nucleus to  <dig>  in the peroxisome. to determine if the differences in ω values are significant across compartments, we first clustered the compartments by mean . the resulting three groups, in order of increasing ω, are: the golgi apparatus and the nucleus, all other compartments except the peroxisome, and finally the peroxisome . we tested for significant pairwise differences between compartments in ω using a mann-whitney u-test  at a significance level of α =  <dig>  . the tests were conducted in a nested fashion, such that groups for which we could not reject the hypothesis of equal values of ω were compared to their nearest neighbors . this procedure allowed us to make seven comparisons, rather than the  <dig> possible pairwise comparisons. we find that the distributions clustered with low ω values  are statistically indistinguishable . those in the large intermediate cluster can be split among groups that are statistically indistinguishable including lysozyme and transport compartments , endoplasmic reticulum and external reactions , and the cytosol and mitochondrial compartments, which are both statistically distinct from each other . the peroxisome is also statistically distinct from the remaining compartments .

network construction
we next explored the role of metabolic network structure in influencing selective constraint, using the metabolic network of duarte et al.  <cit> . this network includes information on reaction compartment and directionality that were used to create a semi-directed metabolic network where reactions are nodes. two nodes are connected by an edge if they share a metabolite. note that because metabolites are compartment-specific, edges do not connect reactions in differing compartments. edges are also disallowed if the two reactions in question are irreversible and the interconnecting metabolite serves as a substrate in both reactions or a product in both. the resulting network has  <dig>  edges and  <dig>  nodes, of which  <dig>  have at least one associated gene .

removal of currency metabolites
one of the implicit steps in preprocessing metabolic networks is removing currency metabolites, such as water and atp that participate in numerous reactions. failing to remove such metabolites prior to analysis can lead to an overestimation of connectedness between reactions.

rather than introducing an arbitrary cutoff to define currency metabolites, we sought to use to the structure of the network itself to identify them. other authors have defined and systematically removed currency metabolites from their networks based on their knowledge of the metabolic system  <cit> . unfortunately the definition of currency metabolites is not consistent in the literature. therefore, the network statistic we chose to identify currency metabolites is modularity. newman  <cit>  defines a measure of optimal modularity, q, as the quality of the subdivision of a network   <cit> . huss and holme  <cit>  introduce Δq, which is q for the empirical network minus the average q of a number of random networks. as we remove increasingly less common metabolites, the Δq of most cellular components has a well-defined maxima . interestingly, when we either consider the network as a whole or the reactions of the cytoplasm alone, the resulting analysis does not present such a well-defined maximal Δq , and we propose two reasons for this discrepancy. first, the large number of reactions means that removing certain metabolites  dramatically changes the network topology, yielding instability in the modularity measurements . second, many of the reactions in the cytoplasm are transporters. because such transport reactions link distinct modules  in the network, it is expected that would they behave suboptimally in a modularity analysis.

correlations between graph properties and ω
we investigated the relationship between two measures of network topology and the selective constraint on the genes associated with network reactions. the measures of reaction importance were the node degree and the betweenness centrality. interestingly, there is a weak, but statistically significant correlation of betweenness centrality and ω , but no significant correlation between node degree and ω . the network with currency metabolites included shows no relationship between network position and ω .

there could be several sources of error associated with such an analysis of network structure and selective constraint. one obvious one is the compartment-by-compartment differences in average selective constraint already described. to explore the role of compartmentalization on this association, we examined the relationships between centrality and ω on a per-compartment basis , finding that four compartments had statistically significant association between degree and ω and three had significant associations of betweenness and ω. oddly, we found a significantly positive association between these variables in the lysozyme.

a. spearman's r rank correlation of degree and ω.

b. spearman's r rank correlation of betweenness-centrality and ω.

* p <  <dig> 

** p <  <dig> 

positive selection among the metabolic genes cannot explain the associations seen
we found  <dig> sets of orthologous metabolic genes that showed evidence for positive selection, spread across all cellular compartments . excluding these genes did not alter our compartment specific estimates of ω, the correlations between network statistics and ω or the significance of the differences in ω between compartments .

there is a weak relationship between gene expression and selective constraint
using  <dig>  genes in both our sample and the huge index  <cit>  we found a weak statistical relationship between ω and maximum expression level . for metabolic genes this correlation is somewhat stronger . this relationship, however, is weaker than the relationship we find between network position and ω in metabolic genes, implying that expression may not the dominant predictor of selective constraint in mammals in the same way it is in yeast  <cit> .

discussion
our conclusions that gene function, expression, cellular localization and network position influence selective constraint will individually come as little surprise to researchers. this is especially true of our conclusion that purifying selection acts more strongly on metabolic genes than on genes from the genome at large: function is a known correlate of rate of evolution  <cit> .

while we find a significant correlation between reaction centrality  and selective constraint in the metabolic network, this result comes with several important caveats. first, although it is reasonable to interpret ka/ks as the level of selective constraint a gene experiences, in fact, this statistic represents an average evolutionary rate: in particular, two genes with the same fraction of amino acid substitutions forbidden by natural selection might have differing values of ka/ks if one gene had undergone more adaptive amino acid substitutions. we have partly controlled for this effect by omitting orthologs with evidence of positive selection, but it is not currently possible to completely remove this effect. another caveat is that the association of betweenness-centrality and  constraint disappears when the currency metabolites are included. it is also worth noting that node degree on its own is not predictive of constraint in mammals, similar to the lack of association between these variables seen in e. coli  <cit> . we suggest one useful message to take from this result is that the relationship that exists between selective constraint and betweenness centrality is dependent on the manner in which the network is constructed. special care has been taken in justifying the removal of currency metabolites across networks, however different removal strategies produce different associations of centrality and constraint .

from a more general perspective, it is also important to recall that networks are only computational abstractions of a biological reality. to speak of an association of betweenness and selection is therefore actually to suggest that betweenness, a measurable quality, also represents an underlying biological feature. in this work, we have not directly demonstrated such a biological association. likewise, there is a difference between the metabolic network associations seen here and those in protein interaction networks. in protein interaction networks, the pairwise binding of proteins is directly mediated by sequences, and natural selection can act to maintain complementary sequences in two interacting proteins  <cit> . in metabolic networks, the relationship is more tenuous; one assumes that central reactions are required for proper function of the metabolic network and hence enzymes catalyzing such reactions will be under greater constraint. even if this argument holds, the constraint is on function and not specifically on sequence. if an enzyme can maintain this function using differing sequences, there might be no necessary association of sequence constraint and centrality.

when we break the metabolic network down by compartment, we do find associations between network centrality  and constraint in some, but not all, compartments . one lesson from these complex results is that although it is intuitive to consider the relationship between metabolic network structure and selective constraint at a global level, differences in constraint among compartments may confound global analyses. likewise, the variation in constraint among these compartment raises interesting questions: it is unclear why enzymes from the golgi apparatus and nucleus should be more highly conserved than those from the central group of compartments . strikingly, enzymes implicated in external reactions fall within this central group, and are not distinguished by having a uniquely fast or slow rate of substitution. this result contrasts the findings by liao et al.  <cit>  and julenius and pedersend  <cit>  that the intra-/extra-cellular localization of a protein is highly predictive of its ω. however, note that these authors considered all genes in a given compartment, as opposed to the strictly metabolic ones analyzed here.

one potential explanation for these differences in constraint between compartments is that those compartments have different tolerances for misfolded proteins. protein misfolding appears to have a significant fitness cost in yeast  <cit> , and it is not unreasonable to hypothesize that the spatial organization of the nucleus  <cit>  might induce a particularly high cost for misfolded proteins. however, one observation that speaks against this hypothesis is the weak association of constraint and expression. our results thus suggest that although gene expression in some manner constrains mammalian protein evolution, it is less effective at doing so in mammals than in yeast.

CONCLUSIONS
in general, we find that although the position of a mammalian gene's product in the metabolic network and its expression level are both associated with that gene's evolutionary constraint, neither factor is determinative. thus, unlike yeast, the forces that determine the selective constraint on mammalian protein-coding genes are likely both to be complex and to vary between genes.

