BACKGROUND
the orf virus  is the type species of the genus parapoxvirus belonging to the family poxviridae. it is a skin epitheliotropic double-stranded dna virus that causes pustular skin lesions in sheep and goats, known as contagious ecthyma  <cit> . most interestingly, animals are not protected against orfv re-infections, which might also be due to the short-lived orfv-specific adaptive immunity. orf is a zoonotic disease  <cit>  that can be transmitted to humans by contact with infected animals. while orf is usually a benign self-limiting illness, it can be very progressive in immune-compromised hosts  <cit> .

poxviruses provide considerable inventories of gene products that allow them to evade the host immune response  <cit> . it has been previously shown that orfv encodes immunomodulators like orfv il- <dig>  the gm-csf- and il-2-inhibitory factor  or the orfv chemokine binding protein cbp, which have the ability to inhibit cytokine synthesis of monocytes  <cit> . these evasion strategies seem to play an important role in supporting orfv replication and enabling repeated re-infections.

cell-mediated immunity is critical for the clearance of virus-containing cells. infected hosts normally react by activating their mhc i - mediated cellular immune response  <cit> . mhc i transmembrane glycoproteins function by binding intracellularly processed peptide antigens and presenting them on the cell surface to cytotoxic t cells  <cit> . during viral infection, a spectrum of antigenic peptides is displayed by mhc i molecules, resulting in the specific recognition of the infected cells by cytotoxic t cells . however, many viruses, including poxviruses  <cit> , evade the t cell-mediated immune response, primarily by decreasing the levels of surface mhc i, thus reducing the presentation of pathogen-derived antigens  <cit>  to escape cellular immunosurveillance mechanisms  <cit> . mhc i down-regulation of infected cells increases susceptibility to natural killer  cells, and many viruses have also evolved strategies to escape this immune detection  <cit> .

the ability to inhibit proinflammatory cytokines  that regulate mhc expression is a mechanism of poxviruses to prevent the up-regulation of mhc i  <cit> . the gene product m153r of myxoma virus interferes directly with the antigen presentation pathway and induces the loss of β2-microglobulin associated mhc i, both at the cell surface and in an intracellular post-golgi compartment  <cit> . genes of cowpox virus modulate the mhc i antigen processing and expression. the cpxv <dig> protein is responsible for decreased surface expression of mouse and human mhc i molecules by using the physiologic kdel-pathway to retain mhc i in the er  <cit> , whereas the cpvx <dig> protein prevents tap-dependent peptide loading  <cit> .

we are interested to identify possible immune evasion mechanisms of orfv, the type species of parapoxvirus. also in vitro propagation of wild-type orfv is very restricted and mostly primary ovine or bovine cells are used, which limits the availability of mhc i or cell compartment specific reagents. therefore, we took advantage from the vero cell-adapted orfv strain d1701-v to analyse virus induced alterations of mhc i surface expression in infected permissive vero cells. we show that this parapoxvirus impairs mhc i surface expression by structurally disrupting the golgi apparatus. most interestingly, golgi fragmentation is accompanied by a defective intracellular mhc i transport, pronounced co-localization of mhc i and cop-i-vesicles, disturbed carbohydrate trimming of golgi-localized mhc i molecules and a reduction of mhc i surface expression of up to 50%. in addition to these effects, we also noticed that the half-life of the remaining mhc i surface population is remarkably increased. all observed evasion phenotypes except for the mhc i half-life effect are linked to the expression of early orfv genes. on the basis of our findings we postulate that orfv modulates mhc i surface expression in infected cells by targeting the vesicular transport machinery and the structure and function of the golgi apparatus. thus, it is tempting to speculate that the discovered orfv-mediated effects on mhc i act in concert to facilitate infection and allow the acute virus to replicate and shed prior to clearance by the host immune response.

RESULTS
orfv induces down-regulation of surface mhc i molecules
surface expression of mhc i was investigated in orfv-infected and non-infected vero cells by flow cytometry using the mhc i specific monoclonal antibody  w6/ <dig> as described in methods. as shown in figure 1a, orfv infection resulted in a significant decrease of the mhc i surface expression. twelve hours post infection  about 80% of mhc i was detectable on the cell surface compared to non-infected cells, which was further reduced to 70% at  <dig> hpi, and to almost 50% at  <dig> hpi. these decreases were statistically highly significant as determined by one-way anova analysis . reduction of mhc i surface expression was dependent on live, replicating orfv. thus, infection of the cells with β-propiolactone-inactivated virus did not change the amount of mhc i expressed on the surface of vero cells .

to analyze whether expression of early or late orfv genes might be responsible for the mhc i down-regulation, arac was used to inhibit viral dna synthesis and thereby preventing intermediate and late gene expression of orfv  <cit> . figure 1b demonstrates that blocking of orfv intermediate and late gene transcription  did not abolish mhc i down-regulation or affect mhc i surface presentation in non-infected cells. infection of vero cells and the effect of arac were controlled by immunofluorescence studies using the mab 13 c <dig>  which is directed against the late major envelope protein of orfv .

orfv infection increases the half-life of remaining surface mhc i molecules
virus-infected cells were treated with brefeldin a  to examine the biological stability of cell surface expressed mhc i molecules. bfa prevents the anterograde mhc i transport from the endoplasmic reticulum  to the golgi apparatus, and thereby inhibits the supply of newly synthesized mhc i to the cell surface. this experimental design allows the analysis of the half-life of surface expressed pre-existing mhc i by using flow cytometry. bfa-treated, non-infected vero cells showed a  <dig> and 60% reduction of surface mhc i after  <dig> and 20 h incubation, respectively . in contrast, virus-infected vero cells showed at the same bfa-incubation time points only a marginal mhc i decrease of 10% and 30% . these results suggest that orfv infection increases the half-life of the remaining mhc i surface population by affecting surface stability and/or recycling of mhc i molecules. to examine whether early and/or late orfv gene expression might be responsible for the increase in mhc i surface survival, cells were additionally treated with arac during orfv infection and bfa treatment. figures 1c, d show that the mhc i half-life on the surface of non-infected cells was not altered by arac. in infected cells the presence of arac has some neutralizing influence on the orfv mediated half-life effect on surface mhc i . thus, the orfv-dependent increase of mhc i surface stability might be partially controlled also by late gene products.

orfv infection does not influence mhc i-transcription
a semi-quantitative rt-pcr was used to determine whether orfv infection might influence the mhc i mrna synthesis and thereby reduces mhc i surface expression. the amount of mrna specific for the housekeeping gene gapdh was related to the amount of mhc i mrna at different times after infection. each pcr product taken at the linear phase of pcr amplification was analyzed by gel densitometry. as shown in figure 2a, the ratio of mhc i to gapdh mrna in non-infected cells ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  , which remained almost unaltered  <dig> or 24 h after orfv infection . thus, the observed decrease of mhc i surface expression cannot be attributed to a prevention or inhibition of mhc i mrna transcription by orfv.

orfv infection disturbs carbohydrate trimming and maturation of mhc i
next we analyzed whether and to what extent intracellular maturation of mhc i along the secretory route might be affected by orfv infection. endoglycosidase h  – cleavage experiments were performed with anti-mhc i immunoprecipitates from detergent extracts of biosynthetically labelled, infected or non-infected vero cells. endo h is used to monitor posttranslational modification of glycosylated proteins within the golgi. the mhc i-attached high mannose oligosaccharides are modified by a series of different er and golgi enzymes. endo h is able to cleave oligosaccharides until the medial golgi enzyme α-mannosidase ii removes two mannose subunits. since all later carbohydrate structures are endo h-resistant, the enzyme monitors mhc i maturation within the late secretory route.

as can be seen from the sds-page analysis in figure 2b upper panel, 12 h after orfv infection intracellular mhc i-maturation is comparable in infected and non-infected vero cells. in both situations we observed an approximately 1: <dig> signal ratio between endo h-sensitive and -resistant mhc i molecules . an additional minor species  of partially resistant mhc i was also visible in infected cells . after  <dig> and 36 h of infection, the population of endo h-resistant mhc i was almost unaffected whereas the amount of endo h-sensitive mhc i decreased by more than half  as determined by densitometric scanning. most importantly, the latter phenomenon was linked to a simultaneous increase of partially endo h-resistant mhc i molecules by  <dig> and 55%, respectively. no such formation of unusual mhc i forms could be observed for non-infected control cells after  <dig> or 36 h of incubation . the distinct behaviour of mhc i maturation in orfv-infected cells was also seen in western blot experiments, in which lysates of infected and non-infected vero cells were assayed by using a different anti-mhc i antibody  with apparently higher specificity for the mature forms of mhc i. the two endo h-resistant and -sensitive protein bands found after immunoprecipitation  or in western blotting  by the two different anti-mhc i antibodies  most likely represent different allelic mhc i products expressed in vero cells. taken together, these findings suggest that orfv-infection interferes with the functional requirements for proper carbohydrate trimming of mhc i within the cis- and/or medial-golgi or the transport between the exocytic compartments.

orfv infection results in morphological changes of the golgi apparatus
next, we investigated whether orfv infection might affect the secretory pathway and golgi transport of mhc i and thereby prevents intracellular trafficking of newly synthesized mhc i to the cell surface. therefore, we analyzed infected cells by confocal immunofluorescence after co-staining of intracellular mhc i and giantin, a main component of the cis- and medial-golgi. the results in figure 3a demonstrate that virus infection caused substantial changes in the localization patterns of mhc i and giantin. already  <dig> hpi, mhc i dispersed into the cytoplasm with a punctuated vesicular structure  continuing to  <dig> hpi , whereas mhc i in non-infected vero cells showed a dense and ring-shaped perinuclear staining .

in non-infected cells, giantin-staining was characterized by a compact perinuclear pattern  that disappeared during orfv infection and scattered throughout the cytoplasm . simultaneously, co-localization between giantin and mhc i, which was clearly seen in non-infected cells , was reduced during virus infection  as verified by calculating the coefficient of co-localization . the orfv-induced golgi spreading was also found in arac-treated infected cells  indicating the involvement of early orfv gene. the orfv-induced dislodgment of golgi from its original nucleus-associated location into the cytoplasm could be confirmed by quantitative analysis of the distances between golgi and nucleus in infected and non-infected cells . the distance from the centre of the nucleus of each cell to the peripheral fringe of the golgi was almost duplicated in infected cells, in the presence as well as in the absence of arac, when compared to non-infected cells, and was highly significant according to t test .

the trans-golgi network  represents another important constituent of the late secretory route involved in exo- as well as endocytic processes  <cit> . the possible influence of orfv on the tgn structure was examined with a tgn46-specific antibody. partial co-localization between tgn <dig> and mhc i was visible in infected and non-infected cells. similar to giantin and mhc i, tgn <dig> lost its prominent perinuclear distribution after virus infection in favour of a punctuated vesicular pattern within the cytoplasm , which was also seen in infected cells arrested for early gene expression by arac . quantitative analysis of the images  revealed a significantly increased distance  between tgn and nucleus  in comparison to non-infected cells . in summary, in virus infected cells golgi and tgn are structurally dispersed into the cytoplasm and these processes are linked to early gene expression.

influence of orfv on the intracellular transport of mhc i molecules
since orfv-infection leads to a fragmentation of golgi, we explored the viral influence on golgi-transport of mhc i. cop-i is a protein complex that coats vesicles transporting polypeptides between different golgi compartments and from the cis-golgi back to the er  <cit> . therefore, we analyzed intracellular staining of mhc i and cop-i-component β-cop in infected and non-infected cells by fluorescence microscopy. non-infected vero cells displayed a characteristic juxtanuclear staining pattern of mhc i  but only partial intracellular co-labelling of mhc i and β-cop . in infected vero cells a prominent perinuclear and vesicular mhc i-staining was observed  <dig> hpi that, however, dispersed into the cytoplasm after  <dig> hpi . in contrast to non-infected cells, mhc i/β-cop co-localization could be seen for both infection time points  confirmed by pearson value calculation . it must be noted that the non-infected cells were photographed with longer exposure time for the sake of better visualization. additional arac experiments showed that this effect is also controlled by early orfv gene expression .

given expression levels of β-cop were analyzed by western blot experiments in infected and non-infected cells. figure 5b demonstrates that the 95 kda β-cop protein was hardly detectable in cell extracts of non-infected vero cells, most likely due to the fact that β-cop, like other cop-i components, does not stably exist out of the coatomer complex  <cit> . nevertheless, 24 h after orfv infection β-cop was clearly visible with reduced amounts expressed after  <dig> hpi suggesting that the population of stably assembled cop-i structures is drastically enlarged in infected cells. comparable protein loading was controlled by β-actin staining . taken together, our findings provide evidence that the amount of mhc i-containing stable cop-i vesicles increased significantly during the first  <dig> hours after orfv infection.

discussion
the presented study shows that cellular orfv infection leads to structural dispersion of the golgi/tgn compartments and enrichment of cop-i vesicular structures. these processes are accompanied by an increase in the steady state expression of β-cop , defective carbohydrate trimming of mhc i within the golgi , reduction of surface expressed mhc i molecules and a prolonged half-life of pre-existing mhc i on the plasma membrane . upcoming studies have to prove whether the described interferences of orfv with the mhc i expression also occur in natural host cells.

our findings demonstrate that in orfv-infected cells the intra-golgi- and endosome/tgn-transport of mhc i was severely disturbed. orfv seems to utilize early gene expression to block mhc i export within the late secretory route and thereby reduces mhc i surface expression. as shown by our experiments orfv alters the perinuclear localization as well as the overall structure of the golgi and tgn in infected vero cells. similar effects on the golgi have also been described for a variety of different viruses. early gene expression of varicella zoster virus leads to mhc i down-regulation by impairing its transport to the cell surface  <cit> . a late event in the reproductive cycle of herpes simplex virus type  <dig> causes fragmentation and dispersal of the golgi in infected vero cells, which coincides with virion assembly  <cit> . the infection with human rhinovirus 1a  induces golgi-fragmentation into vesicles that appear to be used as a substrate for viral rna replication  <cit> . another positive-strand rna virus, the poliovirus, induces dramatic disruption of the golgi with consequences for the secretory complex  <cit> . furthermore, it is known that vaccinia virus becomes enwrapped by cisternae derived from the intermediate compartment between er and golgi stacks as well as the tgn  <cit> . recently tan et al. also observed fragmentation of the golgi during orfv infection, and reported the golgi localization of an orfv envelope protein during late stage of infection  <cit> . the authors suggested that it is concealed between two golgi membranes, which are forming wrapped mature virions. in the present study, the destruction of the golgi structure is clearly not linked to virus envelope formation since the observed structural modifications are also visible in the presence of arac, which prevents the expression of late orfv genes essentially required for the virus envelope.

orfv-infected cells are characterized by a reduced amount of newly synthesized mhc i on the plasma membrane as well as a prolonged half-life of the remaining pre-existing surface mhc i molecules . down-regulation of mhc i is clearly arac-insensitive and thus apparently linked to the expression of early orfv genes whereas it cannot be excluded that the observed mhc i half-life effect might be also controlled by late orfv gene expression. it is tempting to speculate that the respective viral gene products target compartments within the late secretory route. since structural and functional integrity of the tgn are essentially required for endosomal/tgn-trafficking, the observed disruption of the tgn in infected cells  might be suspected to interfere with endocytosis as well as endosomal recycling of mhc i. a similar phenotype has been described for the hpv <dig> protein e <dig>  <cit> , which mediates disruption of the exo- and endocytic trafficking, including transport of the mhc i  <cit> , which causes reduced mhc i surface presentation and extends the half-life of the remaining mhc i molecules on the plasma membrane .

the orfv infection leads to an accumulation of mhc i in cop-i vesicles . cop-i is the cytoplasmic membrane-coat complex  of seven distinct proteins and is required for both anterograde and retrograde transport in the secretory pathway  <cit> . the observation that orfv infection increases the cellular expression levels of β-cop  and the amount of cop-i vesicular structures suggests inhibition of uncoating of cop-i vesicles by orfv. the identification of responsible orfv protein, as found in coxsackievirus  <cit> , requires further detailed studies. in contrast to vaccinia virus, which hijacks the cop-i coatomer for viral particle formation  <cit> , no correlation between accumulation of cop-i vesicles and viral biogenesis was observed, since the orfv-mediated effect was also detectable in the presence of arac.

the endo h-experiments suggest that destruction of golgi and tgn structures as well as intracellular accumulation of mhc i in cop-i vesicles is accompanied by impaired post-er maturation of the n-linked carbohydrates of mhc i. in contrast to non-infected cells, a substantial amount of the mhc i molecules exhibits partial endo h-resistance in orfv-infected cells indicating that these molecules are not correctly processed by carbohydrate-trimming within golgi. this reminds of the defective maturation of mhc i in the presence concanamycin b, a specific inhibitor of the vacuolar type h-atpase  <cit> , suggesting that orfv infection not only affects the intracellular location and structure of golgi and tgn, but also the functional ph conditions within these two compartments.

in addition to mhc i, orfv infection also interferes with the surface expression of the transferrin receptor  , which suggests that the orfv-induced reduction of mhc i-antigen presentation is mediated by subversion of the host cell export machinery and not via specific targeting of mhc i molecules. thus, one could assume that the orfv-mediated modulation of vesicular transport has a more pleiotropic effect that also includes the reduction of antigen presentation and thereby provides an immune subversion strategy in advantage of the viral pathogen.

orfv does clearly not interfere with the expression of mhc i molecules  but uses an evasion strategy that accumulates newly synthesized mhc i molecules within the late secretory pathway  possibly to down-modulate mhc i presenting viral antigens , while simultaneously increasing the half-lives of pre-existing self peptide mhc i complexes at the plasma membrane . this suggests that orfv like other large dna viruses  uses different evasion strategies to interfere with antigen presentation at different levels of mhc i processing.

CONCLUSIONS
we assume that the reduction of surface expressed mhc i and the impaired structure and function of the golgi apparatus, which are possibly controlled by different orfv gene products, independently affect intracellular transport and surface stability of mhc i and cooperatively undermine immune recognition of orfv-infected cells by ctls as well as nk cells. in view of the fact that the immunity elicited by orfv is short-lived, and animals can be repeatedly infected  <cit> , mhc i subversion may contribute to rescuing orfv from host immunity and supporting viral replication in epidermal cells.

