BACKGROUND
an appreciation of the immunological mechanisms that affect the interaction between the host and its pathogens is crucial for an understanding of the epidemiology of infection  <cit> . by linking within-host immunological processes to the between-host dynamics of infection it is possible to explain, and ultimately prevent, the conditions that allow for the invasion and survival of a pathogen within a host and the consequences for transmission. fundamental to this is the knowledge of how the immune response affects pathogen replication and clearance as well as the intensity and duration of shedding and, thus, transmission.

chronic bacteria infections can pose a challenge to the study of host infectiousness and associated immune response in that bacteria can either persist in the host, despite an acute inflammatory phase and active immunity, or colonize and persist without causing any apparent clinical or symptomatic effects  <cit> . bacteria can activate their pathogenicity at a later time by triggering serious disease and high infectiousness or can increase their transmission rate in response to changes in host susceptibility  <cit> . these findings suggest that immune-compromised and chronically infected hosts can act either as life-long bacteria shedders or shed bacteria for a restricted period, usually coinciding with the acute phase of infection. to understand the dynamics of chronic infections, we need to identify not only the key immunological processes that affect long term pathogen persistence but also how pathogen replication, intensity and duration of bacteria shedding is associated with the immune response.

here, we investigated the relationship between immune response and shedding rate in a chronic bacteria infection using the bordetella bronchiseptica-rabbit system. our recent work on the epidemiology of b. bronchiseptica in a free living population of rabbits  showed that this is a common and persistent infection: annual prevalence ranged between 88% and 97% and by  <dig> months of age, 65% of the individuals had already seroconverted  <cit> . a model for bacteria infection was suggested where the annual recruitment of new infected individuals was associated with the onset of the host breeding season and the availability of new naïve offspring. breeding, seropositive females represented the main source of infection for the newborns. however, it was not clear whether they were chronically infectious or in a re-activated infectious status due to the immuno-suppressed conditions during breeding.

current knowledge on the immunology of b. bronchiseptica infection is largely derived from laboratory work with rats and mice and occasionally rabbits  <cit> . studies on mice suggest that the bacterium stimulates an initial strong innate and subsequent acquired immune response characterized by the clearance of the bacteria from the lower respiratory tract but the persistence in the nasal cavity up to  <dig> days post infection, with the potential for life-long bacteria shedding  <cit> . the mechanisms involved in the persistence of bacteria in the nasal cavity are still unclear but the adhesin filamentous hemagglutinin  appears to play an important role in the colonization of the unciliated olfactory epithelia  <cit> . while highly informative, rats and mice show no documented ability for oro-nasal b. bronchispetica transmission and are not useful hosts for exploring the effect of host immunity on bacteria shedding and transmission in general  <cit> .

motivated by our recent work on the epidemiology of b. brochiseptica infection in a natural system, we examined whether chronically infected individuals can be long-term, constant bacteria shedders or whether the frequency and intensity of shedding changes with time and between individuals as constrained by their immune response; for example, hosts may not shed bacteria despite being chronically infected. we established a laboratory model system wherein rabbits were infected with b. bronchiseptica strain rb <dig> and acquired immunity and bacteria shedding was quantified for  <dig> days post infection. we focused our attention on the immunological parameters relevant to the dynamics of b. bronchiseptica, as previously identified in mice and rabbits, and examined how they affect the intensity and duration of the oro-nasal shedding.

RESULTS
to highlight heterogeneities in the shedding pattern and associated immune response between individuals, blood and tissue samples were individually processed.

infection of rabbits with b. bronchiseptica rb50
intranasal infection of rabbits led to the successful colonization and establishment of bacteria in the entire respiratory tract. by  <dig> days post infection  the mean number of bacteria colonies in the respiratory tract was  <dig> times higher than the initial inoculum . levels peaked at day  <dig> post infection in all the three organs but quickly decreased thereafter and, by  <dig> days post infection, b. bronchiseptica was completely cleared from the trachea and lungs but persisted in the nares . the number of bacteria consistently declined with the duration of the infection, dpi  but nares were significantly higher than either trachea or lungs , once differences among individuals and the non-independent sampling of the three organs from the same host were taken into account. number of bacteria in the respiratory tract was negatively affected by serum igg and circulating lymphocytes  but positively influenced by circulating neutrophils , when corrected by host variability and the non-independence of sampling the three respiratory organs from the same individual . the analysis repeated for each organ confirmed the negative effect of igg on bacteria in the nares  but also highlighted the positive effect of il- <dig>  and the negative role of il- <dig>  on bacteria in the lungs . it is important to note that the cycle threshold  is inversely related to cytokine expression level, therefore and as reported above, the sign of the coefficient describing the cfu-ct relationship should be interpreted as positive when negative and vice-versa. results also showed a negative effect of serum antibodies and circulating lymphocytes  and a positive effect of circulating neutrophils  on bacteria in the trachea . overall, these findings support the hypothesis that igg, iga, neutrophils and lymphocytes are heavily involved in b. bronchiseptica clearance from the lower but not the upper respiratory tract, despite the negative effect of igg. the positive association with neutrophils is probably caused by their rapid recruitment and short-lived contribution in the bacteria removal, as previously recorded  <cit> . moreover, our results further support the suggestion of an immunological interference between antibody-mediated clearance  and antagonistic il- <dig> anti-inflammatory activity in the lungs, which may explain the delay in bacteria clearance from this site as reported in other models  <cit> .

bacteria shedding
the goal of this study was to quantify the rate of b. bronchiseptica shedding in relation to the immune response and to use this finding to gain stronger insights into the epidemiology of a chronic infection. the strain of b. bronchiseptica used in this work was originally isolated from the nares of a  <dig> month old new zealand white rabbit and it was assumed that it could be naturally transmitted between individuals  <cit> . indeed, we found that rabbits were able to shed bacteria onto a bg blood agar plate by direct oro-nasal contact, which mimicked the natural contacts observed between free living individuals. mean number of bacteria shed per second was  <dig>   cfus; shedding was high during the first month post infection and again  <dig> weeks later but substantially dropped between the two peaks . based on the longitudinal data , we found a significant negative effect of igg on number of bacteria shed , once corrected by host variability. blood cells did not contribute to the pattern observed. the analysis was repeated using bacteria cfu counts from the nares of animals sampled at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> post infection, and a weak but significant positive relationship was observed between bacteria shed at these sampling points and bacteria in the nasal cavity . together these results suggest that shedding is positively influenced by the level of infection in the oro-nasal cavity and negatively affected by serum igg.

three main patterns of shedding were identified during the course of the infection: i- bacteria were shed with variable intensities at irregular intervals , ii- intensity of bacteria shed fell with the progression of the infection  and iii- individuals never shed bacteria despite being infected  . to highlight immunological differences associated with these shedding patterns, analyses were repeated among the three groups using longitudinal blood data. no significant differences in serum igg, iga, neutrophils and lymphocytes were observed among the three patterns, however, the intercept of the models was consistently significant , once corrected for variability between hosts and their multiple sampling. this finding supports the hypothesis that the strength of the initial immune response is crucial in modulating the dynamics of shedding. during the second week post infection, differences in the dynamics of infection were observed between the intermittent and the fade-out group . the relatively low number of bacteria shed by the intermittent group  was associated with low serum igg  and high serum iga  as well as high circulating neutrophils  and lymphocytes . in contrast, the higher shedding in the fade out group  was correlated to high serum igg  and low serum iga  and white blood cells . although not conclusive or statistically significant, these relationships suggest that the strength of the early antibody and blood cells response may play a role in affecting both the initial and long-term pattern of b. bronchiseptica transmission.

host immune response overview
overall, the immune response of rabbits to b. bronchiseptica infection confirmed previous findings reported in other animal models  <cit> .

peripheral response
infected hosts developed a strong serum igg and iga response compared to the controls . the level of igg rapidly increased in infected rabbits and remained consistently high for the duration of the infection, however and as previously highlighted, it was not sufficient to completely clear the bacteria from the upper respiratory tract . iga levels in infected rabbits peaked around week three post infection and decreased thereafter, probably as a consequence of the successful clearance of bacteria from the lower respiratory tract  <cit> . nevertheless, values remained significantly higher in infected compared to controls  and for the duration of the experiment . collectively, the systemic antibody profiles suggest that rabbit immune protection against b. bronchiseptica is robust for the first  <dig> months  post infection but does not result in complete clearance.

the neutrophil concentration in the blood decreased with the duration of the infection  and was similar between infected and controls except in the first  <dig> weeks post-infection, where a significant neutrophilia was observed in infected compared to controls . these findings further support the short-lived and early involvement of neutrophils in b. bronchiseptica clearance  <cit> .

cytokine response in the lungs
as shown in fig.  <dig> and based on the 2-ΔΔct transformation, a high il- <dig> expression was observed in the lungs of infected rabbits in the first  <dig> days post infection, this was followed by a short-lived peak in ifn-γ at  <dig> days post infection, and a general decrease in cytokine expression thereafter. il- <dig> showed consistent baseline expression. overall and using the raw ct values for analysis tractability, results confirmed the important anti-inflammatory role of il- <dig> in b. bronchiseptica infected rabbits . ifn-γ and il- <dig> ct values significantly changed among sampling time but not between infected and controls . through its anti-inflammatory properties and involvement in the recruitment and activation of other anti-inflammatory cells  <cit> , il- <dig> probably facilitated the establishment of bacteria in the respiratory tract and the subsequent persistence in the nares, while the peaks at  <dig> and  <dig> days post infection in ifn-γ confirmed its important role in bacteria clearance from the lungs and possibly trachea. in summary, the dynamics of cytokine expression in the lungs of infected rabbits was in line with previous studies  <cit> .

discussion
this study showed that rabbits infected with bordetella bronchiseptica strain rb <dig> were able to shed bacteria by oro-nasal contact for at least  <dig> days post infection. individuals naturally interacted with bg blood agar plates and a few minutes of direct contact were sufficient for the transmission of bacteria onto the medium. the mean number of bacteria shed followed the dynamics of infection, in that, shedding was high during the initial first month and decreased thereafter, although occasional peaks were observed up to  <dig> weeks post infection. the variability in the shedding pattern was unexpected but supports the hypothesis that rabbits with a chronic b. bronchiseptica infection can be long-term shedders, through a persistent infection in the upper respiratory tract. specifically, most of the bacteria were shed at irregular intervals and with intensities that vary both within and between individuals. however, we also showed that some individuals never shed bacteria while infected, and this supports the hypothesis of a non-linear relationship between host infectiousness and b. bronchiseptica transmission. moreover, since the immune system imposed constrains on the level and duration of infection we may argue that there was also a non-linear relationship between immune response and transmission dynamics.

the host acquired immunity, and probably the level of the early response, influenced the intensity, duration and pattern of bacteria shed. serum igg appeared to contribute to bacteria clearance in the lungs and trachea and the initial reduction in the nares. igg also exerted a negative effect on the amount of b. bronchiseptica shed and together with iga and white blood cells appeared to influence the initial and long-term shedding pattern. indeed, a robust and timely igg response probably modulated the long term shedding of b. bronchiseptica by quickly reducing or controlling replication in the nares below a threshold value required for consistent and prolonged pathogen transmission. in contrast, it is possible that the initial lower infection levels stimulated a milder immune response that allowed bacteria replication above a threshold necessary for long term shedding. while the number of bacteria in the nares was positively associated to the level of bacteria shed, some infected individuals never shed bacteria, supporting the hypothesis that a minimum threshold level of infection is necessary for bacteria shedding.

serum iga was probably more involved in the initial clearance of the lower respiratory tract, which agrees with the general role of this immunoglobulin in the early protection against invasive infections  <cit> . serum igg and iga have been previously shown to be sufficient for b. bronchiseptica clearance in the lower but not the upper respiratory tract  <cit> . similarly, neutrophils are involved in the early clearance of b. bronchiseptica from the lower respiratory tract  <cit> . our findings on the role of serum antibodies and bacteria clearance are in line with previous work but also highlight the effect of serum igg on the dynamics of b. bronchiseptica shedding.

at the cytokine level, the high il- <dig> in the lungs during the initial  <dig> months of infection, was fundamental to delay clearance in the lower respiratory tract and probably contributed to the persistence of bacteria in the nasal cavity and associated shedding. indeed, the absence of il- <dig> synthesis has been related to augmented b. bronchiseptica clearance as well as reduced, albeit more effective, antibody production and higher ifn-γ in mice  <cit> . the association between serum antibodies, cytokines and bacteria shed has been reported in other host-bacteria systems. for example, a negative relationship between fecal shedding of escherichia coli o157:h <dig> and igg and iga was observed in cows previously infected with a homologous bacteria strain  <cit> . mucosal iga was shown to reduce vaginal shedding and re-infection with c. trachomatis in mice  <cit> , while human infections with campylobacter spp. exhibited an inverse relationship between the shedding of fecal bacteria and age-dependent increases in serum igg and iga  <cit> . moreover, ifn-γ expression appeared to contribute to the reduction of chlamydia trachomatis and c. muridarum shedding in mice  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that rabbits were heterogeneous in their pattern of shedding b. bronchiseptica and that this was associated with differences in the host immune response. the dynamics of infection and partial clearance was consistent among individuals and a positive relationship was observed between bacteria shed and bacteria in the nasal cavity. yet, some hosts shed bacteria intermittently, others shed bacteria only during the initial few weeks of infection while some individuals never shed bacteria. together these findings suggest a strong non-linear relationship between force of infection, immune response and shedding rate for this chronic infection. the molecular mechanisms regulating these interactions are still obscure and more studies are needed to understand the persistence of bacteria in the upper respiratory tract as well as the processes controlling bacteria dispersal through direct oro-nasal contact or aerosol.

the occurrence of individuals that did not shed bacteria and the exclusion of a few contaminated plates, especially from the early part of the study, affected our search for a robust association between shedding patterns and the immune response. nevertheless, the general patterns of bacteria dynamics and immune response, currently described, are consistent in this host-pathogen system as confirmed by our more recent studies on rabbits co-infected with b. bronchiseptica and gastrointestinal nematodes . in conclusion, more attention should be given to the understanding of the relationship between host immune response, the level of infection and heterogeneities in pathogen shedding.

