BACKGROUND
circadian rhythms are oscillations in behaviour and physiology whose function it is to anticipate environmental changes associated with the solar day  <cit> . at the molecular level, they consist of a network of transcriptional and translational feedback loops that drive the  <dig> h expression of core clock components  <cit> . circadian control is required for healthy life, thus disruption of circadian cycle leads to pathologies such as cancer, obesity, lipid disorders and type 2-diabetes  <cit> . some of these abnormalities were discovered in mouse models lacking core clock genes clock and bmal <dig>  <cit> . phenotypes resulting from mutations of clock genes are highly affected by genetic background  <cit> . yoshiki defined genetic background as the influence of all genes of the genome that may interact with the gene of interest and potentially influence the specific phenotype  <cit> . to date, a number of reports have shown that genetic background affects the phenotype caused by gene disruption  <cit> .

when studying gene expression, qpcr is the dominant quantitative technique due to its broad dynamic range, accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and speed  <cit> . normalization in qpcr controls for variations in all experimental steps, enabling comparison between different samples  <cit> . different normalization strategies are available, where application of reference genes as internal controls seems to be the most appropriate  <cit> . unfortunately, there is no universal reference gene that would be stably expressed under all experimental conditions. hence, normalization to reference genes that are validated in individual experiments is a prerequisite for accurate interpretation of biological data  <cit> .

the broader scope of our research is to understand the circadian expression of genes in different tissues of the two commonly used laboratory mouse strains  and to determine the tissue-specific effect of the targeted disruption of transcription factor crem. in this manuscript, we show that genetic background and the circadian time are important factors influencing expression of commonly used qpcr reference genes. this should be taken into consideration for accurate interpretation of biological data.

RESULTS
selection and characteristics of candidate reference genes
seven candidate reference genes  were selected  <cit>  and their expression measured in  <dig> livers and  <dig> adrenals from the inbred strain ,  <dig> livers and  <dig> adrenals from the wild type mixed strain  and  <dig> livers and  <dig> adrenals from the mixed strain with a targeted disruption of the crem gene . for livers, three additional reference genes were selected by refgenes , based on meta analysis of the most stably expressed liver genes in various mouse strains as detected by affymetrix chips  <cit> . gene symbols, full names, accession numbers and gene functions are listed in table  <dig>  intron spanning primers were designed wherever possible, with the exception of rplp <dig> and tbcc where primers lie within a single exon. to determine primer specificity, melting curve analyses were performed on all primer pairs during the primer validation process as well as after each qpcr run. the specificity of the amplicon was confirmed by the presence of a single peak. primer efficiencies were calculated based on slopes from standard curves by lightcycler  <dig> software . standard curves were prepared with five-fold serial dilutions of the cdna pool. a negative control  was also included to determine possible amplification from genomic dna. only primers with single peaks and good negative controls were used in the study. primer details are listed in table  <dig> 

expression level of reference genes
expression of measured reference genes is represented as raw quantification cycle  in figure  <dig>  rn <dig> s shows highest expression in all samples with a mean cq of  <dig> . this is not surprising since rn <dig> s represents the bulk of total rna. the cq values of other candidates were between cq 18- <dig>  tbcc shows lowest expression in all samples with a mean cq of  <dig> . the largest variation across the studied  <dig> samples was observed in actb and hmbs  and the smallest for eif2a, tbcc and utp6c .

search for optimal reference genes by genorm
genorm ranks reference genes according to their average expression stability value , from the most stable  to the least stable . an important advantage of genorm is that it provides the optimal number of reference genes required for accurate normalization. this number is based on the pairwise variation values )  <cit> .

we divided expression data into eight groups, according to the tissue  and mouse strain . groups a to f thus represent stably expressed reference genes of each tissue in each mouse strain. groups g and h consider genetic differences between mouse strains because samples of all strains are joined for each tissue. the time of sacrifice  cannot be included as a variable by genorm analyses. the same groups have been applied as well in normfinder analyses.

when evaluating reference genes within each strain, relatively small m values are observed , indicating a greater degree of expression stability between samples. however, when genetic differences between mouse strains are included in evaluation, a larger degree of variation  is observed , which supports the notion that genetic variability importantly influences expression. in this case, actb is the least stable in both liver and adrenal glands. it also displays a far greater m value compared to other genes, showing that it is indeed not a good gene for normalization in mouse tissues. eif2a and tbcc in the liver  and gapdh and hmbs in adrenals  are most stable if all strains are considered.

we also determined the optimal number of reference genes for normalization . in all groups , a pairwise variation value  of less than  <dig>  was determined, confirming that  <dig> stable reference genes might be sufficient for accurate normalization, as proposed by vandesompele et al  <cit> . addition of further genes in groups a to f did not influence the v value significantly. however, in groups g and h, addition of least stable genes did raise the v value above  <dig>  .

determination of reference genes by normfinder
normfinder uses a model based approach to calculate gene stability value for either the most stable reference gene or the best combination of two genes. it has the advantage to allow estimation of variations between time points, which is crucial in circadian experiments. normfinder gene stability values and rankings are shown in table  <dig>  in this analysis, samples in all groups  were divided further into  <dig> subgroups according to the time of scarification .

in groups a to f, data was grouped according to tissue, mouse strain and the time point. in groups g and h, data was grouped only according to tissue and time point. *-best candidate reference gene according to normfinder.  - the best combination of two reference genes together with their stability value are calculated only if group identifiers  are included in the analysis. "best two" is not always equal to the first and second ranking genes, but represent the two genes with minimal combined inter-and intragroup expression variation  <cit> .

similarly to genorm, normfinder also showed differences in ranking of reference genes in different mouse strains. in liver samples of 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko strains hprt <dig> always ranks among the top two reference genes , however in the c57bl/6jolahsd strain it is among the least stable genes . the opposite is seen for hmbs, which is most stable in the c57bl/6jolahsd strain  and among least stable in 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko strains . when genetic differences between strains are included in the evaluation, actb is the least stable gene , followed by hmbs and gapdh.

ranking is again more consistent for adrenal glands. ppib ranks as the most stable reference gene both in each individual mouse strain  and also irrespective of the mouse genetic background . hprt <dig> is the least stable gene in adrenals of each investigated mouse strain , while actb ranks last. again, this result is obtained only if genetic differences between strains are taken into consideration .

in individual mouse strain groups , with the exception of group f, gene stability value for the best combination of two reference genes is lower than the value of the most stable reference gene , suggesting that normalization on a single reference gene may not be sufficient.

normalization of biological data by reference genes of different stability
dbp  is one of the most robust circadian genes in the liver, with the peak of expression between ct10-ct <dig>  <cit> . we monitored the dbp hepatic expression  in mouse strains c57bl/6jolahsd, 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko. to test the role of reference gene selection on interpretation of the hepatic dbp expression, we applied different normalization procedures: with a) actb which is commonly used for normalization, but was determined as the least stable gene by genorm and normfinder; b) the average of the two most stable reference genes according to genorm  and c) the average of the two most stable reference genes according to normfinder .

discussion
qpcr is a method of choice for quantitative gene expression analysis. due to its high sensitivity, normalization with stable reference genes is important for accurate analysis of the biological variation in the data  <cit> . the selection of appropriate reference genes is, however, far from trivial. it has been shown that application of non-validated reference genes can lead to inaccurate data interpretation  <cit> .

understanding the tissue-specific circadian behaviour of genes and proteins is often required in drug-treated mouse models, including knockout models from different mouse strains. in recent years, the circadian aspects of metabolism and drug detoxification became more important for proper understanding of physiology, pathophysiology, drug metabolism, etc.  <cit> . even though a number of studies discuss the selection of reference genes  <cit>  no study discussed circadian experiments and only one past study evaluated different mouse strains  <cit> . the majority of circadian studies still perform normalization using a single reference gene  <cit> .

we evaluate ten candidate reference genes for their expression stability in a circadian experiment with mouse liver and adrenal glands in three mouse strains . seven genes from our study have been evaluated previously under a variety of experimental conditions  <cit> . three additional genes  were selected by refgene as the most stably expressed after the meta analysis of liver affymetrix expression profile  <cit> . publicly available microarray data have been successfully used before for reference gene selection  <cit> . we show that irrespective of the analysis applied , different mouse strains show different rankings of reference genes. utp6c was indicated as unstable reference gene in c57bl/6jolahsd livers by both programs , whereas in the 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko it ranked among the top three .

when comparing gene expression between different mouse strains, three reference genes from the affymetrix meta analyses ranked among the most stable, with eif2a being first by both programs . this indicates that refgenes tool is useful in narrowing down the number of candidate reference genes, especially when comparing mouse strains.

differences in ranking of reference genes were observed not only between mouse strains, but also between tissues, as confirmed by both programs. genes most stable in livers of 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko strains ranked among the least stable in c57bl/6jolahsd mice . adrenals show similar ranking between strains. ppib is usually the most stable and hprt <dig> the least stable gene in all strains by both programs. our study shows that reference genes suitable for one mouse strain should not automatically be used for normalization in another strain. the same applies for different tissues.

the average expression stability value m determined by genorm shows little variability in gene expression between samples taking into account circadian effect both in liver and adrenals within each strain. this is in line with the pairwise variation value , which is well below the  <dig>  threshold value set by vandensompele  <cit> , indicating that normalization of target genes with a combination of the two best genes is sufficient. the m value of reference genes was substantially higher when searching for stable genes between mouse stains. here actb was identified as the least stable in both liver and adrenals . similar results were obtained when comparing human tissue samples  <cit> .

to test whether selection of the least stable reference gene  affects normalization when compared to normalization with the two most stable genes selected by genorm and normfinder, a known and robust liver circadian gene dbp has been normalized to three factors . normalization to actb leads to a large difference in the expression pattern between the c57bl/6jolahsd strain and the 129pas plus c57bl/6j and crem ko strains . this can lead to a false impression that expression of dbp is substantially higher in c57bl/6jolahsd. this difference, however, almost disappears when normalisation is performed on the two most stable genes eif2a and tbcc  or eif2a and rn <dig> s  . even though the programs did not select identical reference genes, a similar dbp expression profile was obtained in both cases. however, the ability of normfinder to distinguish between different time points provides an advantage over genorm when sufficient samples and genes are evaluated  <cit> , as is the case in circadian experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we investigated the most reliable reference genes for normalization of circadian studies within or between mouse strains in livers and adrenal glands. the study is unique in its analysis of  <dig> mouse strains,  <dig> tissues and circadian sampling and in the magnitude of samples and genes tested . we show that differences in the reference genes exist between mouse strains as well as between tissues of the same strain. we also show that selection of a reference gene that appears stable in each mouse strain separately, can lead to interpretation errors, when used for normalization in different mouse stains. we identified altrernative reference genes that are stable in mouse strain comparisons.

