BACKGROUND
several features characterize the physiological and metabolic aspects of phototrophic heliobacteria  <cit> :  they are the only known phototrophs that belong to the gram-positive bacterial phylum firmicutes, and as is typical of members of this group, which includes species of bacillus and clostridium, heliobacteria can form heat resistant endospores;  they produce the unique pigment bacteriochlorophyll g ;  they produce 81-hydroxy-chlorophyll a with a farnesol tail , which serves as the primary electron acceptor from the reaction center  special pair;  they contain a type i homodimeric rc bound to the cytoplasmic membrane;  they require organic carbon sources for both phototrophic growth and chemotrophic  growth; and  they are active nitrogen-fixers and also produce hydrogen. further, heliobacterium modesticaldum, isolated from hot springs microbial mats and volcanic soils in iceland  <cit> , is one of only two known anoxygenic phototrophs that can fix nitrogen at temperatures higher than 50°c   <cit> .

genomic sequence data of h. modesticaldum suggests that several genes required for the known autotrophic carbon fixation pathways are missing  <cit> . this is consistent with previous physiological studies indicating that heliobacteriaceae are obligate heterotrophs  <cit> . in the absence of known co2-fixation mechanisms, it is unknown whether alternative pathways may be adapted by h. modesticaldum for co <dig> assimilation. the genomic information suggests that one candidate for anaplerotic co <dig> incorporation is phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxykinase. we recently identified the non-autotrophic, anaplerotic co <dig> assimilation mechanism in the photoheterotrophic α-proteobacterium roseobacter denitrificans  <cit> . whether a similar anaplerotic pathway and/or other pathways are employed for co <dig> incorporation in h. modesticaldum has not been verified.

it has been reported that pyruvate, lactate, acetate, and yeast extract can support photoheterotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum  <cit> . although essential genes in the oxidative pentose phosphate  and entner-doudoroff  pathways are absent in the genome, genes for the embden-meyerhof-parnas  pathway , gluconeogenesis, and a ribose atp-binding cassette  transporter  have been annotated in the genome. however, neither hexose nor ribose has been reported to support the growth of h. modesticaldum  <cit> . additionally, while the most vigorous growth of h. modesticaldum occurs photoheterotrophically, h. modesticaldum can also grow chemotrophically  by fermentation  <cit> . but heliobacterial energy metabolism during chemotrophic  growth is not fully understood. to address these questions about the carbon and energy metabolism of h. modesticaldum, experimental evidence gathered using a multi-faceted approach and working hypotheses are presented in this report.

RESULTS
d-ribose, d-fructose and d-glucose can support the growth of h. modesticaldum
only a few defined carbon sources, lactate, acetate  and pyruvate, and yeast extract, an undefined carbon source, have been reported to support growth of h. modesticaldum  <cit> . in order to enhance our understanding of the energy and carbon metabolism of h. modesticaldum, it is useful to explore other organic carbon sources. glucose or fructose are reported to support the growth of heliobacterium gestii but not h. modesticaldum  <cit> , whereas a complete emp pathway has been annotated in the genome of h. modesticaldum  <cit> . in the yeast extract  growth medium with  <dig> % yeast extract included, significant cell growth can be detected with  <dig> mm d-glucose or d-fructose supplied, and cell growth is glucose concentration -dependent . although interpretations of these experimental results are complicated by the fact that  <dig> % yeast extract alone can support the growth of h. modesticaldum  <cit> , photo-assimilation of glucose to generate cell material is identified by mass spectrometry . the mass spectral studies are further elaborated below.

by optimizing the growth conditions, we successfully grew the cultures on d-ribose, d-glucose and d-fructose in the growth medium containing  <dig> % yeast extract , whereas no growth can be detected with only  <dig> % yeast extract in the culture medium . cell growth is dependent on the concentration of d-sugars, and no growth of h. modesticaldum is seen with  <dig> mm 2'-fluoro-2'-deoxy-d-glucose  as the sole carbon source . lack of the growth on fdg, a glucose analogue, is consistent with the mechanism of action of fdg that cannot be metabolized inside the cells because it lacks the 2'-hydroxyl group in normal glucose required for conversion of d-glucose-6-phosphate to d-fructose-6-phosphate in glycolysis. alternatively, no growth is detected on l-arabinose, which is one of the most abundant pentoses present as a constituent of bacterial cell wall and is a more common isomer than d-arabinose. many bacteria contain an inducible operon that encodes a series of enzymes and transporters that allows l-arabinose to be used as a sole carbon source in cell culture. no arabinose transporter  is annotated in the genome of h. modesticaldum.

in addition to physiological studies, we also determine the uptake of d-hexose and assay the enzymatic activity for the enzymes specific for the emp pathway. our studies indicate 20-25% d-fructose  and ~10% d-glucose  being assimilated, consistent with better growth on d-fructose than on d-glucose. no acetate is excreted from  <dig> mm glucose-grown cultures . enzymatic activity of hexokinase , 6-phosphofructokinase  and pyruvate kinase , three enzymes specific for the emp pathway and not shared with the gluconeogenesis pathway, can be detected in hexose-grown cultures. together, our studies indicate that h. modesticaldum uses the emp pathway for carbohydrate metabolism when d-glucose, d-fructose and d-ribose are supplied as carbon sources.

probe glucose photoassimilation by mass spectrometry
as described above, glucose and fructose can enhance the growth of h. modesticaldum in ye medium . we have investigated the roles of glucose in the cultures grown on glucose and  <dig> % yeast extract. in addition to the experimental evidence presented above, we determined the molecular mass of photosynthetic pigments of h. modesticaldum, bchl g and 81-oh-chl af , in glucose-grown cultures by maldi-tof mass spectrometry. if glucose is photo-assimilated via the emp pathway to produce cell materials of h. modesticaldum, bchl g and 81-oh-chl af should be labeled when 13c-labeled glucose  is added to the growth medium. to test the hypothesis, we obtain mass spectra of chls extracted from pyruvate-grown cultures as the positive control, since pyruvate has been established as the sole carbon source for h. modesticaldum. chls were extracted as reported previously  <cit> . because an acidic matrix  was used to prepare the samples submitted to mass spectral analysis, peaks corresponding to demetallization of bchl g and 81-oh-chl af were detected : bchl g,  <dig> da; 81-oh-chl af,  <dig> da) . compared to the sample from unlabeled pyruvate-grown cultures , higher molecular masses corresponding to labeled chls  were detected using pyruvate as the sole carbon source .

similarly, we determined the molecular mass of chls from the cultures grown on unlabeled glc  or glc  in ye medium. because  <dig> % yeast extract alone can support the growth of h. modesticaldum  and produce chls, unlabeled chls were detected in the mass spectrum from cell cultures grown in ye medium containing glc . in contrast, less unlabeled bchl g was detected in the samples from cultures grown on pyruvate as sole carbon source . nevertheless, the lower panel of figure 1d shows that most of bchl g and 81-oh-chl af molecules are 13c-labeled in the samples from glc-grown cultures, since the peaks corresponding to 13c-labeled molecular mass of chls  cannot be detected in unlabeled glucose-grown sample . together, our studies demonstrate that glucose is transported into cells and photoassimilated to produce cell materials.

growth on yeast extract
as previously reported  <cit> , we also found that yeast extract  alone can support growth of h. modesticaldum . it is known that many undefined carbon sources, vitamin mixtures and amino acids included, are included in yeast extract. we successfully replaced yeast extract with vitamin b <dig> for supporting the growth of a different photoheterotrophic bacterium  <cit> . in all of the growth media of h. modesticaldum, vitamin b <dig> has always been included, and it is not yet known what carbon sources in the yeast extract support the photoheterotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum. with approaches listed in materials and methods, we have estimated that the amount of pyruvate, acetate and lactate in yeast extract is negligible. however, the inclusion of pyruvate or acetate as a defined organic carbon source, along with yeast extract, can significantly enhance growth . alternatively, it is possible that some amino acids in yeast extract may support the growth of h. modesticaldum, and the oxidation of amino acids transported into the cell can generate reducing power and chemical energy. to test this hypothesis, we grew h. modesticaldum on casamino acids that contain predominately a mixture of free amino acids, and observed comparable cell growth with  <dig> % casamino acids versus with  <dig> % yeast extract after  <dig> hours of growth . also, we didn't observe significant growth enhancement with vitamin mixtures included in casamino acids-grown cultures. together, our studies support the idea that amino acids contribute to the growth of h. modesticaldum. further, we have probed the contribution of glutamate and glutamine for cell growth of h. modesticaldum. glutamate can serve as a nitrogen source for h. modesticaldum  <cit> , while our current studies indicate that either glutamate or glutamine  cannot support the growth of h. modesticaldum as a sole carbon source during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth.

to investigate the impact of yeast extract on metabolic pathways, we compared transcriptomic data from cultures containing pye  and pms  growth media . it is generally assumed that proteomic and transcriptomic data are related  <cit> , and that higher mrna levels normally lead to more protein production, particularly in prokaryotes with no mechanism of post-transcriptional modification. our data show that the addition of yeast extract to the culture media has little effect on the transcriptional levels of most genes involved in carbon metabolism and other cellular functions .

non-autotrophic co <dig> assimilation by h. modesticaldum
it has been recognized that pyruvate is the preferred organic carbon source for heliobacteria and it can support both photoheterotrophic and chemotrophic growth  <cit> . consistent with previous reports, our studies show that h. modesticaldum grows better using pyruvate as carbon source compared to other organic carbon sources , and the rate of cell growth corresponds to that of pyruvate consumption . in contrast to co2-enhanced growth of chlorobaculum  tepidum and other green sulfur bacteria  <cit> , no difference in growth rate can be detected with or without  <dig> % hco3- included in pyruvate-grown cultures . moreover, no growth can be detected with hco3- as the sole carbon source .

the lack of autotrophic growth in h. modesticaldum can be attributed to the lack of a gene encoding atp citrate lyase   <cit> , which catalyzes the cleavage of citrate to acetyl-coa and oxaloacetate  and is one of the key enzymes specific in the autotrophic co <dig> fixation via the reductive  tricarboxylic acid  cycle  <cit> . to confirm the absence of an enzyme having acl activity, we performed activity assays in cell-free extracts of h. modesticaldum and cba. tepidum. the latter served as a positive control for acl activity, which is documented in cba. tepidum  <cit> . consistent with previous reports, the activity of acl was clearly detected in cell free extracts of cba. tepidum, but not in h. modesticaldum . additionally, the activity of citrate synthase, catalyzing the formation of citrate from condensation of oaa and acetyl-coa in the oxidative tca cycle, also cannot be detected .

alternatively, the genomic data suggest that certain non-autotrophic pathways may be available for co <dig> assimilation in h. modesticaldum  <cit> . the pcka gene , encoding phosphoenolpyruvate  carboxykinase , has been annotated in the genome of h. modesticaldum. the activity of pepck  was detected in cell-free extracts of h. modesticaldum and pcka is expressed, based on qrt-pcr analysis, in all of the growth conditions tested . together, our experimental data indicate that h. modesticaldum uses pepck to assimilate co <dig> and generates atp via substrate-level phosphorylation , in agreement with previously proposed carbon metabolic pathways in heliobacteria  <cit> .

aΔct = ct  of the target gene - ct of the 16s rrna gene  <cit> 

bΔΔct = Δct  - Δct 

c relative expression level is = 2ΔΔct

acetate can serve as a carbon source with co2-enhanced growth
where fdred and fdox represent the reduced and oxidized form of ferredoxin , respectively.

the pora gene , encoding pfor, has been annotated in h. modesticaldum. the enzymatic activity of pfor has been reported in pyruvate-grown cultures of heliobacterium strain hy- <dig>  <cit> . in some relatives of the heliobacteria, such as clostridium thermoaceticum and other clostridia, pfor is linked to the carbon fixation via the reductive acetyl-coa pathway   <cit> . while enzymes that function in this autotrophic carbon fixation pathway are commonly found in both methanogens and acetate-producing clostridia  <cit> , they are not found in the genome of h. modesticaldum  <cit> .

phototrophic versus chemotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum
h. modesticaldum can grow either photoheterotrophically in the light or chemotrophically in the dark  <cit> , but heliobacterial energy metabolism during chemotrophic  growth is not well understood. because pyruvate is a required nutrient for fermentative growth  <cit>  and also best supports phototrophic growth of heliobacteria, the following studies of heliobacterial phototrophic and chemotrophic growth were obtained from cells grown in pye medium. the od <dig> of cell cultures and pyruvate consumption during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth are shown in figure 3a, and the levels of gene expression in each growth condition are reported in table  <dig>  the major results from our investigation are illustrated below.

 acetate assimilation and excretion
while our results are different from the report of heliobacterium strain hy- <dig>  <cit> , the authors found more acetate being produced during chemotrophic growth  than during phototrophic growth . both our and their studies demonstrate that acetate can be produced from pyruvate-grown heliobacterial cultures during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth. two acetate assimilation/excretion pathways are possibly employed by h. modesticaldum. one is catalyzed by acetyl-coa synthetase , proceeding through an acetyl adenylate intermediate; and the other is catalyzed by acetate kinase  and phosphotransacetylase   <cit> . no acs activity was reported in the studies of heliobacterium strain hy- <dig>  <cit> , and it is possible that ack and pta are responsible in the acetate assimilation/excretion pathway in heliobacterium strain hy- <dig> 

in contrast, genes encoding acs  and ack , but not pta , have been annotated in the genome of h. modesticaldum. the relative gene expression level  of acsa is approximately one order of magnitude lower than that of acka , whereas the activity of acs can be only detected in cell extracts of phototrophic growth . in contrast, the enzymatic activity of ack and pta can be detected in cell extracts of pyruvate-grown cultures during both phototrophic and chemotrophic growth.

aactivity of acs was determined by a colorimetric assay of ppi  <cit> , and activity of ack and pta was determined by coupling assays reported previously  <cit> .

together, our studies suggest that:  h. modesticaldum uses acs for catalyzing the conversion of acetate to acetyl-coa. lack of enzymatic activity of acs and low expression of acsa in the cultures grown in darkness is consistent with the physiological evidence that acetate cannot support the chemotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum;  the gene expression level of acka and enzymatic activity of ack and pta are similar during chemotrophic versus phototrophic growth, in agreement with a similar ratio of acetate excretion/pyruvate consumption in light and darkness, indicating that h. modesticaldum uses pta and ack to convert acetyl-coa to acetate. atp is generated via substrate-level phosphorylation in the reaction of acetyl-phosphate being converted to acetate; and  while no pta gene has been annotated in the genome, function of pta is identified in h. modesticaldum to convert acetyl-coa to acetyl-phosphate. alternatively, some bacteria can use pyruvate oxidase  to produce acetyl-phosphate from pyruvate, whereas the o2-dependence of pox catalysis is not feasible in the strictly anaerobic bacterium h. modesticaldum. also, no pox gene is annotated in the genome. the proposed acetate metabolism of h. modesticaldum is shown in figure  <dig> 

 gene expression in carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen metabolism
to extend our understanding from the physiological studies shown in figure  <dig>  we monitored some key genes for carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen metabolism during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth. compared to the photoheterotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum, in which energy is generated from light and reducing powers h and fdred) are generated from light and oxidation of organic carbon , less energy and reducing powers are expected to be generated for h. modesticaldum in darkness. in agreement with this hypothesis, most of the genes involved in energy metabolism are down-regulated during chemotrophic growth . for instance, genes encoding enzymes for  the emp pathway , 6-phosphofructokinase, and pyka , pyruvate kinase);  nitrogen assimilation  and nifk , subunits of molybdenum-dependent group i type  nitrogenase); and  hydrogen production  and hupl , subunits of uptake nickel-iron -hydrogenase ; nuoefg , encoding -hydrogenase; and hymd , encoding the hymd subunit of fe-only dehydrogenase).

 pyruvate metabolism is either active or up-regulated in darkness
as shown in figure  <dig>  the expression level of genes presumed to carry out pyruvate metabolism during chemotrophic growth is either up-regulated, such as pora , or not affected, as in the case for fdxr -nadp+ oxidoreductase ) and two adjacent ferredoxin genes, fdx  and pshb . despite the lack of genes encoding pyruvate dehydrogenase, pfor can be an alternative enzyme for converting pyruvate into acetyl-coa and fdred in pyruvate fermentation , and fdred can interact with fnr, known to be the last electron transporter in the light-induced electron transfer chain, to produce nadph .   

note that high fnr activity  is detected in the cell free extract of h. modesticaldum . consistent with the studies of fnr from other organisms, we also detected that fnr in h. modesticaldum has higher specificity for nadph versus nadh, and that the reaction turnover for producing fdred, by measuring the formation of nadp+ or nad+ , is more than 50-fold faster for nadph than for nadh . the rate of nadph oxidation is accelerated with addition of ferricyanide . together, the discovery of fnr activity in cell extracts indicates that the reducing power required for carbon and nitrogen metabolisms in h. modesticaldum can be generated from fnr during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth.

 photosynthetic pigments produced in darkness
the genomic information indicates that h. modesticaldum has the simplest chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway compared to other sequenced photosynthetic bacteria. a putative mechanism of bchl g biosynthesis was recently proposed  <cit> . the biosynthesis of photosynthetic pigments during chemotrophic growth under nitrogen fixing conditions has been observed for some species of heliobacteria, including heliobacillus mobilis, heliobacterium gestii and heliobacterium chlorum  <cit> . here, we would like to examine if h. modesticaldum can also produce chls in darkness. figure  <dig> shows the normalized absorption spectra of the intact cell cultures from phototrophic and chemotrophic growth, after cell light-scattering has been digitally subtracted from the raw data . the absorption peaks of the unique pigment bchl g at  <dig> nm and of 81-oh-chl af at  <dig> nm can be detected in figure  <dig>  indicating that photosynthetic pigments can be produced by h. modesticaldum during chemotrophic growth. the expression levels of genes responsible for chls biosynthesis, bchy , bchb , bche  and bchg , are 2- <dig> fold lower in darkness than grown phototrophically .

 nitrogen is assimilated during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth
biological nitrogen assimilation  is an ancient process that is widely distributed in prokaryotes, and is found in some members of all groups of phototrophic bacteria  <cit> . previous studies showed that nitrogen assimilation in heliobacterial cultures is "switched-off" when nh4+ is supplied as the nitrogen source and activated with n <dig> supplied  <cit> , and that h. modesticaldum is one of the only two known anaerobic anoxygenic phototrophs that can fix nitrogen at temperatures above 50°c  <cit> . significant amounts of chemical energy  and reducing power  are required during diazotrophic growth   <cit> .

in the energy metabolism of h. modesticaldum, atp and reducing power are required for carbon metabolism, nitrogen assimilation and hydrogen production. because of the energy and reducing power demanded for nitrogen fixation, diazotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum in darkness may be very challenging. figure  <dig> shows diazotrophic and non-diazotrophic growth during phototrophic and chemotrophic growth, and growth of h. modesticaldum is slower during diazotrophic growth. table  <dig> indicates that a similar amount of acetate is excreted during diazotrophic and non-diazotrophic growth. together, our studies suggest that h. modesticaldum generates sufficient chemical energy and reducing power for both carbon metabolism and nitrogen assimilation during chemotrophic growth.

discussion
d-sugars are photoassimilated by h. modesticaldum
while the emp pathway is annotated in the genome, no sugar-supported growth has been reported for h. modesticaldum. it is not uncommon for microorganisms that have the emp pathway annotated but do not use glucose and other sugars as carbon sources, and to date only one heliobacterium, heliobacterium gestii, has been reported to grow on c6-sugars, i.e. glucose and fructose  <cit> . alternatively, fermentation of glucose through the emp pathway has been reported in non-phototrophic bacteria in the phylum firmicutes  <cit> . in this paper, we present the first report on the growth of h. modesticaldum supported by d-ribose, d-glucose and d-fructose with "vitamin-level"  yeast extract included. with the support of multiple lines of experimental evidence, including physiological studies, activity assays, gene expression data, and mass spectra, our work addresses the puzzle that the emp pathway has previously been annotated but no sugar-supported growth has been reported for h. modesticaldum.

the growth on d-ribose confirms the proposed function of a putative ribose abc transporter  and ribokinase  through genome annotation, and growth supported by d-ribose, d-glucose and d-fructose suggests that annotated emp and non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathways in h. modesticaldum are active in carbohydrate metabolism. as d-fructose and d-glucose are polar molecules, glucose, fructose or hexose transporter proteins are required to move those molecules across the cell membrane into the cells. no known hexose transporter has been reported for h. modesticaldum, which may partially explain slower growth on d-hexose than on d-ribose. it remains to be determined if the putative ribose transporter of h. modesticaldum functions as a hexose transporter, since no ribose transporter has been reported previously to accommodate a hexose.

metabolism of carbohydrate through the emp pathway supplies  <dig> atp and  <dig> nadh to the cells, which are significant for the energy metabolism of h. modesticaldum, because essential genes in the oxidative pentose phosphate and ed pathways, which provide reducing equivalents during carbohydrate metabolism, are absent in the genome. moreover, utilization of glucose can provide an additional path for h <dig> production in h. modesticaldum as reported in some non-phototrophic bacteria  <cit> .

the biological significance of the alternative co2-assimilation pathways
the co2-anaplerotic pathways are known to replenish the intermediates of tca cycle, so that removal of the intermediates for synthesizing cell materials will not significantly slow down the metabolic flux through the tca cycle. our recent studies showed that the photoheterotrophic bacterium r. denitrificans uses the anaplerotic pathways to assimilate co <dig>  all of the genes encoding the enzymes for co2-anaplerotic pathways, pep carboxylase, pep carboxykinase, pyruvate carboxylase and malic enzyme, have been annotated in the r. denitrificans genome, and activities of these enzymes have been detected. the alternative co2-fixation pathways account for making up 10-15% cellular proteins of r. denitrificans  <cit> . our studies presented here also suggest that h. modesticaldum uses two anaplerotic pathway, pep carboxykinase  and pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase , for assimilating co <dig> 

what is the biological importance of pepck and pfor in h. modesticaldum? although the anaplerotic co2-assimilation cannot support heterotrophic growth in the way that the autotrophic co2-fixation supports autotrophs, these two co2-anaplerotic pathways are critical for the carbon metabolism of h. modesticaldum . first, the co2-assimilation by pfor catalyzes the formation of pyruvate from acetyl-coa, a reaction that cannot be catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase. hence, pfor is essential for acetate assimilation and pyruvate metabolism. second, as shown in figure  <dig>  pepck is required to convert pep into oaa in the partial reductive tca  cycle. without assimilating co <dig> by pepck, carbon flux through the partial rtca cycle cannot take place.

possible functions of pfor and fnr during chemotrophic growth
to evaluate the function of pfor and fnr in pyruvate metabolism in darkness, we examine the culture growth in acetate-supported medium with and without the addition of hco3- and acetate excretion from pyruvate-grown cultures. no co2-enhanced growth in acetate-supported medium can be detected, and cell growth in acetate medium is extremely slow in darkness . also, approximately 44% of the pyruvate in pyruvate-grown cultures is converted into acetate during chemotrophic growth . madigan and coworkers reported a large amount of co <dig> by analyzing the gas phase of chemotrophic-grown heliobacterial cultures  <cit> . together, the following roles of pfor and fnr during chemotrophic growth can be proposed :  pfor provides energy and reducing power for cellular functions. pfor catalyzes pyruvate fermentation to acetyl-coa, co <dig>   <dig> fdred and  <dig> h+ . fdred is used for carbon and nitrogen metabolism in darkness , and  <dig> fdred and  <dig> h+ from the oxidation of pyruvate can generate h <dig> by -hydrogenase  .  <dig> fdox can be then used for pyruvate fermentation. further, acetyl-coa can be utilized to generate acetate and produce atp through substrate-level phosphorylation catalyzed by ack . this atp production process may partially explain pyruvate being the most favorable nutrition source; and  fnr produces nadph during chemotrophic growth. as mentioned above, essential genes in the oxidative pentose phosphate and ed pathways, two potential sources producing nadph, are missing in the h. modesticaldum genome. while nadph is generated by fnr via the light-induced electron transfer during phototrophic growth, nadph production is also required during chemotrophic growth. it is likely that some fdred molecules produced by pyruvate fermentation in h. modesticaldum are used to produce nadph by fnr during chemotrophic growth . when this occurs, fdox is regenerated for pyruvate fermentation . in summary, since -hydrogenase and fnr compete for using  <dig> fdred and  <dig> h+ produced from pyruvate fermentation, intracellular nadh availability likely plays important role on h <dig> production, as well as nitrogen and carbon flux, in h. modesticaldum.

CONCLUSIONS
h. modesticaldum is one of the only two cultured anoxygenic phototrophs that can fix nitrogen at temperatures above 50°c. only acetate, lactate and pyruvate have been reported previously to support the photoheterotrophic growth of h. modesticaldum, and it is necessary to further explore carbon sources in order to understand energy metabolism in-depth. in this paper, we developed the growth medium close to a minimal growth medium, and report the first studies, with comprehensive experimental evidence supported, that d-ribose, d-glucose and d-fructose can be photoassimilated as sole carbon sources to generate cell material. additionally, in the absence of autotrophic co <dig> fixation, h. modesticaldum uses two co2-anaplerotic pathways during phototrophic growth: pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase  and phosphoenol-pyruvate carboxykinase . the co2-anaplerotic pathways by pfor and pepck are essential for acetate assimilation, pyruvate metabolism and introducing carbon flow into the rtca cycle for generating cell materials, including photosynthetic pigments .

our studies suggest that pfor and ferredoxin-nadp+ oxidoreductase  are required for generating reducing power h) during chemotrophic growth. a similar ratio of acetate excretion/pyruvate consumption is observed in pyruvate-grown cultures during phototrophic versus chemotrophic growth, and conversion of acetyl-coa to acetate can generate atp for the energy required for h. modesticaldum in darkness. also, since energy and reducing power produced by h. modesticaldum during chemotrophic growth are rather limited compared to phototrophic growth, cellular functions demanding high-energy input, such as nitrogen fixation and hydrogen production, are down-regulated. nevertheless, our studies indicate that h. modesticaldum produces sufficient energy and reducing power for both carbon metabolism and nitrogen fixation during chemotrophic growth, albeit at a relatively low growth rate. an overview of energy metabolism pathways of h. modesticaldum is shown in figure  <dig>  in summary, our reported studies not only significantly broaden our current knowledge, but also provide new and essential insights on the energy metabolism of h. modesticaldum.

