BACKGROUND
the principal cholinergic innervation to the hippocampus arises from the basal forebrain, specifically from the medial septum and diagonal band of broca . progressive loss of basal forebrain cholinergic cells, marked by reduced cholinergic acetyltransferase  levels  <cit> , acetylcholinesterase activity  <cit>  and p75ntr receptor expression  <cit> , occurs in aging, dementia and neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease   <cit> . according to the "cholinergic hypothesis of ad" posited more than two decades ago, the symptoms of failing cognitive function associated with ad and advanced age are attributed to cholinergic neuronal dysfunction  <cit> . this idea is backed by studies linking the mnemonic functions of the cortex and hippocampus to the cholinergic system  <cit>  and the association of cognitive deficits with the severity of the loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurones  <cit> . more recently, some authors have proposed that the decline in learning and memory is also related to decreased hippocampal neurogenesis associated with the degeneration of cholinergic neurones  <cit> .

neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus is governed by a multitude of molecular mitogenic signals, transmitters and trophic factors, acting spatially and temporally to modulate distinct steps in the birth and maturation of the new neurones. besides the pathological loss of cholinergic function, other physiological factors such as stress  <cit> , aging  <cit> , and drugs of abuse like nicotine  <cit> , alcohol  <cit>  and opiates  <cit>  can reduce adult neurogenesis. conversely, factors like antidepressants  <cit> , exposure to enriched environments  <cit>  and hippocampal-dependent learning  <cit>  upregulate adult neurogenesis. one of the most striking inducers of neural progenitor cell division in the dentate gyrus is the simple behavioural act of running  <cit> .

it is still unclear as to how or why physical activity specifically elicits neurogenic mechanisms in the hippocampus  <cit> . it is recognized, however, that wheel running evokes a rhythmic firing pattern, theta rhythm, in the hippocampus  <cit> . the synchronous firing of pacemaker cells, comprising cholinergic and gabaergic neurones originating from the msdb, generate the theta oscillations  <cit> . these septohippocampal projections heavily innervate the dentate gyrus, forming axosomatic contacts with granule cells and axodendritic contacts with hilar cells within the neurogenic locality  <cit> . increases in the intensity of movement are correlated with increases in frequency of theta  <cit> . furthermore, running is also associated with acetylcholine release in the hippocampus  <cit> . transgenic mice expressing an inactive form of acetylcholinesterase, and hence expected to have elevated acetylcholine levels, showed increased cell proliferation in the subgranular layer of the dentate gyrus  <cit> . this evidence suggests that the septohippocampal system may be involved in running-mediated neurogenesis.

our present study aims to investigate the effects of running on hippocampal neurogenesis in cholinergic lesioned mice, which serves as a model for aspects of ad and age-related dementia. to lesion cholinergic projections to the hippocampus, we employed an immunotoxin. murine-p75-saporin  is a conjugate of saporin toxin and a mouse-specific monoclonal antibody directed against the p <dig> neurotrophin receptor, which is found predominantly on the cholinergic neurones of the basal forebrain. this allows selective elimination, and spares other cholinergic neurones located elsewhere in the brain, even within the adjacent striatum and nucleus accumbens  <cit> . injection of the immunotoxin results in a substantial reduction in chat activity in both the basal forebrain and hippocampal regions, and a concomitant impairment in learning and memory  <cit> . to assess neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus, we performed experiments with the dna synthesis marker bromodeoxyuridine .

RESULTS
cholinergic lesioning in the msdb is partial but selective
adult mice were randomly assigned to running and non-running groups to be sacrificed  <dig> hours or  <dig> weeks after injection of brdu following  <dig> days of free access to a running wheel or control exposure to an immobilised running wheel . bilateral stereotaxic infusions of mu-p75-sap or vehicle were made. after  <dig> days recovery, running wheels were placed in the cages for  <dig> days. at a dose of  <dig>  μg of immunotoxin,  <dig> out of  <dig> lesioned mice survived, a 65% survival rate. this is comparable with a 68% survival previously reported  <cit> . after  <dig> days of exposure to the running wheels, mice were injected with brdu and sacrificed  <dig> hrs or  <dig> weeks later . sections through the msdb were immunostained for chat  and cholinergic cells were counted. there was no significant difference in the numbers of chat-positive neurones between runners and non-runners. we performed one-way anova analysis with dunnett's post-hoc tests on the number of chat labelled cells in the animals that were sham lesioned  or lesioned and injected with brdu  <dig> hrs  or  <dig> weeks  after lesioning. mu-p75-sap injections resulted in a significant depletion of cholinergic neurones in the medial septum  for lesioned groups both  <dig> hrs and  <dig> weeks after brdu injection . gabaergic neurones in the msdb, identified as parvalbumin-immunopositive cells  <cit> , were not affected by the lesions . cholinergic deafferentation did not affect the distance run by the mice. the distance accumulated by each runner daily ranged from  <dig> km to  <dig> km. there was no difference in the number of revolutions of the running wheel between the lesioned  and the non-lesioned group .

running increases progenitor cell proliferation in both non-lesioned and lesioned animals
sections through the hippocampus were immunostained for brdu . for each brain, we systemically sampled dorsal hippocampal tissue sections from bregma - <dig>  mm to - <dig>  mm. brdu-immunopositive cells along the length of the subgranular zone  and granule cell layer of the dentate gyrus were counted. two-way anova showed that both running  and lesioning  had significant effects on the number of brdu-immunopositive cells in the dentate gyrus. there was a significant interaction between running and lesioning . post-hoc analysis using independent samples two-tailed t-tests revealed that running increased the number of brdu-labelled cells in both non-lesioned  and lesioned animals . comparisons between the runners in the lesioned group and the control group demonstrated that cholinergic denervation significantly potentiated the running-induced increase in brdu-immunopositive cells . there were no significant differences in the length of the dentate gyrus across all treatment groups.

running increases survival of progenitor cells despite reduced survival in lesioned animals
two-way anova showed that running had a significant effect on the number of brdu-immunopositive cells surviving at the  <dig> weeks time point . post-hoc t-tests of unequal variances revealed that this was due to significant increases in brdu-immunopositive cells surviving in both the non-lesioned  and lesioned runners  . two-way anova showed that lesioning had no significant effect on the number of brdu-immunopositive cells at  <dig> weeks .

to analyse the effect of running and lesioning on the numbers of brdu-labelled cells over time, we performed a three-way anova. lesioning , running  and time  significantly influenced the number of brdu-labelled cells. there were also significant interactions between lesion and time  and between running and time . the three-way interaction between running and lesion over time was significant , hence we carried out further statistical tests to compare the effect of time within the lesion and running groups. for follow-up analysis, an index of cell survival was calculated by dividing the number of brdu-labelled cells surviving at the  <dig> weeks time point by the mean number of labelled cells  <dig> hours after brdu administration. two-way anova showed that lesioning significantly decreased the percentage survival of brdu-immunopositive cells at the  <dig> weeks time point . there was also a significant interaction between running and lesioning . post-hoc two-tailed t-tests revealed that cholinergic lesioning significantly decreased the percentage survival of newborn cells in the dentate gyrus of runners compared to non-runners . the proportion of brdu cells surviving after  <dig> weeks was marginally, but not significantly, reduced in lesioned runners compared to non-lesioned runners .

taken together, these data suggest that without cholinergic inputs, the bulk of progenitors that proliferate in response to running are not able to survive beyond one month.

running increases neurogenesis in mice with partial cholinergic denervation
to determine the phenotype of surviving differentiated newborn cells at the  <dig> week time point, double immunolabelling was carried out to assay for co-expression of either neuronal specific nucleus protein , a marker for mature neurones, or glial acidic fibrillary protein , an astroglial marker, with brdu labelling in cells within the granule cell layer of the dg . running had a significant effect on neurogenesis . in the sham lesioned group, post-hoc t-tests showed that the runners had enhanced neurogenesis . comparisons between runners and non-runners within the cholinergic deafferented mice showed that, although running was discontinued  <dig> weeks earlier, the effect of running on neurogenesis was still significant  . within the runners, lesioning had no effect on neurogenesis . neither lesioning  nor running  affected the percentage of surviving brdu-labelled cells that differentiated into neurones.

astrogenesis remained constant despite the various treatments . similarly, lesioning  and running  did not affect the proportion of astrocytes .

discussion
our findings indicate that running increases adult hippocampal neurogenesis, in spite of cholinergic denervation.

lesioning
in contrast to the rat species selective 192-ig-saporin, which is reported to eliminate virtually all cholinergic cells in the rat forebrain  <cit> , the mouse mu-p75-sap toxin was not as potent and only resulted in a partial cholinergic lesion. the reduction, nevertheless, was significant and specific, depleting almost half the cholinergic neuronal population but leaving the subpopulation of gabaergic cells intact. the percentage loss in our experiments was comparable to that reported by other groups using mu-p75-sap in mice  <cit> . such partial depletion of the cholinergic neurones in the basal forebrain may more accurately reflect the cholinergic cell loss seen in progressive neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer's disease, than total cholinergic lesioning.

this selective, partial cholinergic lesioning had no effect on progenitor cell proliferation in mice, as estimated by the brdu-immunopositive cells present  <dig> hours after injection of brdu. this finding is in agreement with a previous study in rats, in which partial lesioning of septohippocampal afferents by intraseptal infusion of n-methyl-d-aspartate  did not affect cell proliferation in the hippocampus  <cit> , and is in line with other studies involving pharmacological manipulation of the cholinergic system, which reported no effect on proliferation despite effects on cell survival  <cit> . in contrast, complete transection of the fimbria-fornix, which contains all fibres projecting from the medial septum to the hippocampus in addition to other afferent fibres, was reported to reduce progenitor cell proliferation in the dentate gyrus of rats  <cit> . moreover, near complete forebrain cholinergic lesioning in rats by injection of high doses of 192-ig-saporin into the ventricles or both the msdb and nucleus basalis magnocellularis was also reported to reduce cell proliferation or short-term survival  <cit> . together these data suggest that progenitor cell proliferation in the mouse dentate gyrus is relatively insensitive to specific, partial depletion of cholinergic septohippocampal afferents but that complete cholinergic deafferentation can impair adult hippocampal progenitor cell proliferation in rats.

it has been reported that on average, 50% of the newly generated cells in the adult rodent brain die by apoptosis  <cit> . a similar percentage of cell loss occurred in the non-lesioned, non-running group in the present study. however, selective, partial cholinergic lesions did not significantly change the number of surviving cells in the non-running group of mice. this is in contrast to the results of near complete or complete forebrain cholinergic lesions produced by injection of 192-igg-saporin into the ventricles or both the msdb and nucleus basalis magnocellularis in rats  <cit> . likewise, studies conducted using cholinergic agonists and antagonists yielded results which indicated that the neurotransmitter acetylcholine is involved in survival of newborn cells  <cit> . our present result indicates that survival of the newborn cells of the mouse dentate gyrus is not sensitive to selective, partial lesioning of cholinergic afferents. the greater effect reported in the other studies may be attributable to more complete cholinergic depletion throughout the entire forebrain.

the surviving newborn cells differentiated into cell types expressing either neuroneal or glial cell markers. in our model, the cholinergic system has no effect on the phenotypic fate of progenitor cells in the dentate gyrus, consistent with findings in various previous studies  <cit> .

running
in corroboration with findings from previous studies, running increased the number of brdu-labelled progenitor cells approximately two-fold  <cit> . in lesioned animals, running elevated the number of brdu-positive cells by four-fold. these data suggest that exercise may still increase hippocampal cell proliferation in the face of gradual cholinergic degeneration such as occurs in age-related dementia and progressive neurodegenerative disease such as alzheimer's disease.

the runners in the sham lesion group also had a significantly greater proportion of surviving brdu-labelled cells  <dig> weeks after brdu injection. about two-thirds of the number of progenitors labelled by brdu at  <dig> hours were able to survive for at least one month in the non-lesioned, running group. these data show that running enhanced the survival of newborn cells, similar to findings reported by van praag and co-workers  <cit> .

although the running wheel was only present for the first twelve days of the experiment, this initial bout of activity led to an increase in the number of neurones generated in the granule cell layer  <dig> weeks after removal of the running wheel. this is in agreement with reports that the fate of the newborn cells is decided early  <cit> .

interactions between lesioning and running
interestingly, we observed that cholinergic deafferentation markedly potentiated the running-induced effect on proliferation, leading to an approximately three-fold increase over the non-lesioned runners. brain-derived neurotrophic factor  is reported to be important for regulation of cell proliferation in the adult dentate gyrus  <cit>  and is suggested to be one of the factors involved in mediating the effects of exercise on neurogenesis  <cit> . neurotrophins such as ngf, bdnf and nt- <dig> are synthesized in the hippocampus and undergo retrograde transport to the msdb where they maintain survival and function of septal neuronal populations  <cit> . ablation of basal forebrain cholinergic neurones impairs retrograde transport and may lead to accumulation of neurotrophins in the hippocampus, which could result in an enhanced proliferative response to running.

in contrast to the lesioned non-runners, the lesioned runners group showed a very pronounced reduction in the proportion of newborn cells surviving at  <dig> weeks. this indicates that selective, partial lesioning of cholinergic afferents, while not sufficient to affect baseline survival of newborn cells in the adult mouse dentate gyrus, can markedly reduce the percentage survival of running-induced newborn cells. in many models of pathology, the robust induction of adult neurogenesis appears to be transient and non-specific. cell proliferation was increased in animal models of brain insult such as epileptic seizures and stroke but only a small fraction of the newborn cells survived longer than one month  <cit> . moreover, neuroinflammatory responses, such as occur in response to immunotoxic cholinergic lesions  <cit> , are suggested to be detrimental to the survival of newborn cells  <cit> . for these reasons, the interaction between running and inflammation caused by the lesions could have potentiated a brief spurt in proliferation, but the viability of the progeny of these precursor cells could not be sustained with the lack of cholinergic input.

others have reported that physical activity stimulates neurogenic potential by targeting precursor cell division  <cit> . furthermore, prolonged running can boost the survival of the progeny of these progenitors  <cit> . our study was designed to investigate the effects of running on cell proliferation and so running was not continued throughout the four weeks following brdu injection in our experiments. it would be interesting to observe the effects on survival of brdu labelled cells in cholinergic ablated mice had running been continued.

despite the cholinergic depletions, the effect of running-induced elevation in newly generated neurones remained unaltered. in other words, the initial short period of running sufficed to expand the pool of progenitor cells and increase the number of neurones in partial cholinergic denervated mice.

in summary, our results demonstrate that an intact cholinergic system is not an absolute requirement for the maintenance of progenitor cell generation and determination of their lineage. depleting septohippocampal cholinergic projections may not thwart the pro-proliferative actions of running but acetycholine-regulated signalling may be important in prolonging the viability of the newborn neurones. given that cholinergic lesions in adult mice lead to impaired learning and memory  <cit> , we used this experimental paradigm to model neurodegenerative diseases that involve loss of cognition such as ad and dementia. our findings bode well in that physical activity may encourage neurogenesis despite central nervous system cholinergic cellular deficits. that the majority of running-induced progenitors do not survive the onslaught of death-engendering signals such as the absence of cholinergic inputs, shows that additional survival-promoting signals are required to maintain the pool of running-induced newborn cells. translated loosely, this may be in the form of cognitive challenges, as exemplified in animal models where learning and environmental enrichment promote survival of cells  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that the proliferative effects of running are not affected by reduction in cholinergic input. in the presence of cholinergic depletion, running still resulted in the formation of more neurones despite a reduction in survival of newborn cells.

