BACKGROUND
a lichen is a symbiotic association of a fungus  and a photosynthetic partner , which may be an alga  or a cyanobacterium . in the association the fungus produces a thallus, or body, within which the photobionts are housed  <cit> . around 20% of all fungi and 40% of all ascomycota are lichen-forming. recent estimates of global diversity suggest that there are between  <dig>  and  <dig>  species  <cit> .

most lichens and isolated lichen-forming fungi grow extremely slow, but the lichen-symbiosis is a very successful association as lichens can survive in almost all adverse terrestrial conditions  <cit> . they are also famous for their particular secondary products, which are frequently used as antibacterial and antiviral compounds  <cit> . the lichen-forming fungi differ from non-lichenized fungi by their adaptations to symbiosis with photobiont  <cit> . this mutualistic association, as called lichenization, is one of the most important fungal lifestyles and the lichenization, considered by some researchers, has evolved many times in the phylogeny of fungi  <cit> , and also some major fungal lineages may have derived from lichen symbiotic ancestors  <cit> .

the principal problem about lichenization is the necessity of fungal propagules meeting a suitable photosynthetic partner for the resynthesis of the symbiosis  <cit> . the recognition step is complicated, involving many morphological and molecular changes. scanning electron microscopy  has been used to investigate the changes in morphology during the early resynthesis of the lichen thallus  <cit> . however, few studies have explored the resynthesis events in lichen using molecular tools. previous studies suggest that the mycobiont-derived lectins  may play a key role in recognition  <cit>  between both symbionts.

the interdependent relationship between mycobiont and photobiont is the foundation of lichenization, which required for both symbionts to maintain each other. in the lichen thallus, the photobiont provides its mycobiont with photosynthetic products  <cit> , previous reports showed that lichen-forming fungi absorb polyol  or glucose from algae or cyanobacteria, respectively  <cit> , and in most green algae lichens, the hyphae of the mycobionts wrap tightly around photobiont cells, thereby protecting the photobiont cells from a range of biotic and abiotic stress, including drought, high light and mechanical damage. the protection from light-injury is associated with secondary metabolic substances, such as melanins, produced by lichen-forming fungi  <cit> . however, little is known about the signals and mechanisms that lead to symbiotic recognition and maintenance in lichen, although it can be predicted that some metabolic products and macromolecules are essential.

the whole life cycle of lichen is rarely observed in the laboratory or in nature  <cit> . the detail of lichenization, whereby a lichen-forming fungus contacts with a compatible photosynthetic partner, recognizes it and captures it, has become a hot topic in recent studies  <cit> . endocarpon pusillum is the most successful cases on artificial resynthesis of the fertile  thalli from isolated mycobiont and phycobiont  <cit> , and it will be very useful to reveal the origin of symbiosis between fungi and photosynthetic organisms.

endocarpon is a special genus, which have hymenial algal cells in their perithecia and the ascospores are discharged together with the hymenial algal cells  <cit> . the systematics and physiology of e. pusillum  have been studied well. the mycobiont e. pusillum exhibits much stronger desiccation-tolerant than other non-lichenized fungi as it can survive for  <dig> months under desiccation stress in combination with starvation stress  <cit> . although a large number of fungal genomes have been published, no lichen-forming is included, and only two mitochondrial genomes from lichen-forming fungi  and a transcriptome from the lichen cladonia rangiferina have been reported until now  <cit> . therefore, the genome of e. pusillum was sequenced and analyzed to ascertain the biological features of this lichen-forming fungus and the traits of lichenization.

RESULTS
general features of the genome
the genome of the lichen-forming fungus e. pusillum was sequenced to about 78-fold coverage using both  <dig> and illumina technologies . all sequences were assembled into  <dig> scaffolds  containing  <dig>  contigs, with a genome size of  <dig>  mb , which was almost identical to the result calculated by real-time polymerase chain reaction   <cit> . the average gc content of the genome is  <dig> %, and exonic region has a 4% higher gc content than the intronic region. repetitive sequences represent 15% of the genome. a circular map was generated for the  <dig> largest scaffolds to illustrate the genome features more clearly .
endocarpon pusillum 
genome

endocarpon pusillum
the whole project has been deposited at ddbj/embl/genbank under accession number apws <dig>  a total of  <dig>  protein-coding genes were predicted, and  <dig>   of these genes have no significant matches to known proteins from public databases. a total of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  proteins were assigned to gene ontology  terms, the eukaryotic orthologous groups  and functional catalogue  databases, respectively. the distributions of the top  <dig> go, kog, and funcat terms of the sequences are presented in figure  <dig> 

phylogenetic analysis of e. pusillum
the orthologous genes from the lichen-forming fungus e. pusillum and  <dig> other non lichen-forming fungi whose genomes were available were identified using inparanoid  <cit>  with default parameters . phylogenetic analysis was performed using  <dig>  single-copy orthologous genes identified among the genomes of above mentioned  <dig> fungi from the subkingdom dikarya, and a linearized phylogenetic tree was constructed with estimates of the divergence times among these taxa . the phylogenomic analysis shows that the e. pusillum lineage is more closely related to the human pathogen exophiala dermatitidis, which is the anamorph species of capronia belonging to the chaetothyriales, and the e. pusillum belongs to the verrucariales. both the orders belong to the same subclass chaetothyriomycetidae, and the divergence between the lichenized verrucariales and nonlichenized chaetothyriales occurred approximately  <dig> million years  ago . this result is consistence with the phylogenetic analysis for ascomycota using ribosomal rna  <cit> .

repeat-induced point mutation
repeat-induced point mutation  is a gene silencing mechanism that can cause c-g to t-a mutations on repetitive dna sequences, and the mutations from c to t mostly occur at cpa dinucleotides  <cit> . according to the method proposed by margolin et al. <cit> , sequences with a high ta/at ratio  and a low / ratio  are thought to indicate rip  <cit> .

a quantitative alignment-based method, ripcal  <cit> , was used to search for evidence for rip in e. pusillum genome. the rip indices of the repetitive sequence are  <dig>  and  <dig> , and those of non-repetitive sequence are  <dig>  and  <dig> , which indicates that the regions of repetitive sequence in e. pusillum have undergone rip. in addition, the percentage of genes in multigene families shows that e. pusillum has a low proportion of genes in multigene families . the analysis of amino acid similarities in multigene families among eight fungi indicates that there are fewer best-matching  genes in the e. pusillum genome , which implies that some genes in the multigene families in e. pusillum are rip mutated. however, the function of rip in lichen-forming fungi still remains unclear.

the mating systems and reproduction
the genes involved in the mating process were identified in e. pusillum genome. the result shows that there is a single mating type  locus containing both a matα and hmg domain in the genome, which provides the molecular evidence for homothallic lifestyle of e. pusillum . genes for conidiophore development and asexual reproduction were also identified, together with those involved in fruit body development and sexual reproduction , and genes with the function of pheromone precursor , pheromone receptor , ascus development , and receptors preventing improper sexual development have been lost in e. pusillum. however, it need more experimental evidence to determine whether these missing genes contribute to the special reproduction mode of e. pusillum.
mat 
locus in 
endocarpon pusillum
.

secreted proteins
secreted proteins are important effectors that modulate the interaction between pathogenic microbes and hosts  <cit> , and many small secreted proteins  are virulence factors  <cit> . however, e. pusillum has fewer secreted proteins than other phytopathogenic fungi  according to the blast results , and the function of 66% of ssps is unknown. lichen-forming fungus and pathogenic fungi are different, even though they both live with another organism and absorb nutrients from their partner. the analysis of the secreted proteins suggests that the ssp-mediated interaction between symbionts in e. pusillum is weaker than the virulence in parasitism .

secondary metabolism
to date, several polyketide synthase  genes have been identified in different lichen-forming fungi  <cit> , but no non-ribosomal peptide synthetase  genes have been found. analysis of the lichen-forming fungus e. pusillum genome revealed  <dig> nrps genes and  <dig> pks genes . the information of genes for secondary metabolism is helpful to the research of the secondary metabolites of e. pusillum and the synthesis conditions.

candidate genes for drought tolerance
at least  <dig> genes involving in these drought resistant mechanisms were identified in the genome of e. pusillum , which will provide us many important clues to resolve the question about why e. pusillum can survive in extreme drought environment. recently, most studies on mechanisms about desiccation-tolerance in lichens have focused on the scavenging reactive oxygen species  <cit> . however, genes involved in regulating osmotic pressure, correcting protein misfolding, and scavenging the reactive oxygen species were identified in e. pusillum genome, which were worthy of further investigation.

multigene families expansion
up to  <dig>  protein families  were identified from e. pusillum and  <dig> other fungi using markov cluster  method. based on badirate analysis, we found that  <dig>  protein families were expanded and  <dig> protein families had undergone contraction in e. pusillum. the outlier results generated by badirate analysis are presented in table  <dig>  the expansion of these protein families might reflect specific characteristics of lichen-forming fungus e. pusillum.
endocarpon pusillum


e. pusillum
protein families involved in signal transduction
compared with other fungi, the lichen-forming fungi are special because they can form mutualistic symbiosis with photosynthetic organisms and this specialty is reflected in its genome. little is known about the functional genes in lichens, and most expanded protein families are function-unknown in e. pusillum ; however, it is likely that many of these expansion families are related to symbiosis. for example, the expressions of wd-repeat domain-containing proteins are up-regulated in the early developmental stages of lichen-symbiosis in cladonia grayi <cit> .

similarly, g protein-coupled receptors , which sense molecules outside the cell and activate signal transduction pathways inside the cell  <cit> , are also likely to provide lichen-forming fungi with a strong ability to response to such signals, and all gpcr families have undergone obvious expansion .
endocarpon pusillum


e. pusillum
e. pusillum
heterokaryon incompatibility protein families
there are  <dig> genes in the e. pusillum genome that were annotated to have heterokaryon incompatibility -related functions, and  <dig> of them are homologous to those in n. crassa and podospora anserina . hi  is a common characteristic among filamentous fungi; it can prevent the formation of heterokaryotic cells in which two different genomes coexist. once the fusion between two individuals with incompatible het loci occurs, the het genes would trigger the hi reaction, which is characterized as growth inhibition, repression of asexual sporulation, hyphal compartmentation and death of the heterokaryotic cell  <cit> . however, the biological significance of hi is still unknown. the expansion of het protein families suggests that e. pusillum is likely to have a strict regulation of its vegetation  <cit> , and may represent a strategy for stable genotype by defending against the transfer of exogenous genes.

lineage-specific protein families involved in self-splicing of insertions
the genes encoding ribonuclease h and transposase, which are predicted to be able to target some insertions, such as group i introns that can be stably integrated into the genome following the reverse splicing reaction  <cit> , belong to lineage-specific multigene families in e. pusillum .

the genomic sequencing data reveal that there are three group i introns in the large-subunit ribosomal dna  of e. pusillum z <dig> at position  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> , and one group i intron in the small-subunit ribosomal dna  at position  <dig> .

group i introns can self-splice themselves from an rna transcript, requiring protein factors to facilitate the correct folding of the ribozyme core  <cit> . there are multiple group i introns present in the nuclear rdna of many lichen-forming fungi  <cit> , and they are considered to decrease the growth rate of lichen-forming fungi by interfering with rrna maturation  <cit> . it is considered an adaption for lichenization: most lichens grow very slowly because the symbiosis would be disrupted if the mycobionts too many nutrients from the photobionts. therefore, it is reasonable that the protein families involved in rna reverse splicing have undergone expansion in a lichen-forming fungal genome that harbors abundant self-splicing introns.

protein families involved in transport
the exchange of ions and metabolites between the mycobiont and photobiont is the foundation of the symbiotic association. for this reason, genes encoding transporter proteins are expected to exhibit some traits in the lichen-forming fungus genome. there are  <dig> genes belonging to the magnesium transport protein cora family, which showed significant expansion in the e. pusillum genome . the cora proteins were the first family to be identified that could transport mg2+ in bacteria  <cit> . the mechanism of action of the cora family has been well characterized in yeast and members of this family can transfer mg2+ both into and out of the cell  <cit> . magnesium is the most important divalent cation in cells, and is particularly important for photosynthesis  <cit> . magnesium deficiency has been reported to affect plant photosynthesis and growth  <cit> . in the lichen thallus, the special structure of the symbionts  makes it difficult for algal cells to absorb magnesium from the environment. however, genes for magnesium transport protein are expanded in e. pusillum, which led us to suspect that during symbiosis the mycobiont could provide magnesium to the phycobiont to meet the needs of their life cycles.

a striking finding is that most nitrogen transporter families are expanded but most sugar transporter families have been lost from the e. pusillum genome . though the mechanisms of substance transfer in lichen are not completely understood, it has been reported that the mycobiont absorbs certain carbohydrates generated by photosynthesis of the photobiont  <cit> . the reduction of sugar transporter genes, especially those for common sugars, such as glucose and fructose, which can be utilized by many organisms, suggests that the mycobiont simply absorbs certain uncommon carbohydrates from their photosynthetic partner. therefore, the genes for many unnecessary sugar transporters have been lost during evolution. the lichen-forming fungi do not rely on common sugars because these carbon sources can be used by numerous microorganisms and lichen cannot compete with them for its slow growth and metabolism.
endocarpon pusillum 


e. pusillum
e. pusillum
by contrast, the expansion of nitrogen transporters suggests that the lichen-forming fungi need to transfer  various nitrogen sources. nitrogen is an indispensable substance for the growth of organisms, and lichens whose photosynthetic partners are green algae must obtain inorganic and organic nitrogen  <cit> . there is no evidence for nitrogen transfer between symbionts in lichen. however, owing to the particular structure of lichen thallus in which the photobiont cells are tightly entwined by mycelia  and the photobiont cells cannot absorb substances from their surroundings directly, it can be deduced that the necessary components for their growth, such as ions and nitrogen sources, must be transferred from the mycobiont to the photobiont. the phycobiont may be have a preference for certain forms of nitrogen; for example, in the alga-bacteria association, the algae prefer nh4+ and no3-, which are release by bacteria when cultured in organic nitrogen conditions  <cit> . thus, the mycobiont may absorb and transform the nitrogen forms that are preferred by its photosynthetic partner. therefore, the expansion of nitrogen transporters should be related to this physiological process. recently, it was reported that the ammonium transporter, mep-α, in lichen-forming fungi was obtained though horizontal gene transfer  <cit> , which can partly explain the mechanism of the expansion of the nitrogen transporter superfamily. this gene appears to have been lost in some groups of lichens, such as in those that are symbiotic with nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria or those that inhabit high-nitrogen niches  <cit> . however, for the lichens whose photobiont is a green alga that cannot fix nitrogen, the expansion of nitrogen transporter families is of great significance in promoting the growth of the lichen thallus, as seen in e. pusillum.

expression analysis of symbiosis-related genes by quantitative real-time pcr 
a qrt-pcr experiment was performed to determine the changes of some symbiosis-related genes in the lichen-forming fungus at transcription level when e. pusillum pre-contacted with its photosynthetic partner, diplosphaera chodatii.

symbiosis-related genes selection
thirty-two genes encoding lectins were identified in the e. pusillum genome. they belong to four superfamilies: concanavalin a-like lectin, fucose-specific lectin, mannose-binding lectin and ricin b-related lectin. for the qrt-pcr assay, six lectin genes were selected as representatives of the four superfamilies, according to the difference in the number of transmembrane helices and signal peptides .

the expansions of nitrogen transporters and the contractions of sugar transporters imply that they are closely related to maintenance of both symbionts. hence, certain genes encoding these transporters were chosen for the qrt-pcr assay. among them, two ammonium transporters and one nitrate transporter that displays high homology to those in other fungi  were included. it has been reported that eight sugar transporters are able to transfer photosynthesis products in other fungi, and they are predicted to be functional at the interface of lichen association  <cit> . thus, the homologous proteins were identified in the e. pusillum genome . the genes sharing homology with known transporters were obtained using blastp and each of them appeared in several blastp results; their expressions were determined by the qrt-pcr assay . nitrogen metabolism and sugar metabolism in fungal cells would be active after nitrogen and carbohydrates were assimilated or transferred. therefore, genes encoding glutamate synthase and nitrite reductase , and that encoding the golgi gdp-mannose transporter, which is functional in the glycosylation of secreted proteins  <cit>  and five enzymes involved in galactose and nucleotide sugar metabolism  were also included. the gene encoding the tetracycline resistance protein was chosen as a control, because it recognizes and exports tetracycline from the cell  <cit>  and is expected to show no expression change under the experimental conditions in the present study.

differences in expression levels of genes involved in symbiosis under co-culture conditions
from the results presented in figure  <dig>  the expression levels of most genes increased only under the condition for experimental group iv  , which indicated that the contact time and biomass ratio of both symbionts affects their recognition and nutrient transfer significantly.

three lectin genes  showed significant increases  in their expression level in experiment group iv compared with the control group b  . interestingly, the common aspect of these lectins is that there are no predicted signal peptides in their amino acid sequences    <cit> . lectins are sugar-binding proteins that play an important roles in cell recognition  <cit> . the first lectin discovered in lichens was that found in peltigera canina and peltigera polydactyla <cit> . thereafter, some studies showed that lectins secreted by lichen-forming fungi may be involved in recognizing their compatible algae  <cit> . lectins, as surface proteins, can directly contact compatible phycobionts, and the contact requires receptor sites on the surface of the phycobiont to which the lectins binds  <cit> . recent studies on lectins in p. membranacea indicated that the expression of galectin lec- <dig> was influenced by the presence of the phycobiont  <cit> , and the evolution of galectin lec- <dig> was driven by interaction with different strains of the phycobiont nostoc <cit> . galectins, together with cellular slime mold lectin discoidin i, do not have signal peptides in eukaryotic cells and both of them have intracellular and extracellular localizations  <cit> . our study showed that lectins without signal peptides could play a major role in symbiotic recognition and provided a practical guide for screening for lectins participating in the interaction between lichen-forming fungi and their photosynthetic partners.

an ammonium transporter  and a nitrate transporter  were up-regulated  in experimental group iv . bbm contains nitrate ions; therefore, the up-regulation of the nitrate transporter  is expected. however, the up-regulation of the ammonium transporter  suggests that ammonium could be produced from nitrate in e. pusillum and transferred to its photosynthetic partner, because there is no ammonium ion in bbm. the differences in the expressions of glutamate synthase  and nitrite reductase  indicate that nitrogen metabolism is altered in the lichen-forming fungus when it meets its compatible alga. it has been reported that algae from different lichens can utilize organic and inorganic nitrogen  <cit> . thus, we can conclude that the pattern of nitrogen transfer in e. pusillum is that the mycobiont absorbs various nitrogen sources from the environment and can convert them to different forms in vivo to meet the algae’s demand for nitrogen, based on the expansion of nitrogen transporter families in e. pusillum genome and the result of co-culture experiments.

the lichen-forming fungus cannot obtain any organic nutrition from bbm. however, six of the symbiosis-related sugar transporter genes  show significant differences in expression in experiment group iv . this suggests that some carbohydrates are released into the bbm by d. chodatii, and the transporters encoded by these genes may be responsible for transferring these carbohydrates into the fungal cells. the upregulation of the expression of the golgi gdp-mannose transporter  under experimental group iv conditions, bearing in mind that a previous study proved that this transporter participates in glycosylation  <cit> , indicated that the sugar metabolic pathway is active in e. pusillum after obtaining carbohydrates. furthermore, the enzymes  involved in galactose and nucleotide sugar metabolism also showed high expressions levels, which demonstrated that the carbohydrates produced by the alga and absorbed by the fungus are indeed used for fungal cell life activities.

native and non-native sugars utilized by e. pusillum
the carbohydrates used for growth and metabolism of lichen-forming fungus originate from the photosynthetic products of its photosynthetic partner, however, the forms of the photosynthetic products absorbed by different lichen-forming fungi vary depending on their different photobionts. it has been report that lichen-forming fungi absorb many polyols or glucose from algae or cyanobacteria, respectively  <cit> , and the photosynthetic product transferred from d. chodatii to e. pusillum was sorbitol  <cit> . additionally, previous studies showed that some monosaccharides, such as glucose, and disaccharides, such as trehalose and sucrose, were transferred between non-lichenized symbionts  <cit> . because some homology structures are frequently found in different sugar transporters from diverse fungi, the specificities of these transporters may be low. therefore,  <dig> different carbohydrates were used to confirm the function of sugar transporters in e. pusillum and the potential carbohydrates transferred into this fungus.

the most significant up-regulation in expression of the examined genes was in the sample with trehalose for  <dig> hours. however, the high expression levels were not maintained over the next  <dig> hours . this suggests that trehalose cannot be absorbed by the lichen-forming fungus as an energy source, but is likely to be a signal molecule for the activation of the gene expression in e. pusillum. trehalose is involved in many functions besides osmoprotection  <cit> , and acts as a signal molecule that is possibly exported from bacteria to plants to regulate the carbon and nitrogen metabolism of plants in plant-bacteria interactions  <cit> . trehalose can be converted into trehalose-6-phosphate , which inhibits hexokinase activity and regulates glycolysis. over expression of the trehalose 6-phospate synthase  gene induces the expression of several genes involved in stress tolerance, and carbon and nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . in the alga-invertebrate association, trehalose produced by the alga was shown to be present in certain symbiotic interfaces  <cit> . although no research has shown a link between trehalose and lichen symbiosis interaction, our results suggest that trehalose may act as a signal molecule and would play an important role in the symbiotic interaction in e. pusillum.

four carbohydrates  increased the transcription levels of sugar transporters or enzymes involved in sugar metabolism in e. pusillum at  <dig> and  <dig> hours . these results suggest that these carbohydrates maintain the metabolism of the lichen-forming fungus over a long period, which implies that e. pusillum may absorb them as its carbon sources through some common sugar transporters. although the transcription levels of some genes slightly fluctuated at  <dig> and  <dig> hours in the presence other sugars  in the bbm, no genes exhibited a clear rising trend compared with the control group, especially those involved in sugar metabolism . this indicates that these sugars cannot be utilized as carbon sources by e. pusillum.

the transcription levels of some sugar transporters, such as f481_ <dig>  f481_ <dig>  and f481_ <dig>  were up-regulated when various sugars were added to the bbm, indicating that they can transfer more than one carbohydrate into e. pusillum. some genes showed different changes in their transcription levels, either in trend or extent, compared with those in the co-culture experiment. for example, sugar transporter f481_ <dig> showed no differential expression in the co-culture experiment, but was up-regulated slightly under some sugars treatments. in addition, the transcription levels of sugar transporters f481_ <dig>  f481_ <dig>  and f481_ <dig> were up-regulated more obviously in the co-culture experiment . these phenomena imply that there is some induction mechanism between the symbionts; i.e., the expressions of certain genes in a lichen-forming fungus are influenced by its photosynthetic partner to absorb organic carbon effectively.

ion chromatography was used to detect glucose, sucrose, sorbitol and mannitol in the filtrates of experiment group iv, and controls b and c, to determine whether they could be released by d. chodatii and to determine the conditions under which this alga secretes organic carbon into the bbm. sorbitol , glucose  and sucrose  have been detected in group iv . thus, sorbitol showed the highest accumulation; however, there were other, unidentified, carbohydrates, which suggested that the lichen-forming fungus e. pusillum preferentially absorbs sorbitol. by contrast, no mannitol was found in this sample. there were no detectable carbohydrates in the control group b and c , which demonstrated that the pure cultured d. chodatii does not release carbon. previous experiments for the phycobionts of ramalina crassa and ramalina subbreviuscula indicated that the pure cultured phycobiont released ribitol to the medium  <cit> . however, hawksworth  suggested that the photobiont had lost its ability to release carbohydrate after isolation from the lichen thallus, and that the lichen-forming fungus exerted some specific control on the photobiont cells that lead them to secrete carbohydrates  <cit> . our result implies that e. pusillum can control the sugar export of d. chodatii, and that the biomass ratio and contact time are crucial for the interaction between the two symbionts.

although mannitol is not released by d. chodatii, it can still be utilized by e. pusillum; it is likely to be because mannitol and sorbitol are isomers. this suggests that e. pusillum has the potential to use non-natural carbon sources. this phenomenon is likely to occur in other lichen-forming fungi, which would contribute to discovering the mechanism of the algal switch  <cit>  and could provide clues for the evolution of lichenization.

CONCLUSIONS
approximately 40% of all ascomycota are lichen-forming; thus, lichenization is regarded as one of the most important fungal lifestyles  <cit> . hence, genomic information for lichen-forming fungi would expand the knowledge of fungi. in the present study, we report, for the first time, the characteristic of the lichen-forming fungal genome, which displays many features that are different to other fungi.

this is the first study to report that the lichen-forming fungal genome have undergone rip. genes for mating system, secondary metabolism, and the drought-related mechanisms were indentified in e. pusillum genome, which are worth being investigated in the future. the evolution analysis of multigene families indicated the expansion and contraction in e. pusillum genome reveal the effect of lichenization on lichen-forming fungi.

co-culture experiments suggest that the lectins without signal peptides would be likely to play an essential role in the recognition of lichen symbiosis, and one of the most striking findings in these experiments is that an appropriate weigh ratio of lichen-forming fungus and its photosynthetic partner and sufficient contact time are vital for their recognition and mutual influence. we also confirmed that the most important natural carbon source for e. pusillum is sorbitol transferred from d. chodatii; however, this lichen-forming fungus can also use other non-natural carbohydrates under the pure culture condition.

a mycobiont-phycobiont interplay model is shown as figure  <dig>  the model reflects aspects of the recognition and interaction of the lichen thallus in e. pusillum and is likely to be applicable to other lichens, especially those whose photobionts are algae. this study provides a valuable genomic resource for future research in screening functional genes including drought-tolerance genes from lichens and would be useful for investigating the formation and divergence on the functional biology between lichenized and nonlichenized fungi.

