BACKGROUND
extensive genome reduction in obligate endosymbiotic bacteria is a hallmark of intracellularity  <cit> . recent genome sequencing of diverse bacterial endosymbionts of insects reveals ongoing symbiont genome reduction, resulting in small gene dense genomes that contain a subset of genes compared to their closest free-living relatives  <cit> . for example, the genome of the gammaproteobacterium buchnera from the aphid, cinara cedri, is only  <dig> kbp, approximately 11-fold smaller that its closest free-living relative escherichia coli  <cit> . currently, the smallest known bacterial genomes, containing fewer than  <dig> protein-coding genes, belong to insect associated obligate endosymbionts  <cit> . eliminated genes include those that are either functionally redundant, or not essential for maintenance of the symbiosis  <cit> . many of the genes evolutionarily retained in endosymbiont genomes are those required for biosynthesis of nutrients essential to the host. however, even endosymbiont essential nutrient biosynthesis pathways experience gene loss such that it is common to find fragmented, but evolutionary retained, pathways that appear incomplete and non-functional  <cit> .table  <dig> 
pantothenate biosynthesis genes and enzyme activities



buchnera and e
.
coli
vitamin b <dig> biosynthesis
buchnera id #
e. coli id #

ilve

ilvi

ilvh

ilvn

ilvb

ilvm

ilvc

ilvd

panb

pane

pand

panc

a. pisum
β-alanine biosynthesis

dpd

dhpase
a

bup

adc

aalternative splice forms are annotated in national center for biotechnology information  a. pisum refseq  gene models. gene identification numbers  are from: buchnera aps  <cit> , e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig>  and a. pisum lsr <dig>  <cit> . enzyme commission number  and enzyme activity are from the brenda enzyme information system  <cit> .



recent genome sequencing of holosymbionts  reveals that fragmented biosynthesis pathways can be completed by three processes:  complementation by host genes with overlapping function  <cit> ;  complementation by genes encoded by another symbiont  <cit> ; and  complementation by genes horizontally transferred to the host nuclear genome from other bacterial genomes  <cit> . all three of these processes can contribute to functional maintenance of metabolic pathways in a single endosymbiont and yet, even accounting for these three independent processes, some evolutionarily retained symbiont pathways remain fragmented making it unclear if they are functional  <cit> .

a fourth process for completion of fragmented biosynthesis pathways was proposed by shigenobu et al.  <cit>  when they hypothesized that missing enzyme steps in fragmented buchnera amino acid biosynthesis pathways are mediated by other  buchnera enzymes with overlapping activity  <cit> . in addition to well-defined primary roles within linear metabolic pathways, it is common for enzymes to catalyze side reactions  <cit> . such multifunctional enzymes that are capable of catalyzing weak side reactions, exhibit either catalytic promiscuity, catalysis of a different reaction type on a single or range of substrates; or substrate ambiguity, catalysis of the same reaction type on a range of substrates  <cit> . extraordinary levels of metabolic plasticity within organisms are facilitated by weak side reactions  <cit> . importantly, weak side activities provide precursor catalytic activity for the evolution of new enzyme function  <cit> . it is not without precedent that multifunctional enzymes with overlapping activity ‘fill holes’ in fragmented essential metabolic pathways  <cit> . for example, the fragmented folate biosynthesis pathway from the obligate intracellular pathogen chlamydia is functional because of the recruitment of promiscuous and adaptable enzymes from other biosynthetic pathways  <cit> .

here, working with the best-characterized holosymbiosis, that of the pea aphid acyrthosiphonpisum with the gammaproteobacterium buchnera, we reveal that the fragmented buchnera pantothenate  biosynthesis pathway can be completed using a buchnera substrate ambiguous enzyme recruited from another pathway. we demonstrate using complementation assays in e. coli mutants that retention of a substrate ambiguous enzyme in the massively reduced genome of buchnera facilitates the collaborative biosynthesis of pantothenate  in the a. pisum/buchnera holosymbiont.

RESULTS
buchnera has a fragmented but evolutionary retained pantothenate biosynthesis pathway
compared to e. coli, the obligate endosymbiont buchnera from the pea aphid, a. pisum, has a fragmented pantothenate biosynthesis pathway that is missing pand, pane and ilve . gene identifiers and enzyme activities are provided in table  <dig>  buchnera with fully sequenced genomes fall into two groups:  those from species such as baizongia pistaciae, c. cedri and uroleucon ambrosiae that have lost the whole pantothenate biosynthesis pathway  <cit> ; and  those from species such as a. pisum, myzus persicae and schizaphis graminum that retain identically fragmented pathways characterized by loss of pand, pane and ilve  <cit>  . evolutionary retention by multiple buchnera lineages of identically fragmented pantothenate biosynthesis pathways that include two genes  that only function in pantothenate biosynthesis, led us to hypothesize that the pantothenate biosynthesis pathway in these species is functional.figure  <dig> 
comparative analysis of the
buchnera
pantothenate biosynthesis pathway and complementary
a. pisum
β-alanine biosynthesis pathways. metabolic pathways were reconstructed using kegg pantothenate biosynthesis pathway from e. coli k- <dig>  and from buchnera from host aphids that included: a. pisum , b. pistaciae , c. cedri , m. persicae , s. graminum  and u. ambrosiae   <cit> . complementary β-alanine biosynthesis pathways of a. pisum   <cit>  are shown. the presence/absence of biosynthesis genes in the buchnera, e. coli and a. pisum genomes is indicated. full details of a. pisum, buchnera and e. coli gene identifiers and enzyme activities are provided in table  <dig>  kegg, kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.



to begin the investigation of our hypothesis that evolutionary retention of identically fragmented pantothenate biosynthesis pathways indicates retention of pantothenate biosynthesis capacity we characterized expression of ilvh, ilvc, ilvd, panb and panc in the specialized aphid bacteriocyte cells that house buchnera. all five of these buchnera genes were highly expressed in a. pisum bacteriocytes and consistently highly expressed across three genetically independent a. pisum lines . functionality of these fragmented pathways requires  host supply of β-alanine and  complementation of pane encoded 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase .figure  <dig> 
quantitative expression analyses of
buchnera and a. pisum
pantothenoate biosynthesis genes. expression profiles for 
buchnera pantothenate biosynthesis genes and  complementary a. pisum β-alanine biosynthesis genes were generated for three independent a. pisum lineages . expression of buchnera genes in bacteriocytes  was normalized to atpe  while expression of a. pisum genes in whole insects , bacteriocyte  and gut  tissues was normalized to gapdh . relative abundance of each gene was compiled into a heat map showing high expression  to low expression . the box shows gene expression fold-change in a. pisum lsr <dig> bacteriocyte  tissues relative to whole insect  expression. fold-change was calculated according to  <cit> ; for each aphid lineage n =  <dig> 



a. pisum synthesizes β-alanine via the uracil degradation pathway in bacteriocytes
a. pisum and other insects synthesize β-alanine via two main pathways:  the uracil degradation pathway  <cit>  and  via decarboxylation of l-aspartate  <cit>  . gene identifiers and enzyme activities are provided in table  <dig>  while synthesis of β-alanine is evolutionarily conserved in the major insect orders  pathway map 00410), we propose that β-alanine biosynthesis in a. pisum is now additionally required to supply buchnera.

gene expression analysis demonstrates that β-alanine biosynthesis via the a. pisum uracil degradation pathway is upregulated in bacteriocytes relative to whole insect expression . consistent with uracil degradation being the major β-alanine biosynthesis route in bacteriocytes, the alternate pathway that synthesizes β-alanine via decarboxylation of l-aspartate is down regulated in bacteriocytes . aspartate decarboxylase  is  <dig> -fold down in lsr <dig> bacteriocytes, 25-fold down in 5a bacteriocytes and 100-fold down in 9-2- <dig> bacteriocytes relative to whole insect expression.

buchnera ilvc complements pane to complete the pantothenate biosynthesis pathway in a. pisum
given host supply of β-alanine, functional pantothenate biosynthesis in buchnera with the fragmented pantothenate biosynthesis pathway requires complementation of lost pane encoded 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase . previous work in salmonella typhimurium  <cit>  and e. coli  <cit>  has shown that ilvc, a gene encoding ketol-acid reductoisomerase  that mediates reactions in the biosynthesis of the essential amino acids isoleucine and valine and production of 2-oxoisovalerate from pyruvate in pantothenate biosynthesis, also has limited 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase  activity. while ilvc can reduce 2-dehydropantoate to pantoate, the activity of ilvc in s. typhimurium to function in pantothenate biosynthesis is 20-fold lower than its activity as ketol-acid reductoisomerase  <cit>  and so low in e. coli that the ilvc knockout mutant was indistinguishable from wild-type k <dig> in its reduction of 2-dehydropantoate to pantoate  <cit> . however, given that generation of e. coli pantoate auxotrophs requires generation of pane, ilvc double mutants, we hypothesized that buchnera ilvc has sufficient 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase activity and, thereby, critically maintains functional pantothenate biosynthesis in buchnera that retain fragmented pantothenate biosysnthesis pathways.

to test the hypothesis that buchnera ilvc has 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase activity sufficient to complete pantoate synthesis we utilized a 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase negative strain of e. coli  and functionally complemented e. coli fe <dig> with buchnera ilvc . when cells were plated on selective plates , rescue of e. coli fe <dig> was only achieved by complementation with e. coli pane and buchnera ilvc . in contrast, under selective conditions, very limited growth of fe <dig> cells transformed with e. coli ilvc was observed, suggesting that e. coli ilvc does not contain sufficient 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase activity to rescue 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase negative e. coli cells, a result consistent with the earlier work of elischewski et al.,  <cit> . as a negative control, e. coli fe <dig> was transformed with puc <dig> empty expression vector. as expected, these puc <dig> empty vector transformed cells did not grow without pantothenate supplementation . when grown in non-selective conditions  fe <dig> cells transformed with e. coli pane, buchnera ilvc, e. coli ilvc and puc <dig> empty expression vector  established robust colonies .figure  <dig> 
functional complementation of
e. coli
pantothenate biosynthesis auxotrophs with
buchnera
pantothenate biosynthesis genes. 
e. coli fe <dig> cells  were transformed with expression plasmids containing e. coli pane, buchnera ilvc, e. coli ilvc and negative control puc <dig> empty vector . for complementation assays 5 μl of cells  was plated on minimal media plates with pantothenate  and without pantothenate . recovery of e. coli mutant growth was assessed after four days at 26°c. 
e. coli at <dig> cells  were transformed with expression plasmids containing buchnera panc, e. coli panc and negative control puc <dig> empty vector . complementation assays were completed as described in .



functional complementation assays were also completed to test the pantoate-β-alanine ligase  activity of buchnera panc. buchnera panc shares only 48% amino acid sequence identity with e. coli panc. despite this high level of sequence divergence, buchnera panc retains pantoate-β-alanine ligase activity . both buchnera aps panc and e. coli panc  functionally rescue e. coli at <dig>  when grown on a minimal media without pantothenate supplementation. negative control e. coli at <dig> transformed with puc <dig> empty expression vector was unable to grow on minimal media without pantothenate supplementation. with pantothenate supplementation, growth of at <dig> transformed with buchnera panc, e. coli panc and negative control cells is observed .

loss of buchnera ilve facilitates holosymbiont integration
loss of buchnera ilve  is not critical to the integrity of the pantothenate biosynthesis pathway in buchnera because buchnera with fragmented pathways retain ilvh/i, ilvc and ilvd and are predicted to synthesize 2-oxoisovalerate from pyruvate . however, the loss of buchnera ilve has important coevolutionary implications for the biosynthesis of the branched chain amino acids . symbiont loss of ilve was first reported in buchnera aps from a. pisum  <cit>  a decade before the genome of a. pisum was published  <cit> . while shigenobu et al.,  <cit>  had speculated that buchnera aps likely utilized the activity of another transaminase to complete branched chain amino acid biosynthesis, members of the pea aphid genome consortium offered an alternate explanation  <cit> , that buchnera loss of ilve encoded branched-chain-amino-acid transaminase is complemented by the host genome encoded branched-chain-amino-acid transaminase . recently, the collaborative role of bcat in the biosynthesis of leucine, one of the three branched chain amino acids, has been confirmed experimentally  <cit> . identical patterns of holosymbiont coevolution involving symbiont loss of ilve have likely also coevolved in the citrus mealybug, planococcus citri  <cit> , and the whitefly, bemisia tabaci  <cit> .

host/symbiont metabolic collaboration and a substrate ambiguous enzyme facilitate maintenance of functional pantothenate biosynthesis pathways in some buchnera lineages
on the basis of holosymbiont metabolic pathway analysis, gene expression analysis and complementation tests in e. coli pantothenate biosynthesis mutants, we propose a model of collaborative pantothenate biosynthesis that critically depends on host supply of β-alanine, and the substrate ambiguous activity of ketol-acid reductoisomerase  encoded by ilvc as 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase  .figure  <dig> 
pantothenate  biosynthesis in the
a. pisum
/
buchnera
holosymbiont.




a. pisum synthesize β-alanine in bacteriocytes via the uracil degradation pathway . to complete pantothenate biosynthesis, β-alanine is transported from the bacteriocyte cytoplasm to buchnera via a currently unidentified transporter . in buchnera’s closest free-living relative e. coli, β-alanine is actively transported via amino acid transporter cyca  <cit> . however, due to extensive gene loss, buchnera has lost almost all substrate specific transporters, including cyca  <cit> . our current working hypothesis, as previously proposed by shigenobu et al.,  <cit> , is that buchnera utilizes a flagellum-derived general substrate transport system for import of essential nutrients, including β-alanine.

notably, we demonstrate that pane encoding 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase has been lost from buchnera’s genome and functionally replaced with ilvc, an enzyme that encodes both ketol-acid reductoisomerase  and 2-dehydropantoate 2-reductase  activity. the gene product of ilvc functions as a substrate ambiguous reductase in branched chain amino acid biosynthesis and pantothenate biosynthesis. functional replacement of pane encoded ketopantoate reductase with a substrate ambiguous ilvc encoded ketopantoate reductase is not without precedent since loss of pane and functional replacement by ilvc has previously been demonstrated in the gram-positive soil bacterium corynebacterium glutamicum  <cit> . in the context of holosymbiont evolution, we hypothesize that retention of multifunctional endosymbiont enzymes facilitates genome reduction while maintaining the functional integrity of essential biosynthetic pathways, a process that facilitates genome reduction but results in increased functional complexity of symbiont-retained genes. consistent with our hypothesis, in genome-wide analyses, it has recently been demonstrated that bacterial species with small, reduced genomes have increased protein functional complexity, leading the authors to suggest that an increase in functional complexity of retained genes in small genomes compensates for gene losses  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
there are currently four mechanisms that facilitate retention of metabolic functionality concomitant with gene loss in the primary endosymbionts of insects. all four mechanisms can operate within a single genome and all four contribute to explaining why fragmented and disconnected biosynthesis pathways, that on first observation appear incomplete and non-functional, are retained across diverse obligate endosymbiont taxa. as more holosymbiont genomes become available, metabolic reconstruction of obligate intracellular symbionts must consider a complex evolutionary patchwork that comprises host metabolic complementarity, symbiont replacement, horizontal transfer of complementary biosynthesis genes to the host genome and now also protein multifunctionality in endosymbionts, all of which contribute to the maintenance of endosymbiont metabolic function.

