BACKGROUND
biological aging represents an age-dependent decline of multiple physiological functions, tissue degenerations and molecular changes. in higher organisms, the aging process is determined by a combination of genetics and environmental factors, and therefore is considered as a complex process. the complexity of the biological aging is also contributed to by multiple molecular inputs  <cit> . molecular regulation and regulators of aging have been identified in simple animal models. however, it is still unclear whether they have a similar contribution to human aging  <cit> . in contrast to simple animals, the aging of humans is characterized by high variations. in order to understand this process, robust and unbiased statistical analyses should be developed.

to describe aging as a time-dependent process, changes in physiological, cellular or molecular parameters with chronological age should be elucidated. for an accurate description, these parameters must be quantitative and should be analyzed with appropriate statistical tests. ideally, the rate of aging-associated changes would be extracted from longitudinal datasets, where changes in one subject are followed over the course of time. in humans, however, longitudinal sampling is often impractical. instead, a cross-sectional dataset that covers a broad age-range is an alternative  <cit> .

cross-sectional genome-wide rna datasets were generated from healthy subjects. genes contributing to tissue degeneration have been identified . in these studies, linear models or an age group analyses were applied to identify age-regulated genes  <cit> . linear models are simple and easy to apply, but make many assumptions that are doubtful for complex processes, such as aging. when describing a time-dependent process with a linear model, we assume a constant change over the entire time, which is highly unexpected in biological processes. to investigate when aging initiates and how it progresses, additional models should be considered.

we developed a novel five-step methodology to study temporal changes in cross-sectional genome-wide rna datasets. in this methodology, the expression trend of each probe was determined using a quadratic model and its p-value was calculated in order to filter the age-regulated probes. subsequently, the age-regulated probes were clustered such that major age-dependent expression trends could be identified . the methodology was developed using a new vastus lateralis  muscles microarray dataset and was evaluated and validated on post-mortem brain frontal cortex   <cit> , kidney cortex and medulla  <cit>  . despite technical and genetic background differences between platforms, similar age-regulated trends were found in vl muscles and in brain cortex. in both datasets, the expression trends bend at two distinct age-positions, at midlife and in old age. in kidney cortex, however, trends bend only in old age. based on these results we suggest that during aging, significant changes in rna expression progress through distinct time points, which differ molecularly.

table shows the four datasets used in this study in chronological order and permuted samples. the number of samples and the age range  are indicated.

* the p-value determined with the globaltest .

** the number of age-regulated probes  was determined using a quadratic regression model and no age-association as null hypothesis. in the permuted datasets, the mean and the standard error  from  <dig> permutations per dataset were calculated.

^the ratio between permuted samples  with a higher to lower number of significant probes, compared with chronologically ordered samples .

RESULTS
identification of age-regulated datasets and age-regulated genes
several cross-sectional microarray studies in humans are publically available  <cit> . those were generated on different platforms and present different genetic backgrounds and technical variations in rna isolation and labeling. we analyzed rna microarray datasets from vl muscles of healthy individuals  <cit>  brain cortex  <cit> , kidney cortex and medulla  <cit>  . the datasets were separately analyzed using a similar procedure: normalization using variance stabilization and normalization , log transformation and gender correction. a significant age-association  was found in vl muscles, brain and kidney cortex but not in kidney medulla . importantly, genetic background differences and technical variations are not expected in the kidney cortex and medulla datasets, since both are from the same platform and in most cases, tissues were collected from the same individuals  <cit> . despite genetic background and technical differences between vl muscles and brain cortex, in both datasets the age-association of genome-wide expression profiles is the most robust. this analysis indicates that reliable age-regulated probes would be found in vl muscles, brain and kidney cortex, but not in kidney medulla.

we have used the datasets from vl muscles, brain cortex and kidney cortex to develop a methodology for age-associated rna expression trends identification, while the kidney medulla dataset was used as a methodological control. this analysis indicates that in humans age-associated genome-wide expression profiles highly differ between tissues.

identification of expression trends in cross-sectional datasets
in cross-sectional datasets, expression levels can vary between individuals and could constrain the identification of significant age-associated expression trends. to overcome this limitation, expression levels were smoothed per probe prior to the selection of age-associated probes. the probe smoothing was carried out per dataset. we compared five different smoothing procedures: linear, quadratic and cubic regression models in order to identify the most adequate for cross-sectional gene expression datasets . the genome-wide fitness of each regression model was statistically evaluated for all probes, per platform and the fitness was compared between each two models. this analysis indicates that the cubic and quadratic model have a similar fit, whereas the fitness of the linear model was significantly worse . the robustness of each model was assessed using the ‘leave-one-out’ cross-validation, indicating that between the four regression models, the linear model has the largest error rate . together, these analyses indicate that a linear model is less suitable to describe age-associated changes in cross-sectional datasets, compared with quadratic or cubic models. it is important to note that quadratic and cubic regression models use fewer assumptions than the linear model, therefore would be more suitable for a dataset in which complex changes occur with time. although both quadratic and cubic models showed similar fit, we carried our analysis using the quadratic regression model, as it is less likely to overfit the data, in comparison with the cubic model.

the significance of age-regulated trends was determined per probe, assuming no age-association as the null hypothesis. only probes presenting a p-value <  <dig>   were kept for further analysis . each dataset passed two filtering steps, therefore p-values were not corrected for multiple testing. in accordance with the globaltest p-value, the number of age-regulated probes in brain, vl muscles and kidney cortex was higher than in kidney medulla, which did not pass the globaltest p-value threshold . only limited overlap  of age-regulated genes was found between each two-tissue combination and less than 2% overlap was found between three-tissue combinations . this suggests that molecular aging differs among tissues, therefore the analysis was carried out per tissue.

to statistically assess the smoothing procedure and the significance of the age-regulated probes, the samples in each dataset were randomly permuted, generating artificial datasets. one hundred permuted datasets were generated per tissue, in order to reduce the impact of permutations that do not highly differ from the chronologically ordered dataset. the ratio between higher to lower numbers of significant probes in permuted datasets compared with the chronologically ordered dataset was considerably small in brain, vl muscles and kidney cortex . in contrast, in the kidney medulla the ratio was much higher , suggesting that the age-regulated probes in this dataset may represent noise.

the number of probes that are found in the original data, but not in the average permuted dataset is an estimation of the amount of truly aging-associated genes  <cit> , therefore from the dataset permutation analysis we can conclude that in the significantly age-regulated datasets the ratio signal to noise is very small.

this analysis demonstrates that the filtering step of the age-regulated probes from the chronologically ordered datasets can be performed with a significant confidence, even without correction for multiple testing. in addition, this suggests that in the datasets with no significant age-association, the fraction of false-positive age-associated probes would be high. moreover, our procedure for age-associated probe identification is not highly affected by genetic background and platform differences.

identification of major age-associated expression trends and bend-positions
to identify trends that are significantly associated with chronological age, the filtered probes were clustered using k-means clustering, with euclidean distance as metric. we identified four stable clusters exhibiting unique trends . interestingly, reciprocal trends bend at similar age , suggesting that major expression changes are at defined time points. to extrapolate the age at which major expression changes occur, we applied k-means clustering with absolute correlation as metric, which clusters reciprocal trends together. two major trends were identified . each absolute correlation cluster represents two reciprocal trends and the time point at which the reciprocal trends intersect within the cluster, represents the age where trends bend . in addition, this point is also defined as the smallest distance between the 95th percentile and the cluster centroids . we named this point an age-position. in vl muscles, two age-positions were identified: at age 43 ±  <dig> and 75 ±  <dig> . the range of each age-position was estimated from  <dig>   <dig> and 4 k-means absolute correlation clusters. moreover, in brain cortex two distinct age-positions at 53 ±  <dig> and 77 ± 3 years were identified . in contrast, in kidney cortex the two age-positions were indistinguishable by age . this analysis suggests that age-positions spatially and temporally differ between tissues.


vl muscles

vl 
a. table summarizes the age  of each age-position and the number of probes, as well as the direction of regulation  in vl muscles, brain cortex and kidney cortex. age-positions ± variations in years are indicated.

b. table shows the gene overlap between vl muscles and brain cortex in each age-position. gene overlap was determined with entrez id. the percentage of overlap is indicated between brackets.

to assess this aspect, we generated from the brain cortex dataset  three datasets with varied age ranges: 36– <dig>  45– <dig> and 26– <dig>  the analysis was repeated on these variant datasets starting from the probe smoothing step. the occurrence of the first age-position in the datasets ‘trimmed’ from the left  was shifted around three years to the right, for each 10 years of reduction in the dataset age range. moreover, fewer significant probes were associated with the first age-position , whilst the second age-position was less influenced with respect to the occurrence age and the number of probes associated with . in the 45–106 years dataset the first age-position was not stable due to the low sample resolution, but the second age-position was unchanged . to assess the effect of centenarians, another artificial dataset was generated by trimming the brain cortex dataset from the right, discarding the elderly . also in this dataset, two distinct age-positions were identified, but compared with the original dataset, the second age-position was more affected with respect to the occurrence age and the number of significant probes . together this demonstrates that in the brain cortex dataset, two distinct age-positions where expression trends bend are stable and consistent, but the exact point is subject to variation according to the age range of the dataset.

next, we examined the effect of the dataset resolution on the occurrence of the age-positions. since the kidney cortex dataset contained the largest number of subjects, we compared the full dataset  with a generated dataset that includes only half of the subjects . to avoid a change in the distribution, the artificial dataset was generated by removing every other sample, maintaining their distribution across decades . age-positions did not differ between the original kidney cortex and ‘half’ of the dataset . this indicates that the resolution in an evenly age distributed dataset has little impact on the occurrence of the age-positions.

the stability of the age-positions and age-associated trends was also evaluated in the kidney medulla dataset. rna expression profiles in this dataset did not present a significant age-association . the trends generated by the  <dig> probes passing the p-value filtering, had a lower fold-change compared with the age-regulated datasets. moreover, the age-positions were not clear or consistent . as  <dig> probes passed the filter for significant age-association, but the dataset itself did not pass under the globaltest threshold, it is highly possible that a considerable amount of these probes represent false-positives.

to further investigate the effect of false positive probes, the age-positions were assessed in the permuted datasets from brain cortex  and kidney cortex , where samples were not ordered according to chronological age. in these permuted datasets, age-positions were not clear and not consistent. together this demonstrates that stable and well defined age-positions can be found in chronologically ordered, age-associated datasets, but not in datasets with insignificant age-regulation.

to verify and validate the specificity of the age-positions and to point the limitations of the procedure, this methodology was applied on several independent and modified datasets. for validations of the age-positions in vl muscles we used an independent vl muscles dataset, where the age range is wider  but the number of samples is slightly smaller  compared with the original vl muscles dataset . also in the validation dataset, two distinct age-positions were identified and these were close to the age-positions from the original dataset . as expected, the lower sample resolution in the validation dataset induces higher variation compared with the original dataset . this suggests that age-positions do not result from technical or methodological artifacts, but represent a biological phenomenon. we noticed that in the datasets with a wider age range, the age-positions shifted about 3 years earlier compared with the original dataset . this suggests that the age range of the dataset could have an impact on the point at which the age-positions occur.

molecular composition of early and late age-positions is distinct
for molecular characterization of the two distinct age-positions, a comparison between the age-positions in vl muscles and brain cortex was made. the overlap of genes  between the tissues at each age-position was limited . however, a similarity was found in the fold-change direction: in both tissues the proportion of up-regulated and down-regulated probes was similar in the 1st age-position, but the down-regulated probes were enriched in the 2nd age-position . this suggests that different molecular processes regulate transcriptional changes at each age-position and those differ between tissues.

to assess the function of genes, gene ontology  enrichment of the significant genes at each age-position was investigated using unique entrez ids . significant enrichment of go terms was determined using fisher’s exact test in a genome-wide context  and subsequently, using hierarchical clustering . in agreement with the origin of the tissues, the muscle contraction and the nerve cell system were the most prominently enriched biological processes in both age-positions in vl muscles and in brain cortex, respectively . the vast majority of significantly enriched go terms differ between the two age-positions and between tissues. however, calcium transport and lipid metabolism were affected in the 1st age-position in both tissues, and in the 2nd age-position apoptosis and mitochondria .
vl muscles 
or brain cortex


vl 
a list of significantly enriched go terms in the early and late age-positions for vl muscles and brain cortex datasets. go terms are ordered according to their significant enrichment. in bold are similar go terms in both tissues. a complete list of the go terms hierarchical trees can be found in additional file 3: tables s8– <dig> 

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
declines with age in tissue and cell functionality characterize biological aging. in cross-sectional datasets obtained from healthy humans, a decline in muscle strength starts only after midlife. using two linear models the decline is significant from the 6th decade and then after it linearly progresses  <cit> . more recently, we identified a decline in rna expression of polya rna binding protein  <dig>  in vl muscles from the fifth decade  <cit> . in agreement with these studies, we found that in vl skeletal muscles a major change in expression trends occurs during early midlife. in addition, we identified a second age, around 70 years, where expression trends changed. coinciding with the 2nd age-position, the muscle waste also known as sarcopenia, is common in elderly  <cit> .

two distinct age-positions were also found in the brain frontal cortex. our analysis demonstrated that the age-positions are consistently found in age-regulated datasets, as compared with the non-age-regulated datasets. the exact age at which trends change is significantly affected by the age-range of the dataset. a shift of ~3 years is to be considered based on the age range of the dataset . in contrast, in the kidney cortex only one age-position was identified. this suggests that in humans, tissue aging differs by temporal and spatial means. as a support, very little gene overlap was found between tissues. moreover, on the functional groups level, only two groups were similar in brain cortex and vl muscles. this suggests that aging in humans is not a linear process, but progresses through at least two age-positions in skeletal muscle and brain tissue. analysis of the brain cortex dataset suggested qualitative changes around age  <dig> and around age  <dig>  our findings are consistent with  <cit> , but provide a quantitative description of temporal changes during aging. we applied observant tests and in-depth analyses, which allow us to conclude that the age-positions identified with our methodology are stable and are not platform-dependent. albeit only limited similarity was found between the four tissues presented in this study, as a proof of concept, conclusions regarding the differences between tissues during aging should be made with a larger comparative study. in addition, during aging, cell composition within a tissue can also change. this study, however does not address possible age-regulated changes in cell composition within a tissue.

based on the datasets used here, the 1st age-position in skeletal muscles is around 40 years of age whereas in brain it occurs around 50 years of age. since the sample resolution and age-range in both datasets is comparable, it suggests that expression changes in skeletal muscles occur earlier compared with the brain cortex. although additional studies are required to confirm this observation, it may have an impact on approaches to improve healthy aging. the 2nd age-position in both datasets is found around 70 years of age and it is characterized by an enrichment of down-regulated genes, that cluster into well known aging-regulated processes  <cit>  such as: apoptosis, mitochondria, hormonal signaling pathways and could mark tissue degeneration. the 1st age-position in both tissues is enriched with changes in calcium homeostasis and lipid metabolism. calcium homeostasis is essential for the maintenance of muscle and nerve cells, and physiological implications have been demonstrated  <cit> . the molecular regulation of calcium homeostasis to cellular aging is not fully understood and requires additional investigation. the impact of lipid metabolisms during aging was studied in more detail, as adiposity increases in a number of tissues  <cit> . recent studies in centenarian cohorts identified regulators of lipid metabolism as candidates for longevity in humans  <cit> . from the list of genes , in each age-position additional regulators of aging in humans could be identified for functional studies.

a genome-wide decline in gene expression in the 2nd age-position could contribute to tissue degeneration in elderly. to assess the impact of the age-positions on longevity, we have analyzed a ‘trimmed’ dataset, excluding samples above 87 years of age. although two age-positions were found in this analysis, we argue that we cannot address the impact of the late age-position to longevity. due to the nature of cross-sectional studies, like those used here, the late age-position could also present survivor effects of those individuals. for instance, it may be possible to observe an expression change in the population above age  <dig>  as they become part of a more exclusive population. changes in expression may occur either due to level increases in every individual at 90 years of age, or due to the individuals with low expression that have small probability of survival until this age and above. in other words, it is also possible that cross-sectional datasets reveal the enrichment in survivor populations. only longitudinal studies following the same subjects in time will be able to make a distinction between these two possibilities and to reveal an impact on longevity.

in statistical modeling there are two competing issues at stake. the first is avoiding bias that arises from the model assumptions that may not be true. the second is avoiding variance that arises from a model that is too flexible, thus the model would overfit the data. previous studies in aging microarray datasets applied linear models in cross-sectional datasets  <cit> . linear models, however, make many assumptions, which are doubtful in complex biological processes. it is highly unlikely that trends in biology are exactly linear. here we have carefully compared linear, quadratic and cubic models on three different chronologically ordered datasets and found that the quadratic and cubic models outperformed the linear model. although we chose to apply a quadratic regression model in our studies here, we recognize that more complex models could be investigated in future studies. the datasets used here are not dense enough for such models, thus the use of a dataset with multiple samples per year and more uniformly distributed samples across age is advised.

