BACKGROUND
most strains of the gram-positive bacterium staphylococcus aureus are avirulent, antibiotic-sensitive commensals; however, over the past several decades there have emerged a number of pandemic, virulent, antibiotic-resistant strains including methicillin-resistant  and vancomycin-resistant  strains  <cit> . although many s. aureus infections originate in the community, it is also the most common nosocomial bacterial infection in u.s. healthcare institutions, accounting for more than half a million hospital-acquired infections annually which exact an enormous financial and healthcare burden.

s. aureus can be detected in its primary reservoir in the anterior nares on a regular basis in about 20%  of the human population  <cit> , leading to efforts for decolonization in healthcare settings  <cit> . some s. aureus strains have acquired any of a large number of virulence factors, and can cause a range of infections from mild to serious including pimples, impetigo, boils, cellulitis, endocarditis, necrotizing fasciitis, osteomyelitis, pneumonia, septic arthritis, septicemia, and toxic shock syndrome  <cit> . the widespread, long-term exposure of humans to s. aureus antigens from non-pathogenic strains may help explain why the development of an effective vaccine against pathogenic strains of s. aureus is difficult  <cit> . as a result of its ubiquity and its ability to acquire virulence and antibiotic-resistance factors it is now estimated that invasive mrsa infections cause more deaths in the u.s.  than hiv/aids  <cit> . s. aureus infections of domestic livestock are also of concern, and cause significant economic losses  <cit> .

our laboratory has developed the distributed genome hypothesis , a model for understanding intra-species gene content differences in bacterial pathogens, especially those associated with chronic infections  <cit> . the dgh states that pathogenic bacterial species use horizontal gene transfer to make available to the genomes of individual strains a set of non-core distributed genes with varying population frequencies, and with varying probabilities of contributing to the species' population fitness. the observation that these distributed genes are present at significantly different frequencies in the population of a given pathogenic species, combined with the fact that the total number of genes available in the population is larger  than the number of genes in any one strain's genome, has led us to describe the set of genes available to a bacterial pathogenic species as a supragenome  <cit>  in preference to the synonymously used term pan-genome  <cit> . the dgh views the combinatorial process of augmenting a set of core genes with a significant number of non-core distributed genes in each strain's genome as an evolutionary strategy to maximize the species' population fitness across a range of environmental conditions  and at rates that are significantly greater than can be achieved through the vertical transmission and exchange of alleles of a relatively fixed set of genes  <cit> .

whole genome shotgun sequencing using  <dig> life sciences' next-generation pyrosequencing technology has been used in our laboratory to obtain high-coverage draft genomic dna sequence datasets for large numbers of strains of several human bacterial pathogens  <cit> . using these data, a predictive finite supragenome model of the dgh was developed, and has been used to delineate the supragenomes of haemophilus influenzae  <cit>  and streptococcus pneumoniae  <cit> , two species that are naturally transformable. here we extend our research on the dgh in several respects:  by comparatively examining all of the genomes that were available for s. aureus, a non-transformable species;  by making use of a newly available automated bacterial genome annotation service  for the annotation of these  <dig> genomes, a service that is based on a set of well-curated biological subsystem annotations  <cit> ; and  by introducing a revised finite supragenome model that allows the estimates of the population gene frequencies to vary during the maximization of the log-likelihood of the observed sample gene frequency data  <cit> . we use the descriptive and predictive capabilities of our revised finite supragenome model to delineate the s. aureus supragenome, compare it with the supragenomes of haemophilus influenzae and streptococcus pneumoniae, and estimate the number of chromosomal genes that would be found with the sequencing of additional s. aureus genomes.

RESULTS
bacterial genomic dna sequences and the annotation data for their protein-coding genes
*the ncbi's "genus species " name for each strain is either staphylococcus aureus  or staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus. abbreviations: antibiotic sensitivity: ca, community-acquired; ha, healthcare-acquired; m, methicillin; r, resistant; s, sensitive; v, vancomycin; vi, v-intermediate; hetero-vi, heterogeneous vi; sa, staphylococcus aureus.

automated bacterial genome annotation is the only practical method to keep pace with the productivity of modern dna sequencing technologies  <cit>  such as those used in this study to obtain high-coverage  draft genomic sequences for clinical s. aureus strains . we chose the rast automated bacterial genome annotation system  <cit>  because it is free of charge, confidential, secure, handles compute-intensive bacterial genome annotation jobs quickly, and allows users to upload their own sequences, i.e., it does not just offer annotations of publicly available bacterial genomic dna sequence datasets. currently, as table  <dig> shows, even based on the rudimentary criterion of cds counts, different automated bacterial genome annotation providers can produce significantly different results from the same genomic dna sequence datasets . thus, to have a consistent set of cds annotations, we used the rast system to annotate both our in-house generated draft genomic sequences and the bacterial chromosomes of the  <dig> published s. aureus strains. .

abbreviations: pgaap, ncbi's "prokaryotic genome automated annotation pipeline"; rast, argonne national laboratory's "rapid annotation using subsystem technology" system; cmr, j. craig venter institute's comprehensive microbial resource ; cmr-p and cmr-t, primary annotations and jcvi's re-annotations; img, doe-joint genome institute's integrated microbial genomes ; n.a., not available. a refseq is derived from an underlying genbank record, but the annotations in each record may differ.

analyses of s. aureus gene frequencies using  <dig> genomes
we used our previously described computational pipeline  <cit>  to cluster the chromosomal genes from the  <dig> s. aureus genomes which has proven to be highly reliable in comparison with other systems  <cit> . this single-linkage clustering procedure is designed to accommodate the use of draft genomic dna sequence data and its annotations, i.e., data that may include open reading frames that are disrupted by genome assembly errors, or genes interrupted by contig breaks. this procedure yields clusters of cds orthologs based on 70% sequence identity over 70% of the shorter sequence. based on these clustering results, genes were classified  based on their frequency as either unique , distributed , or core .

core clusters  have one or more representative cds in each genome examined; unique clusters are represented in only one genome; and distributed clusters in more than one but not all genomes examined.

the clustering results yielded  <dig>  orthologous gene clusters , of which  <dig>  were core,  <dig> were distributed and  <dig> were unique. the unique genes had an uneven distribution, and it was not surprising that the bovine isolate, rf <dig>  had both the largest number of unique genes  and the smallest number of distributed genes . individual genomes contained between  <dig>   and  <dig>   genes, whilst the maximum difference between any pair of s. aureus genomes, out of all possible  pairs, based on protein-encoding gene content, was  <dig> genes. in addition, although only 13% of the total number of gene annotations among the  <dig> strains are non-core, 28% of the total number of genes found in these  <dig> strains are non-core indicating that many of these genes are found repeatedly throughout the species

analyses of s. aureus population gene frequencies using a revised finite supragenome model
to more accurately model the number of genes contained within a species' supragenome we have revised our finite supragenome model to take advantage of the observed gene frequencies obtained from the sequencing of limited numbers of target strains. our model treats each of the n genes in a bacterial species' supragenome as an independent bernoulli random variable, with a gene's occurrence in a genome of one of the strains of the species representing a success outcome of a bernoulli trial that has a probability equal to the gene's population frequency among all strains  <cit> . we model the population gene frequencies for a species with a supragenome as being limited to k classes, with each class defined by two parameters: a bernoulli probability μk that represents the gene frequency, and a corresponding mixture coefficient πk that represents the probability that one of the n genes in the supragenome belongs to class k. thus, in addition to n and k, our model requires 2k additional parameters, which we denote using the vectors μ and π. the k elements of the vector π are constrained to be greater than zero and sum to one. the k elements of μ are constrained to be greater than zero, monotonically increasing with increasing k, and that μk has a fixed value of one . our observed sample data from the |s| genomes under study  is represented by a vector c = {c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig>  ..., c|s|} whose elements equal the number of genes observed in exactly n =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  ..., |s| of these genomes. a constrained nonlinear programming function  from matlab's optimization toolbox is used to maximize the following log-likelihood function of the observed gene frequencies using values of n over a reasonable range  <cit> :  

our initial model only carried out the optimization with respect to n and π; but did not allow the values of μk  to vary during the maximization of the log-likelihood of the observed data. the revised model removes this restriction, and the results obtained using this revised model yield insights not previously available.

an overview of the results obtained using the revised model is shown for three human bacterial pathogens: haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae, and staphylococcus aureus . the results obtained for these three supragenomes differ significantly in their plots of the log-likelihood of the observed data against the values of supragenome size n that were examined during the optimization. fortuitously, these results illustrate two contrasting types of supragenomes  and a third  whose general characteristics are intermediate between these two types. thus, a broad plateau was observed in this plot for h. influenzae, whereas the log-likelihood plot for s. aureus declined very abruptly at estimated values of n that were significantly greater than the estimated size of its supragenome . the revised supragenome model employed herein has the advantage that values of μk  are allowed to vary during the maximization of the log-likelihood. hence a priori estimates of fixed values for these parameters --a procedure that the bottom panels of figure  <dig> show is difficult--are conveniently avoided. at the extreme case of the lowest population gene frequency class, the values of μ <dig> and π <dig> at the maximization of the log-likelihood of the observed data indicate that the h. influenzae supragenome is dominated by a large pool of very rare genes. in contrast, the value for μ <dig> at the maximization of the log-likelihood of the observed data for the s. aureus supragenome  is an order of magnitude greater than that of h. influenzae. at the other extreme of population gene frequencies, even though the estimated size of the s. aureus supragenome at  <dig>  chromosomal genes is the smallest value for n observed among these three species, the absolute number of s. aureus core genes  and their fraction of n  are both significantly greater than the same values for either h. influenzae or s. pneumoniae . this estimate that approximately 30% of the s. aureus genes are non-core is in reasonable agreement with the results of earlier, more limited studies that used comparative genomic hybridization to estimate a value for this parameter of 22%  <cit> .

the finite supragenome model is predictive as well as descriptive, figure  <dig> shows the excellent correlation between the observed sample gene frequency data from the  <dig> s. aureus genomes under study  and the same values predicted using the values of μ, π, and n obtained using our revised finite supragenome model trained on the sample data . figure  <dig>  shows the ability of the model to predict the numbers of new, core, and the total number of chromosomal genes that should be detectable after sequencing up to  <dig> s. aureus genomes. these results agree very well with those obtained using the results from our analyses of the  <dig> s. aureus genomes under study . they also indicate that the sequencing of  <dig> s. aureus genomes will yield  <dig> % of the total number and  <dig> % of the core chromosomal genes in this species' supragenome .

analyses of the rast annotation data for the  <dig> s. aureus genomes under study
the rast annotation data for the s. aureus chromosomal cds agreed very well with the results of our cds clustering procedure . each cds feature in a genbank-style annotation record  typically has a product feature qualifier value associated with it. table  <dig> shows that 96%  of the orthologous clusters generated by our cgs supragenome analysis pipeline <cit>  were comprised of rast-identified cds that all mapped to a single product feature qualifier value. similar results were obtained when confining the analyses to just the core clusters, i.e., the clusters with the largest numbers of members, where there was 98%  agreement between the two methods. in those cases where clusters were comprised of cds that mapped to more than a single product feature qualifier value, the results were often understandable, e.g., the additional product qualifier values were either undefined  or imprecise . the reverse mapping--of s. aureus rast annotation product feature qualifiers to cgs-identified cds clusters--was expected to be more problematic, but these results were also very robust . in this analysis 82%  of the rast annotation cds product feature qualifiers that describe genes belonging to distributed clusters appeared in only a single cluster, and 91%  of the core cluster-derived cds product feature qualifiers were found in only a single cluster. the difference between the results in tables  <dig> and  <dig> indicate that the reverse mapping  is slightly more susceptible to the problems cited above concerning imprecise cds product descriptions.

*shown are the numbers of orthologous clusters of core, distributed, or unique type whose constituent cds yield the indicated numbers of distinct rast annotation cds "product" feature qualifiers.

*shown are the numbers of distinct rast annotation cds "product" feature qualifiers that describe cds belonging to either core, distributed, or unique clusters and where the relevant cds yield the indicated number of distinct clusters. the cds product feature qualifier "hypothetical protein" was deliberately excluded as it would be expected to map to different clusters.

seven percent  of the chromosomal cds clusters  found in the  <dig> s. aureus genomes under study were comprised of cds that were annotated as being phage-derived, and these genes were unevenly distributed among the core, distributed and unique gene sets. thus, a query of the cds product feature qualifier values for the term phage anywhere in the product name yielded a mapping of the cds annotations to  <dig> core,  <dig> distributed, and  <dig> unique clusters. thus, although 72% , 24% , and 4%  of the chromosomal cds clusters found in the  <dig> s. aureus genomes under study represented core, distributed, and unique genes, 3%, 86%, and 11% of the phage-derived genes, respectively, were from these three classes of gene clusters.

the distinctive strategy of the rast system is to have domain experts maintain well-curated subsystem functional annotations  that can be used across bacterial genomes, instead of having the functional annotation of individual bacterial genomes attempted one-by-one by non-experts in the various subsystems that these genomes may encode. subsystems analysis of the s. aureus chromosomal cds annotations in the context of our gene clustering results was quite revealing  in that almost half of the core cds clusters could not be assigned to any rast subsystem, as well as 90% of the distributed cluster cds and 94% of the unique cluster cds. these results highlight our very limited understanding of the biology of this important bacterial pathogen, as well as the need for improvements in functional annotation to keep pace with the extraordinary productivity of dna sequencing technology.

*50% of core, 90% of distributed, and 94% of unique cds could not be assigned to any rast subsystem.

the rast annotation data also provided useful insights into the presence or absence of genetic determinants of methicillin resistance  in the genomes of the  <dig> s. aureus strains under study. thirteen gene product descriptions indicated involvement of the cds expression product in resistance to the antibiotic of choice for s. aureus infections, methicillin. ten of these  <dig> genes were core genes, with the remaining three genes meca, meci, and mecr <dig> distributed among more than one but not all genomes . if present, all of these genes were single copy, with the exception of the fmtb gene, which was present in multiple copies in  <dig> of the  <dig> genomes under study. the presence of the meca gene was consistent with the known methicillin-resistance status of the strains, and its absence in the untested strain cgssa <dig> indicated that this strain should be methicillin-susceptible.

abbreviations : fema, essential for mr ; femb, involved in mr ; femd  involved in mr; fmta, involved in mr ; fmtb,  involved in mr and cell wall biosynthesis; fmtc,  involved in mr ; hmra, involved in mr ; hmrb, acyl carrier protein involved in mr; lyth, involved in mr ; meca, penicillin-binding protein pbp2a, mr determinant, transpeptidase; meci, mr repressor; mecr <dig>  mr regulatory sensor-transducer.

discussion
the first model for supragenome  analysis  <cit>  was developed using genomic dna sequence datasets from eight strains of the species streptococcus agalactiae, also known as group b streptococcus . this model was developed by fitting an exponential decay function to a plot of the average number of core genes observed with increasing numbers of genomes examined , and took the asymptote defined by such a plot as an estimate of the size of the gbs core genome. this model also fitted a second exponential decay function to a plot of the average number of new genes observed with increasing numbers of genomes examined , and took the asymptote as an estimate of the number of new genes that would be observed with each new gbs genome sequenced. finally, this model also estimated the size of the gbs pan-genome by deriving a third equation for its rate of growth. a recent review  <cit>  proposed a revised version of this model that adopts a power law fit  in lieu of the earlier exponential fit of the observed data. in both the original and the power law models, a threshold parameter  is used to distinguish open and closed pan-genomes, where an open pan-genome  is defined as one that will yield a non-zero number of new genes when each additional genome of the species is sequenced. more recently, with the advent of ever less expensive sequencing technologies, making it possible to sequence scores of independent strains, it could be argued that modeling of the supra/pan-genome is unnecessary since sequencing of additional strains can be continued until no significant number of novel genes are identified  <cit> 

the probabilistic foundation of the model used in this work  <cit>  offers a somewhat different perspective, but with the improvements described above that take into account multiple gene frequency classes allows for accurate supragenome modeling of populations/species for which it is not possible to obtain multiple independent clonal lineages  for sequence analysis. in these cases gene frequency were inferred from the different sequence coverage levels observed within the sequenced population. since the vast majority of bacterial species are not culturable, but are now amenable to whole genome sequencing through single cell isolation and whole genome amplification techniques  <cit>  our model can be used to estimate the percentage of the supragenome that has been obtained at intermediate coverage levels.

a recent comparison of the pan-genome model of tettelin et al. with our finite supragenome model demonstrated that the two models make highly similar predictions when provided the same dataset  <cit> , thus serving as a validation for both. however, both models share fundamental challenges in areas such as the selection of appropriate genomic dna sequence datasets to use. for example, we chose not to include s. aureus plasmid dna sequences, e.g., those associated with the published genomes that were used in our analysis , nor the dna sequences of the many s. aureus bacteriophage genomes that have been published  <cit> . however, our analysis included three draft genomes from s. aureus strains that we sequenced, and these unfinished genomes may contain plasmid-derived contigs. the results in table  <dig> in fact suggest that the strain cgssa <dig> may contain one or more s. aureus plasmids. its genome contains the largest number of genes , and the  <dig> unique genes it contains are significantly greater than all but two of the other  <dig> strains. a comprehensive review of the s. aureus genome  <cit>  provides a detailed description of some of the many plasmids and other mobile elements that it may contain. decisions about the inclusion or exclusion of published plasmid and bacteriophage dna sequences in a supragenome analysis can therefore lead to systematic error in estimates of counts of different classes of genes .

other issues arise during the selection of appropriate genomic dna sequence datasets to use in a supragenome analysis. in this work we included genomes that are known to be very closely related, e.g., those of strains jh <dig> and jh <dig>  <cit> , as well as one known outlier genome  of bovine origin  <cit> . these decisions can also be criticized as leading to systematic error in estimates of counts of different classes of genes. however, inclusion of a limited number of closely related and outlier strains also provide for useful internal controls for the results of the supragenome analysis. in some respects, and especially for a species such as s. aureus, bias in the selection of genomic dna sequence datasets to use in a supragenome analysis is unavoidable. given the intense interest in clinically relevant strains of s. aureus, one can reasonably expect that even with the ever increasing affordability and subsequent availability of bacterial genomic dna sequence datasets, the s. aureus strains selected for sequencing will for the foreseeable future be dominated by epidemiologically important clinical strains, and that the much more quantitatively representative commensal s. aureus stains that could be isolated from human subjects will be under-represented in supragenome and other comparative genomic analyses.

the s. aureus core genome has been found to contain a heptameric dna sequence  that is believed to protect it from uncontrolled rearrangements  <cit> . this conserved crossover hotspot initiator or chi site is not the only dna sequence motif and associated nucleic acid information processing system with a putative influence on the structure and maintenance of the s. aureus supragenome. the sau <dig> type i restriction-modification  system has at least two important influences in this regard  <cit> . first, it reduces the efficiency of conjugation between s. aureus and enterococci, the putative source of vancomycin resistance. this is believed to explain why very few vancomycin-resistant s. aureus strains have arisen, despite tremendous selective pressure acting on the bacterial flora of patients treated with this drug  <cit> . second, the sau <dig> rm system's multi-copy specificity gene, sau1hsds, has many alleles with significant population frequencies, and these alleles correspond to the major s. aureus lineages. five copies of this gene occur in the rf <dig> genome; three copies in the genomes of cgssa <dig>  mssa <dig>  usa <dig>  and usa300tch <dig>  and two copies in the remaining genomes we examined . the sau <dig> rm system therefore not only controls horizontal gene flow into s. aureus from other species, but also within s. aureus lineages via the polymorphic rm specificity alleles of sau1hsds loci  <cit> .

analysis of the supragenome of s. aureus isolates from antibiotic-naïve populations would be an interesting extension of this work. paradoxically, antibiotic treatment increases s. aureus conjugation frequency  <cit> ; induces s. aureus temperate phage to excise, replicate, and transfer pathogenicity islands  <cit> ; and when used in combination therapies may unexpectedly increase the spread of resistance among s. aureus strains  <cit> . in some bacterial genomes the selection pressure exerted by antibiotic exposure may also have the unexpected effect of promoting multi-drug resistance due to positive epistasis amongst combinations of alleles of antibiotic resistance loci  <cit> . thus, one might expect that s. aureus isolates from antibiotic-naïve populations would yield an estimate of supragenome size smaller than that reported here, and be comprised of an even larger percentage of core genes. the results of a supragenome analysis may therefore represent an aggregate of the results of environmental niche-specific supragenomes affected by extrinsic agents such as antibiotics that modulate horizontal gene transfer, as well as regulatory allele-specific supragenomes affected by intrinsic genetic phenomena  that also modulate horizontal gene transfer.

another interesting extension of this work would be an analysis of the supragenome of the related species staphylococcus sciuri, which is one of the most abundant staphylococcal species and a frequent epidermal commensal of animals  <cit> . the meca gene found in methicillin-resistant s. aureus  strains encodes the pbp2a penicillin-binding protein, whose affinity for β-lactam antibiotics acts as a sink that vitiates the efficacy of these drugs and protects native s. aureus pbps during their function as bacterial cell wall synthetic enzymes  <cit> . incorporation of the meca gene into the s. aureus genome is an unusual event, and requires both a delivery entity called the staphylococcal chromosome cassette , and a suitable but rarely encountered s. aureus genetic background that can tolerate the presence and expression of the meca gene  <cit> . staphylococcus sciuri, although susceptible to β-lactam antibiotics, is believed to be the source of the precursor homolog of the meca gene present in the limited number of mrsa strains that have emerged worldwide  <cit> . although limited in number, mrsa strains have spread in an epidemic manner with devastating clinical consequences. the s. sciuri genome appears to be ubiquitously agreeable to the presence and expression of its meca precursor homolog  <cit> , and hence a study of the s. sciuri supragenome may yield insights into the genetic determinants whose homologs in, or horizontal acquisition by, a s. aureus genome may predispose to the acquisition of meca.

CONCLUSIONS
the supragenome of s. aureus offers a significant contrast to those of other human bacterial pathogens including h. influenzae and s. pneumoniae which share the nasopharynx as their primary site of colonization. the s. aureus supragenome  was the smallest among these three species, yet it contained the largest number  of core genes . h. influenzae and s. pneumoniae each has a larger horizontal gene pool  <cit>  to draw from by virtue of their possession of autocompetence and autotransformation systems which facilitate the horizontal acquisition of new genes  <cit> . although some strains of s. aureus are deadly pathogens, most are not, and when compared to h. influenzae and s. pneumoniae, the s. aureus supragenome may have co-evolved with its human host for a longer period of time. as a result, there may be relatively less selection pressure on the s. aureus supragenome to maintain a larger size, as over an extended period of evolutionary time it has optimized its ability to maintain core and distributed phenotypes to survive the environmental conditions it typically encounters as a predominantly commensal species of its human host.

finally, we are currently extending the bioinformatic analyses described herein with the development of a free, post-annotation software package for the execution of the full supragenome analysis pipeline described here. this project will provide the community with the ability to reproduce a given set of published supragenome analysis results, re-analyze the underlying data after modification of the parameters used during an analysis, and perform more detailed and insightful querying of the results than can be summarized in a typical journal publication.

