BACKGROUND
massively parallel deep coverage next generation sequencing  technologies have stimulated efforts of de novo genome sequence assembly in recent years. while ngs data productions advance at phenomenal rates, accurate genome assembly and annotation remain challenging, and the extent of what may be missing in these de novo assembled genomes is an ongoing matter of concern. all genome assembly efforts face the challenge of accurately assembling tandem and sparse repeat sequences. current assembly algorithms collapse identical or very similar repeats leading to potential reduction or loss of genomic complexity  <cit> . the short reads produced by current ngs technologies are especially prone to this problem, as repetitive sequences can be resolved only if the reads are long enough to span the repetitive region  <cit> . a frequent practice is to exclude highly repetitive sequences in genome assembly and annotation, on the assumption that they lack protein-coding genes. while this assumption is generally valid, here we provide a clear example that excluding what appears to be simple repetitive sequences could result in the exclusion of an important fitness genotype, in the case of the atlantic cod genome.

atlantic cod is a key commercial fishery species in the cold waters of the north atlantic seas and a prime target for domestication by countries across the north atlantic ocean. star et al.  <cit>  recently reported the annotated genome of a specimen  from the cold-adapted north east arctic cod  stock from the barents sea. the neac_ <dig> genome was among the first complex vertebrate genomes assembled entirely from short reads obtained using the roche  <dig> gs flx titanium platform. the report discussed the interesting potential thermal adaptive properties of the hemoglobins of the cod, as well as its unique adaptive immune system as related to organismal fitness  <cit> . while not the focus of the discussion, it is nevertheless surprising that a crucial fitness trait, the antifreeze glycoprotein   <cit> , which has clear relevance for aquaculture of the species in cold, northerly latitudes, was absent from genome annotations and predicted transcripts and proteins. neither was any allusion made to its presence in the extensive supplementary notes accompanying the report.

afgp is one of the diverse, novel antifreeze proteins that evolved in various polar and subpolar marine teleost lineages, enabling their survival in freezing, icy seawater  <cit> . presence of afgps is long known in a number of northern and arctic atlantic cod populations  <cit> . the near-identical afgps in the arctic/northern cods  and in the unrelated antarctic notothenioid fishes endemic to the southern ocean, is an established prime example of convergent evolution and at the rare protein sequence level  <cit> . antifreeze proteins recognize environmental ice crystals that enter the fish, bind to them and stop their expansion, thereby prevent the fish body fluids, which have less salt and thus a higher freezing point than seawater, from freezing  <cit> . absence of the afgp genotype in the cold-adapted neac_ <dig> would seem inconsistent with its frigid arctic habitats.

afgps are highly repetitive in sequence in the protein and particularly in the coding sequences because they are encoded as large polyprotein precursors  <cit> . thus the possibility exists that the repetitive afgp coding sequence repeats might have been inadvertently excluded along with other non-protein coding repetitive sequences during genome sequence assembly. here we report investigations of the atlantic cod genome data leading to our discovery that afgp coding sequences exist in neac_ <dig>  we provide experimental evidence as well as bioinformatics proofs from comparative genomic sequence analyses, which support the presence of an afgp gene family in atlantic cod. from examining in detail the published methodologies in the atlantic cod genome assembly and annotation process, we deduced the probable causes leading to the exclusion of this major genetic trait.

RESULTS
afgp gene family in atlantic cod
to experimentally verify the presence of the afgp genotype specifically in the north east arctic cod  and norwegian coastal cod , used for genome sequencing and bac library support respectively  <cit> , we performed southern blot analysis of genomic dna of multiple individuals from these two populations . these individuals were collected from several sites along the finnmark coast  and marginal barents sea. we identified them as neac or ncc based on the specimen’s pantophysin i  genotype, the accepted marker for distinguishing the two stocks  <cit> . the neac stock is homozygous  for the presence of an internal drai restriction site in its pani, while the ncc is homozygous for the absence , and heterozygous individuals  can be from either stock but more likely ncc  <cit> . all neac and ncc individuals we examined showed multiple strong afgp-hybridizing bands to an afgp coding sequence probe derived from the related, fully afgp-fortified polar cod boreogadus saida <cit> , similar to the hybridization in the three polar cod individuals included as positive controls . the repetitive coding sequence  of the afgp polyprotein precursor is encompassed in a single exon for known gadid afgp genes  <cit> ; this study], and does not contain recognition sequence sites for the restriction enzyme taqi used for the genomic dna digests. therefore, each hybridizing band  in the genomic southern blot represents one or more afgp genes, indicating that a family of afgp genes or highly similar sequences are present in the genome of both neac and ncc. furthermore, we constructed a partial genomic dna library for a g. morhua individual from outer Øresund, denmark, and isolated and characterized an afgp gene named gm1- <dig> . we also quantified the circulating afgps to be about 5 mg/ml in the blood serum of individuals from the Øresund population , supporting the presence of functional afgp genes in atlantic cod.

afgp locus in atlantic cod genome
we envisioned that afgp cds would still be in the raw genome data of the sequenced neac_ <dig>  thus we blast searched the raw assembly atlcod1a with gm1- <dig> afgp sequence as query. , with glycosylation  on the thr residues  <cit> . the alignment  shows that the partial afgp genes of neac_ <dig> encode the characteristic tandem tripeptide repeats of the afgp peptide backbone, as well as the conserved c-terminus sequence, aaavl*. the aligned nucleotide sequences between atlcod1a_afgp <dig> and gm1- <dig> are  <dig> % identical, thus the two are quite clearly counterparts of each other in neac_ <dig> and the Øresund individual. these high sequence identities indicate that at least some of the neac_ <dig> partial afgp genes we identified from the two altcod1a sequence scaffolds are intact/functional genes.

to determine the spatial relationship of the two afgp-containing atlcod1a scaffolds, we compared their sequences to the genomic afgp locus of the related polar cod b. saida currently being reconstructed from bac clone sequences in our laboratory. the two atlcod1a sequence scaffolds aligned with a ~200 kbp portion of our polar cod afgp locus assembly . the spatial alignment map of the two atlcod1a scaffolds with the polar cod afgp partial locus is shown in figure 2a, and the nucleotide alignments in the form of sequence identity plots using vista  <cit>  are shown in figure 2b, c for the two scaffolds respectively. the extensive conserved regions between the two cods included both afgp coding sequences and intergenic sequences, and they share high nucleotide identities , indicating they are microsyntenic regions. the microsynteny is further supported by two hypothetic protein coding genes  shared by the two species in the nearby upstream region to their respective afgp locus . we also identified a third afgp-containing scaffold, in the atlcod1b/celera assembly , which spans the gap between the two atlcod1a scaffolds, confirming they are collinear .

together, the results from the genomic southern blot  and comparative sequence analyses  clearly support an afgp genomic locus with intact genes is present in the sequenced neac_ <dig> 

possible cause of afgp exclusion from the annotated cod genome
through detailed examination of the assembly and annotation process described by star et al.  <cit>  in their supplementary notes, we deduced the possible cause of afgp exclusion in the annotated atlantic cod genome to be two-fold. the primary cause is the removal of repetitive sequences in the initial steps of the bioinformatics pipeline, and secondarily due to the use of genomes of non-afgp bearing model teleosts as reference for annotating protein gene content in atlantic cod.

afgp sequences are repetitive in the protein and highly repetitive in the encoding gene  <cit> . gadid afgps are encoded as a large polyprotein precursor containing multiple afgp molecules that are cleaved post-translationally at arg or lys residues that occasionally replace thr in the ala/pro-ala-thr tripeptide repeats, to produce the different afgp size isoforms . thus the afgp polyprotein coding sequence region, encompassed in a single large exon, consists of a long run of repetitive 9-nucleotide  sequences that resemble short tandem repeats . as illustration, the single coding exon of the atlantic cod afgp polyprotein in gm1- <dig> is ~ <dig>  3 kbp, and contains  <dig> three-codon  repeats encoding  <dig> tripeptide repeats. a tally of the codon usage  shows pronounced bias, resulting in a predominant 9-nt sequence of gc-gcc-ac, which will appear to assembler algorithms as a very long string of 9-nt strs. also because of the codon bias, this repeated 9-nt sequence can be further reduced into a 3-nt equivalent of the predominant sequence c , which will likely be regarded by assembly programs as trinucleotide simple sequence repeats . escalating the repetitiveness is that gadid afgp polyprotein genes have duplicated under selection from frigid marine conditions, forming multigene families  that would meet the demand for an abundance of the survival protein. the two atlcod1a sequence scaffolds alone contain seven afgp genes , and potentially more if additional genes exist within the gaps. this expectedly will result in a plethora of short repetitive afgp coding sequences in the deep-coverage raw roche  <dig> reads.

note: there are a total of  <dig> single codons from the  <dig> 9-nt  repeats in gm1- <dig> 

supplementary note  <dig> of star et al.  <cit>  indicated that before assembling the roche  <dig> reads, they “excluded highly repetitive, non-informative reads” from their data set. they stated that these included shotgun reads encompassing strs and ssrs, and sets of paired-end reads if one or both ends consist of strs or ssrs. this data reduction likely completely eliminated the str- or ssr-like afgp cds except for the 5′ and 3′ ends of the afgp coding exon immediately adjacent to non-repetitive upstream and downstream sequence , leading to gaps in the middle of afgp genes we identified in the two atlcod1a scaffolds . the str/ssr-culled read data were assembled using newbler and the celera assembler, generating atlcod1a and atlcod1b respectively . the newbler assembly atlcod1a was chosen for genome annotation. repeat masking was applied to atlcod1a using existing te  libraries and a de novo created custom library for cod,  resulting in the masking of  <dig> % of the assembly. the repeat-masked atlcod1a then underwent whole-genome structural alignment and re-ordering using the three-spined stickleback genome as reference followed by projection annotation supplementary note  <dig> of  <cit> . we compared the unmasked and repeat-masked version of atlcod1a, and found most of the afgp cds that survived the str/ssr culling  became masked , rendering the afgp genotype essentially non-existent prior to protein gene annotation. annotation was carried out by projecting protein-coding gene models from three-spined stickleback through the whole genome alignments onto the re-ordered cod genomic regions. additional protein-coding gene models from other teleost genomes  were mapped onto cod genome regions having no alignment with stickleback . none of these model teleosts require antifreeze protection in their temperate or tropical habitats and had not evolved the novel antifreeze genotype, thus, the exclusion of a major genetic trait in the assembled atlantic cod genome remained unrecognized.

gene-rich repetitive sequences
exclusion of the well-known prominent and important afgp trait in atlantic cod genome annotation brings to light that common assumptions of repetitive sequences as gene-less or gene-poor do not always apply. atlantic cod afgp genes are by no means a lone case of gene-rich repetitive sequences representing a major and/or novel trait. other prominent proteins composed of short repetitive sequences are present in a variety of organisms, including the convergently evolved afgps in the antarctic notothenioids  <cit> , other antifreeze proteins in fish  <cit> , insects  <cit>  and plants  <cit> , fibrous silk fibroins in spiders  <cit>  and moths  <cit> , amelogenin in primates  <cit> , human dentin sialophosphoprotein  <cit> , involucrin  <cit> , collagens  <cit> , and others. exclusion of the repetitive coding sequences of these prominent proteins from the genome assembly of the respective organism would be a major blunder. missing repetitive and duplicated sequences due to limitations in sequence assemblers has also resulted in omission of more subtle coding exons in human genomes despite the availability of a highly refined reference genome  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have “resurrected” some of the missing afgp genes from the atlantic cod raw genome assemblies, and reconstructed a partial genomic afgp locus for this species. while it is well appreciated that all genome assemblies have gaps of information due to bioinformatics limitations, missing a known and prominent fitness trait lends to confusion in the field. we therefore suggest that this biologically relevant trait be restored to the cod genome annotations. the gadid afgp trait is relevant not only to the biology and culturing potential of the cod species, but as an evolutionary innovation, has broad relevance in the pursuit of understanding molecular mechanisms of invention of new gene and function. for the ever expanding efforts at de novo assembly of new genomes, the case of the missing atlantic cod afgp genotype hopefully will promote vigilance in avoiding categorical assumptions that all repetitive sequences lack protein coding information. while we await improved algorithms for accurately assembling repetitive sequences, longer reads from traditional sequencing methods such as sanger still has its place and the painstaking approach of assembling repeat sequences with extensive manual inspection and validation is unavoidable. this approach has been successfully applied to assemble the ~400 kbp highly repetitive and polymorphic afgp genomic locus that convergently evolved in the antarctic notothenioid fish  <cit> . lastly, while projection annotation of de novo assembled genomes of new species using model genomes as reference certainly has great utility, novel traits might have evolved since the species diverged. thus an appreciation of the evolutionary history and major known biological traits of a new species targeted for genome sequencing is inevitably necessary.

