BACKGROUND
wolbachia and cardinium are intracellular bacteria infecting a wide range of arthropod species. they have been classified as reproductive parasites, being able to manipulate their host's reproductive system in order to promote their own transmission  <cit> . recently, beneficial effects of wolbachia have been identified as well, as wolbachia can protect hosts against virus infection  <cit> . cardinium may also exert beneficial effects  <cit>  and in many other cases the effect of wolbachia or cardinium is unknown. wolbachia is well studied and is widespread among arthropods and nematodes. it is estimated that around 66% of all insects are infected with wolbachia  <cit> . this diverse genus has been subdivided into  <dig> “supergroups”  on the basis of molecular phylogenetic analysis  <cit> . cardinium was more recently discovered and has so far been found in 6-7% of all arthropods, though seems to be more common in chelicerates than in insects  <cit> . wolbachia and cardinium have been found co-infecting the same host species  <cit> .

although wolbachia and cardinium are generally considered to be clonally inherited via vertical transmission, there is now a large body of molecular evidence for discordant phylogenies of host and endosymbiont  <cit> . distantly related wolbachia or cardinium strains can infect closely related host species, and closely related strains may infect distantly related host species. such patterns suggest horizontal transmission of bacteria  between hosts, although direct evidence for horizontal transmission is rare  <cit> .

horizontal transfer has been further supported by evidence for recombination  <cit> . for wolbachia, recombination has been found between genes  as well as within genes . intergenic recombination is evident from inconsistencies between gene trees  <cit> . intragenic recombination has been observed within the genes wsp, ftsz, and glta and within and between supergroups a and b  <cit> . recently, a genomic comparison of a-group wolbachia strains by klasson et al.  <cit>  showed highly recombining genomes, implying frequent horizontal gene transfer.

cardinium has been less well investigated: although there is some evidence for inconsistent phylogenies between cardinium and their hosts, which is compatible with horizontal transmission, only a few studies have been performed, mainly focusing on a single gene   <cit> , and there is currently no evidence regarding recombination in cardinium.

phylogenetic and evolutionary studies on wolbachia have mainly focused on samples representing a wide range of host species  <cit> . based on two genes, jiggins  <cit>  showed that among strains from a wide range of host species, the rate of recombination is similar to that of a horizontally transmitted bacterium . it remains however unclear to what extent these conclusions will be supported by the analyses of much more tightly defined samples such as those recovered from closely related host genera, or even from a single host species from a single geographical and temporal source. most current studies which address this have used only one or two genes or a restricted number of species or populations  <cit> . a study by baldo et al.  <cit>  included a more detailed study of the extent of recombination and horizontal transfer in a single spider genus and revealed that horizontal transfer explains a large part of the wolbachia distribution patterns within the genus. exact rates of recombination among wolbachia strains have however not been inferred so far, which makes it difficult to draw direct comparisons with rates found for other bacteria. recombination rates can be obtained from multilocus sequence data. strains that differ at only a single locus are grouped into clonal complexes. subsequently, the allele sequences are examined to determine whether single allelic variants within a clonal complex result from point mutation or homologous recombination  <cit> .

we present here a detailed study of the diversity of wolbachia and cardinium in the phytophagous spider mite family tetranychidae, by analyzing strains recovered from seven bryobia species, tetranychus urticae, and petrobia harti. we consider strain diversity between tetranychid host species, within single host species  and within single populations and individuals. both wolbachia and cardinium have been reported from this family. wolbachia has been detected in at least six asexual and one sexual bryobia species and strains from both supergroup b and k have been found  <cit> . supergroup k is a new supergroup that has only been detected in bryobia so far  <cit> . we investigate intra- and intergenic recombination in wolbachia  and cardinium , and quantify the rate of recombination relative to mutation for wolbachia, by analyzing the variation between pairs of very closely related strains. we compare this endosymbiont diversity to the degree of host congruence , host mitochondrial dna diversity, and geographical distribution.

RESULTS
we included wolbachia strains from seven bryobia species  and t. urticae, and cardinium strains from b. rubrioculus, b. sarothamni, t. urticae, and p. harti   <cit> . we were unable to reliably determine the infection status of the other bryobia host species  due to the lack of adequate material and/or inconsistent amplification of the bacterial genes, therefore these species were excluded from further analyses. the dataset includes strains from sexually  and asexually  reproducing species.

multiple infections
wolbachia and cardinium were found co-infecting b. rubrioculus, b. sarothamni, and t. urticae. in b. rubrioculus and b. sarothamni, wolbachia and cardinium strains were obtained from doubly infected individuals, whereas in t. urticae they were obtained from singly infected individuals . multiple wolbachia strains infecting a single host individual were not detected, and neither were multiple cardinium strains. sequence chromatograms revealed no double peaks and cloning and sequencing of eleven pcr products did not reveal multiple infections.

wolbachia diversity
sequences from the four wolbachia genes  were recovered for  <dig> wolbachia infected individuals, except for wsp from b. spec. v . the wolbachia strain infecting b. spec. v belongs to the newly described supergroup k  <cit> , which is highly divergent from supergroup b strains infecting other tetranychid mites. we excluded the supergroup k strain from phylogenetic and recombination analyses. no insertions or deletions were found within ftsz, groel, and trmd. within wsp small indels  were found in a few strains but all sequences could be unambiguously aligned.

the sequenced wolbachia strains reveal a high diversity. from the  <dig> wolbachia strains ,  <dig> strains  were found unique . between  <dig>  and  <dig>  alleles were found per locus . nucleotide diversity was 5- <dig> times higher for wsp than for the other loci . the dn/ds ratio was <  <dig> for all loci, indicating that the genes where not subjected to positive selection. the wsp gene also revealed a high rate of intragenic recombination , with two sites identified within hyper variable region  <dig>  under positive selection . despite this high nucleotide diversity and recombination rate for wsp, we found the most alleles for trmd.

π = nucleotide diversity

forty-four out of the  <dig> strains were grouped into five clonal complexes . all other strains differed at more than one locus from the strains in these complexes. a total of  <dig> alleles deviated from the alleles from the founding genotypes within the clonal complexes . a significant higher number of these variant alleles were found for trmd compared to the other loci , which is consistent with the observation that this locus contains the most alleles.

a allelic variants within each clonal complex are depicted, listed per sequence type . likely recombinational changes are depicted in plain text, and putative mutations are shown in bold. disputable cases are highlighted in italics . for each allelic variant the allele number is given, with in superscript the number of polymorphic sites between the allelic variant and the typical allele of the clonal group. * indicates non-unique mutations .

b host species name in which each st was detected is indicated .

c the frequency of each sequence type is listed.

recombination between wolbachia strains
we investigated intergenic recombination by analysis of allelic variation within the clonal complexes. this approach reveals whether variant alleles arose by point mutation or by recombination. of the  <dig> variant alleles, four differed from the typical allele in the clonal complex by a single nucleotide change . three of these single nucleotide changes, however, were non-unique. two other alleles differed by two nucleotide changes, and could be either derived by point mutations or recombination . one of these variant alleles was found elsewhere in the dataset, implicating recombination. all other allelic variants differed from the founder alleles at four or more sites and were considered as putative recombinational imports. ignoring alleles with one non-unique and two nucleotide changes, the estimated ratio of recombinational events to mutational events per gene fragment is 11: <dig>  if we include non-unique changes as recombinational imports, and unique changes as point mutations, the ratio is 15: <dig>  we therefore conclude that new alleles were  <dig>  to  <dig> times more likely to be generated by recombination than by point mutation. this is a conservative estimate because single nucleotide changes were attributed to point mutation and not to recombination, although recombination between similar alleles could result in a single nucleotide change. further, a high rate of recombination is consistent with the observed incongruence between the four gene tree topologies .

intragenic recombination is another process that may contribute to the origin of new wolbachia genotypes. we detected intragenic recombination within the trmd and wsp genes . the alignment of wsp genes shows that the polymorphic sites are not randomly distributed, but clearly shows a mosaic pattern consistent with recombination. intragenic recombination is not restricted to wolbachia strains from the same host species, but also involves strains infecting different host species. for example, the wsp sequence obtained from wolbachia in b. sarothamni  is a recombinant between the wsp sequences obtained from wolbachia in b. kissophila  and t. urticae  .

cospeciation of wolbachia and host species
examination of the concatenated wolbachia phylogeny reveals that there is generally a lack of cospeciation between host and parasite . wolbachia strains obtained from a single host species do not clearly cluster. for example, strains from b. rubrioculus are found at different places in the phylogeny. the same is true for strains from b. spec. i. on the other hand, the wolbachia phylogeny is not completely random with respect to host species. some wolbachia strains from b. kissophila cluster together, whilst others cluster with strains from b. spec i  or b. rubrioculus . two b. kissophila-derived strains  are very divergent from all other b. kissophila strains. in the exceptional case of b. sarothamni, the same wolbachia genotype was found in all five populations . this strain was not found in any of the other species, although it closely resembles the wolbachia strain infecting b. berlesei at three of the four genes . bryobia sarothamni and b. berlesei share the same host plant species, cytisus scoparius, which potentially facilitates horizontal transmission of both wolbachia strains and genes.

finally, a single b. praetiosa individual was investigated. although this species was found to harbor a unique wolbachia strain, this strain shares each of its alleles with strains in  other host species. although allelic identity by descent cannot be ruled out without more detailed analysis, this observation is also consistent with frequent inter-allele recombination. within the other species, divergent wolbachia strains were found between populations and also within populations . in five b. rubrioculus mite populations, six divergent wolbachia strains were found: population pl <dig> contains two divergent wolbachia strains. for b. spec. i three wolbachia strains were detected in two populations: two individuals from bel <dig> harbor highly divergent wolbachia strains .

correlation between wolbachia and host mitochondrial diversity or geographical location
it has been suggested that infection by wolbachia affects host mitochondrial diversity and that mitochondrial haplotypes and wolbachia haplotypes may be linked  <cit> . as this has serious implications for population studies based on mtdna  <cit> , we were motivated to examine this possibility for b. kissophila. high levels of diversity at the mitochondrial coi locus were observed within b. kissophila, which resolved into four clades   <cit> . however, there was little evidence for correlation between the coi haplotypes and the wolbachia strains . a total of  <dig> populations were investigated for b. kissophila, and a highly divergent set of wolbachia strains was found within this species. twenty-one wolbachia strains were found, four of which were shared between populations. within several populations  more than one wolbachia strain was detected.

bryobia kissophila coi clade a was highly divergent from all other coi clades, and contains wolbachia strains that are divergent from the ones found in the other clades. however, the two investigated populations belonging to clade a  harbor divergent wolbachia strains. also, some alleles of these strains are shared with other b. kissophila clades  or with other bryobia species  . wolbachia strains from clade b, c, and d show a mixture of different wolbachia strains. there is no correlation with coi haplotype, although there are no strains shared among populations belonging to different coi clades.

there is a similar lack of congruence between wolbachia strain diversity and geographic location of the host populations. very distant populations may harbor identical wolbachia strains , while nearby populations harbor very divergent wolbachia strains . also within populations divergent strains are found.

cardinium diversity
cardinium diversity was investigated by sequencing part of the 16s rdna and gyrb gene. sequences were successfully recovered from all cardinium infected individuals and all sequences could be unambiguously aligned. no insertions or deletions were found within gyrb. within 16s rdna, one insertion and one deletion  were found. for 16s rdna six alleles were found, with  <dig> % variable sites, a maximum p-distance of  <dig> %, and a nucleotide diversity of  <dig>  . diversity for gyrb was much higher, with eight alleles,  <dig> % variable sites, a maximum p-distance of  <dig> %, and a nucleotide diversity of  <dig> .

in total, eight strains were detected within eight populations, belonging to four mite species, and phylogenetic analysis resolved these eight stains into two major clades . the cardinium strain found in p. harti  is divergent from two other clades , which were detected in b. sarothamni and b. rubrioculus , and in t. urticae . these two clades are highly supported. clade i and ii differed at  <dig> % of nucleotide sites for 16s rdna and at  <dig> % for gyrb, while differences within clades are small . generally, there is congruence between the phylogenies obtained for 16s rdna and gyrb which suggests less recombination than in wolbachia, although the evidence is equivocal. however, there is no obvious association between cardinium genotype and host species. clade i contains strains found in three b. rubrioculus populations and in one t. urticae and one b. sarothamni population, while clade ii contains highly related strains found in two b. sarothamni populations and one b. rubrioculus population. one strain was found infecting two host species: b. rubrioculus  and b. sarothamni . other strains belonging to b. sarothamni population fr <dig> group within clade ii . these patterns imply horizontal transfer of strains  between and within host species.

discussion
this detailed study of reproductive parasites in nine tetranychid mite species reveals a high genetic diversity. wolbachia strains belonging to two highly divergent supergroups  were detected . the diversity within supergroup b was high, with  <dig> unique strains found in  <dig> investigated individuals. the level of recombination detected is extremely high, supporting the mosaic genome structure of wolbachia  <cit> . cardinium was less frequently found in the mites than wolbachia, but also showed a high level of diversity, with eight unique strains detected in  <dig> individuals on the basis of only two genes.

wolbachia diversity
we investigated wolbachia diversity at a fine scale with respect to host diversity, by comparing strains from nine closely related host species, all belonging to the family tetranychidae, and mainly from the genus bryobia. our study shows that even within a single host genus there exists a high level of wolbachia diversity. wolbachia strains belonging to two highly divergent supergroups  were detected. even within wolbachia supergroup b,  <dig> unique sts were obtained from  <dig> infected hosts. although there was little correlation between host species and wolbachia strains, strains were not distributed randomly among different species , so that a certain level of specificity was observed. strains within clonal complex i were restricted to b. kissophila and within clonal complex v to b. sarothamni. other complexes however contain strains from different host species. it is striking that many alleles are shared among the different sts, even from different host species, indicating that recombination contributes substantially to the genetic diversity of wolbachia. recombination is further evidenced by the many phylogenetic conflicts observed among the individual gene trees and a high recombination rate compared to mutation rate. analysis of the variant alleles in the clonal complexes reveals that the rate of recombination compared to point mutation in the diversification of lineages ranges between  <dig> : <dig> and 11: <dig> 

the observed recombination rate and diversity is much higher than what would be expected for clonal organisms. recombination is rare in other clonally inherited, obligate intracellular bacteria  <cit> . the high recombination rate we found is comparable to rates of horizontally transmitted human pathogens. for example, for streptococcus pneumoniae a recombination to mutation ratio of 10: <dig> was found, for neisseria meningitidis a ratio of 5: <dig>  <cit> . horizontal transmission of wolbachia has been observed, but examples are rare  <cit> . although many studies based on molecular data have suggested extensive horizontal gene transfer of wolbachia  <cit> , it is unclear if bacteria are transmitted horizontally, or if the transfer concerns single genes, possibly via bacteriophages  <cit> . the high rate of recombination found in this study, the observation that individual alleles are shared among wolbachia strains from different host species but complete sts are not, and the fact that wolbachia is mainly clonally inherited, suggest that individual genes rather than complete bacteria are exchanged. alternatively, transfer of bacteria leading to mixed infections and subsequent recombination may explain these observations. although our cloning data suggest that mixed infections are rare, this possibility cannot be excluded . the observation that the trees are not completely random with respect to host species suggests that vertical transmission does occur  <cit> .

homologous recombination in bacteria can occur by transformation, conjugation, or transduction. conjugation and transformation require physical contact, or close proximity, of donor dna and recipient bacteria. ecological circumstances may create opportunities for recombination, e.g., wolbachia strains from b. sarothamni and b. berlesei share three of the four alleles, and their mite hosts feed on the same host plant species . other ecological interactions have been suggested as means for bacteria or gene exchange, e.g., host-parasite interactions or double wolbachia infections  <cit> . however, in many other cases, opportunities for recombination are less obvious. transduction involving vectors  is a more likely manner of gene exchange. good vector candidates are bacteriophages, as these have been isolated from wolbachia infected populations  <cit>  and seem to be common in wolbachia genomes  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses suggest that the bacteriophage wo is horizontally transferred between different wolbachia strains, and is able to infect new wolbachia hosts  <cit> . other, free-living, bacteria might even be involved in phage-transfer. we also noted the presence of a bacteriophage in an individual of b. spec. i. the bacteriophage sequence, detected coincidentally with groel primers, appeared similar to the sequence of the wolbachia bacteriophage wocaub <dig> from cadra cautella   <cit> , and to part of the sequenced genome  of wolbachia from drosophila melanogaster .

with strict vertical transmission, strong linkage disequilibrium between host mtdna and wolbachia would be expected. however, recombination may uncouple such associations, and could be a reason for the observed lack of congruence between host mtdna and wolbachia sts. there are some signs of congruence, with related host strains  sharing identical or closely related wolbachia strains, but due to the high rate of recombination such associations are broken up rather quickly.

cardinium diversity
for cardinium, the two investigated genes showed highly similar phylogenies, giving no clear evidence for intergenic recombination. also, no signs of intragenic recombination were found. there was however no congruence between cardinium strains and associated host species: similar strains were found in b. rubrioculus, b. sarothamni, and t. urticae. only the strain infecting p. harti was clearly distinct from all other strains. the sharing of strains among different host species, and the occurrence of divergent strains in one host population , suggest that horizontal transmission is also prevalent for cardinium. horizontal transmission seemed also to explain diversity patterns found for cardinium infecting cybaeus spiders  <cit> . patterns of recombination and horizontal transfer should however be further studied including more genes. an mlst set for cardinium is desirable, for reliable strain typing and for investigating patterns of recombination, horizontal transmission, or host manipulation. this requires the use of several independent markers, sufficiently distant from each other within the genome.

phenotypic effects of wolbachia and cardinium in spider mites
we analyzed wolbachia and cardinium strains from both asexual and sexual host species. weeks and breeuwer  <cit>  showed that wolbachia is involved in causing asexuality in at least two species: b. praetiosa and an unidentified species. wolbachia is possibly causing asexuality in the other infected asexual bryobia species as well. the general observation is that all individuals within the asexual bryobia species are infected with wolbachia. no males have ever been observed, neither in cultures nor in the field, and additional lab experiments including at least  <dig> individuals per species  show a fixed infection with wolbachia . moreover, weeks and breeuwer  <cit>  analyzed  <dig> b. kissophila,  <dig> b. praetiosa, and  <dig> b. rubrioculus individuals and found all individuals infected with wolbachia. we detected cardinium in one asexual species, b. rubrioculus. this species is doubly infected with both wolbachia and cardinium, although cardinium was not found in all individuals. it is unclear if cardinium is having an effect on the host species, but it is unlikely that it induces the asexuality as not all individuals are infected. we detected both wolbachia and cardinium in the sexually reproducing species b. sarothamni and t. urticae. both species appear polymorphic for infection with both bacteria. cardinium induces strong ci in b. sarothamni, while no effect for wolbachia has been found so far  <cit> . previously, wolbachia was found inducing ci in t. urticae  <cit> , but no effect of cardinium on t. urticae was found so far  <cit> . we detected only cardinium in p. harti, but weeks et al.  <cit>  also report wolbachia from p. harti. the effects of both wolbachia and cardinium in p. harti, and t. urticae require further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
we found a relatively high rate of recombination for wolbachia strains obtained from host species of the family tetranychidae. considering the fact that wolbachia is widely distributed among arthropods, we investigated strains from a restrictive host range. it remains to be investigated if our findings present a general pattern and if similar recombination rates will be found among strains from other restricted host ranges. our study of diversity within cardinium revealed incongruencies among host and bacterial phylogenies, confirming earlier findings. analysis of additional genes is needed to investigate recombination rates within this reproductive parasite.

