BACKGROUND
most common methods for protein bioconjugation rely on the reaction of amines to activated esters or thiol groups to maleimides. the limited control over the specificity of these reactions results in heterogeneous protein conjugates and frequently gives rise to protein inactivation. a variety of bio-orthogonal ligation methods that were originally developed in peptide chemistry have recently been applied to allow for controlled protein conjugation. native chemical ligation  is a chemoselective reaction of a c-terminal thioester with an n-terminal cysteine to yield a native peptide bond under aqueous conditions. this method was originally developed by dawson et al. in  <dig>  <cit>  to allow the chemical synthesis of proteins from smaller peptide fragments obtained by solid phase peptide synthesis  <cit> . the development of expression systems that use self-cleavable intein domains to generate recombinant proteins with a c-terminal thioester  <cit>  resulted in a further extension of the possibilities for ncl. ncl has enabled the conjugation of recombinant proteins to spectroscopic labels, dendrimers, liposomes and micelles, as well as the site-specific immobilization of proteins to surfaces and the facile incorporation of unnatural amino acids  <cit> . furthermore, posttranslational modifications that are inaccessible using standard e. coli expression systems can be introduced in recombinant proteins using ncl  <cit> .

the c-terminal thioester that is required for ncl is easily obtained using the impact™ system  <cit> , which allows expression of the protein of interest as a fusion protein with a c-terminal intein domain followed by a chitin binding domain . purification of the fusion protein using chitin affinity chromatography is typically followed by the addition of a small nucleophilic thiol, mercaptoethane sulphonic acid . mesna enables the cleavage of the target protein catalyzed by the intein domain, resulting in the production of a stable c-terminal thioester of the target protein. however, due to the reducing environment of the e. coli cytoplasm, disulfide bridges of recombinantly produced proteins are often not correctly formed. refolding strategies for proteins with disulfide bonds typically use a glutathione redox buffer to assist in the refolding process  <cit> . we observed that incubation of proteins with a c-terminal mesna – thioester with glutathione results in the formation of an unstable c-terminal glutathione-thioester, followed by hydrolysis to a carboxyl group.

since the refolding procedure that is required to obtain disulfide containing proteins in their native state can lead to loss of the thioester functionality, ncl is typically performed directly on the immobilized fusion protein to yield a stable amide bond, followed by refolding in redox buffer systems  <cit> . however, this method does not allow precise control of important ligation conditions such as reaction stoichiometry and it cannot be used to generate stable thioester proteins for subsequent conjugation to cysteine-functionalized surfaces. the alternative to perform protein refolding after ligation of the unfolded protein to a surface is less attractive, since most protein folding procedures yield substantial amount of misfolded proteins that are then also attached to the surface or nanoparticle.

here we report the development of a new redox buffer based on mesna and its oxidized disulfide  <dig> -dithiobis  that shows a refolding efficiency that is comparable to that of the glutathione redox couple. using ribonuclease a as model protein we show that inclusion of dimesna during intein-mediated cleavage results in simultaneous on column refolding and thioester formation, providing a novel method for the production of correctly folded, disulfide-bridge containing proteins with a c-terminal thioester suitable for native chemical ligation.

RESULTS
novel mesna/dimesna redox couple
the glutathione redox couple is the most common redox couple used to assist in protein refolding. to investigate the stability of protein thioesters in a glutathione redox buffer, green fluorescent protein  with c-terminal mesna thioester was used as a test protein and incubated for  <dig> hours in glutathione refolding buffer. esi-ms analysis showed significant transthioesterification and subsequent hydrolysis of the glutathione thioester . to avoid the problem of transthioesterification with components of the redox buffer present in refolding buffers, we developed a mesna-based redox buffer by synthesizing the oxidized, disulfide form of mesna,  <dig> -dithiobis    <cit> . figure 1b shows that gfp-mesna is stable in a mesna-based redox buffer. a small peak corresponding to hydrolyzed gfp was observed after  <dig> h incubation at rt, but the amount of hydrolysis is significantly reduced compared to the incubation with glutathione redox buffer. the efficiency of the mesna/dimesna redox couple in protein refolding was tested using bovine pancreatic ribonuclease a . rnase a is a small protein of  <dig> amino acids that contains  <dig> disulfide bridges  <cit>  and has been extensively used as a model to study the effects of disulfide bonds on protein refolding. commercially available rnase a, purified by hplc was unfolded in a  <dig> m guanidinium hydrochloride  denaturating buffer using trisphosphine  as reducing agent. refolding was achieved by dilution of the unfolded rnase a in 3/ <dig> mm mesna/dimesna containing refolding buffer. to compare this refolding buffer with conventional refolding conditions, refolding was also performed in a refolding buffer containing 3/ <dig> mm gsh/gssg. refolding efficiencies were calculated based on an activity assay using the fluorescent 6-fam-darudada-6-tamra substrate for rnase  <cit> . kinetic measurements of the increase in fam emission at  <dig> nm upon substrate cleavage by rnase a were performed. a linear fit to the initial  <dig> seconds of each activity assay yielded the enzyme's initial velocity. a calibration curve using known concentrations of commercial rnase a was used to determine the concentration of enzymatically active rnase a after refolding and thus the refolding efficiency . using this activity assay, refolding efficiencies of  <dig> ± 5% for the mesna couple compared to  <dig> ± 5% of the glutathione couple after  <dig> hours of refolding were determined. these results show that the mesna/dimesna redox couple is a suitable alternative redox buffer for the refolding of rnase a .

on-column refolding
we next tested whether protein refolding and mesna-induced cleavage of immobilized rnase a-intein-cbd could be performed simultaneously . raines and coworkers previously reported the expression of an rnase a-intein-cbd fusion protein in e. coli  <cit> . because of the reducing environment of the e. coli cytoplasm, the rnase a domain was not correctly folded and inactive, but the fusion to the intein-cbd prevented its aggregation. the soluble fraction obtained after cell lysis that contained the rnase a-intein-cbd fusion protein was loaded onto a chitin column and washed to remove contaminating e. coli proteins. while keeping the ratio between mesna and dimesna constant at 3: <dig> , three different concentrations of mesna/dimesna were tested, 3/ <dig> mm, 30/ <dig> mm and 75/ <dig> mm. the highest rnase a activity was obtained with  <dig> mm mesna and  <dig> mm dimesna, which probably represents a compromise between thiol-induced cleavage, which is optimal at high concentrations, and the efficiency of refolding, which is optimal at low mm concentrations. as expected, incubation with only reduced mesna  yielded no active rnase a .

conjugation to cys-peg-dspe
using this protocol of simultaneous column purification, refolding and thioester generation we routinely obtained  <dig>  mg of active rnase a-mesna per l of e. coli expression medium. to proof that the rnase a-mesna was indeed active in ncl reactions we tested its reactivity with cysteine-functionalized pegylated phospholipids . cys-peg-dspe can be used to conjugate proteins in a controlled way to either form liposomes or micelles  <cit> . overnight incubation of rnase a – mesna with cys-peg-dspe in a ph  <dig>  hepes buffered saline  and  <dig> mm 4-mercaptophenylacetic-acid  as a catalyst resulted in a ligation yield of ~50% as estimated from the intensities of the bands of the sds-page gel. moreover the absence of the reducing agent tcep in the ligation reaction showed no negative effect on the ligation yield . these results show that the use of ncl to obtain well-defined protein liposomes and other cysteine-functionalized nanoparticles, can now be extended to disulfide containing protein domains.

CONCLUSIONS
a novel procedure was developed that allows simultaneous purification, refolding and generation of a c-terminal thioester in recombinant proteins that contain disulfide bonds. the mesna/dimesna redox couple was shown to have a refolding efficiency that is comparable to that of the commonly used glutathione redox couple. the compatibility of the mesna/dimesna redox couple with the chitin column purification procedure for proteins with a c-terminal thioester was shown, resulting in on-column refolding simultaneously with cleavage of the protein from the intein domain and c-terminal thioester generation. this strategy should be generally applicable to generate disulfide-bond containing proteins with functional c-terminal thioesters for subsequent native chemical ligation.

