BACKGROUND
spatial patchiness of forage often results in uneven livestock grazing, with potential implications for patterns of forage intake, resource degradation, and plant community composition and invasibility  <cit> . grazing concentrated in patches of preferred forage can lead to patch degradation over time. improved grazing uniformity and the prevention of heavy, uneven grazing in patches of preferred forage is a primary goal of sound grazing management  <cit> . however, a better understanding of the mechanisms governing forage preference and selectivity in patchy, heterogeneous environments is needed to inform new management approaches that enhance grazing distribution at spatial sales ranging from bites to patches  <cit> .

preference and selectivity are related but different terms that describe patterns of forage selection. preferences are traditionally determined by offering equally accessible amounts of alternative forage and comparing forage intake. thus, preference is a term that describes the individual's forage intake in the absence of any constraints on availability or accessibility  <cit> . selectivity, on the other hand, is a measure of forage intake under patchy, heterogeneous conditions where alternative forages are not equally available or uniformly distributed  <cit> . in this context, selection of preferred forage can often be constrained by environmental and physiological trade-offs  <cit> . thus, depending on the trade-offs involved, selectivity will not necessarily coincide with preference.

grazing ungulates exhibit complex patterns of selectivity in heterogeneous environments with several forage species  <cit> . selectivity patterns often agree with the intake rate-maximization hypothesis  <cit> , which predicts both a matching of patch selection and intake rate  <cit> , and behavioral strategies to overcome the constraints impose by spatial heterogeneity on preferences  <cit> . according to this hypothesis, energy, protein, minerals and food mass are some of the foraging currencies. patch residence time, travel speed, and search patterns are some of the decision variables and mechanisms by which animals achieve a certain foraging success  <cit> . foraging theory predicts that selectivity increases with increasing difference in profitability  among options. when patch encounter rate declines, selectivity is also expected to decline.  <cit> .

theoretical models  <cit>  suggest emerging selectivity patterns from behaviors that operate across several nested foraging scales. selectivity can occur at the scale of a bite, feeding station, patch, or feeding site  <cit>  depending on how behaviors with regard to bite formation  and movements between successive bite locations , feeding stations , and patches  take place. this nested nature of foraging suggests that selectivity could result from differential behaviors at separate feeding scales and may accumulate with the continuation of foraging events across feeding scales  <cit> .

spatial heterogeneity in the quantity and quality of food and forage depletion are major determinants of foraging behaviors across these scales  <cit> . structural characteristics of single plants within a patch can affect the functional response of instantaneous intake rate through effects on bite mass and handling time  <cit> . increased rates of forage depletion will tend to decrease residence times in patches  <cit> . patch size relative to animals  <cit>  and distances between patches  <cit>  can also affect grazing patterns within and between patches through effects on patch selection and through rewards and costs of grazing at the current patch  <cit> . thus, patchiness across a foraging landscape can force herbivores to trade-off preference and diminishing rewards at a current patch undergoing depletion against the travel cost of searching for a new undepleted patch  <cit> . selectivity of preferred forage should decrease when rewards relative to travel distance decrease as patches are spaced further apart  <cit> . average intake rates should decline with increasing distance between patches, whereas time spent foraging and the number of bites per patch should correlate positively with the size of patches and the distance between them  <cit> . if patch size and distance are important determinants of foraging patterns, changes in their size and spacing should have predictable effects on selectivity of grazing livestock.

the goal of this study was to quantify the effects of spatial patchiness and scale of foraging on ingestive behavior and selectivity of cattle. following charnov's  <cit>  marginal value theorem, we hypothesized that cows adopt a foraging strategy that maximizes intake rate, however, selectivity for preferred species will be constrained by the spatial heterogeneity of forage. the following associated predictions were tested: 1) grazers prefer the forage species that yields higher intake rates, 2) selectivity for preferred species increases with increasing patch size but decreases with increasing distance between patches, 3) selectivity for preferred species increases as more feeding events are integrated across feeding scales, 4) average dry matter intake rate decreases as distance between patches increases, and 5) patch residence time increases with patch size and as distance between patches increases.

RESULTS
tall fescue plants were shorter and had more mass per pot than alfalfa plants . tall fescue herbage had lower ivdmd%, higher cp%, higher dm% and higher ndf% than alfalfa . both species sustained similar biting rates, but alfalfa plants yielded larger bites and greater intake rates . based on differences in ndf%, it was estimated that alfalfa plants provided a potential digestible daily intake 56% higher than fescue .

1ns: not significant.

cows showed a significant preference  and selectivity  for alfalfa. as expected, preferences were constrained under the  <dig> treatments, resulting in a lower selectivity index compared to preference . patch size and distance between patches did not affect either partial or cumulative selectivity. when examining selectivity along separate steps of the grazing process, significant partial selectivity occurred, but only at the bite scale due to differences in bite mass between plant species. partial selectivity was also observed at the feeding station scale . when integrating behaviors along the grazing process, cumulative selectivity increased from patch encounters to total intake, but became significant only when bite formation and mass were included as final steps in the grazing process .

partial or cumulative selectivity indexes with different superscript are significantly different according to duncan test. n =  <dig> 

average intake rate declined linearly whereas travel time, speed, and proportion of total herbage consumed increased linearly with linear increases in the distance between patches . no patch size effects or interactions between patch size and distance were observed.

at the patch level, cows had similar behavioral responses to patch size and distance between patches in both alfalfa and fescue patches . no interaction between factors was detected. we observed positive linear effects of patch size on dry matter intake, number of bites, and residence time per patch for both species. as patch size increased, cows increased the number of feeding stations visited per patch, but not the number of bites taken per feeding station . roughly  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> feeding stations per patch were observed for small, medium, and large patches, respectively . the number of bites per feeding station ranged from 5– <dig> regardless of patch size or species . when cows foraged on small and large patches of alfalfa, they cropped heavier bites and achieved higher intake rates compared to medium patches. when cows foraged on fescue patches, bite weight and intake rate were not affected by patch size.

there were no significant interactions between patch sizes and distances between patches.

main effect least square means with different superscript are significantly different according to lsd  <dig> . there were no significant interactions between patch sizes and distances 

the number of bites and residence times in alfalfa and fescue patches increased linearly as distance between patches increased. a similar but weaker trend was detected in dry matter intake . with an increase in distance from 1– <dig> m, bites and residence time increased by 23% in alfalfa patches, while bites, residence time, and intake increased by 52%, 44%, and 45%, respectively, in fescue patches . as distance increased, cows tended to visit more feeding stations per patch and take more bites per feeding station in fescue, but not alfalfa, patches . though not statistically significant, bite weight and intake rate decreased 4–5% in alfalfa, and 3–9% in fescue patches as distances increased from 1– <dig> m . biting rates within alfalfa and fescue patches were not significantly affected by distance between patches, but biting rate in alfalfa tended to increase linearly as patch size increased .

discussion
foraging behavior and intake maximization
in agreement with expectations, cows exhibited preference and selectivity for alfalfa, the species associated with higher forage quality, heavier bite weights and greater intake rate and potential daily forage intake . however, contrary to prediction  <dig>  selectivity was not significantly influenced by differences in patch size or distance. as expected, selectivity was dependent on scale-specific behaviors and tended to increase with the integration of behaviors across foraging scales . average dry matter intake rate decreased as distance between patches increased , whereas patch residence times increased with increasing size and distance between patches . overall, our findings support the conclusion that when confronted with heterogeneous, patchy environments of contrasting plant species, cows grazed in a manner consistent with the "intake rate-maximization" hypothesis in two ways. first, over the integration of foraging scales, cows selected the preferred species that yielded higher intake rates. second, in response to travel time constraints, cows were able to modify behaviors within and between patches to compensate for decreases in average intake rate.

we attempted to expose cows to a clear trade-off between quantity and quality whereby more restrictive foraging conditions  would motivate lower selectivity for the preferred forage in order to achieve maximum daily intake or instantaneous intake rate  <cit> . the trade-off obtained did not affect selectivity, with the exception that preference for alfalfa was much greater than selectivity. however, the fact that selectivity in all of the patchy environments was much lower than the preference for alfalfa indicates that greater restrictions to intake can reduce selectivity. contrary to studies where spatial scale of patchiness readily affected selectivity patterns of herbivores  <cit> , lack of response in this study may be influenced by our experimental design. forcing cows to graze in a linear path along an alley where encounters with plant species are strictly sequential may limit the ability of cows to orient their grazing paths toward preferred patches.

in this study, cows exhibited three mechanisms that adjust intake rate and foraging efficiency in response to changes in a patchy food environment. first, cows selected more alfalfa over fescue when patches were arranged side-by-side  than when arranged sequentially in monospecific patches . second, patch residence time and depletion  <cit>  increased with increasing distance between patches  <cit> . third, travel speed between patches also increased with increasing distance between patches, a compensatory response related to the period of acceleration and deceleration associated with each patch  <cit> .

patch depletion and residence time
the greater increase in patch residence times with increasing distance between patches in fescue compared to alfalfa patches reflects the predominant role of sward structure and is also consistent with a strategy linearly related to maximization of intake rate. tall sparse swards exhibit faster depression of within-patch intake rate with increasing patch depletion than short dense ones, with important implications for patch time residence  <cit> . foragers maximizing intake rate should respond to an increase of travel time between patches by increasing residence time more in patches with slow  than in patches with rapid depression .

as patch size increased , the number of feeding stations per patch increased in direct proportion  whereas bites per feeding station and bite weight were not significantly different, with the exception that bite weight was smaller in medium than in small alfalfa patches. this suggests that patches were essentially depleted in a systematic manner by horizons and provides an experimental basis for scaling up patch depression curves in models of grazing behavior in heterogeneous environments with variable patch sizes  <cit> .

foraging scales
selectivity for alfalfa was a scale-dependent process that emphasized the bite formation level. grazing is a nested process where forage selection emerges from various behaviors at several feeding scales  <cit> . selectivity can increase as temporal and spatial scales expand  <cit> . in this study, cows exhibited partial selectivity for alfalfa by visiting more feeding stations per patch of alfalfa compared to fescue, but mostly by obtaining larger bites from alfalfa . whether or not these components of selectivity are best interpreted as a result of structural constraints of plants on bite formation or as true changes in feeding motivation is debatable. bite weight seems to be more sensitive to the structural effects of local sward attributes, while behaviors at higher levels in the hierarchy  are more dependent on changes in feeding motivation driven by integrated responses to large scale biotic and abiotic heterogeneity  <cit> . this nested nature of grazing suggests the need to further refine quantitative approaches to better understand the influence of plant structural and animal volitional factors likely to result in patterns of grazing selectivity. this study suggests that at least within the range of bites to patches, selective behaviors are likely to accumulate across scales.

CONCLUSIONS
manipulation of foraging selectivity of livestock is a key to managing their impact on the landscape, but it is difficult. whether in pastures or rangelands, major problems often result from uneven grazing and its effects on plant demography, competition and community structure. traditional grazing management schemes are not based on a mechanistic understanding of the grazing process, and therefore, have not evolved to keep up with the changing needs of ecosystem management.

selectivity can increase as more behavioral steps and spatial levels are involved. therefore, total selectivity and relative impact on a preferred patch type or plant species can be reduced by limiting the numbers of levels available for selection. this can be achieved by reducing the available area and or time for grazing. the effect of reduced levels of selectivity can complement the traditional method to obtain even grazing of all patches by forcing animals to deplete available forage.

differential defoliation of plant species is strongly linked to the effects of plant architecture on bite weight. these effects seem to be "hard wired" and show little susceptibility to manipulation of foraging behavior. other things being equal, taller plants yield larger bites and are defoliated more severely. this work provides a better understanding and quantification of components and mechanisms of cattle selectivity in heterogeneous environments that can support the development of novel grazing management methods.

