BACKGROUND
genome-wide analyses of multiple organisms in a variety of experimental biological systems are powerful tools employed in biomedical research. however, microarray platforms for numerous species, particularly large mammals, have yet to be fully developed. large mammals, often preferred species for modeling of various pathophysiological conditions and environmental responses, demonstrate better concordance to humans with regard to toxicological effects compared to small animal models   <cit> . further, large animal models are indispensable in disease modeling that requires longer live span  <cit> , in organ transplant research  <cit> , and in studies where multiple samples are required to be collected  <cit> . for organ- and system-specific applications, such as the respiratory system, canine and ovine lungs are physiologically and hemodynamically more closely related to human lungs than rodent lungs and allow regional evaluation of air, blood, and exudate distribution. thus, canine  <cit>  and ovine  <cit>  models are the most commonly utilized in pathophysiological modeling of the respiratory system.

despite these obvious advantages of the large mammal model, the lack of large mammal genomic sequence data presents significant limitation for genome-wide analysis of gene expression profiles by microarray techniques. to overcome this limitation, cross-species rna hybridization has been utilized as one potential solution  <cit> . this approach is based on the notion that evolutionarily-conserved genetic sequences between mammals will be efficiently detected during cross-species hybridization. despite a paucity of literature focused on the use of affymetrix genechip oligonucleotide array for cross-species hybridizations  <cit> , we speculated that this array platform could potentially serve as a powerful tool for cross-species genome analysis. genechips carry 11– <dig> oligonucleotide probes per target gene, increasing the opportunity to potentially identify genes with stretches of high homology to specific probes. to test this hypothesis, we cross-hybridized total rna obtained from canine lung tissues to the human hg-u133a genechip. analysis of generated expression profiles using affymetrix microarray suite  showed that approximately 14% of canine mrna hybridizes to the human probe sets and generates hybridization signal similar to that of human mrna. analysis of available canine orthologues corresponding to these well performing human probes revealed high sequence similarities between human and canine counterparts. based on these findings we speculated that even canine genes with only partial sequence similarities to their human counterparts can be identified by mas  <dig>  if the analysis is restricted to probes with high sequence similarity to their canine counterparts. antipova et al. recently reported that utilization of a single well performing affymetrix probe pair can be sufficient for detection of its corresponding target  <cit> , further supporting our hypothesis.

a straight forward approach to test this hypothesis would be to align the target sequences from the human hg_u133a genechip to the known canine sequences using basic local alignment search tool , followed by identification of human probes with high sequence similarity to their canine counterparts. unfortunately, due to limited canine genomic information, only 3% of human target sequences from the hg_u133a genechip have been matched to known canine orthologues, which renders this approach inadequate. however, we speculated that since canine orthologues with high sequence similarities to human probes generate detectable hybridization signals, the reverse should be also true: the detectable hybridization signal should reflect high sequence similarity. therefore, we examined individual probes instead of complete probe sets. probes with detectable hybridization signals were considered adequate representatives of their corresponding canine orthologues and were thus employed for final signal intensity calculations. the mas  <dig>  analysis when restricted to probes with detectable hybridization signals, demonstrated a 4-fold increase in canine transcript detection as compared to unrestricted analysis. our results strongly suggest that identification of probes with detectable cross-species hybridization signal and subsequent restriction of gene expression analysis to these probes can be applied to multiple related species for which gene arrays are not commercially available.

RESULTS
the hybridization pattern of the protein translocation complex beta gene involved in cell maintenance  is assumed to be constantly expressed in the majority of tissues and was selected for demonstration of the probe level analysis. this analysis was conducted using signal intensity values generated by hybridization of human and canine sec61b mrnas to hg-u133a genechip. the probe level analysis deconstructs the entire affymetrix probe set into its individual components and allows one to evaluate the performance of each individual probe. detailed output of human sec61b hybridization to 203133_at probe set  shows that signal intensity value of pm  obtained for 11th probe pair is higher than that of mm . therefore, correction for the background will produce positive signal intensity value, and this probe pair will contribute to the "present"  classification by mas  <dig> . however, cross-species hybridization of canine mrna to the same probe pair does not produce sufficient signal intensity value , possibly due to differences in target sequence between canine and human. this will, therefore, shift the overall probe set classification towards "absent"  classification. at the same time, there are probes that failed to detect both human and canine sec61b. this could be due to either secondary structure formation   <cit>  or the presence of sequences in the hybridizing mrna mixture that possess homology to the 11th mm probe, thus raising the background signal over the specific signal. the pattern of sec61b hybridization shows that, among  <dig> probe pairs of the 203133_at probe set,  <dig> probes  failed to detect its target in human tissues but the detectable hybridization of the remaining  <dig> probes prevailed , resulting in classification of the sec61b transcript by mas  <dig>  as "present". in contrast, a reduction in the number of probes that were able to detect canine sec61b down to only  <dig> probes  caused mas  <dig>  to classify this gene as "absent". as shown in figure 2c, the failure of the  <dig> non-hybridizing canine sec61b probes was mainly attributed to differences in gene sequences between these two species.

this observation held true for most of the evaluated targets, leading us to speculation that among the  <dig> human probes of a given probe set there will be probes with high sequence similarity to its canine target and that identification and utilization of these probes will increase sensitivity of cross-species hybridization. moreover, when we evaluated performance of all  <dig> , <dig> hg-u133a probes from  <dig> cross-species hybridizations, we found that almost half of these probes  generated a detectable hybridization signal . therefore, we speculated that excellent and poorly performing probes should be equally distributed in the probe sets as well, and that masking of the poorly performing half will increase transcript detecting ability of these modified probe sets. the test run of mas  <dig>  analysis using masking of the  <dig> poorly performing probes of 203133_at probe set converted the initial "absent" call for canine sec61b gene to a "present" call and will formulate the basis for further investigation. since the canine genome is not yet completed, we were unable to select probes with high canine/human sequence similarity solely based on gene sequence information. instead, we evaluated the overall performance of each individual probe based on their hybridization signal. we speculated that sequences of human probes with a reasonable cross-species hybridization signal  most likely possess a high similarity to their canine targets.

the probe level analysis was performed for  <dig> expression profiles generated by hybridization of  <dig> different human tissues and  <dig> expression profiles generated by hybridization of canine lung tissues to the human hg-u133a genechip. the resulting hybridization signal pattern of the 203133_at probe set for both species is presented in figure 2d and 2e. as expected, differences in the canine sec61b mrna sequence region corresponding to the 11th probe  did not allow canine target detection in  <dig> out of  <dig> hybridizations . these data suggest that once a probe poorly hybridizes to its target in several initial experiments, it will most likely fail to detect its target in the substantial number of consequent hybridizations. to investigate whether this pattern persists throughout whole gene array, we analyzed hybridization patterns of all  <dig> probes of the hg-u133a genechip. the resulting histogram for the same species hybridization  demonstrates that a large fraction  of probes performed well during  <dig> or more hybridizations . this trend was also true for poorly performing probes, where a considerable fraction  probes failed to detect their target during  <dig> or more hybridizations. in canine/human hybridization the number of poorly performing probes was higher  while fraction of well performing probes lowered to 38% . the analysis of the overall net effect of canine/human sequence differences on the hybridization pattern was conducted by correction for poorly performing probes during human samples hybridization. this revealed a 7% decrease in well performing and 13% increase in poorly performing probe fractions . for detailed evaluation of direct effects of interspecies sequential differences on the cross-species hybridization, we selected probe sets where all probes generated detectable hybridization signal during human sample hybridization. interestingly, among these probes, the fraction of probes that detected their corresponding canine targets during  <dig> or more cross-species hybridization was surprisingly high , with a very low  fraction of probes that failed to detect their targets in canine tissues . to evaluate correlation between performance of an individual probe and its alignment to the corresponding canine target, the number of mismatches were identified and counted for  <dig> randomly selected canine genes. this analysis demonstrated that, on average, probes in both excellent and poorly performing fractions had  <dig> and  <dig>  mismatched bases, respectively, with the mismatch rate significantly lower in excellent performing probes . the presence of a mismatch in probes with detectable hybridization signal was not unexpected and correlates with previously reported observation that relatively long  stretch of the perfect match could produce stable hybridization and signal generation  <cit> .

the criterion for masking of a particular probe was based on the performance of a given probe throughout  <dig> genechips. we found that masking of probes which poorly performed  in  <dig> or more hybridizations  produced the highest number of "present" calls  therefore this percentage was selected as a cut off value for masking. we speculated that probes that failed to detect its target in more than 40% of hybridizations lack homology to their canine counterparts at least in part due to sequence divergence. to test this hypothesis we conducted a sequence analysis of randomly selected samples and find that out of the  <dig> tested probes  <dig> probes aligned against canine sequence with one or more mismatches and  <dig> of these probes  were masked by our procedure.

we also analyzed the effects of our procedure on the probe set size . the main fractions of probe sets adjusted to human  or canine  hybridizations are represented by 5– <dig> and 4– <dig> probe pairs, respectively. our masking procedure left  <dig>  probe-sets unaltered and completely eliminated  <dig>  probe sets based on the human hybridization pattern. analysis of canine hybridization identified  <dig>  highly homologous canine targets, which hybridize to the entire corresponding human probe sets, and eliminated  <dig> probe-sets  where none of the probes recognizes its target in canine tissues.

we next examined relative location of poorly performing human probes on the canine genes. it has been reported previously that human/canine homology is prone to be higher within the coding region  <cit> . our findings are consistent with this report and show that our approach masked more probes towards the 3' untranslated region of target sequences .

the effect of our masking procedure was also evaluated for transcript abundance detection. the combined  output of regular mas  <dig>  analysis was compared with outputs produced using masking files generated for human and canine hybridizations . in human hybridization, our algorithm reduced "absent" calls by  <dig> fold and increased "present" calls by more than  <dig>  fold. the application of the masking file generated for canine hybridization had a more modest effect than human-specific masking. the transcript detection during the hybridization of canine mrna to the human hg-u133a chip was much less sensitive  than that of hybridization of human mrna . our canine-specific masking recovered approximately 60%  of transcripts which, otherwise, were called "absent" by mas  <dig> . the anticipated increase in transcript detection by application of human-specific masking is attributed to the masking of imperfectly designed probes. as shown in figure  <dig>  the 11th probe of the 203133_at probe set failed to detect its target in both canine and human tissues. therefore, masking of such a probe will improve transcript detection in both canine and human sample analyses. similarly, the canine-specific masking of human hybridization also increased the number of detectable transcripts as compared to non-masking results .

finally, we compared transcripts detected by our masking procedure with those identified by hybridization of canine lung tissues to the newly developed affymetrix canine genechip. we have identified  <dig> orthologous transcripts common to both hg-u133a and canine genechips and compared their detection in both arrays using "present"/"absent" classifications by mas  <dig>  or gcos  <dig> , respectively. this analysis showed that our masking approach increased the fraction of correctly identified transcripts by 46% and decreased the false negative fraction by 53% as compared to unmasked transcript detection .

discussion
the widespread use of large mammal models in respiratory research, coupled to the limited availability of corresponding gene microarrays, motivated us to investigate the feasibility of utilizing gene arrays designed for related organisms. in this work, we hybridized canine lung tissues to human affymetrix hg-u133a genechip, and demonstrated that oligonucleotide probes designed for identification of human targets were able to generate detectable hybridization signal for canine tissues . however, the number of identified transcripts was 3– <dig> times lower than that of the transcripts which were identified during human sample hybridization . our analysis indicated that the low sensitivity of the majority of the hg-u133a probe sets to canine transcripts was due to partial genomic differences between human and canine sequences . the abundance of probes in affymetrix probe sets  presented an opportunity for reduction of probe sets to probes that generate detectable cross-species hybridization signal and therefore, improving transcript detecting ability of such modified probe sets. our probe level analysis allows evaluation and identification of probes that failed to detect their targets in canine tissues. we demonstrated that this poor performance was not random, but rather linked to either imperfect probe design  or interspecies differences in genomic sequences . another indirect linkage of probe/target sequence similarity and probe performance was demonstrated by inclination of poorly performing probes toward the 3' end of a target , which is more prone to diversity  <cit> . the masking of this poorly performing probes resulted in an increase of "present" calls in both species , where the increase in human transcript detection was attributed mainly to masking of imperfectly designed probes. interestingly, the increase of "present" calls was more prominent in canine hybridizations when we masked the most poorly performing probes that were not able to detect their targets in more that  <dig> hybridizations. however, thereafter the difference in number of "present" calls between canine and human remains constant . this comparable increase in the amount of "present" calls is most likely species-independent and attributed to probe set optimizations, which is reflected by changes in probe set sizes. we demonstrated that masking probes that were not detecting their targets in 40% cases generated maximum of "present" calls in both species  and speculated that probe pairs that poorly performed in more than 40% of hybridizations lack homology to their canine counterparts. this was confirmed by alignment analysis of these probes to their canine counterparts , which showed that 82% of masked probes produced one or more mismatches with their canine counterparts. the remaining 18% can be attributed to a sequencing error, a single nucleotide polymorphism, or longer than  <dig> bp stretches of perfect matches that can produce detectable hybridization signal  <cit> . we also identified probes that were perfectly aligned to their canine counterparts yet perform poorly. these probes represented approximately 7% of tested probe pairs, a value similar to that previously reported  <cit>  and can be attributed to the secondary structure or to the presence of yet unknown sequence that recognizes mm probe as a perfect match and the resulting increase in background signal obscure the hybridization signal.

we demonstrated that modification of probe sets by masking poorly performing probes drastically increased detection of canine transcripts by the human hg-u133a genechip . to validate these results, we compared transcripts identified by our masking approach with those identified by hybridization of canine lung tissues rna to the affymetrix canine-specific genechip. this comparison demonstrated that modification of probe sets prior to mas  <dig>  analysis drastically increases correlations between transcripts identified by same- and cross-species hybridizations . the slight increase  in false positive transcript fraction introduced by our procedure is a common feature of high density oligonucleotide array analyses  <cit>  and is well compensated by the approximately 10-fold decrease in the false negative transcript fraction from 59% to 6% .

CONCLUSIONS
the studies presented here show that the affymetrix microarray platform can be successfully used for cross-species hybridization of related organisms. a simplified version of this method  has already been successfully applied to small  data sets  <cit>  and produced biologically sensible results. we expect that method presented here will be applicable not only for canine/human hybridization but also for other combinations of cross-species hybridizations. whenever there is homology between species, there is an opportunity for identification probes with detectable hybridization signal using probe level analysis described here. this method will accelerate genome-wide analysis in experimental models for which species-specific gene arrays are not currently available.

