BACKGROUND
metabolic dysfunction has been implicated in a wide variety of human diseases such as obesity, diabetes, inborn errors of metabolism, neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. the recent reconstruction of genome-scale models of human metabolism  <cit>  provides an important biochemical basis for systems analysis of metabolic related aspects of human physiology and pathology  <cit> . such systems approaches are critical, as metabolism itself is a molecular transformation process where numerous metabolic pathways are inextricably interlinked  <cit> . however, the human body consists of many distinct tissues and cell types, each only expressing a fraction of the metabolic genes encoded within the genome  <cit> . additional variability arises from environmental conditions and external stimuli. none of this variation can be fully accounted for with only the generic human metabolic model. considering the context—e.g., genomic, anatomical, environmental, or temporal—under which a subset of the genome-scale biochemical network operates is therefore essential to understanding the molecular basis for many human diseases.

the importance of tissue-specific context in disease is evident from distinct metabolic profiles of cancers arising from different tissues. for example, it has been experimentally demonstrated that myc oncogene-induced liver tumors show increased glutamine uptake, while myc-induced lung tumors show glutamine secretion <cit> . another study showed that while lactate dehydrogenase a is important for breast carcinoma, neuroblastoma, and b-cell tumor cells, it is dispensable for myc-induced lymphomagenesis  <cit> . similar results were observed for phosphoglycerate dehyrogenease in breast cancer and melanoma  <cit>  versus myc-induced lymphomagenesis  <cit> . importantly, cancer metabolism in general also operates in unique environmental and signaling contexts compared to normal physiology and metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes  <cit> .

the context in which a metabolic network operates can be viewed at multiple scales, all of which can be dependent on one another. the broadest level typically associated with metabolic models is genomic context—i.e., the full enzymatic capability encoded in the genome. since the genome is the starting point from which to construct any generic organismal model, we will not consider it further here. a more critical contextual consideration for genome-scale models in higher organisms—especially in human tissues—is the subset of metabolic enzymes that are being expressed  at a given time. the transcriptional regulatory state governs which subset of metabolic enzymes and pathways are active, and manifests as either  the specific expression program for a tissue or cell type; or  the tissue or cellular response to intracellular or environmental conditions. the ideal strategy for modeling such contextual differences would be the integration of a generic, genome-scale model  with a detailed, context-specific transcriptional regulatory network , including signaling events that relay cues from the cellular microenvironment. however, as these trns cannot yet be comprehensively and accurately reconstructed and modeled in human cells, recent efforts have turned to employing context-specific expression data to create models that are representative of active metabolism in specific human tissues and cell types either across a wide range of experimental conditions or under a particular condition  <cit> .

for clarity, we will henceforth delineate “tissue-specific” as meaning the representative active metabolic network for a tissue , and “condition-specific” as specific network states  of tissue-specific models. we also note that when higher resolution data is available, tissue-specific models can be further discretized into region or cell type specific models . tissue-specific models are generally more desirable than condition-specific for predictive modeling, because they retain the flexibility and redundancy inherent in the metabolic network; specific conditions can subsequently be simulated directly by defining model constraints. generating condition-specific models can still be highly useful, especially when coupled with experimental data for testing and validation; methods such as imat  <cit>  and gimme  <cit>  have been used successfully to estimate the metabolic state of tissues under particular pathophysiological conditions. while the need for tissue-specific metabolic models is strong, the available number remains small. importantly, significant knowledge and data is required to reduce a generic model to a tissue-specific model with enough rigors to allow for different condition-specific capabilities. computational tools that can more rapidly generate tissue models that can represent a spectrum of physiological conditions will be highly useful for investigating metabolic dysfunctions in various diseases.

the model building algorithm , a current state-of-the-art computational method to build tissue-specific metabolic models, has been used to build liver, generic cancer, and two cancer cell line metabolic models thus far <cit> . the resulting models have been used to predict potential drug targets and improve metabolic flux predictions  <cit> . while a core set of high-confidence reactions in mba is determined based on gene expression or literature evidence, the ranking and inclusion of non-core reactions is based on iterative model simulation for many different random reaction orderings. notably, the random sampling in mba—on the order of  <dig> iterations in published studies—is limited in its coverage of the large space of possible orderings, potentially affecting the accuracy of the tissue-specific model. while this problem is mostly avoided by a stringent requirement in mba for model consistency , a more deterministic and simulation-independent ranking of non-core reactions would serve to dramatically speed up model construction time.

we have developed a method called metabolic context-specificity assessed by deterministic reaction evaluation  that leverages gene expression evidence, network structure, and metabolic function to construct context-specific models in an automated, deterministic, and high-throughput fashion. similar to mba, mcadre emphasizes the inclusion of a high-confidence core set of reactions from a generic genome-scale model, based on tissue-specific expression evidence. non-core reactions are explicitly ranked according to their own expression evidence as well as weighted connectivity to other reactions in the network, and then sequentially removed in the inverse order of this ranking. the decision whether to confirm or reject each removal is determined by the consequent flux capacity of core reactions, as well as a universal test of metabolic functionality. to evaluate the performance of our method, we reconstructed a new liver model and compared results to liver models built by mba: mcadre was able to achieve similar coverage of high evidence reactions, improved metabolic functionality, and dramatic speed up. the deterministic decision making in mcadre, coupled with an automated pipeline of data collection and processing, enables researchers to efficiently generate accurate and robust initial models from publicly available expression data.

as a demonstration of mcadre’s capabilities, we leveraged data from the human gene expression barcode project  <cit>  to automatically reconstruct draft genome-scale metabolic models for  <dig> human tissues and cell lines, collectively called the tissue-specific encyclopedia of metabolism . all  <dig> metabolic models , mcadre codes and input data  are available at  <cit>  and are also available in the supplemental materials. we identified many amino acid metabolic pathways as enriched in  <dig> brain tissue models in tsem, which agrees with the known role of amino acids in neurotransmitter metabolism. by comparing tumor and normal metabolic networks in tsem, we also identified pathways with known roles in tumor metabolism. in particular, we identified part of the eicosanoid metabolic pathway as a potential selective target against tumor tissues. further analysis of metabolic networks in tsem, especially through integration with regulatory networks and various omics data, may offer novel insights of the metabolic aspects of various diseases.

RESULTS
method overview and advantageous features of mcadre
mcadre builds a tissue-specific model from a generic human metabolic model  <cit>  based primarily on gene expression data and metabolic network topology . like mba, we define a core set of reactions that should be present and active  in the tissue model . the set of core reactions are determined from gene expression, and non-core reactions are evaluated and ranked according to a combination of expression and connectivity evidence . to help ensure the basic functionality of the tissue-specific models, mcadre includes a metabolic function test in the model building process. specifically, the checkmodelfunction module tests the ability of the current model to produce key metabolites from glucose, based on criteria previously used to universally evaluate such models  <cit>  . this list can be customized based on literature evidence or metabolomics data  to include tissue-specific metabolites or known capabilities of the tissue or cell type. we sequentially prune non-core reactions from the generic model in the determined order, provided that removal does not affect fluxes through the core reaction set or production of key metabolites from glucose. the former requirement is waived when removing non-core reactions whose associated genes are not expressed in any tissue samples. for each reaction removed from the generic model, all resulting inactivated reactions are also removed.

allowing for a flexible core reaction set increases tissue-specificity of metabolic pathways
in addition to the core set of reactions , mcadre defines a negative set of reactions whose genes are not expressed in any tissue samples. in this case, when expression evidence strongly suggests that a reaction should not be included, we relax the constraint described above to also allow for removal of any consequently inactivated core reactions. the non-expressed reaction is removed, along with all reactions that can no longer carry flux, only if the ratio of resulting inactivated core reactions to inactivated non-core reactions is smaller than a specified ratio. this parameter governs the sensitivity versus specificity of the final tissue model: a lower ratio cutoff leads to inclusion of more reactions with strong positive evidence, while a higher cutoff leads to removal of more reactions with strong negative evidence. it is important to note the difference between non-expressed reactions  and non-gene associated reactions . non-gene associated reactions include spontaneous reactions and reactions catalyzed by enzymes not annotated to genes yet. non-gene associated reactions are not included in the negative set, and no core reactions are allowed to be removed when mcadre tries to remove these reactions.

the utility of allowing for a flexible core can be seen with the bile acid biosynthesis pathway in the liver. although many cell types express several enzymes in the bile acid pathway, the complete pathway is present only in the liver  <cit> . the tissue-specificity of this pathway is also supported by microarray data: among  <dig> tissues, we found that almost all bile acid synthesis reactions have strong evidence of activity in the liver, but not in other tissues . however, a few reactions in this pathway have strong evidence in non-liver tissues . if a "hard" core were to be enforced—i.e., requiring all reactions with expression evidence above a threshold to carry flux and remain in the tissue model—most reactions in the bile acid synthesis pathway would be included in these tissues, even though most reactions in the pathway lack expression evidence. when we allowed for a flexible core, only liver and liver cancer models included almost complete bile acid synthesis pathways , while most other tissues did not have reactions from this pathway. in contrast, when using a hard core, most models included a majority of bile acid reactions , conflicting with known tissue specificity. for cerebral cortex, for example, 70% or 5% of the bile acid synthesis pathway is computed as present when using a hard or flexible core, respectively, supporting the importance of including the flexible core in the mcadre approach. this result is achieved when the inactivated core to non-core reaction ratio is set at  <dig> , and sensitivity analysis shows that the resulting models are robust to the precise selection of the cutoff ratio .

there are  <dig> and  <dig> confidently positive  and negative  metabolic reactions in the cerebral cortex, respectively. in reconstructing the final model, tradeoffs must be made between these sets. for example,  <dig> confidently negative reactions are essential for basic functionality of the model . to remove all the other  <dig>  confidently negative reactions,  <dig>  confidently positive reactions would be removed. on the other hand, to include all  <dig> confidently positive reactions,  <dig>  confidently negative reactions have to be included. at ratio  <dig> , as shown in the additional file 3: table s <dig>   <dig>  confidently positive reactions were removed, while  <dig>  confidently negative reactions were removed.

there are  <dig> remaining reactions whose associated metabolic genes are not expressed in any cerebral cortex microarray samples but still retained in the model to complete necessary functionalities. for  <dig> of the  <dig> reactions, protein-level staining evidence is available in the human protein atlas   <cit> . among these  <dig> reactions, according to gene-reaction mapping,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> reactions have negative, weak, moderate, and strong protein staining evidence, respectively. therefore, more than 80% of confidently negative reactions based on transcriptomic data that were retained for functionality considerations by mcadre do in fact have some proteome-level evidence. this can either be caused by limitations of the microarray gene expression measurements, or potential effects of post-transcriptional regulation of the corresponding metabolic genes.

compared with enforcing a strict inclusion of all the core reactions with the ability to carry metabolic flux,  <dig> core reactions are removed if when we allow a flexible core reaction set in building the cerebral cortex model. these reactions are removed because many non-expressed reactions need to be included in the model for these  <dig> reactions to carry flux. among the  <dig> reactions, there are  <dig> udp-glucuronosyltransferase reactions encoded by utg1a <dig> and utg1a <dig>  udp-glucuronosyltransferase reactions occur mainly in the liver and intestines, and neither utg1a <dig> nor utg1a <dig> are expressed in the brain in general or the cerebral cortex in particular  <cit> . three reactions in bile acid synthesis, all associated with scp <dig>  are also removed. sterol carrier protein  <dig> shows negative staining in cerebral cortex neuronal and glial cells according to hpa. however, according to the input microarray data from the gene expression barcode, all udp-glucuronosyltransferase reactions and reactions associated with sterol carrier protein  <dig> have high expression-based evidence . in these two examples, mcadre correctly removed reactions for which many other reactions with little expression evidence are needed to carry flux. in summary, mcadre is designed with the goal of balancing strongly positive and negative expression evidence. inconsistent reactions based on gene expression data  for each of the  <dig> tissue-specific models are included in additional file  <dig> to facilitate further manual curation.

mcadre significantly reduces computation time to generate context-specific models
the novel reaction ranking scheme based on three criteria  enables mcadre to perform a single optimized iteration to infer a tissue-specific model from the generic human metabolic map. in contrast, mba determines whether to retain non-core reactions through a large number of random iterations  to account for the effects of the order in which reactions are removed  <cit> . the order of reaction removal remains influential in mcadre—e.g., redundant reactions can be removed interchangeably with equal effects on core reactions, but whichever reaction is pruned first mandates the retention of the latter. however, mcadre leverages gene expression, topology, and literature evidence to directly determine ordering in a quick deterministic fashion, avoiding random iterations. each iteration in mba involves flux variability analysis , which amounts to on the order of  <dig>  separate optimizations. this computational complexity limits not only the throughput of reconstructing metabolic models, but potentially their reproducibility: as the full solution space of ordered reaction removals is extremely large, the  <dig> permutations sampled by mba necessarily represent only a tiny fraction of all possibilities. the stringent requirement in mba that final tissue-specific models be consistent  enforces the inclusion of many lower-evidence reactions, and leads to mostly similar models from run to run. still, even with a heuristic speed-up  <cit>  or the efficient fastfva algorithm  <cit> , one iteration of mba takes ~ <dig> hours on a single  <dig>  ghz cpu with 4g ram using the open source glpk solver. the whole mba reconstruction process, with ~ <dig> iterations, would therefore take on the order of ~ <dig>  cpu-hours. mcadre dramatically improves the computational speed via deterministic evidence-based evaluation of reactions, requiring only ~ <dig> cpu-hours under the same configuration. with the ibm cplex solver , the model reconstruction time was further reduced to  <dig> hours.

manual curation of metabolic models often continues over several iterations of simulation-based hypothesis generation, experimental validation, and model refinement to improve quality and predictive accuracy. such iterative curation is also important in computational model reconstruction, especially when new and better  data becomes available. new technologies such as rna-seq provide unprecedented characterization of the transcriptome  <cit>  with a much lower detection limit than microarray. as rna-seq data become available for a variety of tissues and cell types  <cit> , it is important that corresponding models are updated to better reflect the metabolic capacity corresponding tissues: metabolic genes expressed at low levels may be regarded as not expressed by microarray and excluded from metabolic models. because mcadre reduces the computational time of model reconstruction almost  <dig> fold, it is much more convenient to build or update a large collection of tissue-specific models when new data are released.

coverage-based and functional validation of a mcadre-constructed liver model
as initial validation of the mcadre method, we used the algorithm to reconstruct a liver model  and compared it to the liver model in the original mba publication  <cit>  , as it is the best characterized mba-generated tissue model to date. we built the livercadre model based on  <dig> normal liver microarray samples . notably, both mcadre and mba result in consistent final tissue models, so all liver model reactions examined are able to carry flux . while livercadre includes  <dig> reactions to the  <dig> in livermba, the two models share  <dig> reactions, a significant overlap ; these overlapping reactions constitute over 80% of all reactions in each model, and thus substantial convergence between the approaches, establishing confidence for the quality of models generated with mcadre. to more directly evaluate the performance of mcadre and mba for generating new tissue-specific models, we also used mba to build a model from our liver expression training data ; livercadre exhibited similar or better coverage and increased functionality in comparisons with the new mba model built with the same training data.

mcadre-constructed liver model improves coverage of highly expressed genes and proteins
while the two models share most reactions, we chose to further explore the gene-associated reactions unique to each model. there are  <dig> and  <dig> gene-associated reactions unique to livercadre and livermba, respectively. for each set of reactions, we first examined the coverage of highly expressed metabolic genes in an independent data set , not used in building either liver model and based on a different microarray platform than any of the training data used by mcadre. we assume that reactions with strong expression-based validation  are more likely to be present in the liver. the set of gene-associated reactions unique to the mcadre model have higher expression-based validation score than gene-associated reactions unique to livermba . livercadre includes more reactions with strong expression-based validation than the mba model  and fewer reactions with poor to no gene expression-based validation than livermba .

as mrna and protein levels are only moderately correlated in mammalian cells  <cit> , we also compared coverage of the two liver models at the protein expression level. we collected protein staining data from the human protein atlas   <cit>  for  <dig> metabolic genes in recon  <dig> . protein staining strength is divided into four levels by hpa: strong, moderate, weak, and negative. we mapped the hpa data to reactions according to gene-reaction associations, and assigned each reaction a score, based on the staining strength of its associated metabolic gene. as shown in figure 3b, 29% of gene-associated reactions unique to livercadre have strong protein staining support, and 20% have negative staining support. in comparison, only 4% of reactions unique to livermba have strong protein staining support, while 40% have negative protein staining support. moreover, gene-associated reactions unique to livercadre collectively have significantly higher scores than livermba .

mcadre-based liver model is functionally comparable to the existing liver model
the liver plays a major role in metabolism and carries out important metabolic functions such as gluconeogenesis, triglyceride synthesis, amino acid degradation, and ammonia and ethanol detoxification. we investigated the ability of the two liver models to carry out these hepatic metabolic functions; the details of each metabolic function simulation are described in methods. we found that the two models are functionally comparable , which is expected given that they share a large percentage of reactions. both models can detoxify ammonia and ethanol; both can simulate gluconeogenesis from physiologically important substrates such as pyruvate, lactate, alanine and glutamine; and both models can degrade most amino acids and produce urea as byproduct. while livermba can degrade more amino acids and generate glucose from a broader range of glucogenic substrates, only livercadre is able to synthesize triglyceride from glucose and fatty acids. triglyceride synthesis is a major hepatic function underlying blood glucose and lipid homeostasis — the ability to simulate this function in silico enables the investigation of liver metabolic network states in normal and pathological conditions such as obesity and fatty liver disease. while livermba includes over  <dig> reactions manually curated to be active in the liver  <cit> , no such curation was done to build livercadre. livercadre also outperforms the new mba liver model built with the same training data in liver metabolic function tests . detailed results of the liver function simulations can be found in additional file 3: table s7-s <dig> 

the liver is also able to regenerate after injury, which involves the synthesis of biomass precursors such as nucleotides, amino acids, and lipids. a biomass reaction was added to both models  that accounts for the growth requirement of amino acids, nucleotides, lipids, and other metabolites , and we tested the ability of the two models to grow in silico in rpmi  <dig> tissue culture medium conditions . the livercadre model was able to simulate growth without further manual curation, while livermba lacked this capability. further analysis identified that livermba could not grow because it contained no reactions in the inosine monophosphate  pathway, and therefore could not produce purines. as de novo purine synthesis primarily occurs in the liver  <cit> , this lack of this capability represents a metabolic gap in livermba. moreover, many membrane phospholipids such as phosphatidic acid, phosphatidylethanolamine, phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine are derived from triglyceride. as livermba cannot produce this metabolite, the production of these glycerophospholipids is consequently blocked. this demonstrated the importance of the metabolic function test in mcadre, as it ensures the basic functionality of the resulting model and may save substantial post hoc manual curation.

mcadre for high-throughput model generation
after verifying that our new liver model could show similar or better coverage and functionality when compared to state-of-the-art models and algorithms, we next took advantage of the automated and computationally efficient nature of mcadre to generate a large collection of tissue and cell type specific metabolic models. the gene expression barcode project previously collected, annotated and binarized microarray data for  <dig> human tissues and cell lines on the affymetrix u133plus <dig> platform  <cit> . we used these binarized microarray data sets as input evidence in mcadre to extract individual models from the generic recon  <dig>  thereby establishing a tissue-specific encyclopedia of metabolism . this effort provides the most comprehensive mapping to date of human tissue-specific metabolic networks, and for many of the  <dig> tissues or cell types, this represents the first time a genome-scale metabolic model has been built.

tissue-specific encyclopedia of metabolism enables global analysis of human tissues
the tissue-specific encyclopedia of metabolism  includes  <dig> tumor tissues and cell lines, and  <dig> of these tumor tissues also have corresponding normal tissue models. it also contains metabolic models of  <dig> different brain tissues, many of which are affected in various neurological diseases. a full list of the  <dig> tissues and the corresponding microarray data can be found at  <cit>  and  <cit> . all new metabolic models already include several important features for in silico simulation of cellular behavior: they have functional central metabolic pathways , can synthesize non-essential amino acids from glucose, synthesize nucleotides via de novo or salvage pathways, have functional fatty acid synthesis pathway , and can synthesize key membrane lipids. these functionalities are a result of the basic universal metabolic function test integrated into mcadre, which can be further customized to reflect the specific capabilities of individual tissues and cell types. the latest version of these models, as well as additional models built with latest data  can be downloaded from  <cit> . to facilitate further manual curation, inconsistent reactions  for each model are included in the supplementary material as well as in the above website.

with this comprehensive set of tissue-specific draft metabolic models, we can start to evaluate global properties of these networks and their relationship to human metabolism in the body . models in the tsem contain  <dig> reactions on average , with most models ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> reactions . the smallest model is neutrophiles, which included  <dig> reactions. the largest models are liver tumor, normal liver and kidney, which included  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> reactions respectively. this is expected as the liver and kidney are among the most metabolically active tissues in the human body. there are  <dig> reactions that appeared in at least one of the  <dig> context-specific models, representing 93% of the flux-carrying reactions in recon  <dig> ;  <dig> reactions appear in at least 90% of the  <dig> models, and  <dig> reactions appear in at most 10% of the models.

distributions of tsem model reactions correspond to known features of brain and tumor tissues
we identified pathways that are enriched in brain tissue models—i.e., pathways with more reactions present in normal brain tissues than in normal non-brain tissues . among the pathways most enriched for completeness in brain  were taurine and hypotaurine metabolism, aromatic amino acid biosynthesis, cysteine metabolism, alanine and aspartate metabolism, glutamate metabolism, and valine, leucine, and isoleucine metabolism. this makes sense, as many amino acids are either neurotransmitters or intermediates in neurotransmitter synthesis. the brain is also known to contain higher concentrations of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids  than most other tissues, and both cerebral endothelium and astrocytes elongate and desaturate precursors of the long-chain pufas  <cit> . as such, it is not surprising to see that the fatty acid elongation pathway includes significantly more reactions in brain tissues than non-brain models. pathways better enriched in brain tissue models are in agreement with known brain-specific metabolic functions, demonstrating the quality of these models.

apathways are sorted by difference in percentage of reactions present in brain vs. non-brain tissues.

we also identified pathways enriched in the  <dig> tumor tissues compared to their  <dig> corresponding normal tissues , including folate metabolism, eicosanoid metabolism, fatty acid activation and nucleotide metabolism. folate metabolism is necessary for de novo nucleotide synthesis. the enrichment of reactions for this pathway—as well as the nucleotides pathway—in tumor tissue models makes sense because nucleotide synthesis is more active in proliferating tumor cells, and many enzymes in nucleotide synthesis are classical chemotherapy targets.

apathways are sorted by difference in percentage of reactions present in tumor vs. normal tissues.

additionally, tumors overexpress fatty-acid synthase  and undergo significant de novo fatty-acid synthesis  <cit> —fasn has been identified as a drug target in many tumors  <cit> . fatty acid activation reactions are catalyzed by acyl-coa synthetase , which acts downstream of fasn and converts long-chain fatty acids to acyl-coa. fatty acid activation is a critical step in several lipid metabolic pathways, including phospholipid and triacylglycerol biosynthesis. some genes in this pathway  are overexpressed in certain types of cancer and inhibition of these genes induced apoptosis in cancer cells  <cit> . notably, eicosanoid metabolism is the second most tumor-enriched pathway. eicosanoids, which are biologically active lipids derived from arachdonic acid by cyclooxygenase, lipoxygenase, and p <dig> epoxygenase, have been implicated in inflammation and cancer  <cit> . biologically active sphingolipids are involved in cancer pathogenesis-ceramide functions as a tumor-suppressor lipid, while sphingosine-1-phosphate functions as a tumor-promoting lipid  <cit> . this supports the identification of the sphingolipid pathway as enriched in tumor metabolic networks.

as a comparison, we also calculated the enrichment statistic for these brain and tumor enriched pathways using only expression data. using the gene-reaction-pathway annotation from recon  <dig>  we calculated the average ubiquity score of metabolic genes in a pathway  and compared values for the above pathways in brain vs. non-brain and tumor vs. normal tissues. as shown in additional file 3: table s <dig>  only  <dig> of the  <dig> brain-enriched pathways and  <dig> of the  <dig> tumor-enriched pathways identified by the model-based approach are also found by expression data alone, respectively. this shows the increased signal that can be extracted through the model-based approach.

we repeated the analysis to identify individual reactions that occur significantly more frequently in tumor tissue models than in normal tissues. interestingly, the top most differentially included reactions  together form part of the eicosanoid metabolism pathway, from arachidonic acid to leukotriene a <dig>  c <dig>  d <dig>  e <dig> and f <dig> . the first two reactions are catalyzed by 5-lipoxygenase, which is induced by inflammatory stimuli and is often constitutively expressed in various cancers  <cit> . furthermore, inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase has been shown to reduce cell proliferation and angiogenesis  <cit>  and augment the antitumor activity of other drugs  <cit> . leukotrienes have been implicated in various diseases such as asthma, cardiovascular diseases, and cancer  <cit> . for example, leukotriene c <dig> and d <dig> promote angiogenesis  <cit> ; leukotriene d <dig> also promotes intestinal epithelial cell migration  <cit> . while involvement of genes and metabolites in the eicosanoid metabolic pathway has been reported in some cancers, our pathway and reaction level analysis revealed the importance of this pathway across a broad range of tumors arising from many different tissues.

athese reactions form a pathway that catalyzes the production of leukotrienes from arachidonic acid.

comparison of tsem kidney model with the existing kidney metabolic model
as a demonstration of the utility of models in tsem, we compared the tsem kidney  metabolic model with the existing reduced kidney metabolic model  from chang et al. <cit> . while kidneytsem is a genome-scale metabolic model with  <dig> reactions, kidneyreduced aims to capture the core kidney metabolic phenotype and only includes  <dig> reactions. first, we compared the  <dig> and  <dig> gene-associated reactions unique to each model that also have protein staining evidence .  <dig> and  <dig> of gene-associated reactions unique to each model have non-negative protein staining, respectively. as expected, the kidneytsem model includes many more enzymes that are expressed in the kidney.

chang et al. compiled a list of  <dig> important renal metabolic functions, which consisted of the secretion and uptake of metabolites that regulate blood pressure. following chang et al., we added exchange and demand reactions for the  <dig> metabolites, and maximized the uptake or secretion of each metabolite according to whether it is absorbed or secreted by the kidney.

kidneytsem was able to achieve  <dig> of the  <dig> renal metabolic functions  while kidneyreduced—as expected—achieved all  <dig> renal metabolic functions that it was designed for. the six renal functions that kidneytsem failed to achieve included secretion of prostaglandin i <dig>  vitamin d, tryptamine, and absorption of acetate, oxalate, and l-carnosine, demonstrating a need for additional manual curation after the automated reconstruction.

chang et al. also compiled a list of  <dig> gene deficiencies that are known to cause kidney disorders.  <dig> of the  <dig> genes are in kidneytsem model, and all  <dig> gene deficiencies were predicted by kidneytesm to affect at least one of the  <dig> renal metabolic functions kidneytsem can achieve under normal conditions . thus, the recall rate was 55%, with a precision of 100%. although not as accurate as kidneyreduced, kidneytsem can simulate most renal metabolic functions and demonstrates good predictability of genetic perturbations. it is important to note that while kidneyreduced is based on a significant amount of metabolomics data, transcriptomic data, and most importantly, manual literature curation, the reconstruction of kidneytsem is fully automated using transcriptomic data alone – an important point for rapid applicability to a broad range of contexts.

comparing mcadre with the recently published init method
during the preparation of this manuscript, a new method  capable of genome scale tissue-specific metabolic network reconstruction was published. this method was used to build genome-scale metabolic networks for  <dig> human cell types and  <dig> cancer types, collectively referred to as the human metabolic atlas   <cit> . the fundamental strategy of mcadre and init is somewhat similar. both mcadre and init start from a generic human metabolic model, and use expression data to infer a tissue-specific sub-network. both methods require that the model should be able to produce certain important metabolites. while mcadre requires the model to produce universally important metabolites from simple precursors like glucose , init allows the model to uptake all metabolites to produce these key metabolites .

there are certain important differences between the two methods. init primarily uses the evidence from the human protein atlas  as input, but can also incorporate gene expression and metabolomics data; algorithm parameters  are also optimized for hpa data  <cit> . mcadre can use any data that can quantitatively measure mrna or protein abundance, but herein primarily uses gene expression microarray data. although proteome data from hpa provide more direct evidence for the existence of corresponding metabolic reactions, current proteomic data is much less comprehensive than transcriptomic data from microarray or rna-seq. to date, transcriptomic data from public repositories have explored a much broader range of human tissue/cell types and pathophysiological conditions: we were able to use mcadre to build  <dig> human tissue-specific metabolic models based on transcriptomic data from a single microarray platform. additionally, while mcadre and other model building algorithms  are based on the steady state assumption of no net accumulation of metabolites, i.e., mass-balance, init allows for a small positive net accumulation of metabolites if a metabolite is present in a cell type according to metabolomics data.

we validated mcadre by showing that the mcadre-built liver model can simulate a wide range of liver metabolic functions . an init-built liver model was shown to more accurately cover liver metabolic gene expression than the manually reconstructed hepatonet <dig>  <cit> . however, it is unclear how this better coverage at the gene level will translate to model functionality: while hepatonet <dig> was tested to be able to simulate a comprehensive set of  <dig> liver metabolic objectives, no such metabolic function simulation was reported for the init-built liver model.

we also compared the tissue-specific encyclopedia of metabolism  built by mcadre and the human metabolic atlas built by init. overall, tsem included  <dig> models and hma included  <dig> models. hma included  <dig> cancer models while tsem included  <dig> cancer models;  <dig> are shared. there are  <dig> and  <dig> normal tissue/cell types in tsem and hma respectively. overall, the two collections shared  <dig> normal tissues , with  <dig> unique to hma and  <dig> to tsem. one main difference is the coverage of tissues in the brain. while hma included  <dig> models covering  <dig> brain structures , tsem included  <dig> models covering  <dig> distinct brain structures. thus, the two collections of tissue-specific metabolic models are largely complimentary, with tsem covering many more tissues.

CONCLUSIONS
large amounts of data have accumulated in public data repositories, characterizing the molecular phenotype of a variety of human tissue and cell types across a wide range of pathophysiological states  <cit> . however, the number of available tissue-specific metabolic models, which enable the systematic simulation of metabolic functions in normal and disease contexts, remains relatively small. to bridge this gap, we have developed a new automated method  to efficiently build tissue-specific metabolic models in a high-throughput manner. from the comparison of brain and non-brain tissue models and the comparison of tumor and normal tissue models, it is clear that the pathway-level analysis is in agreement with literature. the corresponding models therefore enable further exploration of brain-specific metabolic functions and identification of drug targets that specifically kill tumor cells with minimal side effects on normal tissues. combined with automated data acquisition and annotation tools  <cit> , mcadre has the potential to transform large repositories of gene expression data into repositories of functional tissue-specific metabolic models.

importantly, metabolism is under extensive transcriptional regulation  <cit> . mutations in transcription factors can cause various metabolic diseases  <cit> , and many tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes are also transcriptional regulators of metabolism  <cit> . combined with methods that automatically integrate transcriptional regulatory networks and metabolic networks  <cit> , mcadre may help to systematically identify the metabolic effects of transcription factors perturbations in various tissues. ultimately, we hope to expand the tsem to include both metabolic and corresponding transcriptional regulatory networks for many tissues and cell types. additionally, metabolic interactions between different tissues and cell types play important roles in health and disease  <cit> , and there have been pioneering studies that used integrated multi-cell type or multi-tissue type models to such interactions  <cit> . the large collection of tissue and cell type specific models in the tsem may facilitate the integrated modeling of metabolic interactions such as those between adipocytes and macrophages, different brain tissues, and between tumor and stromal microenvironment.

