BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, dna is packaged into chromatin structures, the basic unit of which is the nucleosome. each nucleosome consists of about  <dig> bp of dna tightly wrapped around a histone-protein octamer containing two copies each of h2a, h2b, h <dig>  and h <dig>  <cit> . the packaging of dna restricts its accessibility to proteins such as transcription factors, and therefore the transcriptional activation of many genes requires chromatin modifications such as reversible acetylation of the core histones  <cit> . the steady-state level of acetylation is controlled by the antagonistic activities of two types of enzymes: histone acetyltransferases and histone deacetylases . hdacs thus play key roles in transcriptional regulation and also in other cell processes that are influenced by the acetylation state of core histones, such as chromatin assembly, dna repair, and recombination  <cit> .

hdacs have additional activities that are not directed at histones: many hdacs are partially found in the cytoplasm, and some have been shown to act on non-histone substrates, such as the cytoskeletal protein, tubulin, and the transcription factors p <dig> and yy <dig>  <cit> . acetylation/deacetylation might thus be a widespread type of post-translational modification, acting in a manner similar to phosphorylation/dephosphorylation in the regulation of protein activity  <cit> . in addition, hdacs have recently attracted considerable attention because chemical inhibitors of hdacs induce growth arrest, differentiation, and/or apoptosis of cancer cells both in vitro and in vivo, and may thus represent a new class of anti-tumor agents  <cit> .

recent phylogenetic studies  <cit>  classify the non-sirtuin hdacs into three families: the well-known class  <dig> , class  <dig> , and an additional class defined by the recently identified human hdac  <dig>  <cit> . this third class has been named class  <dig> to distinguish it from the unrelated nad-dependent class  <dig>  i.e. the sirtuin deacetylases related to the yeast sir <dig> protein  <cit> . orthologues of the eukaryotic hdacs are found in prokaryotes  <cit> , and phylogenetic analyses indicate that most of them can confidently be assigned to one or another of the three classes distinguished among eukaryotic hdacs  <cit> . these prokaryotic proteins act biochemically on non-histone substrates and are usually labelled as 'acetoin utilization proteins' or 'acetylpolyamine amidohydrolases' with reference, respectively, to their involvement in the utilization of the carbon source acetoin or in the deacetylation of polyamines such as spermine  <cit> . it is known, however, that acetylpolyamine aminohydrolases share some important functional features with eukaryotic histone deacetylases, as both:  recognize an acetylated aminoalkyl group;  catalyse the removal of the acetyl group by cleaving an amide bond; and  increase the positive charge of the substrate  <cit> .

in this study, we have identified, through similarity searches against sequenced genomes and est data, a very large sampling of putative eukaryotic and prokaryotic proteins belonging to the class  <dig> hdac family. in the remainder of this paper we call these 'class  <dig> hdacs' on the sole basis of their orthology to the characterized class  <dig> hdacs of metazoans, and irrespective of their actual functional specificities, which have not been characterized. by means of multiple phylogenetic analyses, we show that the class  <dig> hdacs display unexpected phylogenetic relationships, at odds with the phylogeny of the corresponding species. some eukaryotic proteins appear more closely related to eubacterial proteins than to those of related eukaryotic species. we discuss the possibility that this anomalous phyletic distribution might be the consequence of multiple ancient horizontal gene transfers between prokaryotes and eukaryotes, or alternatively, the result of gene duplication and a high rate of differential gene loss.

RESULTS
derivation of a comprehensive set of class  <dig> hdacs
in a survey of animal hdacs, we found by blast blast searches against the national center for biotechnology information  nr database that some animal class  <dig> hdacs are more similar to eubacterial hdacs than to those of other eukaryotes. in order to conduct a phylogenetic analysis of these sequences on the largest possible sampling of hdacs, we retrieved a large number of protein sequences of class  <dig> hdacs  by means of blast searches against the ncbi nr database, and also against various finished and unfinished genomes and expressed sequence tag  data. to ascertain that the retrieved sequences were bona fide class  <dig> hdacs, we used both the "reciprocal best blast hit" criterion and phylogenetic analyses . we identified class  <dig> hdacs in  <dig> eukaryotic and  <dig> eubacterial species representative of evolutionarily very distant lineages . we failed to detect any class  <dig> hdac in some archaea, fungi, and apicomplexa . in the corresponding genomes, one or more hdac sequences were found but they belong to hdac class  <dig> and/or class  <dig> .

phylogenetic analyses of the class  <dig> hdacs
we performed a multiple alignment of the retrieved class  <dig> hdacs of  <dig> different species and used this alignment to construct phylogenetic trees. we then applied several different phylogenetic methods  to reconstruct evolutionary relationships among the class  <dig> hdacs. we used both statistical support  and congruence between the different phylogenetic methods as indicators of the reliability of the different internal branches of the tree. figure  <dig> summarizes these results. the trees obtained by the different phylogenetic methods can be found in the additional files  <dig>   <dig>  5).

we found two large well-supported monophyletic groups . one group, which we named the 'eukaryotic group', includes only eukaryotic proteins of animals , land plants and a green alga , and ciliates , i.e. of representatives of three of the main eukaryotic lineages  <cit>  . the other group, called the 'mixed group', includes proteins of representatives of various lineages, both eubacterial and of eukaryotic: animals , green algae , a red alga , diatoms , and a coccolithophore alga . this mixed group includes a well-supported monophyletic group  comprising eukaryotic sequences and sequences from cyanobacteria and proteobacteria.

the phylogeny of the class  <dig> hdacs appears, in many respects, at odds with the phylogeny of the species in which these proteins are found. in the mixed group, we identified, for example, a monophyletic group of nine animal proteins showing closer resemblance to eubacterial proteins than to those of other animals . this group includes sequences belonging to representatives of several animal lineages: a cnidarian , two arthropods , an annelid , an echinoderm , and four vertebrates . strikingly, the class  <dig> hdac found in these teleosts is only distantly related to that found in another teleost fish, the zebrafish danio rerio, and is more closely related to eubacterial proteins . similarly, one class  <dig> hdac found in locusta migratoria is closer to those found in eubacteria than to those of other insects  and to the second class  <dig> hdac of locusta migratoria. in the mixed group, we also found class  <dig> hdacs in two green algae, chlamydomonas reinhardtii and ostreococcus tauri , appearing more similar to eubacterial class  <dig> hdacs than to those of other viridiplantae, such as arabidopsis thaliana, oryza sativa, or to the second class  <dig> hdac of chlamydomonas reinhardtii. we further noted the existence of a monophyletic group including proteins of very distant eukaryotic species : the diatoms thalassiosira pseudonana and phaeodactylum tricornutum , the red alga cyanidioschyon merolae, and the green alga ostreococcus tauri . the green alga sequence is thus more closely related to those of the diatoms, which are evolutionarily quite distant, than to those of any other viridiplantae. finally, we found a monophyletic group comprising the second hdac sequence found in the genome of the cnidarian nematostella vectensis and the sequences of two distantly related eubacteria, cytophaga hutchinsonii  and psychrobacter cryhalolentis  .

there is thus a clear incongruence between the hdac protein tree and the phylogenetic tree of the corresponding species. we then looked more closely at the distribution of class  <dig> hdacs in eukaryotes . class  <dig> hdacs are found in three of the main lineages of eukaryotes   <cit> . inside each of these groups, some species possess proteins belonging to the eukaryotic group and others display proteins of the mixed group, with a few species possessing both types . the eukaryotic class  <dig> hdacs thus clearly display an anomalous phyletic distribution, given our current view of the phylogenetic tree of eukaryotes.

discussion
two main mechanisms might account for the unexpected phylogenetic relationships among class  <dig> hdacs and the anomalous phyletic distribution of the eukaryotic ones:  ancient gene duplication followed by differential gene loss or  horizontal gene transfer .

let us first examine the anomalous phyletic distribution of some eukaryotic class  <dig> hdacs in the light of the 'gene duplication-gene loss' hypothesis . as both the mixed-group type and the eukaryotic-group type occur  in a wide range of eukaryotes, the duplication event postulated to have given rise to these two types of genes must have occurred early in eukaryotic evolution. the presence of two types of class  <dig> hdacs would thus be the ancestral situation of most or all eukaryotes. the punctate distribution we see today would be due to loss, at a high rate, of one or the other type of class  <dig> hdac. as the mixed-group class  <dig> hdacs of eukaryotes appear more closely related to eubacterial hdacs than to the eukaryotic-group hdacs, we must even consider the possibility that the duplication event occurred before the eukaryotes and eubacteria diverged . the presence of two types of class  <dig> hdacs would be the ancestral situation for both eubacteria and eukaryotes. the transition to the present-day situation would have involved not only a high rate of differential gene loss in eukaryotes, but also the loss of one of the paralogues in eubacteria, probably at an early stage of eubacterial evolution.

one main problem with this view is that both types of class  <dig> hdac genes must have coexisted in the ancestors of lineages  where some descendants have one type of hdac and other descendants have the other type. we would expect many of these organisms to still possess both genes, but as a rule, this is not so . we found both gene types in only three eukaryotic species, as opposed to  <dig> species possessing only one gene. as more genomes are sequenced, more will probably be found to contain both genes, but the presence of a single gene in most genomes studied to date does not support the notion that the two categories of class  <dig> hdacs represent two paralogous groups that originated early in eukaryotic evolution. in addition, the model of ancient gene duplication followed by differential gene loss fails to fully explain some of our observations, such as the strongly supported separation of two diatom hdacs, those of thalassiosira pseudonana and phaeodactylum tricornutum, within the mixed group . much more complicated scenarios are therefore required, making this model less plausible and not especially parsimonious.

the other main possibility is hgt, the transmission of genetic material from one species to another . hgt is a widespread and important phenomenon in prokaryotes. it is one of the driving forces of genome evolution in both archaea and eubacteria  <cit> . over the past few years, it has become increasingly clear that hgt has had an impact on eukaryote evolution also, at least in the case of unicellular and/or parasitic eukaryotes  <cit> , yet the occurrence and the importance of hgt in organisms such as land plants and animals is less obvious and very controversial. although claims have been made for hgt in multicellular organisms, only very few cases have been clearly demonstrated, and these mainly concern eukaryote-eukaryote and/or host-parasite gene transfer  <cit> . the main criteria used in the aforementioned publications to detect hgt are unexpected phyletic distribution, differential presence or absence in closely related species, and incongruent phylogenetic trees  <cit> . our data meet all these criteria , and are therefore very suggestive of the occurrence of hgts having shaped the evolutionary history of the class  <dig> hdacs.

although our data do not allow a firm determination of the direction of these putative hgts , we favour the hypothesis that transfer occurred from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, and that the eukaryotic-group members are the 'original' eukaryotic hdacs and the mixed-group members are the 'transferred' hdacs. in support of this view, class  <dig> hdacs are found in many diverse eubacterial species representative of most major eubacterial lineages . to imagine that a class  <dig> hdac was present in early eubacterial evolution  is a more parsimonious mechanism than to postulate that the different prokaryotic class  <dig> hdacs were acquired from eukaryotes by numerous independent hgts.

an important feature of the putative prokaryote-eukaryote hgts is that most of them are probably ancient, as indicated by the species ranges covered by the monophyletic groups distinguished among the mixed-group eukaryotic hdacs . for example, the existence of the aforementioned monophyletic group comprising all nine metazoan sequences indicates that the transferred gene was already present in the last common ancestor of these animals, i.e. in that of most or all animals. this means that the recipient of the putative hgt was not a present-day complex metazoan but an ancient, probably much more simple  ancestor. this is important, as gene transfers from prokaryotes to eukaryotes with sequestered germ lines, such as most present-day animals, appear to be very rare  <cit> ; almost all other putative hgts we have detected concern unicellular eukaryotes. a possible exception concerns the second hdac sequence found in the genome of the cnidarian nematostella vectensis, which forms a monophyletic group with the sequences of cytophaga hutchinsonii and psychrobacter cryhalolentis . although we cannot rule out contamination of the genomic data from which these sequences were obtained, this might be indicative of a much more recent hgt involving a complex multicellular organism.

besides these putative eubacterium-eukaryote transfers, there is also the possibility of at least one eukaryote-eukaryote hgt. this is suggested by the existence of a monophyletic group including very distant eukaryotic species : the diatoms thalassiosira pseudonana and phaeodactylum tricornutum , the red alga cyanidioschyon merolae, and the green alga ostreococcus tauri . the green alga sequence is more closely related to those of the evolutionarily very distant diatoms than to those of any other viridiplantae. we suggest that this association may be the result of eukaryote-eukaryote hgts between these phytoplanctonic species.

lastly, we note that in most lineages only a single hdac is found , yet two different proteins are found in the diatoms thalassiosira pseudonana and phaeodactylum tricornutum, the cnidarian nematostella vectensis, and the green alga ostreococcus tauri. in all these cases, both proteins belong to the mixed group and are not closely related, suggesting independent hgts. the existence of eukaryotes with only mixed-group hdacs  suggests that gene transfer was sometimes followed by functional replacement of the 'original' eukaryotic gene by the transferred one. the only eukaryotes to possess both a mixed-group and a eukaryotic-group protein are the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii and two animals  . similar multiple replacements have been reported for the eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1α  <cit> . whether these replacements are due solely to chance or have selective advantages  <cit>  is an open question that awaits functional and biochemical characterization of the proteins and still broader sampling of eukaryotic hdac genes.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here shed new light on the evolutionary history of class  <dig> hdacs. these proteins display unexpected phylogenetic relationships, at odds with the phylogeny of the corresponding species, suggestive of ancient horizontal gene transfers between prokaryotes and eukaryotes. this suggests that the evolution of important eukaryotic multigene families, such as the histone deacetylase gene family, may have been shaped by horizontal gene transfers.

