BACKGROUND
sexually transmitted infections  are a worldwide public health problem accounting for over  <dig> million newly acquired infections every day . the two most commonly reported bacterial stis in the united states are chlamydia  and gonorrhea  . if left untreated, these stis cause significant health risks such as pelvic inflammatory disease  in women, which can lead to infertility, chronic pelvic pain and ectopic pregnancy  <cit> . bacterial vaginosis  is the most common vaginal condition reported by women and evidence suggests that this condition can also be sexually transmitted  <cit> . bv is associated with preterm birth, endometritis and increased risk of acquisition and transmission of stis, including c. trachomatis, n. gonorrhoeae, and hiv . while bv is a complex disorder thought to arise from the overgrowth of a wide array of anaerobes  and a decreased proportion of lactobacillus spp.  <cit> , gardnerella vaginalis often predominates during bv and is thought to form a biofilm that is associated with bv recurrence  <cit> .

the constituents of the vaginal microbiota can affect susceptibility to stis, though little is known about the molecular mechanisms at work in these interactions. in particular, women with lactobacillus-dominated vaginal microbiota are at lower risk of contracting n. gonorrhoeae and other stis . lactobacillus spp. inhibit growth of n. gonorrhoeae in vitro, and inhibitory strains are more prevalent in women not infected with gonorrhea  <cit> . depending on growth conditions, lactobacillus spp. inhibit n. gonorrhoeae and g. vaginalis, through production of hydrogen peroxide , lactic acid and/or secreted proteins . it is unlikely though that h2o <dig> plays a major role in vivo as physiological concentrations are below that required for inhibition of bv-associated bacterial growth  <cit> . the majority of investigations into the interactions of lactobacillus spp. with n. gonorrhoeae and g. vaginalis have been performed in vitro. while this work has provided valuable insights into these interactions, more complex models are required to expand our knowledge of how vaginal lactobacillus spp. influence pathogen attachment, growth and virulence in the female reproductive tract.

while mouse models of both n. gonorrhoeae and g. vaginalis infection have been developed, these models are limited by the fact that the mouse vaginal epithelium in keratinized , and that the resident mouse microbiota has been somewhat characterized and is not similar to that of humans  <cit> . further, the mouse vaginal ph, which is thought to be a critical factor in sti protection, is higher than that of humans and it is unclear how well results in mice extrapolate to humans . mice are also relatively expensive and low throughput. our limited understanding of vaginal microbial interactions with one another and with host mucosa highlight the need for a new model that will allow these questions to be addressed in a biologically complex and defined environment.

porcine vaginal mucosa  may represent a novel model for sti interactions with the resident microbiota and the host mucosal surface. pvm is an excellent model of the human vagina. as in humans, pvm is composed of a stratified, squamous epithelium with a similar surface lipid composition and underlying resident immune infiltrate  <cit> . pvm is also similar to the human vagina in ph and permeability characteristics. an ex vivo pvm model has been used extensively to study the interactions of staphylococcus aureus and its virulence factors with the host mucosa, as well as to investigate biofilm formation and antimicrobial efficacy . the similarity of pvm to the human vaginal mucosa, and its demonstrated use as a model for pathogen/host interactions and biofilm formation make it an excellent candidate for similar investigations with sti pathogens.

in the current study, the ex vivo pvm tissue model was used to explore the role of cervicovaginal lactobacillus spp. in affecting colonization and growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae. it was hypothesized that human clinical isolates of lactobacillus spp., g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae can colonize and grow on ex vivo pvm, form biofilm , and that interactions of these organisms could be investigated using the pvm model. the data presented support these hypotheses and demonstrate a clear role for ph and lactobacillus in inhibition of pathogen growth on live vaginal mucosa.

RESULTS
human clinical isolates grow and form biofilm on pvm
the pvm is obtained as relatively large specimens , from which 5 mm biopsies are taken and trimmed to produce mucosal explants   <cit> . to determine if human clinical bacterial isolates can grow on pvm, explants were inoculated with ~104 cfu/explant of lactobacillus spp., g. vaginalis, and n. gonorrhoeae. l. crispatus consistently grew  <dig> to  <dig> logs, exhibiting peak growth at 48 h post-inoculation with ~  <dig>  x 106 cfu/explant  . l. iners, l. jensenii, and l. gasseri also showed maximal growth at  <dig> – 72 h with ~107 cfu/explant, but they were not used for further experiments in the current study . g. vaginalis grew to ~  <dig>  x 107 cfu/explant  with peak growth at  <dig> – 72 h . n. gonorrhoeae grew to ~  <dig>  x 107 cfu/explant  with peak growth at  <dig> – 48 h . it should be noted that n. gonorrhoeae grew best on the pvm when the underlying media was at ph  <dig>  –  <dig>  . all n. gonorrhoeae experiments were performed under aerobic conditions, as n. gonorrhoeae did not grow on pvm anaerobically with rpmi as the underlying media. all other organisms were grown on pvm anaerobically.fig.  <dig> growth of human clinical isolates on porcine vaginal mucosa . a pvm is obtained as large specimens  and 5 mm explants are trimmed  and placed mucosal side up in transwells over liquid media . “air” refers to either an aerobic or anaerobic environment depending on the experiment being performed. b
l. crispatus, c
g. vaginalis, and d
n. gonorrhoeae were inoculated onto pvm explants at ~ 104 cfu/explant . explants were processed for cfu/explant at each time point to evaluate bacterial growth. data was log <dig> transformed and plotted on a log scale as the mean ± sd



n. gonorrhoeae can form a biofilm in continuous-flow chambers and on human cervical epithelial cells, suggesting that biofilm formation in vivo may play a role in pathogenesis  <cit> . similarly, g. vaginalis can form a biofilm in vitro and in vivo that might contribute to the resistance of bv to standard treatments . the ability of n. gonorrhoeae and g. vaginalis to form biofilm on pvm was assessed in order to determine if the pvm model can be used to study the mechanisms of biofilm formation. a live/dead stain was used with confocal microscopy to visualize both biofilm development and the health of pvm epithelium. by 24 h post-inoculation, single and microcolonies of adherent bacteria were observed on pvm explants colonized with g. vaginalis . where these colonies were observed, the underlying epithelium showed a mix of live  and dead  cells, whereas on areas of tissue that did not show bacterial colonization, the epithelium appeared mostly green as in the uninfected controls . by 48 h, patchy g. vaginalis biofilm was observed that thickened and colonized more of the surface area of the tissue over time . for these large areas of biofilm the underlying epithelium was either completely degraded or composed of dead cells . pvm colonized with n. gonorrhoeae exhibited robust biofilm development within 24 h  when compared to uninfected controls . by 48 h post-inoculation, n. gonorrhoeae formed a thick biofilm covering most of the surface of the explants . control tissue remained healthy and uninfected over the course of the experiment . unlike the epithelial toxicity observed with g. vaginalis biofilm, epithelial cells that could be seen between patches of n. gonorrhoeae biofilm were mostly green indicating that they were alive. biofilm was not observed on explants colonized with l. crispatus alone at any time-point .fig.  <dig> 
g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae form biofilm on pvm. strains were inoculated onto pvm explants at ~ 104 cfu/explant and processed for microscopy at indicated times. the live/dead stain allows for imaging of both the mucosal epithelium and bacteria. green cells are alive while red cells are dead. a-d, i-l uncolonized control  tissue remains healthy throughout both experiments as evidenced by large green intact epithelial cells. e-h by 48 h post-colonization, g. vaginalis  forms a patchy biofilm that persists and spreads over time . m-p in just 24 h n. gonorrhoeae  forms a robust biofilm, which thickens and persists over time . epithelial cells that can be seen under and around the ng biofilm are alive as evidenced by their green staining, while those on gv-colonized explants are dead . scale bars = 100 μm for all images



low ph inhibits growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae on pvm
lactic acid is thought to play a critical and complex role in maintaining a healthy vaginal environment  <cit> . it is thought that one important function of lactic acid is inhibiting the growth of potentially pathogenic organisms including g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae. acetic acid is produced by g. vaginalis and other anaerobes and high levels of acetic acid in vaginal fluid are associated with bv . to determine if lactic acid, acetic acid or acidity alone  affect growth of the organisms under study on the pvm model, culture media containing acids at ph  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig>  were produced and placed under transwell membranes containing explants prior to inoculation with various organisms. a reduction in ph with any of the three acids tested had no affect on growth of l. crispatus at 48 h post-inoculation . in contrast, g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae were unable to grow on pvm in the presence of media adjusted to ph  <dig>  with all three acids tested . interestingly, while n. gonorrhoeae grew well over both lactic acid and hcl at ph  <dig> , it consistently grew poorly over acetic acid at ph  <dig> , regardless of inoculum.fig.  <dig> various acids inhibit growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae on pvm. rpmi was ph-adjusted with lactic acid, acetic acid or hydrochloric acid  and placed under transwells containing pvm explants. bacteria were enumerated 48 h post-colonization. l. crispatus and g. vaginalis were incubated anaerobically, while n. gonorrhoeae was incubated aerobically. a the low ph produced by each of the three acids has no effect on growth of l. crispatus. b
g. vaginalis growth is inhibited at ph  <dig>  in the presence of all three acids. c
n. gonorrhoeae growth peaked at ph  <dig>  in the presence of lactic acid and hcl, while growth was inhibited at ph  <dig>  in the presence of acetic acid. asterisks indicate significant difference from inoculum  



l. crispatus produces lactic acid and inhibits growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae on pvm
lactobacillus spp. inhibit in vitro growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae  <cit> . co-colonization experiments were performed to determine if l. crispatus affects g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae growth on pvm. because inhibition of growth of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae is thought to rely in part on lactic acid production by vaginal lactobacillus spp., resulting in low ph, unbuffered rpmi was initially used to maintain explants. pvm was inoculated with l. crispatus for 48 h prior to addition of g. vaginalis . under these conditions, the ph of the media under the transwells containing explants inoculated with l. crispatus did not go below  <dig>   and growth of g. vaginalis was only reduced by ~ ½ log .fig.  <dig> unbuffered rpmi does not support sufficient ph changes in the presence of l. crispatus on pvm. unbuffered rpmi was placed under transwells and relevant explants were inoculated with l. crispatus. after 48 h, relevant explants were inoculated with g. vaginalis. experiments were performed under anaerobic conditions and the ph of media below explants was monitored over time. a media under uncolonized controls  and those colonized with g. vaginalis  alone reached ph  <dig>  while those colonized with l. crispatus  alone or co-colonized with both organisms  reached ph  <dig>  . b the presence of l. crispatus had a statistically significant , yet minor effect on g. vaginalis growth. dotted line represents gv inoculum



it seemed likely that the relatively small number of bacteria on each explant was insufficient to produce enough lactic acid to lower the ph of the 1 ml of media below the transwells to <  <dig> . it was hypothesized that use of media previously “conditioned” by l. crispatus would support meaningful ph changes in the presence of l. crispatus. to test this hypothesis, l. crispatus conditioned media  produced by sterile filtering overnight aerobic cultures  of l. crispatus  was mixed with unbuffered rpmi resulting in a ph of  <dig>  –  <dig> , which is permissible for growth of g. vaginalis . this allowed for testing the ability of l. crispatus on pvm to lower the local ph to that observed in the vagina of healthy human subjects  and inhibit growth of g. vaginalis.

after 48 h, l. crispatus lowered the ph of cm below the transwells to  <dig> , a ph that was maintained over the course of the experiments . the cm below transwells containing uninfected explants or those colonized with g. vaginalis alone remained at ph  <dig>  –  <dig> . when g. vaginalis was added to explants pre-inoculated with l. crispatus, it failed to grow whereas g. vaginalis placed on explants alone  grew to normal densities . the levels of d- and l-lactic acid were significantly increased in cm under transwells containing explants inoculated with l. crispatus but not those that were uninfected or colonized with g. vaginalis alone . d-lactate levels produced by l. crispatus alone averaged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm and l-lactic acid levels averaged  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm over  <dig> experiments . these data are in excellent agreement with results showing that 60 mm lactic acid  was required to lower the ph to  <dig>  and inhibit growth of g. vaginalis . it should be noted that the levels of d- and l-lactic acid reported in the “cm” columns of fig. 5c and d are from overnight aerobic broth culture . further accumulation of d- and l-lactic acid in this media  was achieved under anaerobic conditions on pvm.fig.  <dig> conditioned media supports l. crispatus-induced ph changes, inhibiting growth of g. vaginalis on pvm. media from overnight aerobic broth culture of l. crispatus was sterile filtered and mixed with unbuffered rpmi to achieve ph  <dig> . this conditioned media  was placed under transwells and relevant explants were inoculated with l. crispatus. after 48 h, relevant explants were inoculated with g. vaginalis. experiments were performed under anaerobic conditions and the ph of media below explants was monitored over time. a media under uncolonized controls  and those colonized with g. vaginalis  alone remained at ph  <dig>  –  <dig>  while those colonized with l. crispatus  alone or co-colonized with both organisms  were reduced to ph  <dig>  . b the presence of l. crispatus inhibited g. vaginalis growth. dotted line represents gv inoculum. asterisk indicates significant difference in growth between the two groups shown . c, d d- and l-lactate levels in the cm below transwells from experiment  were analyzed at 96 h. cm below explants colonized with l. crispatus  showed a significant increase in lactic acid when compared with uncolonized controls  and g. vaginalis  alone . e a comparison of d- and l- lactate levels in cm below lc alone infections shows that d-lactate is produced at ~2x the level of l-lactate .  data shown are combined 



to directly analyze the effect of l. crispatus on n. gonorrhoeae growth, experiments were performed with unbuffered rpmi that was adjusted to ph  <dig>  with lactic acid prior to inoculation. after 48 h, l. crispatus lowered the ph of media below transwells to  <dig>  and further lowered the ph to  <dig>  by 96 h . when n. gonorrhoeae was added to explants pre-inoculated with l. crispatus, the organism failed to grow whereas n. gonorrhoeae placed on explants alone grew to normal levels . the effect of l. crispatus cm on n. gonorrhoeae growth was also determined. after 48 h l. crispatus lowered the ph of underlying cm to  <dig>  and further to ph  <dig>  after 96 h . the cm below transwells containing uninfected explants or those colonized with n. gonorrhoeae alone remained at ph  <dig> . surprisingly, n. gonorrhoeae did not survive over cm, even at an otherwise permissible growth ph  and in the absence of l. crispatus pre-inoculation . the inability of n. gonorrhoeae to survive on pvm in the presence of cm was observed with cm produced from anaerobic and aerobic l. crispatus cultures obtained without shaking . though the background media for cm  did affect n. gonorrhoeae growth on pvm, it was not bactericidal as was observed with cm. these data indicate that l. crispatus 24-9- <dig> produces a factor in broth culture that kills n. gonorrhoeae even when the ph is permissible for n. gonorrhoeae growth.fig.  <dig> 
l. crispatus inhibits growth of n. gonorrhoeae. a, b unbuffered rpmi or  l. crispatus cm was adjusted to ph  <dig>  and placed under transwells. relevant explants were inoculated with l. crispatus. after 48 h, relevant explants were inoculated with n. gonorrhoeae. experiments were performed under aerobic conditions and the ph of media below explants was monitored over time. a rpmi under uncolonized controls  and those colonized with n. gonorrhoeae  alone remained at ph  <dig>  while rpmi under explants colonized with l. crispatus  alone or co-colonized with both organisms  was reduced to ph  <dig>  . b the presence of l. crispatus inhibited 48 h n. gonorrhoeae growth. asterisk indicates significant difference in growth between the two groups shown . c cm under cntl or ng remains at ph  <dig>  while cm under explants colonized with lc alone or co-colonized with both organisms  was reduced to ph  <dig>  . d while n. gonorrhoeae did exhibit a growth defect over nyc + rpmi media  it was completely killed by aerobic or anaerobic cm at ph  <dig> , even in the absence of a l. crispatus co-infection. asterisks indicate significant difference from inoculum . for  and , dotted lines represent ng inocula



discussion
our limited understanding of the interactions of microbes and the importance of microbial structures such as biofilms in affecting the health of the human female reproductive system requires the development of predictive, biologically complex models. the goal of the current study was to use ex vivo pvm to model interactions of lactobacillus with g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae. lactobacillus spp., and g. vaginalis colonize the human vagina, while n. gonorrhoeae is an obligate human pathogen that preferentially infects both the endo- and ectocervix . the pvm is squamous epithelium similar to human vaginal and ectocervical epithelia making it an ideal candidate for ex vivo studies of these organisms. human clinical isolates of lactobacillus spp., g. vaginalis, and n. gonorrhoeae, colonized and grew on pvm to clinically relevant densities. lactobacillus spp. grew to ~  <dig>  x 107 cfu/ml, which is in accordance with published findings of  <dig> – 109 cfu/ml in vaginal specimens  <cit> . growth of g. vaginalis on pvm  mimics the densities found during bv, as women without bv are colonized by <  <dig> x 107 cfu/ml, while those with bv are colonized by >  <dig> x 107 cfu/ml  <cit> . n. gonorrhoeae grew to ~  <dig>  x 107 cfu/ml, which is slightly higher than the reported range of  <dig> x  <dig> –  <dig> x 106 cfu/ml obtained from vaginal washes  <cit> . these data demonstrate that the observed growth of human clinical bacterial isolates on pvm reflects the number of organisms found in human vaginal fluids/washes. investigations of temporal dynamics on pvm are limited though as growth of the organisms under study generally peaked at  <dig> – 72 h post-colonization and waned at later time points, likely due to depletion of nutrients in this closed system.

both g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae form robust biofilms on pvm. multiple lines of evidence suggest that biofilm formation by g. vaginalis strains in vivo is a critical first step in the development and recurrence of bv  <cit> . additionally, evidence suggests that the ability of any particular strain to form a biofilm may be a key factor in distinguishing pathogenic g. vaginalis from commensal strains found in many asymptomatic women  <cit> . the g. vaginalis strain used in this study  produces a cholesterol-dependent cytolysin , vaginolysin   <cit>  that lyses cervical epithelial cells  <cit> . pvm colonized with g. vaginalis biofilm showed extensive epithelial cell death, suggesting that vly might be active in this system. the staphylococcus aureus cytolysin α-toxin is required for biofilm formation on pvm  <cit>  while the streptococcus pneumoniae cdc, pneumolysin, is not required for biofilm formation in a mouse nasopharyngeal colonization model  <cit> . it will be interesting to determine if vly is required for biofilm formation ex vivo and what role lysis versus epithelial cell signaling may play in the vly contribution to g. vaginalis colonization and/or biofilm formation  <cit> . because g. vaginalis is a genomically diverse species, other factors might be important in determining characteristics necessary for pathogenicity  <cit> . future experiments will explore the molecular mechanisms used by g. vaginalis, and n. gonorrhoeae to form biofilm on pvm and the ability of lactobacillus spp. and their secreted products to prevent/disrupt these biofilms.

vaginal ph increases in women with bv and may be associated with sti susceptibility. it is becoming evident that lactic acid produced by lactobacillus spp. contributes to overall vaginal health and inhibition of growth of pathogenic organisms in vitro  <cit> . bv-associated organisms, including g. vaginalis, produce acetic acid and there is a loss of lactic acid production and an increase in acetic acid in the vaginal fluid of women with bv  <cit> . of the three acids tested, lactic acid consistently showed a much larger degree of killing g. vaginalis at ph  <dig> . it may be that lactic acid has a specific bactericidal affect on g. vaginalis but it is unclear if this affect is necessary to keep g. vaginalis growth in check, or if the effects of low ph alone are sufficient to do so.

co-colonization experiments with l. crispatus and g. vaginalis on pvm  clearly showed an association between lactic acid production, a reduction in the local ph, and inhibition of g. vaginalis growth. these results reflect previous observations that under anaerobic conditions , lactic acid inhibits growth of g. vaginalis  in vitro  <cit> . the results here show that l. crispatus inhibition of g. vaginalis growth is ph-dependent; lactic acid production is not sufficient to inhibit g. vaginalis growth if it is not accompanied by a reduction in ph. l. crispatus produced higher levels of d- versus l-lactate, as previously reported for the species  <cit> . the differential production of d- and l-lactate by various lactobacillus spp. may be important in influencing host responses and susceptibility to bv and future work will tease out these differences by expanding the species and strains used in co-infection experiments.

women with lactobacillus-dominated vaginal microbiota are less susceptible to n. gonorrhoeae infection  <cit> . the mechanism of inhibition of n. gonorrhoeae by lactobacillus spp. is unclear as multiple studies demonstrate that lactic acid, h2o <dig>  and lactobacillus bacteriocins can inhibit n. gonorrhoeae growth in vitro depending on the growth conditions. though lactic acid alone at ph  <dig>  was permissible for n. gonorrhoeae growth, l. crispatus anaerobic cm at ph  <dig>  was not, indicating that this l. crispatus strain produces a factor other than lactic acid that inhibits n. gonorrhoeae growth. this data also supports the hypothesis that h2o <dig> does not likely play an inhibitory role in vivo, as h2o <dig> is undetectable in lactobacillus broth culture incubated anaerobically and in cervicovaginal fluid  <cit> .

pvm represents a biologically relevant model that cannot only be used to ask fundamental questions about microbial interactions, but also help translate new technologies to clinical use. while it is likely that some host/bacterial interactions are not identical between the porcine and human mucosal epithelia, pvm has proven to be useful in assessing host toxicity of potential antimicrobials and is predictive of clinical efficacy  <cit> . the use of probiotic lactobacillus spp. has been investigated as a prevention of and treatment for bv  <cit> . the pvm model used in this study could be used to screen potential probiotic organisms for their ability to prevent the growth of a variety of bv-associated organisms and decipher the mechanisms of inhibition. advantages of pvm include that it is not subject to regulation as live animal models are, it is inexpensive, relatively easy to obtain and semi-high throughput. this model is potentially an excellent platform for initial testing of novel therapeutics against stis, such as drug-resistant strains of n. gonorrhoeae. importantly, toxic effects of new drugs on the host mucosa and resident protective microbes such as lactobacillus spp. could also be investigated with the pvm model.

future work will include investigations of the mechanisms of biofilm formation, lactobacillus spp. interactions with bv-associated organisms and sti agents, the host response to colonization and the efficacy of antimicrobials against stis using the pvm model.

CONCLUSIONS
an acidic environment  inhibits colonization of live vaginal mucosa by both g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae regardless of the acid tested. n. gonorrhoeae grows best in the presence of lactic acid at ph  <dig>  perhaps contributing to increased susceptibility during bv. additionally, a high concentration of acetic acid inhibits n. gonorrhoeae growth on pvm at ph  <dig> . a stable l. crispatus colonization of live vaginal mucosa is able to prevent colonization of g. vaginalis in a ph-dependent manner, while l. crispatus secretes a factor that kills n. gonorrhoeae. the pvm model will continue to be used to investigate these interactions and the mechanisms of g. vaginalis and n. gonorrhoeae biofilm formation on live vaginal tissue.

