BACKGROUND
cells from the mononuclear phagocyte system play central roles in the pathophysiological processes of inflammation  <cit>  and infection  <cit>  lipopolysaccharide , a cell membrane component of gram-negative bacteria, is a potent stimulator of immune responses of the mononuclear phagocyte system  <cit> . stimulation of monocytes with lps is a frequently employed model system to study inflammatory responses  <cit>  and coagulation  <cit> . one approach to investigate cellular processes is by gene expression studies. due to its high sensitivity, specificity, dynamic range and straightforwardness, quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction  has become one of the most frequently used techniques to measure gene expression. for comparison of expression levels between certain conditions of a cell or organ gene expression quantities need to be normalized to a standard. several approaches have been proposed to achieve adequate normalization, but expression levels of internal reference genes, habitually called housekeeping genes, are mainly used  <cit> . studies from the past years have undoubtedly shown that stability assessment of internal reference genes for each experimental condition is a prerequisite for valid normalization of gene expression and reliable gene expression results  <cit> . this notion has therefore also been included in the recently published miqe guidelines describing "minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time pcr experiments"  <cit> .

in contrast to the fact that gene expression analysis in lps-stimulated cells from the mononuclear phagocyte system is frequently employed - documented by about  <dig> pubmed entries on "lps, monocyte and gene expression"  - a systematic evaluation of reference gene stability has, to our knowledge, not been published yet. moreover, a thorough review of the literature of the last years indicated that most of the published rt-qpcr results in lps-stimulated monocytes were normalized to either gapdh or actb alone, although normalization to a single reference gene is only rarely justified  <cit> .

in the present study, mrna expression levels of twelve candidate reference genes were assessed by rt-qpcr in human monocytes stimulated with lps from different bacteria. the software applications genorm  <cit> , normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit>  were subsequently used to calculate the most stably expressed reference genes and to determine the optimal number of reference genes required for reliable normalization of gene expression data. these results were then applied to normalize expression levels of genes known to be involved in immune response and to evaluate different normalization strategies. we show that gene expression levels in lps-stimulated monocytes are significantly dependent on the choice of reference genes which emphasizes the importance of reference gene evaluation in the frequently employed model system of lps-stimulated monocytes

RESULTS
stability of reference gene expression
to identify the most stably expressed reference genes in lps-stimulated and non-stimulated monocytes, the expression levels of twelve candidate reference genes  were measured by rt-qpcr in human monocytes from six healthy donors stimulated for three hours with lps from e. coli and n. meningitides, respectively, and in non-stimulated monocytes before and after three hours in culture. initially, descriptive statistics of expression levels were calculated by the software bestkeeper showing that b2m and actb were the highest expressed genes with cq  averages of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . lowest expression was obtained with the candidate reference genes golga <dig> and ctbp <dig> with mean cq values of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. figure  <dig> shows individual cq values of the investigated candidate reference genes across all samples. to determine the optimal choice and number of reference genes, the expression values of the candidate reference genes were processed in the applications genorm  <cit> , normfinder  <cit>  and bestkeeper  <cit> , which are freely available programs and generally accepted methods  <cit> :

r <dig>  square of pearson's correlation coefficient. e, efficiency as calculated from 10-fold serial dilutions. &assay ids from applied biosystems

descriptive statistics were calculated for all  <dig> samples. cq, quantification cycle; gm, geometric mean; am, arithmetic mean; min, minimum; max, maximum; sd, standard deviation; 
cv, coefficient of variation.

i) genorm analysis
expression stability of the investigated candidate reference genes in lps-stimulated and non-stimulated monocytes as calculated by the program genorm  <cit>  are shown in figure 1a. high gene expression variability results in high m values and indicates low expression stability. the reference genes ppib and b2m are identified as the two most stable genes with an average expression stability m score of  <dig> . as recent experimental data from the genorm developers have shown that stably expressed genes typically exhibit mean m values lower than  <dig>  in relatively homogeneous sample panels  <cit> , the candidate reference gene ppia can also be regarded as stably expressed with an average expression stability m value of  <dig>  together with ppib and b2m . the frequently used reference genes actb and gapdh performed poorly as reference genes according to the genorm calculations and must therefore be regarded as not appropriate for gene expression normalization in monocytes stimulated with lps.

in addition to a ranking regarding the expression stability of each gene, genorm also calculates a normalization factor for each sample based on the most stable reference genes and reports the optimal number of required reference genes. figure 2b illustrates the determination of the optimal number of reference genes based on the pairwise variation of sequential normalization factors with increasing number of reference genes included for normalization factor calculation. according to the genorm developers' original publication data, the authors propose  <dig>  as the cut-off, below which the optimal number of reference genes is achieved and the inclusion of an additional reference gene not required. in our study, v2/ <dig>  is already below this cut-off implying that the employment of the two best-performing reference genes  is likely to result in reliable gene expression normalization of target genes . however, as the authors of the original publication explicitly recommend the minimal use of the three most stable internal control genes for normalization of rt-qpcr results  <cit> , we decided to calculate the normalization factor based on the three best-scoring reference genes  for further analysis.

ii) normfinder analysis
normfinder employs a model-based approach which, in addition to the overall expression level variation, also takes intra- and intergroup variation of the candidate normalization genes into account to evaluate the expression stability  <cit> . table  <dig> presents the ranking of the candidate reference genes from our study according to normfinder. the results for intra- and intergroup variation are shown in additional file  <dig>  in our study, normfinder identified actb as the most stably expressed reference gene with a stability value of  <dig> , followed by ppib  and golga <dig> . for the best combination of two reference genes with a stability value of  <dig> , normfinder suggests the combination b2m and tbp with individual stability values of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the frequently used reference genes ubc and gapdh were the least stable reference genes according to the normfinder analysis, indicating that traditional reference genes exhibit substantial variation under certain circumstances.

*tbp and b2m were reported as best combination of two references genes with a stability value of  <dig> 

we noted that, due to different mathematical approaches of the two programs, normfinder ranked actb as the most stable, single reference, whereas the same gene performed poorly in the genorm analysis.

iii) bestkeeper analysis
bestkeeper  <cit>  analyses start by calculating standard descriptive statistics for investigated genes, which are shown in table  <dig> for our study. this analysis showed a high variation of the candidate reference gene ctbp <dig> with a standard deviation  of  <dig> . the developers of bestkeeper suggest the exclusion of studied genes with sds higher than  <dig>   <cit> . ctbp <dig> was consequently regarded as not stable and excluded from further bestkeeper analysis. moreover, the candidate ubc exhibited with a r <dig> of  <dig>  and a p-value of  <dig>   only a weak correlation with the geometric mean of all included candidate reference genes, which is referred to as the bestkeeper index. hence, ubc was also excluded. all other candidate reference genes showed sds <  <dig> , with ppia, ppib and b2m exhibiting the lowest sds , which are thus regarded as the most stable candidate reference genes according to bestkeeper. all candidate reference genes were highly correlated to the bestkeeper index with coefficients of correlation between  <dig>  and  <dig>  and p-values <  <dig>  . repeated pairwise correlation and regression analysis of candidate reference genes performed by bestkeeper is presented in additional file  <dig> 

unfortunately, neither the software nor the original publication presents a ranking of reference gene stability  or suggests an optimal number of reference genes for reliable normalization of expression levels based on the bestkeeper index. taking this into account and the fact that bestkeeper is founded on similar principles as genorm, which also identified the candidate genes ppia, b2m and ppib as the most stable genes, it was opted not to use bestkeeper results for further analysis.

evaluation of different normalization strategies
after identification of the most stably expressed reference genes in primary human monocytes stimulated with lps, we were interested in validating our data and whether different normalization strategies significantly change gene expression results. for this, we quantified the mrna expression of two target genes  known to be significantly regulated upon lps stimulation of monocytes and, based on our data, used different approaches to normalize the expression levels of these target genes. the following normalization approaches were applied:  a normalization factor calculated by genorm based on the three most stably expressed genes ,  the geometric mean of the best combination of two genes as recommended by normfinder ,  the single best gene as suggested by normfinder , and  another gene frequently used for gene expression normalization, gapdh. subsequently, we investigated whether these strategies resulted in significantly different expression results.

as expected, we observed an extreme increase in expression levels of tnf-α  and il <dig>  in monocytes stimulated with lps either from e. coli or n. meningitides compared to non-stimulated monocytes . these results were significant with all four normalization strategies . however, when comparing the fold change obtained by different normalization approaches, we found that normalization with gapdh alone resulted in a significantly higher fold change compared to the normalization strategies based on several reference genes as suggested by genorm and normfinder. this significant difference was observed for both tnf-α and il <dig> . thus, normalization to gapdh alone indicated significantly higher expression levels than normalization to a combination of several stably expressed genes, resulting in an overestimation of the fold change in gene expression. gene expression levels normalized to actb alone showed a trend towards overestimation of expression levels compared to the normalization with a reference gene combination; however, this difference was not significant at the  <dig>  level . another interesting finding was that we observed a significant difference in tnf-α mrna levels in monocytes stimulated with equimolar concentrations of lps from n. meningitides or e. coli when using a normalization strategy based on several stably expressed reference genes as suggested by genorm or normfinder . in contrast, no significant difference between tnf-α mrna levels in monocytes stimulated with e. coli and n. meningitides lps, respectively, was found when normalized to either actb or gapdh alone . independently of the normalization approach, no significant difference in il <dig> expression was observed between monocytes stimulated with lps from e. coli and n. meningitides, respectively .

p-values were assessed by wilcoxon matched pairs signed ranks test. paired student's t test was performed as well and resulted in highly similar findings .

gn comb, normalization based on ppib, b2m and ppia as suggested by genorm; nf comb, normalization based on tbp and b2m as suggested by normfinder; nm, n. meningitides; ec, e. coli; stim, stimulated.

differences in target gene expression results due to the choice of reference genes imply the regulation of unstable candidate reference genes during stimulation. therefore, we calculated the mrna level changes of the candidate reference genes between stimulated and non-stimulated cells . when normalizing the expression values of the candidate reference genes to the best reference gene combination as suggested by genorm and normfinder, respectively, we found that several candidate reference genes were significantly regulated with changes up to 80%  in lps stimulated monocytes compared to non-stimulated cells . here, both normalization strategies resulted in highly similar findings .

discussion
our study is, to our knowledge, the first report investigating expression stability of a panel of candidate reference genes in the frequently employed inflammation model of lps-stimulated monocytes. we used three different programs  to evaluate the expression stability of twelve candidate reference genes and, based on these results, investigated different normalization strategies applied to the mrna levels of two target genes, tnf-α and il <dig>  in monocytes stimulated with lps from e. coli and n. meningitides, respectively.

in lps-stimulated monocytes, actb and gapdh are mainly used as reference genes. in our study, we chose commonly used reference genes from the literature   <cit> . in addition, we included three novel reference genes, ctbp <dig>  golga <dig> and tmbim <dig>  which were identified by lee et al. using statistical analysis of large human microarray datasets from various experimental conditions and therefore called universal housekeeping genes  <cit> . published microarray-based gene expression results of resting and activated mononuclear cells would probably result in several promising candidate reference genes. comparison of our chosen reference genes with a previous, microarray gene expression study from our group using stimulation conditions identical to this study showed that several candidate reference genes investigated here  were among the least regulated  genes   <cit> . this indicates that the reference gene panel evaluated in this study included several promising candidates.

one of the main findings from our study is that several genes, like gapdh, actb or ubc, which probably due to traditional reasons are still frequently used for normalization of rt-qpcr data, exhibit substantial variation in lps-stimulated and non-stimulated monocytes. these findings clearly suggest that these genes disqualify as single internal control genes in lps-stimulated monocytes. this observation is supported by several other studies which have shown significant variability of traditional "housekeeping" genes in different experimental conditions rendering them unsuitable as internal standards  <cit> . for example, glare et al. demonstrated strong downregulation  of both gapdh and actb in inflamed biopsy tissue of asthmatic patients compared to healthy controls or treated patients  <cit> .

the evaluation of candidate reference gene stability depends on the method used. surprisingly, normfinder evaluated actb as the most stable single gene, whereas genorm and bestkeeper found actb to be one of the least stable genes. this discrepancy is probably due to the different algorithms used in the programs. genorm calculates the average pairwise variation for a candidate reference gene with all other tested genes and bestkeeper focuses on the coefficient of variation of a gene across all samples, whereas normfinder employs a model-based approach which, in addition to the overall expression level variation, also takes intra- and intergroup variation into account. even if such a discrepancy in actb stability has been reported before  <cit> , the expression level changes observed in the present study resulted in highly similar findings, both for the target genes tnf-α and il- <dig> , and for the candidate reference genes , when using the best combination of reference genes as suggested by genorm or normfinder.

instability of normalization genes is likely to introduce a bias in reported gene expression results. in our study, we showed that normalization to gapdh indicated significantly higher expression levels of target genes than normalization to a combination of stably expressed genes, resulting in an overestimation of the fold change in gene expression. moreover, we observed a significant difference in tnf-α mrna levels in monocytes stimulated with lps from n. meningitides or e. coli when using a normalization strategy based on several stably expressed reference genes. in contrast, no significant difference between tnf-α mrna levels in monocytes stimulated with e. coli and n. meningitides lps, respectively, was observed when normalized to either actb or gapdh alone. these false-negative results illustrate that slight changes in gene expression differences and affection of metabolic pathways may be overlooked when normalizing mrna levels to single genes and not to a combination of stably expressed genes. our findings that gene expression results vary depending on the chosen normalization strategy are not without precedence. for example, dheda et al. nicely showed that a significant upregulation of il <dig> in patients with tuberculosis compared to healthy controls can be masked when rt-qpcr results are normalized to an inappropriate reference gene, in this case gapdh  <cit> . moreover, treatment of tuberculosis patients led to a  decrease in il <dig> expression when a validated reference gene was used. in contrast, normalization of il <dig> to gapdh resulted in a 5-fold up regulation indicating persistence of the disease as opposed to the clinical, biochemical and radiological improvement of the patient  <cit> . together with our results, these documentations of erroneous results introduced by the choice of inappropriate reference genes strongly advocate for the demand to make systematic validation of reference genes obligatory for reported gene expression analyses  <cit> .

the absence of universal reference genes with constant expression levels in any experimental condition demands the documentation of the validity of the employed reference genes for each experimental setup. this is also true for our study, as different experimental conditions, such as type and concentration of activator, incubation time or cell type, may require a different set of valid reference genes for proper gene expression normalization. even if the reference genes evaluated as stably expressed in the present study may be considered as candidate reference genes in subsequent studies with similar conditions of monocyte stimulation, the quest for valid reference genes must be repeated and the reference gene stability must be documented for each activation process.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we showed that gene expression levels in lps-stimulated monocytes based on rt-qpcr results differ significantly when normalized to a single gene or a combination of stably expressed reference genes. the importance of our findings is highlighted by the fact that a review of the literature on gene expression in lps-stimulated monocytes of the last years exhibited that the large majority of the published rt-qpcr results were normalized to a single gene, mainly gapdh or actb, and that a systematic comparison of different normalization strategies was lacking. our results indicate that normalization of rt-qpcr data to gapdh or actb alone leads to imprecise gene expression results in lps-stimulated monocytes and that the employment of several, stably expressed reference genes is mandatory. due to the absence of universal reference genes, however, the state-of-the-art evaluation of reference gene stability has to be documented for each experimental setup and tailored to every activation process.

