BACKGROUND
comparison of intraspecies multi-strain bacterial genome sequence data has shown that, even over short evolutionary time scales, genome evolution is dominated by gene insertions/deletions and gene divergence  <cit> . genome levels of intraspecies genetic diversity must be examined if we are to gain a better understanding of genome evolution  <cit>  and if we are to maximize the practical use of bacterial genome sequence information, for instance for development of technical applications, e.g., vaccine or drug development.

one of the aims of bacterial intraspecies comparative genomics is to determine the overall genetic similarity between strains. where sequence information is available, this type of analysis relies heavily on sequence homology and centres on the determination of conserved genes, strain-specific  genes and, where the sequence provides unambiguous evidence, determination of orthologous and paralogous genes  <cit> . although it has become increasingly apparent that obtaining the sequence of multiple strains per species is highly desirable, currently these types of datasets are limited in number. in their absence, other methods for performing comparative genomics have been developed. among them, microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization  based on genome-sequenced strains has shown enormous potential  <cit> .

two different microarray-based approaches have been used to study the genetic composition of unknown bacterial strains. in the first approach, a control genome-sequenced strain was used as a reference to generate the probes for a microarray  <cit> . in the second approach, microarray probes were derived from the tester strain, either from a tester-derived shotgun library or a library enriched for tester-specific dnas  <cit> . with either approach, control- and tester-derived targets are co-hybridized to the microarray and control- and tester-derived signals are compared, often by computing the log ratio  = log <dig>  whereas genes with similar signal in either channel are expected to have lrs near zero, genes with lrs that deviate significantly from lr =  <dig> are likely to show copy number changes or sequence divergence between control and tester strains.

the relatively small number of studies on bacterial m-cgh has demonstrated the power of the method in a comparative genomics context despite a lack of consensus in current methods for analyzing m-cgh data. although potential methods for standardizing and improving analysis have been suggested  <cit>  in practice, m-cgh data has routinely been analyzed by categorizing genes into two groups: genes that are likely to be conserved and genes that are likely to be divergent. one notable problem with this approach is that no attempt is made to differentiate between gene divergence and gene absence, despite the significant biological and evolutionary differences implied by these two types of events. a framework for improved analysis would require empirical data on the relationship between log ratio  from m-cgh experiments and sequence conservation levels, however, to our knowledge no studies exist that have directly examined this question.

the availability of intraspecies genome data from two strains of campylobacter jejuni  <cit> , has provided us with the opportunity to examine the quantitative relationship between the lr and probe/target identity  using our c. jejuni microarray. this experimental design allows us to directly match microarray results to the a priori interpretation of gene divergence and gene absence patterns. the goal of this study is to define the analytical parameters for the accurate prediction of gene conservation levels, leading to improved interpretation of m-cgh data. we present here the results of a detailed analysis of m-cgh experiments using the two genome-sequenced strains of c. jejuni.

RESULTS
determination of technical variation in m-cgh experiments
in order to examine the log ratio  distributions where no differential signals are expected, we performed control experiments in which dual-labelled nctc  <dig>  dna was tested in a series of self-self m-cgh experiments. although our microarray is based on strain nctc  <dig> the resulting lrs should remain close to zero because, regardless of the strain used in the self-self experiment, "control" and "tester" targets are identical. thus, any observed deviation from this result is likely due to technical variability in the assay and can be used to determine a threshold for statistically significant differential signals . the lr distribution in six replicates follows a normal distribution with a mean lr for six replicates of ~ <dig>  ±  <dig>   and, as expected, the mean and standard deviation of the various replicates were uniform regardless of the strain used. the variances observed were due to stochastic differences in the competitive hybridization of targets to the probes on the microarray and a good estimate of the technical variation in our experimental platform. based on this data a lr = ±  <dig> , used by many experimenters to identify divergent or deleted genes in similar m-cgh studies, represents a conservative threshold for divergent gene detection, since genes in which tester and control sequences are identical have a probability of less than  <dig>  × 10- <dig> of having a lr greater than  <dig> 

analysis of the log ratio distribution of highly conserved genes
we analyzed data from a set of m-cgh experiments comparing strain nctc  <dig>  with strain rm <dig> . because the probes in our microarray were pcr-amplified from the control strain, control targets should have 100% probe/target identity  with the probes on the microarray, and the lr values observed should be a function of the pti between tester targets and the nctc 11168-derived microarray probes. the lr distribution of genes with 100% identity between nctc  <dig> and rm <dig>  would be expected to behave much like that of self-self experiments because in both cases control and tester targets are identical and thus have 100% pti. this was found to be the case although the distribution of genes with 100% pti had larger standard deviation  than that of self-self experiments  . genes for which the rm <dig> sequence had less than 100% sequence identity with nctc  <dig> would be expected to yield lrs that deviate from  <dig> due to the decreased hybridization of targets that are imperfectly matched to probes on the microarray. we examined the behaviour of genes with high levels of pti in order to determine the level of sequence divergence that would have an observable effect on lrs. we found that whereas genes with greater than 99% pti had lr distributions that were nearly indistinguishable from those from self-self experiments, genes with as little as 2% sequence divergence  deviated from the lr distribution of genes with 100% pti.

analysis of the relationship between pti and log ratio
in order to examine the relationship between % pti and lr in greater detail, we plotted the mean lr of genes according to their % pti . as shown previously, the lr distribution of genes with greater than 99% pti were similar. however, in lower pti ranges a small yet noticeable decrease in average lr was observed. although the small number of genes with less than 93% identity makes it difficult to obtain meaningful lr trends because of high variance, decreasing pti still led to increasingly negative lrs. one caveat of these observations is that the lr of individual data points within a given pti range show sufficient variability to make pti predictions based on lr values potentially inaccurate across most of the range of ptis. for example, although the difference in mean lr of genes with 95% pti and 96% pti is  <dig> , their standard deviations are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. thus, although the average lr decreased with decreasing pti, there is considerable overlap between the distributions.

analysis of the log ratio distribution of absent genes
genes that are absent in rm <dig>  should have highly negative lrs because they should yield detectable hybridization signal in the control channel coupled with a lack of signal in the tester channel. although the lr distribution of genes with 0% pti was shifted towards the left , it also appeared to be bimodal, with a number of genes with higher than expected lr. when these genes were examined more closely, a common feature was a short microarray probe size . we plotted the lr distribution of genes with probe sizes < <dig> bp and > <dig> bp separately, and found a significant difference in their respective lr distributions . whereas the lr distribution of the former was - <dig>  ±  <dig> , the lr distribution for longer genes was - <dig>  ±  <dig> . this "dampening" in lr amplitude appears to be largely the effect of an overall diminished signal for short genes , possibly due to a difference in hybridization kinetics or hybrid stability under the hybridization and washing conditions used. the effect of decreased signal is that of decreased dynamic range because a lower signal in the control channel restricts the amplitude of the lr that can be measured.

determination of thresholds for highly conserved and absent genes
one of our goals for this analysis was to determine whether the observed trends would enable us to predict the pti in m-cgh experiments based on lr alone. although the levels of technical variability mask the subtle effect that low levels of sequence divergence have on lr, the lr distributions at the two pti extremes , which correspond to highly conserved and absent genes, show very little overlap. this enabled us to establish thresholds that, with high confidence, can be used to predict absent and highly conserved genes in m-cgh data . after removal of genes with short amplicon-based probes from our analysis, we established that less than 1% of the observed lrs > - <dig>  originated from absent genes . similarly, less than 1% of observed lrs < - <dig>  originated from conserved genes  with all false-positive observations stemming from the pyrc gene, which has a pti of only  <dig> %. of  <dig> observed lr measurements in the range between - <dig>  and - <dig> , only  <dig>  originated from genes with greater than 90% pti. although, based on our empirical data, lr values that fall between these two thresholds are likely to be from either absent or significantly divergent genes and unlikely to be from highly conserved genes, there is significant overlap between lr distributions of absent and divergent genes. at lrs ≅ - <dig> , an observation has a nearly equal likelihood of stemming from an absent gene as it does from a present gene and thus the two classes cannot be distinguished in this lr range.

CONCLUSIONS
microarray analysis, whether in the context of gene expression or m-cgh studies, is based on determining which genes have statistically significant differential hybridization signal between two samples. in m-cgh analysis, these differential signals are the result of sequence divergence or differences in copy number. two critical issues rise to the forefront in m-cgh analysis: a) does a gene show genuine differential signal ; b) what is the nature of the event that gave rise to the differential signal ?

because m-cgh generates hybridization data as a proxy for sequence similarity data, it is important that it be analyzed as such. while some empirical work has been carried out on probe/target identity  and data analysis using the microarray platform, the focus has largely been on optimization of species detection and/or identification in complex samples  <cit> . in these applications, the primary goal is that of optimizing probe sets and hybridization conditions to maximize the specificity of species-specific probe/target interactions, possibly at the expense of decreased assay sensitivity and thus the majority of microarrays used for species identification are oligonucleotide-based. by contrast, in comparative genomics, the primary goal is that of gene detection for the purpose of characterizing gene content, and thus the focus must shift to detection sensitivity in order to minimize the likelihood of false positive calls on gene absence events. because oligonucleotide-based arrays can lead to erroneous gene absence calls  <cit> , the majority of m-cgh studies have used amplicon-based microarrays, which are more sensitive albeit at the expense of specificity  <cit> .

a common thread among bacterial m-cgh studies has been the grouping of all outliers into a single category. currently it is unclear whether divergent and absent genes can be distinguished based on lr data alone. although the lack of distinction between these types of events does not negate the results from these studies, it can potentially restrict further analysis of the data. for example, in any pair of intraspecies genomes, sequence similarity can be used to define genes absent in one or the other strain as well as genes that are conserved in both strains. although the "biological interpretation" in the case of gene absence is unambiguous, many possibilities arise when sequences share any level of similarity. for instance, single nucleotide substitutions can lead to truncated or inactive gene products. additionally, the level of sequence similarity required for full functional homology varies from gene to gene, increasing the complexity of the analysis even when dna sequences are directly available. the inexact nature of hybridization analysis further compounds the difficulty in interpreting signal from divergent genes by m-cgh, and thus focusing on conserved and divergent genes ignores the increased reliability of gene absence calls.

in previous work, we presented data suggesting that highly negative lr values were consistent with gene deletion events, paving the way for making the distinction between divergent and absent genes based on lr data  <cit> . when m-cgh data is analyzed such that gene absence events are grouped together with all other gene divergence events , it represents a significant loss of information both from a technical and from a biological point of view. in addition to the greater ambiguity in data interpretation as lrs approach the threshold for gene conservation, the continuous character approach negates the functional distinction that can be made between gene absence and gene divergence events. because the lr thresholds described here could be used to reliably predict gene absence and gene conservation, it would be advantageous to focus the analysis of m-cgh data on the accurate detection of conserved and absent genes. while the data between the two thresholds should not be altogether discarded, the two thresholds represent boundaries defining regions in which gene absence and gene presence can be predicted with high confidence and thus should be given greater weight in subsequent analytical steps. it is important to note that the exact value of the lr thresholds presented here is specific to our experimental platform. the prediction accuracy achieved was remarkably high because of the uniform levels of variance across the multiple replicates analysed and because of the high correlation coefficients between replicates . this dataset was highly idealized because the relatively small number of replicates was carried out in such a way as to minimize technical variation. nevertheless, a previous study in which we applied the thresholds described here on a large dataset showed that lrs below our "absence threshold" correlated very highly with other potential indicators of gene deletion  <cit> .

given the many documented sources of technical variability that can influence microarray results , thresholds for gene presence/absence detection should be calibrated to the differential levels of technical variance found in individual microarray experiments, especially in large datasets. kim et al  <cit>  have suggested a solution to array-specific variance and normalization bias by determining thresholds specific to each array based on the point at which the lr distribution deviates from its inferred normal distribution. in practice, we have found that this approach can be susceptible to "narrow" lr distributions, leading to relaxed thresholds that yield an increased number of false positives for gene divergence. an alternative approach to deal with unequal variances and normalization biases across a dataset is based on normalizing multiple microarrays using the z-score transformation  <cit> , in which lr values are divided by the standard deviation of the lr data distribution. z score-based metrics could be used to replace log ratio-based metrics, enabling direct comparisons that are more valid because data from each microarray is "variance-calibrated".

based on the higher than expected log ratio values obtained in the case of absent genes, the "relative accuracy" of log ratio measurements obtained from short probes is significantly compromised under the standard hybridization conditions we used. it is important to note however, that based on the average standard deviations observed , results obtained from short probes do not lack precision compared to those obtained from longer probes. nevertheless, our results show that data obtained from short probes yield anomalously high log ratio values. it is only because our assay represents a closed system in which all components are known that we were able to determine that short probes can significantly underestimate log ratio measurements. these results would not have been readily apparent in a typical experiment since there would be no a priori knowledge on expected log ratio values. although these results were obtained in a series of cgh experiments, the anomalous log ratio data from short probes is likely to be encountered under any type of microarray hybridization experiment, including gene expression-profiling experiments. although longer probes performed better in our assay, this is likely a result of the higher signal intensity obtained with long probes relative to short probes. optimal hybridization and scanning conditions for long probes would likely be sub-optimal for short probes, leading to decreased signal and a concomitant drop in log ratio amplitudes. thus the problem resides not in probe length per se, but rather in the mixed probe lengths encountered in our microarray. these results have important implications towards microarray probe design because the adverse probe-length effect could be mitigated through standardizing probe length. failing that, it would be advantageous to incorporate probe length effects into any analytical framework.

the results presented here have been used to examine the relationship between lr and sequence conservation. the variability inherent in hybridization-based approaches makes it unlikely that lr data from m-cgh experiments can be used to accurately predict the level of sequence identity among divergent genes. in view of the considerable ambiguity in interpreting the significance of gene divergence even when sequence information is available, the focus on gene divergence in m-cgh studies must be re-assessed. we have established thresholds for the use of lr values for the accurate detection of highly conserved and absent genes, which should increase the robustness of downstream data interpretation and should extend the range of biological interpretation of m-cgh data. an accurate determination of conserved and absent genes should increase the accuracy of strain genotyping, metabolic pathway prediction, and determination of conserved targets for vaccine or drug development from m-cgh data.

