BACKGROUND
humans are living in a constant struggle with infectious microorganisms and whilst improved hygiene has been essential to control such organisms, one of the major steps forward has been the discovery and use of antibiotics. however, the high rate at which bacteria become resistant to currently used antibiotics is regarded as a major threat to the future treatment of infectious diseases in both humans and livestock  <cit> . therefore, there is a growing demand for new types of antimicrobial compounds and interest is focused on host defence peptides  as novel therapeutic agents. hdps are a unique and diverse group of peptides, which can be grouped into different classes, based on their amino acid composition and structure. in humans and other mammals, the defensins and the cathelicidins constitute the two main hdp families. the cathelicidins vary widely in sequence, composition and structure, but share a highly conserved n-terminal structural domain  linked to a highly variable cathelicidin peptide domain  <cit> . the defensins are more uniform, small cysteine-rich cationic peptides  <cit> . defensins have well-established antimicrobial activity against a broad spectrum of pathogens, and in addition they have been shown to have immunostimulatory functions on both innate and adaptive immunity  <cit> . this has prompted a massive interest in synthetic defensins as novel antimicrobial candidates for therapeutic use.

recently, the antimicrobial peptide, plectasin isolated from a saprophytic fungus, was described  <cit> . plectasin is a defensin, which has broad activity against several species of gram-positive bacteria and combined with very low toxicity in mice and on human keratinocytes and erythrocytes, plectasin holds promise as a novel anti-infective treatment  <cit> .

in the present study, we addressed the response of two human pathogens, s. aureus and l. monocytogenes to plectasin. these two pathogens differ in sensitivity towards plectasin with mic values of 16- <dig> mg/l for methicillin resistant s. aureus , and above  <dig> mg/l for the less sensitive l. monocytogenes  <cit> . in addition, the two bacteria represent different routes of infection and may be exposed to different arrays of hdps. s. aureus is a hospital- and community-acquired pathogen that causes a wide range of diseases including septicaemia, toxic-shock syndrome and food poisoning  <cit> . s. aureus is primarily extracellular and produces extracellular enzymes and toxins that cause damage to tissues. l. monocytogenes is a food borne pathogen causing gastroenteritis or septicaemia and meningitis in immunocompromised individuals  <cit> . as opposed to the infection mode of s. aureus, l. monocytogenes is an intracellular pathogen, able to spread from cell to cell within the host and thereby guarded against circulating immune factors.

the purpose of the present study was to investigate if resistance towards plectasin could be induced in s. aureus and l. monocytogenes by transposon mutagenesis and if this resistance would affect the mutants' response to other groups of antimicrobial peptides.

RESULTS
plectasin does not cause cellular leakage
many antimicrobial peptides affect the structural or functional integrity of the bacterial membrane, leading to pore formation and subsequently leakage of intracellular components  <cit> . therefore, we examined the extracellular protein-profile by sds-page analysis. when the two gram-positive pathogens, s. aureus and l. monocytogenes, were grown with and without plectasin, there was no difference, indicating that the bacteria are not leaking macromolecules . to support this notion, we determined the effect of plectasin on the membrane of the two species by measuring the amount of atp leakage. in this study we also included three peptides representing each of the antimicrobial peptide groups: the plectasin-like defensin eurocin, the linear arginine-rich peptide protamine and the α-helical peptide novicidin  <cit> . atp leakage profiles were similar for l. monocytogenes and s. aureus but differed between peptides. when either of the pathogens was exposed to the defensins, plectasin or eurocin, we found that the intracellular atp concentration remained at the same level as the controls treated with peptide dilution buffer only . this indicates that the defensins do not cause pore formation or membrane disruption in any of the bacteria. in contrast, protamine and novicidin resulted in increased atp leakage thus suggesting that they are disrupting the membrane . our finding is in agreement with recent results which revealed that plectasin targets the bacterial cell wall precursor lipid ii and does not compromise the membrane integrity  <cit> .

even though plectasin is known to interact with lipid ii, an increasing amount of evidence has established that hdps can have multiple targets, including cytoplasmic and intracellular targets  <cit> . one such target is the bacterial dna. however, we were unable to demonstrate binding of plectasin or eurocin to dna when examined by in vitro gel retardation .

identification of genes providing increased resistance to plectasin
in order to identify genes involved in the bacterial susceptibility towards plectasin, we created transposon mutant libraries in s. aureus 8325- <dig> and l. monocytogenes  <dig> using bursa aurealis and tn <dig>  respectively. mic values on agar plates were determined for the two wild types and the two transposon libraries were subsequently screened on plectasin-concentrations corresponding to  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> fold mic. after screening  <dig>  colonies of l. monocytogenes transposon mutants, we found no mutants with increased resistance.

screening of the s. aureus mutant library resulted in identification of four colonies with increased resistance, in which the transposon element had inserted into the heme response regulator hssr that together with hsss forms an operon, encoding a two component system   <cit> . s. aureus require iron, and during infection, it can obtain iron through the haemolysin-mediated rupture of erythrocytes  <cit> . while heme is an important source of iron, high concentrations are toxic to s. aureus due to the reactivity of the molecule  <cit> . therefore, the hssrs tcs is able to sense high concentrations of heme and induces the expression of hrtab, encoding the hrtab efflux pump that protects the cells against heme-mediated cell damage  <cit> .

to control whether the selected plectasin concentrations induce spontaneous mutations, s. aureus and l. monocytogenes wild types were grown on tsb and bhi, respectively, with  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> fold mic. we found that no spontaneous mutations, leading to changes in sensitivity, occurred.

no mutants were obtained from the screening of the transposon mutant library of l. monocytogenes for altered resistance to plectasin. however, a homologous system in l. monocytogenes lo <dig> was identified by homology search and we found that the response regulator rr <dig> has a higher identity  to hssr compared to other response regulators  from l. monocytogenes lo <dig>  in addition, rr <dig> show 99% amino acid sequence identity to l. monocytogenes egd-e lmo <dig>  previously identified as an hssr homologue  <cit> . to evaluate the importance of hssr on sensitivity to plectasin of a bacterium other than s. aureus, a l. monocytogenes rr <dig> mutant was included in the experiments.

hssr modulates resistance to defensins
in order to validate the phenotypes obtained by our s. aureus transposon mutant 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa, we transduced the transposon element from 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa to s. aureus 8325- <dig> wild type, giving the mutant 8325- <dig> hssr. in addition, we included another s. aureus wild type, s. aureus  <dig>  and the 15981-Δtcs <dig> , which harbour a deletion of both the response regulator hssr and the histidine kinase hsss  <cit> .

the mic for plectasin was determined for all the strains using the microbroth dilution method  and a mutation in the hssr response regulator in s. aureus lead to a  <dig> to  <dig> fold increased resistance compared to the wild type, regardless of the genetic background. this is in agreement with the initial finding, where we used  <dig> fold mic in the plate screen for transposon mutants. a complementation of 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa  decreased the resistance  <dig> fold compared to the 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa . the deletion of the rr <dig> in l. monocytogenes had no effect on the resistance towards plectasin .

plec: plectasin, euro: eurocin, prot: protamine, novc: novicidin, novs: novispirin. nd: not determined.

in addition, we tested whether the two-component system is involved in altered sensitivity to other antimicrobial peptides namely novispirin , novicidin , protamine  and eurocin . the s. aureus hssr/hssrs mutants were also more resistant to eurocin, the only other defensin, but were not altered in sensitivity to other groups of peptides .

the ability of the s. aureus hssr mutants to cope with higher concentrations of the peptide compared to the wild type was confirmed in a growth experiment. the strains were grown with plectasin  or without plectasin. the wild type did not grow in the presence of plectasin, but the response regulator mutants all grew . complementing 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa  lead to plectasin inhibited growth comparable to the growth of wild type . the growth experiment also showed that the mutant and wild type strains have similar growth kinetics when grown in tsb . in vitro, s. aureus 8325- <dig> was killed rapidly by plectasin , confirming the results from mygind et al  <cit> . the 8325- <dig> hssr::bursa mutant was killed slower than the wild type .

both hrtab and hssrs are required for growth of s. aureus in hemin  <cit> . when we examined the growth of the hssr mutant compared to the wild type we also found it to be almost completely inhibited by  <dig> μm hemin, regardless of the presence or absence of plectasin . the expression of hrtab efflux system has previously been shown to increase  <dig> fold by exposure to hemin through transcriptional activation by hssr  <cit> . however, we found no change of expression of hrtb and hssr in the wild type when plectasin was added using northern blot and quantitative real-time pcr .

plectasin does not affect protein secretion
recent work has shown that exposing hrta mutants to hemin, leads to increased protein secretion, however, when exposing hssr mutants to hemin, a similar change in secretion was not observed  <cit> . to investigate whether plectasin induces a change in protein secretion, we compared the l. monocytogenes and s. aureus wild types to the hssr mutants. we found no difference in the abundance of extracellular proteins, when the strains were grown with or without plectasin .

stress and antibiotic resistance of hssr mutant cells
the relatively small number of tcss in s. aureus and l. monocytogenes imply that some of them are able to sense several different stressors. in streptococcus pyogenes the tcs covrs, senses both iron starvation, antimicrobial peptides and several other stressors  <cit> . we have found that hssr affects the resistance towards defensins in addition to heme concentrations, we therefore determined if the hssrs tcs affects susceptibility to other types of stress. however, when the s. aureus and l. monocytogenes wild types and mutants were subjected to a variety of stress-conditions; growth at 15°c, 30°c, 37°c or 44°c, or growth with the addition of 4% nacl, we found no difference in growth between the wild types and their respective mutants. we also examined the sensitivity of wild type and mutants to several antibiotics, i.e. ampicillin, gentamicin, sulfa/trimethoprim, rifampicin, tetracycline, amoxy/clavulan, cephalotin, clindamycin, enrofloxacin, fusidic acid and oxacillin. no change in mic values was observed when the wild type s. aureus and l. monocytogenes and the corresponding response regulator mutants were compared . thus, as opposed to the covrs tcs, hssr/rr <dig> from s. aureus and l. monocytogenes do not seem to sense other types of stress. the results for rr <dig> correspond with previous experiments, showing no stress phenotype for an rr <dig> mutant  <cit> .

discussion
in the present study, we investigated how the antimicrobial peptide, plectasin, affects two human pathogens. our results indicate that plectasin and another defensin, eurocin, do not perturb the s. aureus and l. monocytogenes membrane, but differentially affect the bacterial survival. these results are in agreement with recent findings, which show that plectasin does not compromise membrane integrity  <cit> . however, the non-defensins, novicidin and protamine did lead to increased leakage, implying that the antimicrobial activity of these peptides involves disruptions of the bacterial membranes .

to identify genes involved in resistance to plectasin, we screened transposon mutant libraries of l. monocytogenes and s. aureus. we were unable to identify any l. monocytogenes mutants more resistant to the peptide compared to wild type. the l. monocytogenes wild-type is more tolerant to plectasin  compared to the s. aureus wild type , which might explain the difficulties in obtaining l. monocytogenes mutants with decreased sensitivity . four isolated s. aureus mutants, more resistant to plectasin, had the transposon element inserted in the response regulator hssr that is part of a tcs, hssrs, involved in sensing heme concentrations  <cit> . a primary mechanism by which bacterial cells respond to changes in the environment is through the action of tcss. tcss typically consist of a membrane-bound histidine kinase that responds to environmental signals by undergoing autophosphorylation followed by transfer of the phosphoryl group to the regulator  <cit> . during contact with a host, s. aureus acquire heme as iron source, but surplus heme can be toxic. the hssrs system is important for sensing the level of heme, and for activating the abc transporter system hrtab, which protects the bacteria against heme-mediated damage  <cit> . changes in iron availability are an environmental signal indicative of mammalian host-pathogen interaction and the hssrs tcs seems to be important for s. aureus to sense and respond to heme as a component of vertebrate blood  <cit> .

our results reveal that a mutation in hssr increases the resistance of s. aureus to two defensin-like hdps, suggesting that the mutation of hssr leads to enhanced bacterial resistance to immune clearance. defensins are an important part of the mammalian immune response and mutant pathogens, more susceptible to hdps, are often attenuated in virulence, indicating that the intrinsic resistance to hdps plays a key role in bacterial infection  <cit> . recently, a link between iron starvation and hdp resistance in yersinia pseudotuberculosis has been shown, supporting the idea that bacteria can sense when inside a host and coordinate their response accordingly  <cit> .

it has previously been reported that a mutation in s. aureus hssr or hrta leads to increased virulence  <cit> . this increase has been suggested to be due to pore formation in the bacterial cell membrane that elicits an increased secretion of immunomodulatory factors, which decreases killing of the bacteria  <cit> . however, plectasin does not form pores or leads to increased secretion of bacterial compounds. these results indicate that the deletion of hssr affects the bacteria in a way that improve their ability to survive defensins of the host defence system causing the observed hypervirulence  <cit> .

we did not observe an upregulation of hssr or hrtb when s. aureus was exposed to plectasin. previous results have shown a  <dig> fold upregulation of hrtab when exposed to exogenous hemin  <cit> . the lack of plectasin regulation of the systems implies that the tcs does not sense the defensins and the abc transporter system hrtab is not involved in exporting the peptides. this suggests that the lack of hssr alleviates a regulation of one or more target genes leading to the resistant phenotype. modifications of the cell surface are known to affect hdp resistance and plectasin targets bacterial cell wall precursor lipid ii, implying a function of hssr on the cell wall synthesis or composition. change in surface charge is known to affect hdp susceptibility and we have previously shown that mprf and dlta mutations affect s. aureus sensitivity to plectasin, novicidin, protamine and novispirin  <cit> . however, the effect of the hssr mutation is probably not due to changes in surface charge, since only plectasin and eurocin susceptibilities are altered.

a consensus dna binding sequence for hssr has been predicted and genomic analysis of s. aureus has revealed that, besides the consensus sequence in the hrtab promoter region,  <dig> genes have consensus sites containing 3- <dig> mismatches  <cit> . whether one of these genes is involved in the observed plectasin resistance remains elusive. further work is needed to clarify whether the hssr mutation has an effect on one of these genes in order to understand the bacterial changes that lead to reduced plectasin sensitivity.

homologues of the hrtab and hssrs systems are found in several gram-positive bacterial pathogens . a possible hssr homologue, rr <dig>  exists in l. monocytogenes. however, a mutation in this response regulator did not affect growth or survival when exposed to the peptides and previous results have shown that rr <dig> is not important for virulence  <cit> . our results show that the susceptibility to defensins can be decreased in s. aureus but not in l. monocytogenes. this inability to obtain more resistant l. monocytogenes mutants could be explained by the difference in mic values between the strains, showing that l. monocytogenes is 4- <dig> fold more tolerant to plectasin compared to s. aureus. whether this difference in sensitivity towards plectasin between l. monocytogenes and s. aureus can be explained by the variations in virulence factors and different routes of infection of the two pathogens remains elusive.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that the s. aureus response regulator hssr, but not the corresponding rr <dig> from l. monocytogenes, is involved in the organisms' sensitivity to defensins, exemplified by plectasin. the mutation of hssr leads to increased resistance towards plectasin and eurocin. the hssrs two component system have previously been shown to be important for heme homeostasis and an hssr mutation leads to increased virulence  <cit> . taken together these results further indicate the importance of this system in sensing environmental cues and responding accordingly. this result support the notion that the system is able to sense internal host tissue and shift to an immune evasive response and that the mutation in hssr leads to enhanced bacterial resistance to host immune factors. during the course of infection, the bacteria must not only cope with iron starvation but also resist antimicrobial peptides, including defensins. whether the difference in responding to the hdps between l. monocytogenes and s. aureus is due to the differences in infection processes still remains unclear. however, our results indicate a functional difference between rr <dig> and hssr and the genes regulated by these regulators, which might explain the difference in hdp susceptibility between the two strains.

