BACKGROUND
alcohol dependence is a brain disorder of complex etiology characterized by brain-wide pathophysiological alterations under continuous crosstalk, with approximately 40-60% contribution from genetic factors  <cit> . as suggested by farris and miles, interacting neuronal and glial networks across distinct brain regions likely control the variety of alcohol endophenotypes, which are ultimately controlled by the regulation of multiple gene networks expressed within individual neurons or glial cells  <cit> . support for these statements is found in the observation that chronic consumption of alcohol induces long-term changes in brain gene and protein expression, which allow brain cells to adapt through homeostatic alterations in distinct signaling pathways  <cit> . although the complex regulatory mechanisms governing these changes are not fully understood, there is mounting evidence that transcriptional reprogramming is brain area-specific and may reflect both pre-existing differences in gene expression and alterations in response to alcohol consumption  <cit> .

micrornas , a type of short non-coding rna with well characterized post-transcriptional regulatory functions, have been recently implicated in cellular responses to multiple drugs of abuse including alcohol  <cit> . moreover, mirnas have extensive regulatory capacity given that a single mirna can simultaneously target multiple genes, and multiple mirnas can cooperatively function while targeting a single gene, therefore allowing for fine-tuned regulation of targeted gene expression. we have previously shown that mirnas, which localize to and display neurotransmitter signaling-related activities at neuronal synapses, are also capable of eliciting distinct and specific activities in other cell types and/or compartments of the cell, such as innate immunity- and epigenetic-related functions in neuronal and glial cells  <cit> . this underscores the impact that molecular efficiency, signaling crosstalk, and cellular economy play in the adaptation and evolution of cellular systems and highlights the significance of mirnas as efficient molecular targets for complex diseases such as addiction.

we have previously reported that in brains of human alcoholics, mirnas appear mostly upregulated, with an overrepresented number of targets among downregulated mrnas. approximately 80% of those targets appeared to be combinatorially regulated by multiple mirnas  <cit> . many of these upregulated mirnas appear to be central regulators of epigenetic-, synaptic signaling-, and neuroimmune-related processes . here we describe new findings in the frontal cerebral cortex  of a mouse model for high voluntary ethanol consumption. mouse models like ours, implementing drinking in the dark  protocols that produce pharmacologically relevant levels of ethanol in blood, have been developed to examine binge-like ethanol consumption  <cit> . binge ethanol consumption in humans is “a pattern of behaviour that may emerge prior to, and contribute to the development of, ethanol dependence”  <cit> . our goal is to identify sets of mirnas and relevant regulatory networks that contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms related to alcohol dependence in humans. we tested the hypotheses that alcohol induces changes in mirna-mrna interaction networks in mouse frontal cortex and that some of the changes observed in the mouse brain are equivalent to changes occurring in similar brain regions from human alcoholics. we report on the integrative analysis of genome-wide mirna-mrna expression profiles from mouse fctx samples and on the implementation of weighted gene coexpression network analysis . using wgcna, we generated correlations among coexpressed gene modules and differentially expressed mirnas and provided evidence for relevant regulatory networks responsive to alcohol actions. we unexpectedly uncovered striking positive correlation patterns between upregulated mirnas and upregulated predicted, validated, and/or correlated mrna targets.

RESULTS
differential expression analysis underscores a major role for upregulation of mirnas in fctx of ethanol-treated mice
in order to evaluate the impact of alcohol consumption on mirna and gene expression in mouse brain, we conducted mirna and mrna profiling studies on  <dig> samples  as described in materials and methods. ethanol-treated mice consumed an average of  <dig>  g/kg/ <dig> h . the mirna expression analysis indicated that, as in prefrontal cortex  of human alcoholics, mirnas appear predominantly upregulated in fctx of alcohol-drinking mice, with  <dig> mirna families upregulated in mouse brain . importantly, we found that a highly significant number of mirna families that are upregulated in pfc of human alcoholics  <cit>  are also upregulated in the fctx of ethanol-treated mice . fourteen out of  <dig> alcohol-induced human mirna families changed expression in the ethanol-treated mice . the fact that upregulation is predominant at the significance level chosen  among differentially expressed mirnas in the mouse frontal cortex is consistent with previous results in human alcoholic pfc  <cit> . the mirna families that change expression in both mouse and human were: let- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig> , as well as mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig> . other differentially expressed mirnas specific to the mouse model were also validated by qpcr, including mir- <dig>  and mir- <dig> family members. moreover, we found a significant match among differentially expressed mouse mirna families and those reported in pfc of ethanol-treated rats  <cit> . seventeen out of  <dig> rat mirna families  were matched to our mouse data, p < 1 × 10- <dig>  the mirna families that change expression in both mice and rats were: mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  overall, these results underscore the relevance of gene regulation by mirnas in response to alcohol consumption and suggest conservation of alcohol-responsive mirna regulatory pathways from rodent to human.

ethanol-responsive genes in brains of mice significantly match respective homologs differentially expressed in brains of human alcoholics
differential expression analysis of the illumina microarray data identified  <dig> genes with expression changes in response to alcohol in the fctx of ethanol-treated mice . a representative group of altered genes, including syt <dig>  tom <dig>  atp2b <dig>  and fermt <dig>  were validated by qpcr  using taqman® assays as described in materials and methods. a significant number of the differentially expressed genes  also changed in pfc of human alcoholics, as reported by the mayfield group  <cit> . such highly statistically significant matches  underscore the relevance of the commonly affected genes. however, it should be noted that 79% of the common gene changes are occurring in opposite directions when the mouse and human models are compared . when our mouse gene expression dataset was compared to an additional profiled cohort of human alcoholics  <cit> , we consistently found a highly significant match among differentially expressed genes between the mouse and human models . moreover, we similarly observed that a relatively large percentage  changed in opposite directions . furthermore, comparison to the human datasets indicated that a majority of the common differentially expressed genes  are upregulated in the mouse brain, while only 34% on average are upregulated in the brain of human alcoholics. these results suggest that brain genes upregulated in early stages of development of alcohol dependence  might undergo downregulation in late stages of the disease , possibly due to homeostatic mechanisms driven by mirna regulation.

integrated mirna-mrna networks reveal positively correlated action of brain mirnas and persistent upregulation of overtargeted mrnas in ethanol drinking mice
in order to better understand mirna-mrna regulatory relationships, we constructed respective interaction networks among negatively and positively correlated interaction groups, using the mirna-mrna interaction universe generated from mirecords predicted  and validated interactions . we found that the negatively correlated network of interactions among upregulated mirnas and downregulated mrnas  was no different from randomized networks generated as a control tool . on the other hand, the corresponding network containing the mirna-mrna interactions that were positively correlated  provided unexpected evidence that this network was twice as interconnected  as expected by chance .

in addition when overrepresentation analyses were conducted on the interaction networks, we found that the majority of upregulated mirnas  have an overrepresented number of targets among upregulated genes , while only about one quarter  had an overrepresented number of targets among downregulated genes . the expected number of mirnas with overrepresented number of targets is 22/45 = 49%, as determined by averaging the proportions obtained for two random networks. therefore, the proportion detected in the positively correlated  network is highly significantly enriched  in mirnas that have a higher than expected number of targets . on the other hand, the proportion detected in the negatively correlated  network is significantly smaller than expected by chance , indicating that the negatively correlated network is depleted of overtargeting mirnas. this is consistent with the observation that out of  <dig> upregulated genes,  <dig>  represented putative upregulated mirna targets, while only  <dig> out of  <dig> downregulated genes  represented putative downregulated mirna targets. these results suggest that the function of the alcohol-induced mirnas is to target alcohol-induced genes.

wgcna identifies brain gene modules perturbed by ethanol
to determine the relevant alcohol-responsive pathways regulated by mirnas, we investigated the organization of the transcriptome in the frontal cortex of the mouse brain by applying weighted gene coexpression network analysis to the  <dig> samples as described in materials and methods. the weighted network identified groups  of genes with similar expression patterns and high topological overlap. topological overlap is a pairwise measurement that describes the similarity of two genes’ coexpression relationships with all other genes in the network  <cit>  and has been shown to globally identify, for example, coexpression patterns that correlate with validated protein interactions in the human brain  <cit> . our wgcna identified  <dig> mrna modules  with highly significant coexpression patterns, which we graphically corroborated by plotting the expression levels for the top  <dig> genes with the strongest membership on alcohol-related modules . all modules were further correlated using the module eigengenes, with the phenotypic traits of interest, namely average ethanol consumption per voluntary drinking session and expression pattern of differentially expressed mirnas. table  <dig> summarizes the wgcna module detection results. we included correlation values to the ethanol consumption trait and the associated p value of these correlations, as well as results from a variety of enrichment analyses. additional details for enrichment analyses are provided in additional file 1: tables s4-s7). we want to point out that the number of modules produced by our wgcna strategy seems rather low and the number of unassigned genes  rather large. one of the reasons for this behavior is that we constrained the minimum number of genes per module to a relatively high number  in an effort to generate larger modules that improve detection of functional enrichment after gene enrichment analysis. moreover, we purposely chose a low cutting height of  <dig>   while implementing the dynamic tree cut method of the blockwisemodules function, to increase the stringency of the module detection step. cutting height sets a threshold for dissimilarity between expression patterns to be considered for module detection: the lower the threshold, the more similar the patterns need to be for assignment into modules. yet another potentially influential factor is the relatively small difference in gene expression between control and ethanol-treated animals, which may make it more difficult to detect significantly different patterns at stringent levels of statistical significance. the relatively small changes in gene and mirna expression observed in rodent and human models of alcohol consumption are a common phenomenon described by researchers in the field  <cit> .

enrichment for differentially expressed genes, functional categories, and cell type-specific markers in coexpressed gene modules detected by wgcna. relevant modules are highlighted in bold fonts.

five modules  presented significant average correlations with the ethanol-related traits , thus warranting further investigation. the alcohol-responsive modules also presented highly significant correlations between module membership  and gene significance  to the ethanol-consumption trait , which strengthen the inference of biological functions of the alcohol-significant genes by analyzing ontology category enrichment in the respective modules. moreover, the five modules significantly correlated with ethanol drinking were significantly enriched with differentially expressed genes . we also detected significant correlations  between individual gene expression patterns and individual differentially expressed mirna expression patterns , which provide indirect experimental validation for a group of predicted mirna-mrna interactions. by correlating the module eigengenes with the differentially expressed mirna expression patterns  and considering the individual significant correlations shown in figure  <dig>  three modules , were found to be preferentially targeted by the differentially expressed mirnas. to assess the validity of this approach, we corroborated the positively correlated expression levels of interacting mirnas and mrnas  by qpcr. additional confirmation for wgcna-suggested interactions was obtained from tarbase, the database for validated interactions, where we found validated interactions between mirnas and mrnas that were positively correlated in our study but negatively correlated in previous publications: mmu-mir-34a-5p --| actb, mmu-mir-200b-3p --| zeb <dig>  mmu-mir-30a-5p --| tnrc6a, mmu-mir-152-3p --| camk2a, mmu-mir-200c-3p --| flt <dig>  mmu-mir-20a-5p --| zbtb7a. also, we found evidence in tarbase for validated interactions between mirnas and mrnas that were negatively correlated in our study as well as in previous publications: mmu-mir-29b-5p --| col4a <dig> and mmu-mir-30a-5p5p --| ak <dig>  apparent spurious correlation was observed among some differentially expressed mirnas and the black module. however, this module did not show significant correlation with the alcohol consumption phenotype. hence the correlations detected among the black module and differentially expressed mirnas are understood as pleiotropic interactions, akin to off-target effects .

a major theme emerging from these analyses is that the alcohol-responsive modules are enriched in genes involved in synaptic transmission and cytokine signaling pathways . this underscores the importance of these pathways in the transduction of alcohol actions. these modules showed enrichment for cell-type specific genes present in neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, but not in microglia-specific genes, which highlight a major effect of alcohol on cells of the neuronal and macroglial lineages. these lineages share a common origin in precursor cells derived from the embryonic germ layer known as the neuroectoderm, which differ from the hematopoietic origin of microglia  <cit> .

to assess potential network topology changes impinged by ethanol consumption, we conducted an alternative network analysis where we implemented wgcna on each animal group independently. calculation of the overlap between coexpressed gene modules from both networks identified significant differences in the modular organization of the independent networks . panel c in additional file 1: figure s <dig> reflects the reorganization of specific modules as the network “evolves” from a non-treated stage  into an ethanol-treated stage . for example, the control c_turquoise module diverted into two distinct modules in the alcohol network . in addition, the alcohol  module included genes that had originally segregated into three distinct modules in the control network . our mirna-mrna integrative analysis suggests that such gene network reorganization events could be mediated, at least in part, by the activation of alcohol-responsive mirnas.

core of interactions in ethanol-relevant, mirna-targeted network modules highlights important regulators of alcohol action 
to gain insight into the alcohol-responsive gene modules preferentially targeted by alcohol-induced mirnas, we constructed gene interaction networks based on wgcna correlation measurements for the red, brown, and turquoise modules. in the red module containing alcohol-upregulated genes, synaptotagmin- <dig> , a member of the synaptotagmin gene family, which is involved in vesicle trafficking and synaptic transmission, is at the centre of the interaction network and the hub gene with higher connectivity . several other genes in the red module, such as sorting nexin- <dig> , target of myb <dig> , and bridging integrator  <dig> , are also involved in membrane trafficking and sorting processes relevant to synaptic transmission as well as the recycling of adaptor components involved in signaling of toll receptors and interleukin il- <dig> receptor, among others  <cit> . regarding mirna targeting of these hub genes , mir-34c-5p and let-7g-5p are main regulatory candidates based on significant expression pattern correlations  with syt <dig>  snx- <dig>  tom <dig> , and bim <dig> . this suggests that mir-34c-5p and let-7g-5p play an important role in the attempted regulation of this module. the central role played by mir-34c-5p and let-7g-5p while targeting additional genes in the red module is also evident in the expression correlation network shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and s <dig> .

in the brown module, which also contains alcohol-upregulated genes, protein phosphatase mg/mn-dependent 1a  and heat shock 70kda protein  <dig>  are the main hub genes. in addition, another heat shock protein , gdp dissociation inhibitor  <dig> , and the glycine receptor beta   were among the highly interconnected genes in the module. the mapk signaling pathway was the most significantly enriched pathway in this module . microrna mir-34c-5p appeared again as a main modulator of hub genes in this module, namely ppm1a and hsp90ab <dig>  as detected by significant correlation among respective mirna and mrna expression profiles. the central role of mir-34c-5p while targeting additional genes in the brown module is again evident in the expression correlation network shown in additional file 1: figure s5b .

in the turquoise module  containing alcohol-downregulated genes, we detected a larger core of hub genes known to be enriched in synaptic transmission, endocytosis, and cytokine signaling . the cxcr4-mediated signaling pathway appeared as one of the most enriched. concordantly, the cxcr <dig> gene was previously reported as one of the genes more significantly overtargeted by mirnas in pfc of human alcoholics  <cit> . regarding mirna regulation of this module, the central role of mir-34c-5p and let-7g-5p is yet again evident in the expression correlation network shown in additional file 1: figure s6b .

discussion
the goal of this study was to gain insights into the molecular mechanisms that are induced by alcohol consumption and governed by mirna regulation in an early stage of development of dependence. this would allow for better understanding of how molecular progression of the disease occurs. using a well-characterized mouse model developed in our lab  <cit> , we evaluated whole transcriptome profiles of mirna and mrna expression from the same samples .

we found that a significant number of mirnas that are upregulated in the fctx of ethanol-treated mice are also upregulated in the pfc of human alcoholics  <cit> . similarly, we found that many genes are differentially expressed in the fctx of the treated animals, and a significant number of these are also differentially expressed in pfc of human alcoholics  <cit> . interestingly, about 40-80% of the common differentially expressed genes change in opposite directions when the human and mouse models are compared, with a majority of differentially expressed genes being upregulated in the ethanol-treated mouse brains but downregulated in the brains of alcoholics. our results demonstrate first, a high degree of conservation of alcohol-relevant genes and pathways from mouse to human and second, unique differences in the direction of gene expression changes between the two models. such distinctions may be a consequence of the duration of ethanol exposure, which lasted for most of the adult life in the case of the human alcoholics , but only  <dig> days during early adulthood in the case of our treated mice . these differences suggest a dynamic gene regulatory network that changes as subjects advance towards alcohol dependence. we acknowledge that there may be undetermined effects that influence our comparison of results across the two species: 1) our expression analysis in mice represents a snapshot at  <dig> hours after the drinking protocol was completed; therefore, the animals could have been experiencing acute withdrawal; while 2) the post-mortem human brain samples originated from human alcoholics that were considered active heavy drinkers until the time of death, thus negating effects of acute withdrawal in this group. it would be beneficial to conduct additional expression studies after longer drinking protocols to determine a time sequence of expression changes in the alcohol-treated mouse as it progresses towards long-term ethanol consumption. it is also important to conduct expression profiling after longer time points of ethanol withdrawal, to determine whether withdrawal may influence the direction of mrna and mirna expression changes in the mouse.

the mouse mirna-mrna interaction networks presented here provide evidence for some striking features in the alcohol-specific network topologies. contrary to expectations and to what happens in the brain of chronic human alcoholics, we did not find differences between the negatively correlated interaction network  and a random network, which indicates no selective pressure under the alcohol treatment for this type of interaction. interestingly, we discovered that the positively correlated network  displayed an unexpected behavior, being twice as interconnected than expected by chance, and with a highly dense core of interactions. when overrepresentation of mirna targets was evaluated, we found that a majority of upregulated mirnas  have a significantly higher number of upregulated targets than is expected by chance , while only 24% of the mirnas displayed the behavior towards downregulated genes . we speculate that mirna targeting of upregulated genes might be in an “uncompensated" state in our mouse model, where mirnas have not yet been able to downregulate the expression of their relevant targets. the extended and highly statistically significant over-targeting of upregulated genes in general, might indicate a signal for transcript downregulation. we speculate that a selective pressure to target ethanol-induced  genes is impinged by chronic, binge alcohol consumption in an apparent adaptive response from the cellular environment to recover homeostasis. to our knowledge, this is the first report identifying positively correlated mirna-mrna networks in an animal model, which we propose as an adaptive mechanism to reinstate cellular homeostasis. our current working model suggests that alcohol drinking activates a variety of brain genes and pathways that are consequently targeted for down-regulation by mature mirnas that are activated in response to the aforementioned gene activation. over-targeting of red and brown module genes by several mirnas described in this work are examples of the behavior. our assumption is that activated mirnas in the mouse frontal cortex had not yet been able to overcome the induced upregulation of alcohol-responsive genes, at the experimental time point chosen to collect the mouse brains and conduct the expression profiling studies. we also suggest, based on expression patterns in similar brain regions from human alcoholics, that mirnas eventually dominate the regulatory interactions with targeted genes and consequently induce a downregulated state in those alcohol-responsive gene.

these results underscore the biological importance of targeting alcohol-induced genes by alcohol-induced mirnas and suggest that induction of mirna targeting in the frontal cortex is a conserved , adaptive response to counter an initial activation of transcription induced by high ethanol consumption. one possible explanation for the unexpected correlation  in the early stages of adaptation  is the temporal inability of mirna expression levels to cope with the levels of expression of target mrnas. it is unlikely that indirect activities  are responsible for such over-targeting of upregulated mrnas by a majority of the upregulated mirnas.

the coexpression network analysis underscores the main biological processes affected by alcohol and mirna regulation in the mouse model, such as synaptic vesicle-mediated transport and endocytic recycling, as well as neuroimmune signaling mediated by chemokine and toll-like receptor signaling. the fact that signaling pathways that are upregulated by alcohol and over-targeted by upregulated mirnas also show up enriched in downregulated modules, confirms the importance of these pathways in transducing alcohol’s actions during early stages of chronic alcohol consumption and their role as triggers of a mirna adaptive response aimed at counteracting such activation. micrornas mir-34c-5p and let-7g-5p, in particular, appear to be central regulators of hub genes in the most significant ethanol-responsive gene modules. similarly, these two mirnas were also upregulated in pfc of human alcoholics  <cit> , and a let- <dig> family member was demonstrated to alter cocaine-induced conditioned place preference behavior when manipulated in the nucleus accumbens of rats  <cit> . we are enthusiastic about future prospects of using let- <dig> modulation in mouse brain to induce behavioural changes related to alcohol consumption and development of dependence.

one of the mirna-targeted hub genes highlighted by the coexpression network analysis was synaptotagmin  <dig> . the synaptotagmin family members are known to function by cooperating with snare proteins and accelerating membrane fusion  <cit> . several other genes in the red module, such as sorting nexin- <dig> , target of myb <dig> , and bridging integrator  <dig> , are also involved in membrane trafficking and sorting processes relevant to synaptic transmission as well as the recycling of adaptor components involved in signaling of toll receptors and the interleukin il- <dig> receptor  <cit> . these results underscore the relevance of synaptic vesicle transport and endocytic recycling in the transduction of alcohol’s actions. our group has previously gathered proteomics/genomics evidence that support the role of these pathways  <cit> .

among the hub genes in the brown module, ppm1a is strongly expressed in the brain and involved in the regulation of the stress response by acting on mitogen-activated protein  kinase signaling and by regulating the immune response  <cit> . ethanol is well known to differentially modulate map kinase signaling cascades depending on the cell type, brain region, and ethanol treatment paradigm  <cit> . ppm1a phosphatase has been reported to play an important role in the termination of tnfα-mediated nfκb activation through dephosphorylation and inactivation of ikkβ  <cit> . accordingly, the nf-κb pathway has been widely implicated in the transduction of alcohol effects, and activation of the pathway is associated with increased ethanol consumption  <cit> . stress-induced chaperones hspa <dig>  and hsp90ab were also among brown module’s highly connected genes. these chaperons exert a variety of cellular functions including proteostasis maintenance  <cit>  and endotoxin-like effects through toll-like receptor  <dig>   <cit> . upregulation of genes encoding several classes of chaperons has been previously reported after ethanol treatment  <cit> . hsp <dig> and hsp <dig> have also been reported as co-clustering factors of the lps-sensing complex, which also contains cd <dig>  cxcr <dig>  gdf <dig>  and tlr <dig>  <cit> . importantly, lps-triggered signaling through this complex has been recently reported to increase ethanol consumption and to alter certain aspects of alcohol reward and aversion in mice  <cit> . glrb, another hub gene in the brown module, codes for the beta subunit of the glycine receptor  that is essential for targeting the receptor to the synapse. glycine receptors contain an integral chloride channel and are known to have modulatory sites for anesthetics, neurosteroids, inhaled drugs of abuse, and ethanol  <cit> . interestingly, α <dig> subunit-containing glycine receptors expressed in spinal cord dorsal horn synapses have been found to be specifically inhibited by inflammatory mediators  <cit> , which raises the possibility that ethanol and ethanol-induced inflammatory signals may initiate converging activities through glycine receptor signaling in the forebrain. overall, this module emphasizes the primary role that activation of stress and inflammatory responses, as well as intracellular vesicle transport and neurotransmitter-mediated signaling, play in the establishment of ethanol-induced behaviors.

in the turquoise module, the cxcr4-mediated signaling pathway appeared as one of the most enriched. concordantly, the cxcr <dig> gene was previously reported as one of the genes more significantly overtargeted by mirnas in pfc of human alcoholics  <cit> . this result underscores the relevance of this cytokine receptor pathway in the transduction of alcohol actions. cxcr <dig> has been reported to interact with the lps-sensing complex that also includes cd <dig>  hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  gdf <dig>  and tlr <dig>  <cit> . as mentioned earlier, lps-triggered signaling through this complex has been recently reported to increase ethanol consumption and to alter certain aspects of alcohol reward and aversion in mice  <cit> . cxcr <dig> has also been implicated in opiate-induced hypernociception  <cit>  and polymorphisms in sdf <dig>  associated with several phenotypes, including alcohol consumption  <cit> . in addition, cxcr <dig> has been implicated in glutamate exocytosis from astrocytes  <cit> , differentiation of oligodendrocytes progenitors and remyelination  <cit> , and appears to be required for proper distribution of gabaergic interneurons and the establishment of functional cortical circuitry in certain cortical regions and layers  <cit> . moreover, the cxcr <dig> ligand  induced presynaptic enhancement of gaba and glutamate release at serotonin dorsal raphe nucleus neurons  <cit> .

the evidence shown here suggests that one of alcohol’s primary effects, in the early stages of development of dependence , is the transcriptional activation of genes involved in synaptic signaling, endocytic transport, and inflammatory response. a limitation of our study is the temporal resolution of the gene expression signal, which is a snapshot at the end of the drinking protocol. we speculate that our results describe the “intermediate state” of a dynamic process of mrna regulation by mirnas. future studies need to explore gene expression profiles at additional time points during the drinking protocol and for an extended period of time and validate the regulatory relationship between mirna/mrna pairs. based on our current model, we speculate that with time, the brain under ethanol insult mounts an adaptive mirna response that counteracts the effect of the initial transcriptional activation. the well-adapted human alcoholic brain might represent this latter state. this hypothesis is consistent with processes of adaptive homeostasis generally triggered by addiction disorders  <cit> . the level of mechanistic conservation we observe between the mouse and human models is impressive, thereby warranting further investigation of the regulatory networks identified in our mouse model.

CONCLUSIONS
by simultaneously studying mirna and mrna expression profiles in the frontal cortex of ethanol-treated mice and comparing these with similar studies conducted in brains of human alcoholics, we provide evidence that alcohol drinking induces extensive activation of mirna expression. we suggest that this is an adaptive response to modulate an initial broad activation of genes primarily involved in synaptic signaling, endocytic transport, and inflammatory response. importantly, conserved subsets of mirnas and mrnas demonstrate changing expression levels in response to alcohol in both mice and humans. our results provide the first evidence for positively correlated mirna-mrna interaction networks based on expression correlation analyses that suggest an adaptive mirna response secondary to the activation of gene expression in brains under ethanol insult. this study underscores the value of integrative mirna-mrna analyses that could be critical for the future of addiction research. further analysis should be conducted with independent expression profiling datasets to validate the use of these conserved mirna and mrna expression signatures as biomarkers for ethanol consumption. in vivo studies  are currently in progress in our lab to elaborate on our findings and to discover specific mirnas or relevant mirna combinations that could alter drinking behaviors. our results identify mirnas as novel and promising therapeutic candidates for the treatment of alcoholism and other complex psychiatric disorders.

