BACKGROUND
eukaryotic species show considerable variation in genome size. this is especially true in higher plants, whose genome size  ranges from  <dig> mbp in genlisea margaretae to  <dig> gbp in paris japonica <cit> . such differences have evolved mainly because of two processes: polyploidy and dna amplification of transposons and related sequences. in eukaryotic genomes, the latter process has resulted in the accumulation of many repeated sequences – sequences that are similar or identical to sequences elsewhere in the genome, but whose number of copies is much higher than that possibly achieved through polyploidization. differences in genome size among species largely depend on the size of this repetitive fraction. in fact, large genomes are filled with repetitive sequences, especially in plants  <cit> . some repeats appear to be non-functional, whereas others have played key roles in the evolution of species  <cit> . for example, the mutagenic action of transposons provides substantial increases in genetic variability  <cit> . transposons also create novel functions, and alter the regulatory patterns of genes, resulting in phenotypic variation  <cit> .

the advent of next generation sequencing  represents a major advance for genetical and biological research, producing millions of genomic sequences at ever increasing speed and decreasing cost. dozens of gigabases of data can be sequenced in a week for the same cost as a few hundred kilobases of sanger sequence . ngs technology has offered the opportunity to acquire genome-scale data for any organism  <cit> .

in either reference guided or de novo assembly of ngs reads, a major computational task is to manage 'multi-reads', i.e. those reads that map to multiple locations and/or contain highly repeated k-mers  <cit> . an algorithm for reference-guided assembly has three choices  <cit> : 1) to ignore  all multi-reads; 2) to perform the best match approach, in which only the best alignment is reported or, if equally good best match alignments occur, one at random or all of them are reported; 3) to report all alignments up to a maximum number. the first strategy restricts the analysis to unique regions in the genome, by discarding all repeats and limiting discovery of some biologically important variants. the other two strategies enable analyses of repetitive regions, with the best match approach providing a reasonable estimate of coverage  <cit>  and reporting all possible alignments to avoid erroneous choices about read placement.

de novo assemblers belong to one of two classes, overlap-based and de bruijn graph assemblers, that each create different types of graphs from the read data. the sequence assembly is then reconstructed by algorithms that traverse the graphs. repeats cause branches in these graphs  <cit>  and assemblers, making a guess as to which branch to follow, can create false joins and erroneous copy numbers. in a more conservative approach, the assembler breaks graphs at these branch points, producing an accurate but fragmented assembly.

the most common error of an assembler is the production of a chimaera by joining two repeats that are not close in the genome. to resolve chimaeras the first and most important tool is the use of paired-end reads. because the distance between the paired reads is known, an assembler can use both the expected distance and the orientation of the reads to reconstruct the correct sequence.

another strategy for handling repeats is to perform statistics on the depth of coverage for each contig. these statistics cannot show exactly how to assemble every repeat, but they do identify the repeats themselves. the assumption is that if a genome is sequenced, for example, to 50x coverage, the genome should be uniformly covered. this means that most contigs should also be covered at 50x. by contrast, a repetitive region will show deeper coverage, thereby allowing the algorithm to identify it as a repeat. in de novo sequencing of a genome, repeats are usually assembled after the assembly of unique regions, and assemblers use multiple paired-ends to link a repetitive contig to a unique one. however, when the objective of research is not to obtain a complete genome but merely single sequence families, the problem of assembling contigs into more extended ones is less stringent. in addition, in the case of repetitive dna families, lower coverage can reduce the occurrence of multi-reads and hence can improve repeat assembly into contigs and repeat identification and reconstruction  <cit> .

the sunflower genome is large . the repetitive component has been recently characterized using a sanger-sequenced small insert library  <cit> . this library provided a first set of sequences  that were used to analyze the composition of sunflower genome in terms of types and abundance of repetitive elements. the fraction of repetitive sequences amounted to 62% of the sequences, while the putative functional genes accounted for 4%. the largest component of the repetitive fraction was represented by long terminal repeat  retrotransposons, especially of the gypsy superfamily. class ii transposable elements were barely represented in that library.

a larger effort to characterize the repetitive component of the sunflower genome was then made by analyzing approximately 25% of the genome from  <dig> random sequence reads  <cit> . in this study, the sunflower genome was shown to be composed of over 81% transposable elements, 77% of which were long terminal repeat  retrotransposons.

the retrotransposon component of the sunflower genome was also analysed in detail by assembling and analyzing bacterial artificial chromosome  clones  <cit> . buti et al.  <cit>  analysed  <dig> bac clones, identifying  <dig> full-length and  <dig> incomplete ltr retrotransposons. among ltr-retrotransposons, non-autonomous elements , which do not carry any protein-encoding sequence, were discovered for the first time in sunflower. the insertion time of intact retroelements was measured, based on the divergence of sister ltrs. all isolated elements were inserted relatively recently, especially those belonging to the gypsy superfamily.

these results were confirmed and extended by staton et al.  <cit> . the ltr retrotransposon fraction was shown to be composed in large part by chromodomain-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons. the authors showed that there is a bias in the efficiency of homologous recombination in removing ltr retrotransposon dna, and provided insight into the mechanisms associated with the composition of the transposable element fraction in the sunflower genome. they also showed that most intact ltr retrotransposons have likely inserted since the origin of this species, providing further evidence that biased ltr retrotransposon activity has played a major role in shaping the dna landscape of the sunflower genome.

in other studies, retrotransposons of the sunflower have been shown to be conserved within the helianthus genus  <cit>  and transcriptionally active  <cit> . fluorescent in situ hybridization studies have suggested that the gypsy and copia superfamilies are most frequent in the heterochromatic regions close to centromeres and telomeres, respectively  <cit> . the genomic organization of gypsy elements is conserved also in hybrid sunflower species derived from the common sunflower, despite large amplification of these elements in the genome of such species  <cit> .

the aim of the present study is to verify the suitability of using different approaches of de novo assembling sequence reads obtained by ngs procedures  to gain a comprehensive characterization of the repetitive component of a plant species , whose large-sized genome is being sequenced thanks to the efforts of an international sequencing consortium  <cit> . the repeat structure of the sunflower genome obtained in this study is validated by comparison with those obtained using a sunflower sanger-sequenced small insert library  <cit> , sanger- or 454-sequenced sunflower bac clones  <cit> , and sunflower de novo assembled  <dig> reads  <cit> .

besides developing further resources needed to sequence the sunflower genome, this study highlights the extent to which the repetitive portion of a plant genome can be characterized using ngs, and describes the utility and concerns raised by ngs methods of surveying such sequences.

RESULTS
comparison of different assembled sequence sets
by varying sequencing technology , coverage , assemblers and assembly procedures , different genomic databases were produced. on the whole, it can be observed that for each of three packages of reads  the split subpackages resulted in the production of a lower number of contigs . however, contigs were far more repetitive than those produced by simple assembly of whole reads, as shown by higher values of average coverage . in fact, sequences assembled from the split sets were from about three-fold  to more than 27-fold  more repeated in the genome than those assembled from unsplit sets.

the annotations of the six sets of assembled sequences show large differences in functional composition . differences were especially pronounced when the same set of reads was split into subpackages prior to assembly. figure  <dig> shows that low redundancy sequences such as putative genes or non-ltr retrotransposons were more common when the assemblies were conducted with no preliminary splitting. in contrast, preliminary splitting resulted in the assembly of larger percentages of ltr-retrotransposons. this is especially true for illumina reads , probably because of their shorter length compared to  <dig> reads. also, contigs for which no significant similarity was found in the existing databases were more  frequent in the unsplit assembled read set .

the six assembled sequence sets  from the illumina,  <dig> large, and  <dig> small sets of reads were each assembled two by two  and annotated. the functional composition of the three resulting assemblies was similar, except that the frequency of retrotransposons was higher in both  <dig> packages than in the illumina read set. in addition, a larger frequency of unclassified sequences was obtained using the illumina read set .

because of the large differences in average coverage and functional composition among the six assembled sequence sets, a further assembly was performed to produce a comprehensive genomic sequence set for sunflower. a total of  <dig>  sequences  were obtained, representing a whole genome set of assembled sequences .

the reliability of this method to obtain accurate sequences was tested by comparison of these sequences to available, sanger-sequenced ones. twenty alignments between assembled contigs and real sunflower dna sequences are shown as additional file  <dig>  mismatches related to transitions/transversions represent only  <dig> % of  <dig>  aligned nucleotides, indels amount to  <dig> %.

sunrep, a database of sunflower repetitive sequences
the wgsas was mapped with the large set of illumina reads as above. the distribution of average coverage of the wgsas is reported in figure  <dig>  the average coverage was used as a parameter by which the repetitive sequences could be discriminated from the others. in plants much of the genome may be repeated because of the polyploidy events that have occurred during their evolutionary history . therefore, we evaluated sequence redundancy in relation to the average coverage of five sunflower gene sequences that were considered as unique reference sequences. by mapping illumina reads to the wgsas to which the five genes were added, we obtained for those sequences an average coverage of  <dig> . we conservatively identified as repeated sequences all of those contigs with an average coverage higher than five-fold the mean average coverage of the five reference sequences . by this method, we identified  <dig>  repeated sequences that constitute a database of repetitive sequences of sunflower, hereafter called sunrep. the remaining  <dig>  sequences of wgsas were classified as unique or low redundant.

the distribution of different sequence types in sunrep is reported in table  <dig>  it can be observed that  <dig> % of sequences included in sunrep did not find any hits in the public databases used for annotation. among the annotated sequence types, retrotransposons were by far the most represented in sunrep. of ltr-retrotransposons, sequences belonging to the gypsy superfamily were  <dig> -fold more represented than those belonging to the copia superfamilies.

interestingly, a large fraction of sequences showed similarity to ltr-retrotransposons, but the superfamily could not be determined. such elements lack coding sequence, are non-autonomous and usually species-specific. they can be discovered only when long sequences are available because their identities are based on structural features and not on sequence similarity to retrotransposon coding domains. in this study, we identified these elements only by their sequence similarity to those first reported by buti et al.  <cit> . non-ltr retrotransposons were poorly represented, as frequently observed in plant genomes.

putative dna transposons accounted for  <dig>  sequences. a portion of these were classified as dna transposons according to sequence similarity to the short domain of the transposase gene. all types of plant dna transposons were putatively found in sunrep, with a prevalence of mites and helitrons.

sunrep contigs showing sequence similarity to ltr-res, non-ltr res, and dna transposons were also analysed using an all-by-all blast search to estimate the occurrence in sunrep of similar sequences within those repeat classes, i.e. sequences that were assembled separately, even though sharing some sequence similarity. each class of repeats was subdivided into families  and singletons . the distribution of such families according to the number of sequences for each of them is reported in figure  <dig> 

the most redundant family, belonging to the gypsy repeat superfamily, included only  <dig> of the  <dig>  sequences of sunrep . only four gypsy families were composed of more than  <dig> sunrep sequences. considering the  <dig> most numerous ltr-res families, the vast majority belonged to the gypsy superfamily . among the  <dig> most numerous dna transposons, the most common families belonged to the helitron class, followed by putative mites . it should be noted that the number of sequences that belong to a family in sunrep does not reflect the redundancy of that family in the genome.

another class of repeats was classified as unknown, but showed similarity to sequences previously isolated and whose redundancy has already been measured in sunflower by molecular and bioinformatic procedures  <cit> . these unknown repeats were largely represented in sunrep. many of these showed similarity to the most repeated sequence identified by cavallini et al.  <cit> , the so-called contig  <dig>  whose nature remains to be ascertained.

finally, according to blast analysis,  <dig> sequences of sunrep showed similarity to putative protein encoding sequences. of these,  <dig> were classified as hypothetical proteins, without any further annotation, the others belonged to  <dig> different gene families, of which  <dig> were represented by at least  <dig> sequences in the database .

the most redundant genes encode the nbs-lrr class of proteins, receptors that recognize highly variable pathogen effectors  <cit> . another redundant gene family encode dnaj proteins. these proteins function in association with hsp <dig> molecular chaperones to facilitate protein folding and play an active role in regulating normal cellular events like protein degradation, morphogenesis and cell cycle progression  <cit> .

the third redundant gene family is very heterogeneous, encoding proteins with un-specified protein-kinase domains, that are involved in the transduction of signals to binding factors, to the centromeres, and to other effectors. beside aspecific kinases, also serine/threonine/tyrosine kinases are encoded by a redundant gene family. the last redundant and heterogeneous gene family encodes f-box motif containing proteins.

sunflower genome composition
in the case of a small insert library  <cit>  or of a whole genomic shotgun sequence library  <cit> , the composition of the sequence set directly reflects the composition of the sunflower genome. conversely, in the case of a sequence set obtained by assembling illumina and  <dig> reads, the simple composition of the set cannot offer a picture of the genome composition, because repeated sequences are assembled together and hence are underestimated. consequently, we evaluated the composition of the sunflower genome by counting the number and percentage of reads that mapped to each sequence in the wgsas. mapping results are summarized in table  <dig> 

based on their similarity to the sequences in the organellar database, we estimated that more than  <dig>  millions of reads were of organellar dna origin. regarding other reads, around  <dig> million reads did not match any assembled sequence, indicating that the wgsas does not cover the entire genome, as expected having assembled only a total of  <dig>  × coverage. it is likely that much of the missing sequences were low copy-number regions in the genome and that the relatively low coverage used in our study did not allow assembly of such loci. such low-copy sequences could be protein encoding genes or rare forms of repeats whose sequence was degenerated until becoming unique. some of these unmapped reads also likely represent sequencing errors of some kind. on the other hand, it is also possible that stringent assembly procedures and shorter reads affecting alignment stringency have contributed to increase the number of unaligned reads.

considering that illumina reads in our experiments were sampled without bias for particular sequence types, the percentage of reads that matched to a sequence class indicated the proportion of that sequence class in the sunflower genome. so, it was estimated that the percentage of repetitive sequences in the h. annuus genome was very high, amounting at least to  <dig> % , while unique or low redundant sequences  represented only  <dig> % of the genome at least. the rest  of the genomic reads did not match any contigs.

sunflower genome composition was estimated also in terms of sequence types. the frequency of each repeat type was calculated based on mapping the wgsas with the  <dig> x coverage of illumina reads and counting the number of reads matching each sequence type. such frequencies are reported in table  <dig>  adopting the nomenclature proposed by wicker et al.  <cit> .

it can be observed that retrotransposons  were by far the most abundant class of sequences in the sunflower genome, accounting for at least  <dig> % of the reads matching the wgsas, while dna transposons and non-ltr retrotransposons showed very low percentages . of ltr-retrotransposons, the vast majority belonged to the gypsy superfamily, which is  <dig> -fold represented compared to copia superfamily. a large amount of the genome  was apparently made up of ltr-retrotransposons of unknown superfamily. it is presumable that their frequency in the sunflower genome was underestimated, and will increase after the sunflower genome sequence becomes available.

in other analyses we mapped illumina reads to a sample of  <dig> intact ltr-retrotransposons of sunflower, isolated by buti et al.  <cit> , to estimate the equilibrium between retrotransposon replication and retrotransposon loss. illumina reads were mapped to these retrotransposons, keeping separated ltr sequences from the respective inter-ltr region . the results of mapping are reported in table  <dig>  it can be observed that the ratios between ltr and inter-ltr average coverage ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . if all retrotransposons belonging to one and the same family were intact, i.e. composed by two ltrs and one inter-ltr region, the ratio should have been  <dig>  for  <dig> out of  <dig> analysed ltr-res the ratio was higher than  <dig>  indicating the occurrence of solo-ltrs of that re family in the genome. the other ltr-res had a ratio ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , i.e. the inter-ltr region was more represented in the genome than the ltr. this result can be explained by the presence of different families that share, at least in part, the inter-ltr region. interestingly, analysing separately gypsy, copia, and unknown elements, the mean ratio between ltr and inter-ltrs average coverage was higher than  <dig> only for gypsy elements .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
in our experiments, different strategies were used for assembling original sunflower sequence reads and for obtaining contigs; i.e. different packages of reads  were subdivided into low-coverage subpackages prior to assembly.

similar levels of sequence coverage have proven to be efficient in generating a considerable amount of biologically useful information and genomic resources in other species  <cit> . by using low genome coverage, most of the assembled contigs do not represent specific genomic loci; instead, they are probably composed of reads derived from multiple copies of repetitive elements, thus representing “consensus” sequences of genomic repeats  <cit> . even though the exact sequence of this consensus does not necessarily occur in the genome, this representation of repetitive elements is sufficiently accurate to enable amplification of whole length repetitive elements by pcr  <cit> . indeed, our comparison of assembled contigs with available sanger sequences demonstrates good correspondence between virtual and real sequences.

our results clearly show that splitting the original packages of reads into a number of subpackages allowed us to assemble more contigs similar to repetitive sequences, although assembled contigs were fewer  than those obtained by assembling the sets of reads prior to splitting. the difference in number and redundancy of assembled sequences was more striking for illumina reads than for  <dig> reads, probably due to the short length of illumina reads. however, splitting the packages of reads did not apparently affect the mean length and the n <dig> of the assembled contigs.

the sequence sets obtained by using different pre-assembly approaches were different in sequence types and redundancy. hence, the production of a wgsas by further assembling of the different sets provided a more complete picture of sunflower genome composition. in addition, the analysis of redundancy based on mapping illumina reads onto the wgsas allowed us to quantify the redundancy of each contig.

sunflower genome composition has already been ascertained using other methods, i.e. biochemical analyses  <cit> , sequencing and analysis of a small insert library  <cit> , whole genome  <dig> sequencing  <cit> . all these analyses may have some potential weakness. biochemical analyses  <cit>  obviously do not consider dna sequence but only denaturation and reassociation kinetics of dna, so rare forms of repeats are excluded such as, for example, retrotransposon remnants. the sanger-sequenced small insert library  <cit>  comprised only  <dig>  sequences, so conclusions are subject to sampling errors. the whole genome  <dig> sequence database  <cit>  is based only on sequence similarity, however the number of  <dig> reads used  might be not sufficient to ensure accurate estimation of genome composition.

the present analyses showed that sunflower genome is mostly composed of ltr-retrotransposons , similar to that already reported  <cit> . it is known that the genome size is determined during evolution by an equilibrium between enlargement of the genome by insertion of res and re-mediated dna removal  <cit> . dna rearrangements, illegitimate recombination, and unequal homologous recombination drive dna removal in plants by a number of mechanisms, such as the repair of double strand breaks  and slipstrand mispairing  <cit> .

the observed large number of retrotransposons indicates that such elements have been actively replicating during the evolution of this species. recent studies have reported that sunflower ltr-res are transcribed even at present  <cit>  and, in at least one case, re transcription was shown to be followed by re insertion  <cit> .

mapping illumina reads to a set of  <dig> available intact ltr-retrotransposons suggested the occurrence of numerous solo-ltrs for  <dig> out of  <dig> res, although the occurrence of res sharing ltrs but having different internal regions cannot be ruled out and could lead to an overestimation of solo-ltr frequencies. solo-ltrs are typically produced by illegitimate recombination. our data suggest that massive amplification of these elements in the sunflower genome was partly counterbalanced by substantial dna loss, especially related to gypsy elements, although in other studies solo-ltrs have been found commonly for copia elements as well  <cit> . it is obvious that a very large number of intact retroelements are needed to validate this analysis.

concerning the different re superfamilies, the ratio between gypsy and copia retrotransposon frequencies amounted to  <dig> , confirming the greater abundance of the former superfamily. this ratio is generally species-specific. gypsy to copia frequency ratio is even higher in papaya , sorghum , and rice  than in the sunflower genome. in other cases, as in maize  <cit> , poplar  <cit> , and olive  a similar abundance of the two superfamilies was observed. finally, in grapevine an opposite trend was found, with copia elements two-fold more represented than gypsy ones  <cit> .

the large abundance of gypsy elements compared to copia can be explained by two hypotheses: gypsy elements have been more active during sunflower evolution and/or they have been active more recently, so that are more easily recognizable by similarity searches, having been subjected to fewer mutations. dating retrotransposon insertions in the sunflower genome indicate that gypsy elements are generally younger than copia, though some copia elements are relatively young as well  <cit> .

retrotransposon and dna transposon sequences included in the redundant fraction of the wgsas  were also assigned to different families within each superfamily, by an all-by-all blast search. the number of sequences composing each family was generally low, confirming that there are not prominent transposon families in this species  <cit> .

in a previous study  <cit> , a different approach was used for determining the composition of different repeat types in terms of families, by using the graph-based method of novak et al.  <cit> . the families of ltr-retrotransposons and dna transposons generally match the results reported in staton et al.  <cit> , with the exception of putative mites, that are more frequent than previously observed in other studies. interestingly, the most frequent dna transposon family belongs to the helitron superfamily and is comprised of a number of sequences comparable to that of the most numerous ltr-re subfamilies. also the graph-based study included one helitron subfamily among the  <dig> most redundant ones in the sunflower genome; all the others belonging to the ltr-re class.

the results obtained by staton et al.  <cit>  and those reported in this study indicate that both the method by novak et al.  <cit>  and the all-by-all blast search  allow a precise estimation of repeat superfamilies and families. the first method allows information to be gained on repeat structure and provides putative consensus sequences of the repeat; all-by-all blast search  can be applied to larger sets of reads.

finally, mapping data indicated that a number of contigs showing similarity to putative protein encoding genes are to be considered as redundant. in many cases such contigs showed similarity to gene families already known to be repeated in plant genomes, such as nbs-lrr genes  <cit> . in other cases, it is likely that functional domains, and not genes, are the cause of apparent redundancy. for example, f-box proteins are identified by the presence of protein interaction domains that bind ubiquitinilation targets and include a large variety of proteins  <cit> . for other contigs, it might be that a gene  lies close to a repeated sequence and the redundancy of that contig is related to the repeated sequence and not to the gene sequence. interestingly, our data indicated the occurrence, in the sunflower genome, of a relatively high number of putative helitrons. these sequences, of transposable origin, are known to include dna retro-transcribed on rna transcripts  <cit>  and might be responsible for the relatively high frequency of gene fragments in the redundant fraction of the wgsas.

in conclusion, the results of our experiments show how different data partitioning and assembly approaches can be used to obtain valuable insights on genome composition using ngs technologies, either  <dig> or illumina, or both technologies combined. concerning sunflower, our data confirm the repeat structure of the genome and give new insights on different aspects of it. moreover, they will facilitate the functional annotation of the h. annuus genome that is currently being sequenced and will be used for studies of intra- and interspecific variability related to h. annuus and its relatives.

