BACKGROUND
cyclamen persicum mill.  is a popular and economically significant pot plant crop in japan, germany, italy, the netherlands and north america. flower colour in commercial lines ranges from white, through red, pink, reddish-purple to purple. the pigments present are predominantly anthocyanins and there have been several studies on anthocyanin and flavonoid pigmentation in cyclamen  <cit> . the main anthocyanins are  <dig> -di-o-glucosides of peonidin, cyanidin and malvidin . there are two missing colour groups in cyclamen, the orange-red of pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins  <cit>  and blue, even though some delphinidin-derived anthocyanins often associated with blue flower colours are present in maroon to purple cultivars  <cit> .

to date there has only been one reported molecular breeding experiment involving flavonoid pigments for cyclamen. it was focused on the generation of yellow flower colours through the production of yellow flavonoid pigments  <cit> . our interest is in altering the anthocyanin-based colours  <cit> . in flower colour modification studies in general, particular attention has been paid to the enzymes responsible for the hydroxylation of the b-ring of the flavonoid molecule, namely f3'h and f3'5'h  because of their key influence on the colour of anthocyanin pigments  <cit> . specific experiments to accumulate delphinidin-derived anthocyanins by over expression of a f3'5'h transgene have been reported for carnation  <cit>  and rose  <cit> , while inhibition of both the f3'h and the f3'5'h genes has been used to modify colour and promote cyanidin- and pelargonidin-based pigment accumulation in flowers in the genera torenia  <cit> , nierembergia  <cit>  and osteospermum  <cit> .

our strategy for modification of flower colour in cyclamen focused on the f3'5'h. substrate feeding experiments with dhk and the f3'h/f3'5'h inhibitor tetcyclacis indicate that the cyclamen dfr can use dhk and that cyclamen has the ability to make pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins . the cloning of a f3'5'h cdna and our cyclamen genetic transformation system  <cit>  have allowed us to investigate flower colour formation in cyclamen. in this study we report on the effects of antisense suppression of f3'5'h on flavonoid end-product accumulation and flower colour.

RESULTS
isolation and sequence analysis of a cyclamen flavonoid 3', 5'-hydroxylase cdna
a putative full-length cdna for f3'5'h  was isolated from a cdna library made from mixed flower bud stages of c. persicum 'sierra rose'. the complete nucleotide sequence has  <dig> nucleotides with a single major orf encoding  <dig> amino acid residues .

when the deduced amino acid sequence for cpf3'5'h was used in a blast search of genbank http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/blast/, the closest sequence was the putative f3'5'h from camellia sinensis , with 83% amino acid identity. the lasergene program megalign  was used to compare the cpf3'5'h deduced amino acid sequence with ten f3'5'h sequences , ten f3'h sequences  and two 'outlier' cytochrome p <dig> sequences . amino acid identity of cpf3'5'h to other f3'5'h sequences was in the range from 75-82%, except for the campanula medium f3'5'h sequence , 68% identity, which is suggested to have a distinct f3'5'h structure  <cit>  and the monocot phalaenopsis hybrida f3'5'h sequence   <cit> . a phylogenetic tree was formed using the clustal w algorithm http://www-bimas.cit.nih.gov/clustalw/clustalw.html with the megalign data . the f3'5'h sequences form a distinct cluster, which includes the cyclamen sequence. based on the amino acid and phylogeny analysis the evidence supports cpf3'5'h as encoding a f3'5'h enzyme.

generation of transformed lines and transgene expression analyses
antisense cpf3'5'h transformants were produced from the 'purple' cultivar using constructs ppn48/ <dig>  and from the 'wine-red' cultivar using pln96/ppn <dig> . flowers from several of the transgenic lines showed significant changes in colour, both in hue and intensity  . no other phenotypic alterations were observed when compared with wildtype plants.

northern blot analysis of cultivar  'purple' transformants showed that eight lines were transgenic for the hygromycin selectable marker . rt-pcr analysis of the nptii selectable marker showed the three cv 'wine-red' lines were also transgenic as expected .

northern blot analysis with a mixed sense and antisense cpf3'5'h probe, , showed that two f3'5'h specific transcripts were detected . there was a marked reduction in endogenous cpf3'5'h transcript in all antisense lines of both cultivars. antisense cpf3'5'h transcript was detected only in the transgenic lines and the levels varied between lines.

flavonoid analyses
anthocyanin content in the petals of the transgenic lines changed in both concentration and profile. the anthocyanins detected in the flower tissue of the regeneration control plants and transgenic lines are shown in figure.  <dig> and  <dig> and are listed in table  <dig>  anthocyanin identities were assigned by retention times and mass spectrometer data and were consistent with the anthocyanins identified previously for cyclamen, predominantly the 3-mono and  <dig>  di-glucosides of peonidin, cyanidin and malvidin  <cit> . malvidin 3-o-glucoside was the predominant anthocyanin in cv 'wine-red' while malvidin  <dig>  di-o-glucoside was the predominant anthocyanin in cv 'purple'.

* anthocyanins were identified using hplc retention times and uv and mass spectrometer data as compared with previously published data.

a change in anthocyanin profile was found in the petal tissue of the transgenic lines as might be expected with a reduction in f3'5'h activity . delphinidin-derived  pigment levels decreased as a proportion of the total anthocyanins in petal tissue of most of the transgenic lines while the proportion of cyanidin-derived pigments  increased. this shift in anthocyanin profile correlates with a loss of expression of the endogenous cpf3'5'h transcript . the greater the loss of expression, e.g. cv 'purple' line # <dig> and cv 'wine-red' line # <dig>  the greater the change in anthocyanin profile . pelargonidin, an anthocyanin pigment with a mono-hydroxylated b-ring, was not produced in the transgenic lines of either cultivar.

there was also a marked reduction in total anthocyanin concentration in petal tissue of the transgenic lines. lines with modified flower colour showed a decrease in total anthocyanin concentration of up to 80% of that in untransformed controls . the difference in anthocyanin concentrations between the transgenic lines and their respective controls were statistically significant at the 5% level.

flavonol profiles were also examined. flavonols in the untransformed and transgenic lines were putatively identified as kaempferol and quercetin 3-glucosides, rutinosides and acylated rutinosides . this is consistent with previous studies  <cit> . total flavonol concentration in the transgenic lines showed a statistically significant increase in most lines . the quercetin/kaempferol ratio also increased significantly in most transgenics lines of cv 'purple' but decreased significantly in all the transgenic lines of cv 'wine-red' .

avalues significantly different from the control at the 5% level

*for these samples n = 1

flower colour analysis
expression of the introduced antisense cpf3'5'h transgene and resulting flavonoid concentration and profile changes in the transgenic lines were translated into visible flower colour changes . cultivar 'purple' lines showed a loss of purple colour and became pink, while the cv 'wine-red' lines remained a similar pinkish hue but with reduced intensity .

the change in colour observed by eye was quantified by colour measurements using a colorimeter. the colour parameters, lightness , chroma  and hue angle  were statistically significantly different from controls in lines with modified flower colour in most lines . the exceptions were lines  <dig>  and  <dig>  for l and c values. both lines exhibited the least change in their anthocyanin profiles . the majority of transgenic lines of both cultivars showed an increase in lightness  and a reduced intensity of colour . this is consistent with the decreased anthocyanin concentration in the petal tissue from the transgenic lines. there was also a clear shift in h° away from purple in the control line towards red in the transgenic lines of the 'purple' cultivar. this change in hue angle correlates with a decrease in the proportion of delphinidin-derived anthocyanins. however line # <dig>  which had the largest proportion of cyanidin-derived pigments, did not have the largest shift in h°. similarly the only line of the cv 'wine-red' transgenics showing a shift from delphinidin- to cyanidin-derived pigments  did not show a significant change in h° while the other two transgenics did. the shift in hue angle for the cv 'wine-red' transgenics was in fact back to the purple region of the colour wheel. the overall shift, however, was very small and hue angle remained in the red/pink region.

colour parameters  were measured with a minolta cr- <dig> tristimulus colorimeter. lightness represents the proportion of total incident light that is reflected. chroma is a measure of colour intensity in relative intensity units. hue angle is derived from a cielab colour space wheel with values stepped counterclockwise from red/purple at 360°/0°, yellow at 90°, bluish-green at 180° and blue at 270°  <cit> . the values shown in the table are means of three petals from three flowers of each line and the sems.

avalues significantly different from the control at the 5% level

*for these samples n = 1

discussion
antisense suppression of cpf3'5'h was successful in changing anthocyanin profiles and flower colour in cyclamen. a shift from predominantly delphinidin-derived pigments to a greater relative proportion of cyanidin-derived pigments was achieved and in general this showed up as a concomitant shift in h°, the parameter indicating colour group. it is interesting that the degree of change in h° did not correlate with the degree of shift in pigments. the fact that the transformants also showed variable drops in total anthocyanin levels and changes in flavonol level and type illustrates both the links between the different pools of flavonoid substrates and the importance of the roles that anthocyanin concentration and flavonol copigmentation play in flower colour.

similar changes in anthocyanin concentration and the accumulation of cyanidin-derived anthocyanins were seen for the two different minicyclamen cultivars and yet the greatest change in h° was seen in the lines of the purple cultivar. this is most likely due to a reduction in the predominant anthocyanin, malvidin 3-5-di-o-glucoside in these lines. this anthocyanin has been reported as being bluer in colour than malvidin mono-glucosides  <cit> . the predominant anthocyanin in the 'wine-red' cultivar is malvidin 3-o-glucoside and this has been reported to give pink/purple colours, closer to the colour associated with cyanidin and peonidin pigments  <cit> .

pelargonidin-based pigments were not detected in the flowers of the transgenics. one explanation for their absence is that suppression of f3'5'h activity was not complete, as evidenced by the presence of delphinidin-derived anthocyanins. this may be either due to inefficiency of the antisense approach , effects due to transgene insertion or copy number  <cit> , or the presence of other unaffected f3'5'h family members. the presence of a f3'h enzyme in the petals could have also removed substrate for pelargonidin production. we have searched for a cyclamen f3'h cdna and found one  with high deduced amino acid similarity to known f3'h sequences of other species . however, transcript levels for this particular f3'h gene were not detectable by northern analysis during cyclamen petal development .

substrate specificity is an important consideration regarding pelargonidin production. in some species, such as petunia  <cit> , cymbidium  <cit>  and osteospermum  <cit> , synthesis of pelargonidin-based anthocyanins is limited by the substrate specificity of the endogenous dfr. our substrate feeding experiments  showed that cyclamen has the ability to make pelargonidin-derived anthocyanins. it is still possible, however, that cyclamen dfr has low substrate specificity for dhk and the action of flavonol synthase , f3'h and f3'5'h means that the dhk substrate is not used for the synthesis of pelargonidin. retransformation of an antisense f3'5'h line from this study, with a transgene encoding a dfr known to efficiently catalyse the reduction of dhk to leucopelargonidin  <cit>  could result in transgenic plants accumulating pelargonidin derivatives in flowers, as successfully demonstrated for osteospermum  <cit> . it remains to be resolved whether there is a f3'h functioning in the flower. the presence of cyanidin-based pigments in the flowers of the antisense cpf3'5'h lines suggests f3'h activity. thus, inhibition of either f3'h or fls gene activity to reduce enzymatic competition for dhk substrate may also be necessary to promote pelargonidin production in dfr/antisense f3'5'h transgenics.

in the cyclamen transgenic lines, total anthocyanin levels decreased markedly while flavonol levels increased and the quercetin/kaempferol ratio changed. similar results were reported for nierembergia flowers modified with an antisense f3'5'h construct and were suggested to be due to a modified flow through the flavonoid pathway  <cit> . a block in f3'5'h activity resulted in an increase in pelargonidin precursors. low f3'h activity coupled with a dfr that putatively does not recognise dhk, was suggested to have led to limited substrate flow toward pigment production and an increase in the sustrate pool for fls  <cit> . the flavonoid enzyme kinetics are not known for cyclamen. however, if the cyclamen dfr has a low specificity for pelargonidin or cyanidin precursors  suggests) this would provide extra substrate for the fls enzyme and explain the increased flavonol levels. competition for substrate between fls and dfr has also been shown to occur in petunia  <cit> .

it is interesting that while flavonol levels generally increased in the transgenics, there were differences in the quercetin/kaempferol ratios between the lines of the different cultivars. quercetin flavonols increased in cv 'purple' lines while kaempferol types increased in cv 'wine-red' lines. this inverse result and the consistency of the ratio change within lines of each cultivar argues against the suppression of f3'5'h activity directly altering the balance of dhk and dhq, and thus what is available for the fls. furthermore, differing substrate specificities of their respective fls cannot account for the observed results. differing specificities of other enzymes are likely to be the cause. the probable candidate is f3'h, which in other species can not only alter the balance between dhk and dhq, but also convert kaempferol to quercetin  <cit> . further studies of cyclamen flower colour would warrant a continued search for a f3'h.

CONCLUSIONS
we report here the first successful alteration of cyclamen anthocyanin pigmentation using genetic modification techniques. our results highlight the intricate interplay between type and concentration of both anthocyanin pigments and flavonol co-pigments in flower colour and illustrate the complexity involved in modifying a biosynthetic pathway with multiple branch points to different end products.

