BACKGROUND
in analyzing the stability of dna replication origins in s. cerevisiae  we faced the question of whether one set of sequences has more and/or better binding sites of a particular transcription factor than the other. one way to address this question is through wet lab experiments such as chromatin immunoprecipitation. here we offer a computational alternative, which can be effective provided the pwm  representation of the transcription factor is known. an obvious advantage of our computational approach is that it is much cheaper to execute and it provides a built-in statistical significance analysis.

there are many computational tools that scan for "good" matches of a given pwm . similarly there are tools that look at the significance of pwm matches in a set of sequences . none of these however directly apply to our problem, where the null assumption is that there is "essentially" no difference in the binding sites between the two input sets, even though both might be enriched, deficient, or neutral in sites when compared to "background" sequences. elkon et al. look for enrichment in the number of sites in a subset of a genomic scale set of promoters  <cit> . in particular their approach is not applicable when the sets of sequences are either disjoint or small. there has also been work on discriminative de-novo motif finding  where the goal is to find a pwm that discriminates between two sets of sequences. this is quite different from our stated goal where the pwm is given and the focus is on assigning significance to the difference in the number and/or quality of sites. robin et al. study a very similar problem to ours, only in the context of a pattern representation of the motif  <cit> . in conclusions section we emphasize some of the differences between this paper and their theoretical work. here we present sadmama  – the tool we have developed to address the aforementioned problem. sadmama implements two different strategies for testing the difference in site frequency as well as site quality between the two input sets. the quicker approach relies on a couple of simplified statistical models from which we derive and carefully implement the appropriate tests. as an alternative for accepting our simplified models, we offer bootstrapping which, by its nature, requires fewer assumptions, but consumes more time. the development of our bootstrap procedure required some innovation since, as we show below, a naive resampling approach can create false positives. that is, it can indicate a significant difference between two input sets that are essentially equivalent as far as the pwm sites are concerned.

our motivation for developing sadmama came from our study of replication origins in s. cerevisiae . dna replication is a fundamental process essential for cell proliferation. while the proteins that are involved in initiating dna replication are essentially conserved from yeast to humans, the implicated sequence motifs that these conserved factors interact with are poorly understood outside of s. cerevisiae . moreover, even for s. cerevisiae the replication initiation process is not completely understood. for example, it is known that the roughly  <dig> replication origins in s. cerevisiae , called arss , differ in several important aspects from one another. these include timing and efficiency of origin firing, as well as sensitivity to mutations in proteins involved in replication initiation. however, much of this variability is yet to be explained and this is an active area of research. our study in  <cit>  was designed to identify arss that are preferentially used in yeast strains defective for replication initiation. sadmama was specifically designed to suggest sequence motifs that might explain the preferential usage we observed in  <cit> . such information could help us gain insight into the determinants that regulate replication origin usage. given our motivation for sadmama's development, it is fitting that we demonstrate its utility in that context:

• we show that sadmama provides a possible explanation for the difference in replication efficiency among two sets of arss we identified in  <cit> .

• essential to replication initiation is the binding of the orc  to the acs   <cit> . using a screen for fragments of s. kluyveri dna that have ars function in s. cerevisiae, we provide evidence that support a recent conjecture that orc binding in some s. cerevisiae arss requires multiple, seemingly redundant acs matches  <cit> .

• finally, we demonstrate how sadmama can be used for exploratory data analysis.

RESULTS
statistical models and tests
scoring words and identifying sites
since our goal is to assess the difference between the pwm matches in the two input sets we first need to define what we consider as a match. in order to do so we first need to specify how we score each putative site, or word of length l, where l is the length, or width, of the pwm. we use the log-likelihood ratio score s=log⁡pmp <dig> where pm=∏i=1lmiwi and mij is the frequency of letter j in position i of the motif, and p <dig> is the null likelihood of w. note that m here represents the pwm as a pfm . in this paper we will generally not make the distinction between the two. also note that given that our null model is a markov chain the annotation p <dig> is somewhat misleading as this probability typically depends on the few characters preceding w in the sequence.

a word w is considered a match if its score exceeds a user specified threshold. for example, only words whose scores lie in the top  <dig> % of the null scores are considered matches . while this defines whether a single word w is considered a match or not, we would often hesitate to consider two matches that almost completely overlap as two distinct matches. here again we rely on the user to specify the amount of overlap that is tolerated between distinct sites, and we apply a greedy strategy to choose sites that conform to the specified overlap.

measuring the difference in the number of sites: the binomial model
to assign significance to the site-frequency difference between the sets, we assume that matches  occur in each of the sets according to a binomial model b i =  <dig>   <dig>  where ni is the number of possible sites in the corresponding set , and pi is the site frequency. clearly this simplistic model glosses over the problem of dependence between overlapping sites. however, overlap is not a real issue with most pwms given a reasonably high threshold. such thresholds are typically chosen anyhow, as binding sites are meant to be rather rare.

the null hypothesis h <dig> is that, p <dig> = p <dig>  note that this is different from the "null background", which specifies how the background is generated. in particular, h <dig> does not assume that all matches are merely random background matches, rather that they are some mixture of random background matches and "real sites". the alternative hypothesis can be a two sided p <dig> ≠ p <dig> or a one sided p <dig> > p <dig> or p <dig> > p <dig>  assuming our binomial model, we can readily test for violation of the null assumption based on the fact that conditioned on the joint number of matches, the number of matches in the first set has a hypergeometric distribution if p <dig> = p <dig> . we therefore compute the two one-sided-alternative p-values by summing up the appropriate tails of the hypergeometric distribution.

measuring the difference in the quality of sites
we offer two ways to measure the difference in the quality of the sites. our null assumption is that the scores of the sites from the two sets form two independent samples from the same, unknown, distribution. a plausible alternative is that one distribution tends to produce better scores than the other, or more precisely, that it is stochastically greater. the mann-whitney test is a non-parametric test that is optimized for testing the alternative that one distribution is a shifted version of the other. while we cannot assume this particular alternative here, this test should still be a reasonably good choice.

alternatively, sadmama can perform a t-test of the difference between the two averaged scores. however, if the motif length l is not very large, the score distribution can be very far from normal . since the t-test relies on the normal assumption, it should be taken with a grain of salt here . since the match scores can be repeated, especially when l is small, we are often forced to use the tied version of the mann-whitney test. this becomes important when the overall number of matches in at least one of the sets is rather small . in this range, the use of the normal approximation to the mann-whitney test is generally discouraged and exact calculation should be used. the latter are significantly more costly for the tied case than for the no-ties case. by default, sadmama decides on its own which method to use when estimating the significance of the test. if the samples are sufficiently large it uses the normal approximation. otherwise, it uses exact methods to evaluate the significance of the test. if no-ties are present, it relies on harding's exact algorithm  <cit> , while if there are ties, it uses a naive dynamic programming approach written by niranjan nagarajan.

keep in mind that if one tests for a difference in the quality of the sites in addition to the frequency of sites, then you should, in principle, adjust for multiple testing. note that in general we cannot assume that these two tests are independent of one another.

the bootstrap approach
sadmama offers a bootstrap  <cit>  inspired set of tests as an alternative to the simplified models described above. bootstrap is a "plug-in" method: to estimate some parameter of a complex distribution we conceptually plug into the appropriate formula an approximating distribution that is typically derived from a small sample of the original distribution. it is often the case that even after plugging in the simplified, approximating distribution we still need to resort to monte carlo methods to estimate the target parameter. these methods work by generating random samples from the simplified distribution, computing a relevant statistic, and finally estimating the parameter of interest from all these samples of the statistic. in our case the complex distribution is the one which generated the two sets, which is not really well defined, and which, in particular, does not yield additional samples. our model of the simplified distribution is that the two input sets are generated by sampling  contiguous blocks or substrings of b letters from some joint pool. sadmama's default assumption is that this joint sequence pool is simply the concatenation of the two input sets. the parameters we are after, are p-values of the statistics that measure the differences in the quality and quantity of sites between the two sets. in particular, sadmama can keep track of the difference in site density as well as the difference in mean site score between the two sets.

for example, to evaluate the difference in site frequency between the two input sets, sadmama first finds this difference. it then creates a large number of "bootstrap images" of the two input sets by resampling b-long substrings, or blocks, from the concatenated original sets. using these monte carlo images, sadmama generates an empirical distribution of the difference in site density, from which we can readily deduce an "empirical p-value" of the difference in site density between the original input sets. with increasing number of bootstrap images, this empirical p-value should better approximate the p-value defined by our simplified distribution. the latter should in turn be a reasonable approximation of the "real" p-value defined in terms of the original, complex distribution.

while in principle this is how sadmama implements bootstrapping, there is one more issue we had to address. generally, when resampling the input sets we would like to avoid using blocks that are too long, as those hinder "proper mixing". the problem with smaller blocks is that, especially when the block size b is smaller than the motif width, essentially all the original sites that were present in the joint pool are obliterated during resampling. this is not an issue if both sets consist only of the "background signal". however, if the two sets are highly enriched with sites, yet in the same way, this kind of bootstrap test might erroneously report significant difference in site density. the reason is that the difference between the two enriched sets might be significant when compared with the typical difference between sets that were essentially made to look like background sets by inadvertently destroying all the sites .

to avoid such false positives, we implemented in sadmama a novel "site-protected bootstrap" approach. it is designed to allow us to sample from the original sites even if the block size is smaller than the motif width. more explicitly, each randomly chosen block might be extended so as to avoid chopping sites. the decision whether or not to extend, or protect, each such block is made in a probabilistic and independent fashion. the length of the extension is the minimal one necessary to avoid chopping any site that started  within the original block. the probability of extending a block is defined so as to make the expected frequency of sites in the combined bootstrap sets the same as the frequency of sites in the original pool. see the methods section for details on the technique and the section on applications of sadmama for examples of its utility.

in general we found that the bootstrap tests follow closely the simplified models based tests. while the bootstrap approach might seem more attractive as it is not derived from an arguably overly simplified model, it takes considerably longer to run to get reliable estimates.

applications of sadmama
stable vs. unstable arss in mcm1- <dig> mutant
mcm <dig> is a transcription factor that has been shown to affect the efficiency of replication origins both directly, by binding to replication origins , and indirectly, by regulating the expression of several factors of the pre-replication complex  <cit> . the mcm1- <dig> point mutant has been shown to exhibit dna replication defects in s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

functionally, arss are divided into two types based on their ability to function in mcm mutant strains such as mcm1- <dig>  stable, or a-type arss function efficiently in both wild-type and mutant cells, whereas unstable, or b-type arss function poorly in mcm mutant backgrounds.

several previous studies have shown a relationship between replication initiation and local transcription patterns . more precisely, in  <cit>  we show that transcriptional interference correlates with reduced ars activity in that 80% of arss located in such transcriptionally active zones are b-type, whereas only 45% are b-type in transcriptionally inactive zones . while transcriptional interference is statistically significant, it is clearly not the sole determinant of ars activity under this unfavorable condition .

arrow represents direction of transcription. filled circle represents location of ars.  = transcriptional interference;  = no transcriptional interference. using fisher's exact with a test two-sided alternative, independence is rejected at  <dig> .

higher affinity for mcm <dig> has been suggested to be a distinguishing feature for telomeric arss that are constitutively active in the mcm1- <dig> mutant  <cit> . in particular, footprinting assays identified a set of binding sites of mcm <dig> in these arss. interestingly, many of these sites can be considered as "half sites", in that they match only half of the canonical mcm <dig> binding site. it is thus tempting to conjecture that stable or a-type arss would, in general, exhibit better  binding sites for mcm <dig> than b-type arss. similarly, it was suggested that abf <dig> may also have a positive effect on the formation of the pre-replication complex  and is therefore another natural candidate for our differential binding affinity analysis.

to test these hypotheses we applied sadmama to analyze the difference in the quality and/or number of these pwm matches  between the stable and unstable sets of transcriptionally active, or , arss. sadmama did not find statistically significant variation in the quality or the number of mcm <dig> matches . however, it found that the stable set has more half-mcm <dig> sites  or alternatively better sites . similarly the stable set has more abf <dig> sites , or alternatively better sites . these p-values should be adjusted for the fact that we considered  <dig> thresholds  but they are still significant at the 5% level even after this adjustment. we had no reason to suspect a difference in acs matches, and indeed sadmama's corresponding p-values were unimpressive even before the multiple testing adjustment. the p-values reported above were generated using the hypergeometric or mann-whitney tests. however, monte carlo site-protected bootstrap tests gave very similar results .

for comparison we also applied sadmama to study the difference in these pwm matches between the stable and unstable set of transcriptionally inactive, or , arss. this time no significant p-values were reported. taken together these results support the hypothesis that half binding sites of mcm <dig> as well as sites of abf <dig> in flanking regions of an ars may protect the ars from incoming transcription traffic  but would have little influence on the stable arss that are not subjected to transcriptional interference.

s. kluyveri vs. s. cerevisiae acs
to get a better understanding of dna replication initiation in s. cerevisiae, we performed a screen to isolate fragments of s. kluyveri dna that have ars function in s. cerevisiae. specifically, we cloned random fragments of s. kluyveri dna into an ars-less vector, transformed the resulting genomic libraries into s. cerevisiae, and isolated  <dig> distinct plasmids which showed ars activity . using the same protocol we also isolated  <dig> native s. cerevisiae arss . naturally, one wonders what confers s. cerevisiae replication activity to these s. kluyveri dna segments. in particular, we should compare them to our native s. cerevisiae arss, and sadmama is a convenient tool for that.

we looked for significant differences between the s. kluyveri and the s. cerevisiae set of arss in terms of binding sites of several auxiliary dna binding factors that are known to be associated with replication initiation: mcm <dig>  half sites of mcm <dig>  rap <dig>  and abf <dig>  sadmama did not find significant variation in any of these. however, surprisingly sadmama did find significantly more acs matches in the s. kluyveri arss than in the s. cerevisiae arss . interestingly, when it came to quality of sites, sadmama reported that the s. cerevisiae arss had better sites . this analysis suggests that the cerevisiae replication initiation machinery can function with multiple weaker acs sites such as the ones we found in the s. kluyveri arss as well as with the fewer but better native sites. this conjecture is consistent with a recent related analysis of native s. cerevisiae arss that contain multiple acs matches  <cit> .

it is interesting to note that the s. cerevisiae arss  have the same at content as the general s. cerevisiae intergenic average: 66%. however, 69% of the s. kluyveri arss are made of at, which is significantly higher than the 58% at content for general s. kluyveri intergenic regions. since the acs matrix is itself at-rich, we asked whether these s. kluyveri arss owe their functionality only to a local spike in the at content. using sadmama we addressed this question in two different ways. first we compared the s. kluyveri set of arss with  <dig>  random permutations of itself. in all of those  <dig>  comparisons sadmama found that the permuted set had a statistically significant smaller number of sites .

similarly, we used sadmama to compare the acs pwm with  <dig>  column-wise random permutations of itself. in only  <dig> of these  <dig>  comparisons did the s. kluyveri set have more sites of the permuted pwm than the original pwm . taken together, these two tests indicate that there is more "acs information" in our s. kluyveri arss than their at content alone yields.

site-protected bootstrap
to test the utility of the "site-protected" bootstrap option in a realistic setting we generated two sets of s. cerevisiae arss by arbitrarily splitting a subset of the confirmed arss in the dna replication origin database oridb  <cit> , into two roughly equal sets: an "even" and an "odd" one. given the arbitrary nature of the split between the sets we expect that there should not be a substantial difference in acs sites between the two. note, however, that both sets are highly enriched with acs sites .

using the hypergeometric test sadmama found, as expected, no significant difference in acs site-frequency between these two sets. however, when using the naive bootstrap approach with block size b ≤  <dig> sadmama consistently reported that one of the sets is significantly enriched in sites. on the other hand, when the "site-protected" bootstrap option was turned on, sadmama consistently found the difference in site-frequency between the two sets to be insignificant .

a look at figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> explains what is going on. the total number of sites in a naively resampled pair of sets is typically significantly smaller than the number of sites in the input sets whereas the site-protected option manages to be consistent with the total number of sites in the two input sets. note how the range of values observed in figure  <dig> is significantly smaller than the range observed in figure  <dig>  this smaller range suggests that normal random fluctuations observed when sampling from the latter distribution might be considered very significant when compared against fluctuations observed when sampling the first distribution.

exploratory data analysis with sadmama
sadmama can also be used to study potential enrichment of binding sites within a single set. for example, we studied whether the set of all  <dig> confirmed s. cerevisiae arss taken from oridb  <cit>  shows enrichment of pwm matches for any one of the  <dig> s. cerevisiae transcription factor pwms defined by morozov and siggia  <cit> . for each such pwm sadmama tested whether the frequency of sites in the ars set is significantly higher than in ars-less s. cerevisiae intergenic file . after adjusting for multiple testing, the only pwm that showed such statistically significant site frequency enrichment is the one representing fkh <dig>  interestingly, fkh <dig> is known to interact with mcm <dig> to form a complex that regulates the cell cycle dependent expression of the clb <dig> cluster in g2/m phases in s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

upon closer inspection of the set of arss we found that many of the sites sadmama attributed to fkh <dig> overlapped with acs matches and indeed aligned properly the matrices are quite similar. moreover, after masking the high scoring acs matches in the set of arss sadmama found the fkh <dig> site enrichment insignificant . finally, the actual binding location data for fkh <dig>  <cit>  exhibits no significant correlation with acs sites located in confirmed arss.

this result seems somewhat disappointing given that the enrichment of fkh <dig> sites can apparently be explained by the obvious enrichment of acs sites. however, sadmama's results still leave us with a potentially interesting question: does the similarity between binding sites of fkh <dig> and the acs have any biological importance? analysis of the literature suggests a positive answer is conceivable. specifically, when overexpressed, fkh2p is known to have a negative role in silencing the silent mating-type cassette hmra in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . moreover, it is known that orc binding to the acs is associated with the chromatin silencing process at this locus . consistent with the similarity we observed in their binding sites, it is tempting to conjecture that fkh <dig> might interfere with the chromatin silencing process by offering some form of competitive binding to orc. since the interference of fkh2p was observed when it was overexpressed, the lack of support from the location data  <cit>  does not rule out this conjecture.

CONCLUSIONS
sadmama offers a computational solution to a novel problem: does one set of sequences have a statistically significant increase in the number and/or the quality of sites of a given pwm than another set. note that setting the second set as a large background set sadmama can also be used to assign significance to matches in a single input set. sadmama implements two types of tests: one type is based on simplified sequence models while the other relies on bootstrapping and as such might be preferable to users who are averse to simplifying models. generally, when resampling the input sets we would like to avoid using blocks that are too long, as those hinder "proper mixing". however, as we show, a naive resampling procedure using shorter blocks can bias the tests. sadmama implements a new stochastic feature, which we term site-protected resampling, and which successfully solves this problem.

sadmama's utility is demonstrated here by offering a plausible explanation to the differential ars activity observed in our previous mcm1- <dig> mutant experiments  <cit> , by suggesting the relevance of multiple weak acs matches to efficient replication origin function in s. cerevisiae, and by suggesting an explanation to the observed negative effect fkh <dig> has on chromatin silencing  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to present a tool for studying the difference in matrix matches between two sets. very recently, and independently of us, robin et al. posed the analogous problem in the context of pattern representation of a motif  <cit> . our hypergeometric test derived from our binomial modelling of the number of sites is somewhat similar to their binomial test, which is derived from a poisson model. however, since we deal with matrices, we also study the difference in quality of sites which they do not. sadmama also offers a bootstrap approach which is not discussed by robin et al. finally, we provide a computational tool while they describe statistical tests.

we identified several ways to improve and expand sadmama's current set of features. to name a couple, sadmama currently assumes that the input sequences are independent which therefore excludes it from analyzing phylogenetically related sequences. given the increased availability of related genomes, extending sadmama to handle such cases is highly pertinent. similarly, for some cases one can argue that a more appropriate motif sites model is that each sequence is endowed with a small, say poisson drawn, number of sites. currently, sadmama fails to correctly handle this model if there are significant differences in the length of the sequences, and extending it to address this model as well is highly desirable. finally, helping the users with analyzing multiple tests when such are specified could increase sadmama's utility. for example, when more than one site-threshold is considered, or when both the frequency and the quality of sites are examined.

