BACKGROUND
enterohemorrhagic escherichia coli  o157:h <dig> is an emerging food- and waterborne- enteric pathogen causing diarrhea, hemorrhagic colitis and the potentially fatal complication hemolytic uremic syndrome in humans
 <cit> . ehec colonization of enterocytes of the large bowel is characterized by an intestinal attaching and effacing  histopathology, which is manifested by a localized degeneration of brush border microvilli and an intimate attachment of bacteria to actin-rich pedestal-like structures formed on the apical membrane directly beneath adherent bacteria
 <cit> . the a/e lesion is due to the activity of a type iii secretion system  mainly encoded by the 35– <dig> kb locus of enterocyte effacement pathogenicity island , which is conserved in some ehec isolates and other a/e pathogens such as enteropathogenic escherichia coli , atypical epec, rabbit epec, escherichia albertii and citrobacter rodentium <cit> . the lee pathogenicity island comprises at least  <dig> genes that mainly are located in five major operons . the lee encodes a ttss, translocator proteins, secreted effectors, regulators, an intimin  and a translocated intimin receptor. the lee-encoded regulators ler, mpc, grlr and grla are required for proper transcriptional regulation of both lee- and non-lee-encoded virulence genes in response to environmental cues
 <cit> .

the lee was acquired by horizontal gene transfer
 <cit>  and is regulated by both generic e. coli- and pathogen-specific transcription factors. consequently, the regulation of the lee reflects characteristics of such genetic elements . silencing of xenogeneic dna in bacterial pathogens under conditions unfavorable for infection is important to ensure bacterial fitness
 <cit> . h-ns, which is an abundant pleiotropic negative modulator of genes involved in environmental adaptation and virulence
 <cit> , is a major silencing factor of horizontally acquired genes
 <cit> . h-ns silences genes in the h-ns regulon by various mechanisms. binding of h-ns to regulatory regions of these genes prevents rna polymerase from accessing and escaping from promoter dna, which represents two different mechanisms used by h-ns to silence gene expression . h-ns is also a major transcriptional modulator of the lee pathogenicity island, where it negatively affects the expression of lee1- <dig>  map and grlra <cit> . further, h-ns binds to regulatory sequences upstream of virulence-associated genes located outside of the lee including those encoding the long polar fimbriae  required for intestine cell adherence and enterohemolysin 
 <cit> .

the expression of ehec virulence genes including those encoded by the lee is derepressed from the h-ns-mediated transcriptional silencing under physiological conditions that ehec encounters during infection. also, lee expression is growth phase-dependent with maximum expression in early stationary phase
 <cit> . h-ns-mediated silencing of transcription is overcome by the action of dna-binding h-ns paralogues such as the lee1-encoded global transcriptional regulator ler . ler promotes the expression of many h-ns-repressed virulence genes including those of lee1- <dig>  grlra and non-lee-encoded virulence genes such as lpf and the virulence plasmid po157-encoded mucinase stce <cit> . thus, ler antagonizes h-ns in the regulation of many virulence genes, which belong to both the h-ns and ler  regulons.

the e. coli stringent starvation protein a  is a rna polymerase-associated protein
 <cit>  that is required for transcriptional activation of bacteriophage p <dig> late genes and is important for survival of e. coli k- <dig> during nutrient depletion and prolonged stationary phase
 <cit> . importantly, sspa down-regulates the cellular h-ns level during stationary phase, and thereby derepress the h-ns regulon including genes for stationary phase induced acid tolerance in e. coli k-12
 <cit> . a conserved surface-exposed pocket of sspa is important for its activity as a triple alanine substitution p84a/h85a/p86a in surface pocket residues abolishes sspa activity
 <cit> . sspa is highly conserved among gram-negative pathogens
 <cit> , which suggests a role of sspa in bacterial pathogenesis. indeed, sspa orthologs affect the virulence of yersinia enterocolitica, neisseria gonorrhoeae, vibrio cholerae, francisella tularensis and francisella novicida <cit> . since e. coli k- <dig> sspa is conserved in ehec where h-ns negatively modulates virulence gene expression, we asked the question of whether sspa-mediated regulation of h-ns affects ehec virulence gene expression. here we study the effect of sspa on the expression of lee- and non-lee-encoded virulence genes and its effect on h-ns accumulation in ehec. our results show that in an sspa mutant elevated levels of h-ns repress the expression of virulence genes encoding the t3ss system rendering the cells incapable of forming a/e lesions. thus, our data indicate that sspa positively regulates stationary phase-induced expression of h-ns-controlled virulence genes in ehec by restricting the h-ns level.

RESULTS
sspa positively affects transcription of ehec virulence genes
to evaluate the effect of sspa on virulence gene expression in ehec during the stationary phase we constructed an in-frame deletion of sspa in the e. coli o157:h <dig> strain edl <dig> atcc 700927
 <cit>  and measured transcription of lee-  and non-lee-encoded  genes . wild type and sspa mutant strains were grown in lb medium to stationary phase with similar growth rates . total rna was isolated and transcript abundance was measured by primer extension analyses using labeled dna oligos specific to each transcript of interest and ompa, which served as internal control for total rna levels. results revealed that transcript levels of lee1- <dig>  grlra, map and stce were reduced by up to 8-fold in the sspa mutant compared to wild type . the expression of these genes was restored when the sspa mutant was supplied with wild type sspa in trans from pqesspa <cit>  . however, the expression of ler and other virulence genes tested  remained repressed when the sspa mutant strain was supplied with mutant sspa from pqesspa84- <dig> <cit> , which expresses sspa containing the triple alanine substitution in the surface-exposed pocket . these results indicate that sspa positively affects stationary phase-induced expression of both lee- and non-lee-encoded virulence genes in ehec. moreover, the mode of action of sspa is likely similar in e. coli k- <dig> and ehec as the surface-exposed pocket of sspa also is required for sspa to affect the expression of ehec virulence genes.

increased expression of ler enhances expression of virulence genes in the sspa mutant
a decreased expression of ler in the sspa mutant  could account for the apparent transcriptional repression of lee2- <dig>  grlra, map and stce  because ler positively controls those genes. thus, we examined whether supplying ler in trans from the plasmid pacycler would alleviate the expression of ler-regulated genes in an sspa mutant . our results showed that transcript levels of lee <dig>  lee <dig>  lee <dig>  grlra and stce were all increased in the sspa mutant harboring pacycler and exceeded that in wild type with up to about 9-fold . these results are consistent with the explanation that a reduced expression of ler in the sspa mutant leads to an insufficient amount of ler to antagonize h-ns-mediated repression of those virulence genes.
 <dig>  the relative transcript levels of target genes normalized to that of ompa are indicated by the numbers in parenthesis.

sspa activates virulence gene expression by reducing the h-ns level
reduced virulence gene expression during the stationary phase could also be due to an increased level of h-ns in the ehec sspa mutant as observed for h-ns-regulated genes in the e. coli k- <dig> sspa mutant
 <cit> . we measured the levels of h-ns in stationary phase cells of wild type and sspa mutant ehec strains by western analysis . indeed, the h-ns level was two-fold higher in the sspa mutant than in the wild type, whereas the level of fis as a control was not increased in the mutant compared to wild type. these results indicate that sspa activates the expression of ehec virulence genes by decreasing accumulation of h-ns. notably, such relative small change in h-ns levels was previously demonstrated to drastically affect the expression of the h-ns regulon involved in stationary phase-induced acid tolerance of e. coli k-12
 <cit> .

genetic analysis further indicated that hns mainly is epistatic to sspa in regulating h-ns-repressed virulence genes in ehec . we deleted hns in ehec wild type and sspa mutant strains as described in methods. the ehec hns mutant derivatives had a mucoid phenotype and a longer generation time  than wild type . therefore, at least two independent clones of each hns mutant derivative were used in each experiment to ensure reproducible results. the expression of lee1- <dig>  grlra, map and stce was between  <dig> and 26-fold higher in an isogenic hns null mutant than in wild type , which is consistent with the fact that there is enough h-ns in stationary phase wild type cells  to partially repress those virulence genes. although the effect of hns on cell growth will be complex, an uncontrolled expression of the lee genes and the t3ss is likely to be detrimental to the fitness of the cell
 <cit> . moreover, the expression level of ehec virulence genes in the hns sspa double mutant was within the range of the level observed for the hns single mutant . thus, our data strongly indicate that sspa is located upstream of h-ns in the regulatory cascade controlling the virulence gene expression in ehec. however, sspa might also directly activate virulence gene expression in addition to controlling h-ns levels.
 <dig>  the relative transcript levels of target genes normalized to that of ompa are indicated by the numbers in parenthesis.

sspa is required for cell adherence and a/e lesion formation
since the expression of lee-encoded genes involved in a/e lesion formation was decreased in a sspa mutant and increased in a hns sspa double mutant , we predicted that sspa affects lesion formation in a h-ns-dependent manner. to address this, we infected hep- <dig> cells with wild type, sspa, hns and hns sspa mutant derivatives of edl <dig>  and determined the ability of these strains to form a/e lesions in vitro. to this end we used the qualitative fluorescent actin staining  assay
 <cit> , where actin filaments are stained with fitc-phalloidin to detect a/e lesions that are visualized as condensed actin directly beneath adherent bacteria. whereas infection with wild type ehec was associated with the appearance of microcolonies of adherent bacteria and a/e lesion formation on 70% of the hep- <dig> cells , the sspa mutant was unable to adhere and form a/e lesions  as determined from examination of more than  <dig> hep- <dig> cells. the a/e lesion phenotype of the sspa mutant was restored when complementing with sspa in trans from pqesspa , whereas mutant sspa supplied from pqesspa84- <dig>  did not complement pedestal formation of the sspa mutant, verifying that the surface-exposed pocket is functionally important for sspa to affect virulence of ehec. consistent with the finding that sspa regulates lee expression through h-ns, the sspa mutant restored the ability to form a/e lesions in the absence of hns in the hns sspa background as in the hns single mutant . however, the hns sspa double mutant seemed to form a/e lesions to a higher degree than the hns single mutant, which indicates that sspa also affects the expression of virulence genes involved in a/e lesion formation independently of the h-ns-mediated regulation. moreover, the finding that the cell adherence ability of the sspa mutant was restored when deleting hns indicates that a factor negatively regulated by h-ns is required for the adherence of ehec to epithelial cells. the long polar fimbria, lpfa, which is part of the h-ns/ler regulon and is required for cell adherence of ehec
 <cit> , might represent such a factor. altogether, the cell adherence and a/e lesion phenotypes of the sspa mutant are consistent with the finding that sspa positively regulates the expression of genes encoding the t3ss including those of the lee by negatively affecting h-ns levels.

the correlation between the effects of sspa on the transcription of h-ns/ler-regulated virulence genes and on a/e lesion formation upon infection of hep- <dig> cells supports the conclusion that sspa upregulates the expression of lee and other virulence genes by reducing the accumulation of h-ns in the cell. a reduced cellular h-ns level mediated by sspa will derepress the h-ns regulon and thereby allow the expression of transcriptional activators such as ler and grla. these two activators then form a positive transcriptional regulatory loop partially by preventing h-ns-mediated repression
 <cit> . accumulation of ler will in turn antagonize h-ns function and with that enhance the expression of virulence genes controlled by ler
 <cit> . at present, the molecular mechanism behind sspa-mediated regulation of the h-ns level during stationary phase and in infection to facilitate virulence gene expression in ehec is unknown. also, it remains to be determined whether sspa directly affects transcription of virulence genes as is the case for sspa in francisella tularensis, where sspa along with two other transcription factors and ppgpp activates transcription to link the nutritional status to virulence gene expression
 <cit> .

we observed that sspa positively affects additional h-ns-controlled virulence traits of ehec such as stationary phase-induced acid tolerance , which enables survival of the pathogen during passage through the low ph environment of the human gastrointestinal tract, and thereby contributes to a low infectious dose
 <cit> . also, sspa positively affects ehec motility , which could influence virulence as motility enables the pathogen to penetrate the intestinal mucus layer during colonization of host cells. this further supports an important role of sspa in ehec virulence. further experiments studying wild type and sspa mutant derivatives of the a/e pathogen citrobacter rodentium in a mouse model could help determine whether sspa is required for virulence in vivo.

CONCLUSIONS
we established an important role of sspa in the regulation of lee- and non-lee-encoded virulence factors of a t3ss, which is important for a/e lesion formation by ehec. sspa downregulates h-ns levels allowing the expression of ehec virulence genes, which are part of the h-ns/ler regulon. virulence genes in many bacteria are horizontally acquired genetic elements and subject to repression by h-ns. thus, our study indicates that sspa potentially plays an important role in the pathogenicity of many bacterial pathogens in general.

