BACKGROUND
anthrax is a disease of wildlife, livestock and humans that remains a public health problem throughout the world. bacillus anthracis, the causative agent of anthrax, is a soil-borne, spore-forming bacterium which persists in soil for long periods of time under appropriate conditions  <cit> . certain soil parameters, including ph, organic content and calcium, may be associated with spore survival  <cit> . anthrax outbreaks among livestock and wildlife result from exposure to these spores and are possibly influenced by climatic and physiological events  <cit> . in endemic areas, human cases of anthrax primarily result from contact with infected livestock during slaughter or butchering  <cit>  and control of livestock disease through vaccination and active surveillance of livestock and wildlife is essential for preventing human disease  <cit> . however, widespread active surveillance is costly and vaccination of every animal is not feasible. it is far more practical to focus these efforts on areas of high risk. to identify these it is necessary to improve our understanding of the ecology of b. anthracis through which animal infection occurs.

the ecology of a pathogen such as b. anthracis can be explored using similar tools as those used for species distribution modelling and conservation planning. for example, ecological niche modelling  has been used to predict the potential ecological and geographic distribution of pathogens based on outbreak locations  <cit> , presence of disease vectors  <cit>  and disease reservoirs  <cit> . the ecological niche of a pathogen, as for other types of species, is conceptualized as the n-dimensional hypervolume of ecological parameters within which the species can be maintained without immigration  <cit> . various approaches to enm identify non-random associations between a species' locality data and environmental parameters. ecological niche modelling experiments of b. anthracis are particularly useful considering the potential associations between spore survival and ecological conditions  <cit> . results can be used as a proxy for disease risk and integrated into focused surveillance strategies for wildlife and livestock in endemic areas and into vaccination strategies that target at risk herds before and during outbreak events  <cit> .

recently, studies of disease ecology have combined molecular genotyping techniques and ecological niche modelling to provide evidence that genetic lineages of a pathogen can have different environmental associations and potential geographic distributions  <cit> . in general b. anthracis has relatively limited global diversity. however, multiple locus variable number tandem repeat analysis  systems for b. anthracis can differentiate strains into distinct lineages and sub-lineages  <cit> . analyses of a global collection of b. anthracis isolates suggests that the a lineage is globally distributed, while other lineages  are geographically restricted. these findings may be explained by adaptive differences, some of which carry fitness costs that limit abundance and distribution of certain lineages or sub-lineages  <cit> . the ecological niche of b. anthracis has been modelled in the united states and kazakhstan using locations of reported outbreaks  <cit> . a stated limitation of these experiments was that the outbreak data potentially included multiple strains of b. anthracis  <cit> . if lineages of b. anthracis do exhibit niche specialization and unique geographic distributions, then it is plausible that current outbreak based ecological niche models are biased toward a dominant strain in a particular landscape. it would then follow that single lineage models may better predict presence of the pathogen at local scales and increase the value of public health measures  <cit> .

kazakhstan is situated in central asia, a region with some of the highest reported human anthrax incidence and mortality rates in the world  <cit> . the majority of human anthrax cases in kazakhstan are related to exposure to infected livestock or handling of products derived from infected livestock  <cit> . in rural areas of kazakhstan, veterinary care and surveillance programs are limited by the country's large land mass and widely distributed rural populations. vaccination of livestock occurs mainly in response to detected outbreaks. in countries such as kazakhstan, prioritizing areas for vaccination and surveillance are necessary for disease control. our group recently created a multi-variate ecological niche model to characterize the broad environmental conditions that support b. anthracis across kazakhstan  <cit> . in a parallel effort, aikimbayev et al. used an eight marker mlva typing system  to describe the diversity of b. anthracis within kazakhstan from  <dig> archival strains  <cit> .

in this study, we first expanded on the previously published outbreak based modelling experiment by adding four soil variables  to the original set of environmental variables. despite literature suggesting a strong relationship between soil characteristics such as high calcium levels and alkaline ph and spore persistence  <cit> , the influence of available soil variables on b. anthracis enm predictions has not been comparatively examined  <cit> . we next used these twelve environmental variables and the collection of mlva- <dig> genotyped samples to create an a <dig> a sub-lineage specific ecological niche model for kazakhstan.

RESULTS
accuracy metrics
ecological niche modelling was performed using the genetic algorithm for rule-set prediction . four experiments were run  and are summarized in table  <dig>  all modelling processes reached convergence of accuracy  prior to reaching the maximum iteration setting . the outbreak-soil model had an area under the curve  of  <dig>  and was significantly different from a random model. total omission of the outbreak-soil model was  <dig> % and average omission was  <dig> %, indicating that  <dig> % of the testing points were predicted by at least one best subset model and  <dig> % were predicted by all models. the auc of the a <dig> a sub-lineage model was  <dig>  and was also significantly different from a random model and had a total and average omission of  <dig> and  <dig> , respectively. both the large and small outbreak models had aucs significantly different than random. accuracy metrics for all models are shown in table  <dig> 

*n was divided into 50%training/50% testing for each model iteration

†auc = area under the curve

predicted distributions of b. anthracis
locations used for input into garp are shown in figure  <dig>  based on areas of agreement of a minimum of six of the best subset models, the outbreak-soil experiment predicted b. anthracis across much of northern kazakhstan and in a narrow band of the southeast. the interior of the country, which is primarily arid, was not predicted to be suitable for the pathogen. the results are similar to those of the experiment without the soil variables with respect to the geographic extent of areas of six or more best subset model agreement . the outbreak-soil experiment expanded two areas in the north which had lower model agreement. the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment predicts a more extensive geographic distribution than that of the outbreak experiment, including areas in the northern interior and western portions of the country . the northern pockets of less suitable geographic areas seen in the outbreak-soil experiment were predicted to be unsuitable based on agreement of six or more best subset models. the overall extents of the geographic predictions of the two experiments were more similar in the south than in the north. the large and small southern outbreak experiments both predicted similar geographic extents as the outbreak-soil experiment . all three projected experiments  were run ten additional times using random external data splits. the subsets of a <dig> a sub-lineage and small southern outbreak experiments showed greater degrees of spatial heterogeneity than did the large southern outbreak experiment set. .

each garp model is composed of  <dig> if-then type rules  which predict the presence or absence of the species for each pixel. rule types for the ten best subset models from the outbreak-soil and a <dig> a sub-lineage experiments were extracted and are summarized in table  <dig>  just over half of the outbreak-soil experiment rules were logit and no atomic rules were included, whereas range rules made up over 60% of the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment rule types and this experiment included four atomic rules in the best subsets. between  <dig> and  <dig> rules defined greater than 90% of areas predicted to be suitable for b. anthracis for each of the best subsets. of the  <dig> rules which predicted the majority of the landscape in the outbreak-soil experiment, the majority  were presence rules and of these 62% were range rules. the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment had  <dig> total rules predict the majority of the landscape; all but one of these was a presence rule and 73% of the presence rules were range rules. the environmental tolerances described by the dominant rules suggest that mean ndvi, altitude, mean temperature, minimum soil calcium and minimum soil organic content are limiting variables for b. anthracis in kazakhstan . median minimum values of mean ndvi, ndvi amplitude, annual precipitation, dry month precipitation, wet month precipitation, mean temperature, altitude and soil organic content are significantly different between the a <dig> a sub-lineage and the outbreak-soil experiment using the wilcox-mann-whitney test at a 95% significance level. median maximum values of ndvi amplitude, mean temperature, dry month precipitation, altitude, soil base saturation and soil organic content differ between the two experiments.

values of the limiting variables were extracted from areas of ten best subset model agreement and plotted in two dimensional variable space. the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment showed a broader ecological envelope than the outbreak-soil experiment based on areas of ten best subset model agreement, despite the smaller geographic area predicted by agreement of all ten models . the two a <dig> locations, which are distant from each other geographically, are found within a narrow range of mean ndvi and mean temperature, but occupy nearly opposite ends of the range of precipitation values. finally, the a <dig> b location was associated with ecological conditions towards the outer boundaries of the ecological envelope predicted by the outbreak-soil experiment.

discussion
this study assesses the addition of soil variables to a previously developed ecological niche model for bacillus anthracis and is the first known to model the ecological and geographic distribution of a single sub-lineage of b. anthracis. inclusion of available soil variables into our anthrax outbreak model resulted in subtle changes in the likelihood of the pathogen in areas of northern kazakhstan, but did not substantially change the extent of geographic predictions or results of rule set analyses  <cit> . the areas predicted as less suitable by the outbreak-soil model correspond to regions of locally different values for all four soil variables . however, it is not known whether these areas represent a unique ecological region or if measurement in these areas was affected by error or bias. the low minimum soil calcium association found in the rule set analyses contrasts with previous literature suggesting that b. anthracis spore persistence is associated with high soil calcium levels  <cit> . the results of our rule set analysis, however, are not directly comparable to previous work in that different units of measurement and sampling techniques were used. in addition, the soils data available for this study had a relatively coarse resolution of  <dig> km and were further aggregated to  <dig> km to match other climatic data for model development. as a result, fine resolution relationships between soil and anthrax occurrences would likely be missed in this experiment. improved resolution of soil and outbreak data, such as exact carcass locations, are likely necessary to characterize the role of soil parameters in promoting anthrax spore persistence  <cit>  and for better understanding the spatio-temporal dynamics and ecology of local outbreaks  <cit> .

the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment predicted a more extensive geographic area of anthrax presence than did the outbreak experiment. this is most pronounced in the northern and central portions of the country. the median minimum values of most variables defined by the dominant rule sets were significantly different. when ecological values of limiting variables were extracted from geographic areas of best subset agreement and plotted in two dimensional variable-space, the a <dig> a sub-lineage was associated with a larger ecological envelope than the outbreak-soil data. this finding illustrates that analysis of dominant rule sets alone should be interpreted with some caution. the variable ranges derived from the dominant rule sets summarize approximately only one-fifth  of the total number of rules generated by garp in the ten best subsets. the values extracted from predicted areas on the landscape are derived from all  <dig> rules contained in the  <dig> best subsests and represent the spectrum of complex interactions between variables and the landscape. because geographic areas of model agreement can be thought of as representative of all sub-sampled regions or populations  <cit> , the finding of a larger ecological envelope for the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment lends support to the hypothesis that the a <dig> a sub-lineage of b. anthracis may have broad environmental tolerances that influence its broad geographic distribution  <cit> .

the a lineage is more widely distributed globally than other subtypes, perhaps reflecting a greater level of fitness as compared to other lineages  <cit> . this finding has been shown on a local scale as well. isolates of the a lineage in kruger national park, south africa, as defined by mlva- <dig> typing, were more diffusely distributed and showed a distinctly different spatial cluster pattern than those of the b lineage. furthermore, the b lineage isolates occupied a narrow range of available ecological conditions within those occupied by the a lineage isolates  <cit> . in the experiments reported here, the a <dig> a sub-lineage locations were associated with lower ph values than the outbreak locations and this could provisionally support the findings from kruger national park  <cit> . it follows that that a b. anthracis lineage and/or sub-lineage other than a <dig> a may predominate in the northern regions of kazakhstan and is driving the narrower geographic and ecological prediction of the outbreak-soil experiment. genotyping of additional isolates from northern kazakhstan is necessary to evaluate this hypothesis. locations of outbreaks of the a <dig> lineage in geographical and ecological space suggests that this genotype may also have a relatively broad distribution, which is consistent with the a <dig> sub-lineage being found across the middle east and china  <cit> . although we cannot make inferences regarding the environmental affinities of the single a <dig> b isolate, we note it is located on the far eastern border of kazakhstan in an area predicted to be unsuitable for anthrax by the outbreak-soil experiment. the a <dig> b sub-lineage has been isolated from geographically limited areas, most notably northern china and texas, and the presence of this genotype is likely a result of historical trade routes  <cit> .

the genetic diversity of b. anthracis isolates in southern kazakhstan is not surprising given the location of this area along the historic silk road  <cit> , but this diversity also implies that this region is supportive of spore persistence. associations between genotypes of b. anthracis, environment, virulence or host species have not yet been fully explored and it is unknown whether genotype influences epidemiological characteristics of outbreaks. understanding these relationships will improve our understanding of anthrax disease ecology, help focus surveillance and efficiently direct proactive vaccination. furthermore, this knowledge can help distinguish between naturally occurring outbreaks, contamination and potential bioterrorism, and greatly enhance epidemiological trace back  efforts during outbreaks.

few studies using garp have quantified and examined rule types. garp begins creating rule sets by choosing the first rule type at random and successful rules are carried forward into subsequent rule sets. thus, the first rule type chosen at random will often predominate in the final rule sets. blackburn and joyner et. al. both presented summaries and distribution of the dominant rule types predicting b. anthracis in the continental united states and kazakhstan, respectively  <cit> . blackburn noted a predominance of range rules among a total of  <dig> rules predicting greater than 90% of the landscape  <cit> . joyner et al divided kazakhstan into northern and southern halves and modelled the two sections separately  <cit> . a greater percentage of range rules described the northern half of the country, whereas logit rules predominantly described the southern half of the country. here, logit rules dominated in the out-break soil experiment and range rules in the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment. further work is required to tease out whether dominant rule types result from the stochastic nature of garp or are related to complex interactions between the organism and environmental variables. additional future work should also explore how rule sets and ecological values found over predicted areas of the landscape can be used to enhance our understanding of the ecology of an organism.

several authors have noted that enm-based predictions of species with widespread distributions show reduced model accuracy which can be improved by dividing species or the range into sub-units  <cit> . one explanation for the apparent poor accuracy of models of widespread species is the use of auc. the auc is sensitive to the area predicted to be suitable for a species relative to the total land area analyzed  <cit> . other considerations include non-uniformity of presence locations , and biological factors such as local ecological adaptations and genetic diversity  <cit> . for example, modelling of francisella tularensis genotypes in the us yielded overlapping, yet different, geographic predictions and ecological associations  <cit> . interestingly, this difference was apparent at intermediate, as opposed to coarse, phylogenetic levels. similarly, fisher et. al. showed that three genotype categories of the broadly distributed pathogenic fungus penicillium marneffei correlated with environmental heterogeneity across vietnam  <cit> . using garp, the genotypes classes were predicted to occupy three non-overlapping geographic areas. as a consequence of b. anthracis being a widely distributed species, models of anthrax outbreaks are subject to similar limitations in accuracy. genotype specific models may therefore have improved accuracy and predictive power, and should be explored at multiple phylogenetic levels.

it is worthwhile to evaluate modelling limitations which could potentially explain differences between experiments. despite studies showing garp to be robust when predicting new landscapes  <cit> , our use of a projected modelling strategy may wrongly predict geographic and ecological distribution given the large geographic area in question. however, projected models created using southern outbreak points show similar geographic predictions as the outbreak-soil experiment, supporting that the broader geographic a <dig> a sub-lineage prediction is not simply an artefact of the modelling technique. that the large and small southern outbreak experiments showed a lesser degree of model agreement than the outbreak-soil experiment and that the large outbreak subsetting procedure had improved spatial homogeneity over the small southern outbreaks subsetting indicates that projected models may be sensitive to issues of sample size and clustering. issues relating to sample size appear to be important in our study. the predicted geographic distribution of b. anthracis varied among the  <dig> random data splits for both the al.a sub-lineage and small southern outbreak experiments. in contrast, the same random data splitting procedure performed with the large southern outbreak and the outbreak-soil experiments showed spatial homogeneity among models  <cit> . although stockwell and peterson and hernandez found that as few as  <dig> presence points are adequate for accurate garp models  <cit> , additional work has shown that certain species or geographic scenarios are more sensitive to sample size than others and that model accuracy can be sensitive to both sample size and extent of the species' range  <cit> . here, any effect of sample size is likely exaggerated by projection onto a large geographic area and the relatively limited resolution the data  <cit> .

some additional limitations apply to our findings. the a <dig> a sub-lineage isolate collection was derived from multiple species, including livestock and humans, and from soil samples. the outbreak data, however, were derived from livestock only. the impact of this on model comparisons is unknown since associations between host, genotype and environment are as yet unexplored. we are limiting our modelled area by political boundaries as opposed to biogeographic limits. finally, the genotyped isolate collection is geographically biased towards the southeast portion of kazakhstan and spans a relatively long period of time  <cit> . sampling bias is common in niche models using historical collections and can create artificial patterns in the data, although garp is arguably less sensitive than other modelling algorithms to spatial bias  <cit> . future genotyping of additional isolates from under-sampled portions of the country, particularly the northern oblasts, will be essential to better characterize the genetic diversity and ecology of anthrax in kazakhstan, allowing the construction of more refined predictive models.

CONCLUSIONS
the inclusion of available soil variables resulted in subtle changes in the predicted geographic distribution of anthrax in kazakhstan, but the experiment is limited by the nature of available soil variables. standardized soil variables and finer resolution data will be essential to characterizing the importance of soil parameters in b. anthracis persistence. the a <dig> a sub-lineage experiment showed a larger geographic and ecological distribution than the outbreak based experiment. understanding genetic-environmental associations will be essential to accurate modelling of anthrax for use in disease prevention and control in kazakhstan

