BACKGROUND
determining the extent to which environmental versus genetic factors are responsible for particular phenotypes is a central question in all of biological research. elucidating associations between genotype and phenotype has been a central goal in human health research for some time, and has resulted in an impressive collection of research on genotype-phenotype relationships  <cit> . while continued analysis of rare monogenic phenotypes is important for mechanistic discoveries  <cit> , unraveling the interplay between genetic and environmental determinants of complex phenotypes will be critical for improving public health  <cit> . for example, gene-environment interactions have been shown to play a critical role in childhood leukemia and asthma  <cit> . however, much less is known about gene-environment interactions as they relate to the etiology of the common complex disease phenotypes such as unipolar depressive disorders, ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease, all of which fall within the top six causes of the global burden of disease, and are projected to increase as the epidemiological transition continues in developing countries  <cit> .

network and bioinformatic methods have recently been applied to synthesize data on gene-disease relationships for those diseases that have a strong genetic component  <cit> . in addition, utilization of functional information to prioritize candidate driver genes in cancer has been advocated  <cit> . however, application of network theory to determine the interplay between genetics and environmental factors in complex diseases has been left unexplored. we hypothesize genetic and environmental factors involved in the progression of a particular complex phenotype are participants in the same underlying cellular processes. to test this hypothesis, we develop networks of complex diseases and environmental factors through linkage of human genetic association studies and mechanistic analyses of environmental factors, using evolutionarily conserved molecular pathways as the unifying system to define relationships. we further explore relationships identified by this method through comparison to known disease-chemical relationships and analysis of transcriptional regulation in gene expression datasets for metabolic syndrome phenotypes, neuropsychiatric phenotypes and several predicted environmental modulators.

RESULTS
clustering phenotypes by pathways
to identify common pathways between complex diseases, we annotated gene-phenotype relationships found in the genetic association database   <cit>  , then analyzed these phenotype-associated gene lists using the structurally enhanced pathway enrichment analysis  algorithm . this resulted in a clustergram of disease phenotypes based on the underlying pathways that are represented by the sum of polymorphic genes associated with a particular phenotype  . distinct clusters of phenotypes with similar broad clinical characteristics are evident such as cancers, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, immune-related disorders, and neuropyschiatric disorders. furthermore, the pathways that define these clusters are consistent with our current understanding of disease etiology. for example, the cancer cluster is defined by low p-values for erbb, p <dig>  and cell cycle pathways and the neuropsychiatric cluster is defined by low p-values for neuroactive ligand receptor interactions, calcium signaling, as well as tryptophan and tyrosine metabolism. moreover, immune related pathways  contribute not only to classic autoimmune and infectious disease phenotypes, but also to a large proportion of the divergent phenotypes represented, such as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disorders, kidney disease, as well as alzheimer's disease and longevity, among others. several unexpected results are also evident, such as the co-clustering of pregnancy loss and preeclampsia with immune phenotypes such as lupus erythematosus and behcet's disease and the co-clustering of asthma with parkinson's disease.

interesting relationships are observed through a comparison of pathways that are associated with preclinical phenotypes to those pathways that are significantly associated with outright disease. for example, when we look at common neuropsychiatric disorders, such as depression and anxiety disorder, we see that genes associated with these phenotypes are specifically associated with neuroactive ligand receptor interactions, calcium signaling, as well as tryptophan and tyrosine metabolism. however, we see that these pathways significantly associated with neuropsychiatric disorders are also associated with obesity, hypertension, and blood lipoprotein composition as well as substance abuse and smoking, all of which are significant risk factors for heart disease  <cit> . in contrast, genes associated with outright disease phenotypes , are significantly enriched in cardiovascular specific pathways such as the renin-angiotensin system and the vegf signaling pathway, as well as immune related pathways, suggesting genetic susceptibility to outright heart failure can be distinguished from genetic susceptibility to risk factors for development of heart disease. therefore, this phenotype-pathway cluster of genetic associations can delineate pathways that may be important at different points in the progression of complex chronic diseases.

an interaction network of phenotypes and environmental factors
next, we sought to meld current knowledge of genetic susceptibility factors with environmental factors that contribute to a particular complex phenotype. to accomplish this, we identified enriched pathways based on compiled lists of environmental factor-gene/protein relationships described in the comparative toxicogenomics database  <cit> . networks between phenotypes  and environmental factors were then developed where edges represent at least  <dig> significant pathways between a given phenotype-phenotype, phenotype-environmental factor, or environmental factor-environmental factor pair. in addition,  <dig> categories including neoplastic, cardiovascular, metabolic, immune, endocrine, neuropsychiatric, pulmonary, and hematologic were used to more broadly define phenotypes. these broad categorizations are important as many of the relationships found in the comparative toxicogenomics database are derived from animal models.

we compared our predicted phenotype-environmental factor relationships to a set of  <dig> manually curated direct chemical-disease relationships as reported in the comparative toxicogenomics database  <cit> . the receiver-operator curve  is illustrated in figure  <dig>  this figure suggests the relative loss in specificity outweighs the gain in sensitivity at a sepea pathway enrichment p-value cutoff of approximately  <dig>  for both specific and broad categorizations of environmental factor-phenotype relationships. at this p-value cutoff,  <dig> of the  <dig>  predicted environmental factor-phenotype relationships are supported by manually curated evidence, demonstrating the majority of connections within our network define new hypotheses of environmental factor-phenotype relationships, yet this overlap is much higher than would be expected by chance . when the diseases analyzed are collapsed into the eight broad disease categories, 48%  of the manually curated relationships are captured in our analysis . this suggests that our method is more sensitive in identifying known chemical-disease category relationships than in identifying known specific disease-chemical relationships. this result makes sense in light of the fact that environmental factor data is largely derived from animal models, where one would not predict strong concordance between phenotypes and specific human diseases. in addition, the pathways analyzed are not specific to tissue and/or life stage, suggesting a specific disease of a particular tissue or developmental stage will be hard to differentiate using this method. based on the hypothesis that there are common pathways associated with both the genetic and environmental components of broad disease categories.

a graphical representation of the predicted network is presented in figure  <dig>  where environmental factors with known physiological actions are colored coded based on mesh annotation . because the above comparison determined the sensitivity and specificity of our environmental factor-phenotype predictions based on only those  <dig> chemical-disease relationships manually curated within ctd, we wanted to determine if the phenotype-phenotype, environmental factor-environmental factor, and environmental factor-phenotype relationships predicted in this graph are supported by known broad categorizations of phenotypes and physiological actions of the environmental factors. therefore, we computed the significance of the number of edges that are shared between nodes in a given category using the graph clustering coefficient  <cit> . using this method, the clustering of the metabolic, immune, neoplastic, and neuropsychiatric phenotypes are considered significant . however, when the mesh annotated environmental factors are added, only the immune and neoplastic categories are significant , suggesting the broad categorization used may not be suitable to describing endocrine and cardiovascular phenotypes, or the mesh annotated physiological actions of many of the environmental factors in this network.

an important application of this work is generating hypotheses of interacting environmental factors that may be important in the prevention, initiation, progression, or treatment of complex diseases based on the network relationships found between phenotypes and environmental factors. therefore, the tight cluster of metabolic syndrome phenotypes and neuropsychiatric disorders identified in figure  <dig> are examined in further detail through analysis of gene expression datasets.

metabolic syndrome cluster
significance in both ppar signaling and adipocytokine signaling form the tight subnetwork of  <dig> environmental factors linked to several metabolic syndrome phenotypes such as serum lipoprotein and triglyceride levels, body mass index, insulin sensitivity, type ii diabetes, and obesity . consistent with our results, a recent network analysis of microarray datasets from diabetes patients suggests ppar signaling is the key underlying pathway in the pathogenesis of type ii diabetes  <cit> . thiazolidinediones, which are antidiabetic pparγ agonists  <cit> , the pparα agonist fenofibrate and the hmg-coa reductase inhibitor atorvastatin, both of which are used in the treatment of hyperlipidemia  <cit>  are identified in this subnetwork. furthermore, dopamine antagonists, which includes several antipsychotic medications known to cause weight gain  <cit>  are identified in this cluster. retinoids are also found in this cluster, which is particularly intriguing in light of novel research showing retinaldehyde represses diet-induced obesity  <cit> . in fact, the widely used antineoplastic synthetic retinoic acid receptor alpha agonist ro 41– <dig> has recently been shown to induce pparγ activity  <cit> . in addition, the increasing body of evidence linking body mass index, retinoids, and cancer risk was recently highlighted in the most comprehensive analysis to date on diet and cancer risk  <cit> . in addition to the pharmaceuticals identified, di-n-hexyl phthalate , a widely used plasticizer that has recently been shown to act as a ppar agonist  <cit>  in addition to previous findings that high levels of exposure cause reproductive toxicity in animal models  <cit> . the omega  <dig> fatty acids present in fish oil are an important dietary environmental factor identified in this cluster  <cit> .

to test the hypothesis that regulation via ppar and adipocytokine signaling plays an important role in environmental and genetic factors influencing metabolic syndrome phenotypes, we analyzed gene expression datasets after exposure to several predicted environmental modulators, as well as gene expression datasets from familial combined hyperlipidemia cases, obese versus lean pima indians and obese versus lean mice fed a controlled diet   <cit> . lists of significantly up or down regulated genes were submitted to dire , a transcription factor binding site  enrichment optimization algorithm that identifies tfbs that are enriched in evolutionary conserved regions surrounding a given set of genes versus a randomly generated background set of genes  <cit> . lists of the tfbs enriched in the evolutionarily conserved regions surrounding the significantly up or downregulated gene list for each dataset are compiled in additional file  <dig>  across all of these independent datasets, binding sites for the three transcriptional regulators of ppar and adipocytokine signaling, namely ppar, nfkb, and stat, are consistently enriched in the differentially expressed gene sets  . therefore, this alternative analysis supports our previous subnetwork predictions suggesting a variety of environmental factors as well as genetic contributions to metabolic syndrome phenotypes can be integrated at the level of ppar and adipocytokine signaling pathways. when the enriched tfbs identified for these metabolic syndrome subnetwork datasets are compared to enriched tfbs identified in the neuropsychiatric datasets , we see that ppar, pu. <dig> and freac binding sites are significantly enriched in these metabolic syndrome datasets .

other tfbs beyond ppar and adipocytokine signaling regulators that are highly enriched across these datasets offer hypotheses for future experimental research in the transcriptional regulation of metabolic syndrome phenotypes. for example, ebox sites for basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor and pu. <dig>  an ets like tf, are important in cell fate programs in hematopoesis, particularly in the monocyte/macrophage lineage  <cit> . this is intriguing in light of numerous studies showcasing the importance of macrophages not only in cardiovascular disease, but in the development of obesity as well <cit>  and their connectivity to ppar signaling  <cit> . zic <dig> is a zinc finger transcription factor known to be important during early developmental programs  <cit> , while preliminary genetic association work suggests atf/creb tfs may also play a role in obesity <cit> . finally, freac sites bind several forkhead members , which have been shown to be important in the regulation of gut-associated lymphoid organ development and regulation of intestinal glucose uptake in mice  <cit> .

neuropsychiatric cluster
our results suggest data from genetic association studies for several neuropsychiatric diseases  converge on tyrosine metabolism and neuroactive ligand receptor interactions, forming a tight cluster of these phenotypes linked by significance in these two pathways. in fact, genes that code receptors and metabolic enzymes of the dopamine and serotonin signaling systems form the basis of this result. in contrast to the metabolic syndrome cluster, very few environmental factors  are found in this tight cluster and include the opiate pentazocine, the muscarinic receptor agonist pilocarpine, and the gaba modulator pentobarbital . in addition, the acetylcholinesterase inhibiting organophosphates, well known for their use as pesticides, are identified in this cluster.

we analyzed gene expression datasets from case versus control studies for several of the phenotypes, as well as gene expression datasets generated from fetal astrocytes or rat forebrain after exposure to the organophosphate pesticide chlorpyrifos . following the method described for analysis of the gene expression datasets for the metabolic syndrome cluster, lists of significantly up or down regulated genes were submitted to dire  <cit> . lists of enriched tfbs in regions surrounding the significantly up or downregulated gene lists for each dataset are available in additional file  <dig>  across all of these datasets, enrichment for ebox and mef <dig> binding sites are found most consistently in the differentially expressed genes for the neuropsychiatric cluster datasets . consistent with the result, several studies suggest coordinated action of the ebox binding proneural bhlh transcriptional activators and mef2c in the differentiation of neuronal subtypes in the developing mammalian forebrain  <cit> . when the enriched tfbs identified for these neuropsychiatric subnetwork datasets are compared to enriched tfbs identified in the metabolic syndrome datasets described above, we see that only chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor  binding sites are significantly enriched in neuropsychiatric datasets . coup-tfs are members of the steroid receptor superfamily in which dopamine is thought to be a physiological activator  <cit> .

consideration of bias associated with genetic association studies
one potential source of bias is the likelihood of false positive associations represented in the gad database. for example, a large multi-center study could not validate several previously reported genetic risk factors for acute coronary syndrome  <cit> . in addition, publication of false positive events could lead to more extensive publication bias as these results are followed up for related phenotypes. to address this potential for bias, we have re-evaluated  <dig> phenotypes for which extensive meta-analyses of genome-wide association  findings exist  <cit> . the list of genes from these recent meta-analyses of gwa studies for alzheimer's disease, parkinson's disease, and schizophrenia represent a subset of those kegg represented genes found within gad, as only one novel gene for each phenotype was identified by the gwa meta-analysis across these phenotypes . subsequently, the sepea algorithm was re-run using the genes associated with each phenotype based on these meta-analyses of gwa results. in general, the predicted enriched pathways were consistent across results obtained with the gad and gwa generated lists, however there were some notable differences . for example, for both the gad and gwa alzheimer's disease gene lists, the renin-angiotensin system pathway ranked the highest, however, using the results from the meta-analysis of gwa studies suggests folate related pathways may be important whereas the gad results suggest tyrosine metabolism is altered. in fact, tyrosine metabolism ranks high for all three phenotypes using the gad generated gene list, whereas parkinson's disease is the only phenotype in which the gwa studies confirm this result. as more gwa results become available for other phenotypes, this potential limitation of the current analysis can be more fully evaluated.

pathways to disease
ultimately, a particular phenotype is produced by the integration of outputs from a multitude of molecular pathways within an organism. therefore, we explored the higher order structure of pathway networks by overlaying our analysis onto the network structure of interconnected kegg pathways . this analysis allows us to simultaneously visualize the key pathways to complex disease progression from the genetic standpoint by adjusting node size to reflect the number of human phenotypes associated with a particular pathway based on the sum of disease associated genetic polymorphisms, as well as from the environmental standpoint, by adjusting the color of the pathway node to reflect the number of environmental factors associated with a particular pathway.

looking at the intersection of the top  <dig> pathways most often enriched in genetic association studies and environmental factor research , suggests metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p <dig>  retinol metabolism, jak-stat signaling, toll-like receptor signaling, and adipocytokine signaling may be five critical pathways important to disease progression from both a genetic and environmental standpoint. from our analysis of phenotypes illustrated in figure  <dig>  we see that metabolism of xenobiotics by cytochrome p <dig> is significantly enriched in genetic association datasets for several phenotypes including cancers, cardiovascular disease, and immune related disorders. adipocytokine signaling defines the cardiovascular and metabolic syndrome phenotypes, many of which have reached epidemic levels over the last  <dig> years  <cit> , suggesting environmental components are critical in the etiology of these phenotypes. retinol metabolism is significantly enriched in genetic polymorphism lists for hormonally regulated cancers such as breast, endometrial, testicular, prostate and thyroid, as well as pregnancy complications, reproductive dysfunction, and cardiovascular and endocrine disorders. this group of phenotypes is particularly interesting in light of the latest time trend statistics from the national cancer institute and centers for disease control. as a whole, cancer incidence rates have been declining over the last decade, with the exception of  <dig> sites . thyroid cancer has by far the largest increase in incidence over the last decade, with an annual percent change of  <dig>  between  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> . in addition, pregnancy complications and endocrine disorders account for  <dig> of the  <dig> primary diagnoses with the greatest percent increase in ambulatory care visits over the last decade  <cit> . these time trends suggest environmental components are critical in rising incidence of endocrine related phenotypes, as the timeframe hardly crosses a generation, highlighting the importance of continued research on exposure routes and health effects of potential endocrine disrupters found in our environment  <cit> .

finally, we note the centrality of ppar and adipocytokine signaling in the pathway network as the primary linkage between metabolism and cellular signaling pathways . as mentioned previously, these two pathways define the metabolic syndrome cluster in figure  <dig>  several genetic and environmental factors are associated with each of these pathways, suggesting genetic and environmental modulators are critical to the role of these pathways in human disease progression, such as in metabolic syndrome phenotypes and cardiovascular disease.

CONCLUSIONS
according to systems theory, although individual genes or environmental factors may be a critical component in the pathogenesis of a particular complex disease, it is ultimately the modulation of underlying pathways that the particular gene/environmental factor is a part of that determines the resultant phenotype. here we have integrated gene centered knowledge from epidemiological and mechanistic environmental research in an attempt to discover the interplay between genetic and environmental mediators of phenotype at the pathway level. in addition, we have provided a higher order structure of pathway interconnectivity to build hypotheses of disease progression based on clusters of pathways defining phenotypes.

the methods and findings presented here open the door to a number of new hypotheses that can be explored regarding the genetic and environmental factors governing human disease. the results suggest retinol metabolism, jak-stat signaling, toll-like receptor signaling, and adipocytokine signaling are key pathways that should be prioritized targets for high-throughput screening currently being implemented to improve toxicity testing  <cit> . for example, analysis of the metabolic syndrome subnetwork highlights the need for further epidemiological and mechanistic analyses of several compounds for their potential modulation of metabolic syndrome phenotypes, including plastic derivatives, synthetic and natural retinoids, pyrethrins and antipsychotic medications. in addition, the role of endocrine pathways in numerous phenotypes for which rates have increased over the last  <dig> years indicates a continued need to evaluate in greater detail the role of endocrine disruption in cancer, pregnancy and reproductive complications, and metabolic syndrome phenotypes. the multifactorial nature of complex diseases necessitates using knowledge-based, systems-driven evaluations, like the one presented here, for uncovering promising hypotheses for future research aimed at improving public health.

