BACKGROUND
the rapidly growing mycobacteria , defined as mycobacteria that grow in culture media within seven days, are mostly environmental organisms, some of which have emerged as important opportunistic pathogens in humans, colonizers in the airway  <cit>  or contaminants on surgical instruments  <cit> . more than a hundred species have so far been identified  <cit> . as different species and their subgroups are known to differ in their pathogenicity and susceptibility to antibiotics  <cit> , their rapid and accurate identification is important for making therapeutic decisions in patient management. unfortunately, although many taxonomic advances have been made in recent years, resulting in the creation of new species, subspecies and subgroups, the taxonomic status of some members is still unresolved.

mycobacterium abscessus is generally regarded as the most important rgm associated with human infections that range from localized cutaneous inflammation to rare but serious disseminated sepsis  <cit> . it is responsible for more than 80% of the chronic lung diseases caused by rgm, some of which require surgical resection of the infected lung for complete resolution of symptoms  <cit> . this organism shows many similarities with another rgm, m. chelonae, and was once classified as m. chelonae subspecies abscessus  <cit> . with dna-dna hybridization studies, however, it became recognized as a distinct species  <cit> . subsequently, the species was divided into three subspecies: m. abscessus sensu stricto, m. massiliense and m. bolletii  <cit>  but the most recent classification describes just two subspecies which are m. abscessus subspecies abscessus  and m. abscessus subspecies bolletii that includes the previous two subspecies of m. bolletii and m. massiliense  <cit> . however, in many phylogenetic and phylogenomic studies, m. abscessus is clearly separated into three subgroups  <cit> . clinical and population studies have also indicated notable differences among the three subspecies  <cit> . hence, in this paper, we use the former three subspecies classification for ease of reference to earlier publications.

traditionally, species identification for rgm is based on biological and biochemical tests such as pigment production, 3-day arylsulfatase reaction, nitrate reduction, iron uptake, and tolerance to 5% nacl. antibiotic susceptibility has also been used to assist in species or subspecies classification. for instance, polymyxin b inhibits m. fortuitum but not m. abscessus  <cit> , while in the m. abscessus group, m. massiliense can be differentiated from the other two subspecies by a truncated erythromycin ribosome methyltransferase  gene associated with susceptibility to macrolide antibiotics  <cit> . although easy to use, the accuracy of these tests can be easily affected by the phenomenon of horizontal gene transfer  and differential gene expression. therefore, phenotypic tests have largely been replaced by modern genotypic methods.

the pcr-restriction enzyme analysis  is one of the most commonly used genotypic methods. direct sequencing of pcr amplified products based on the polymorphism of housekeeping genes has also become available in many diagnostic laboratories. in both methods, the hsp <dig> gene, which is highly conserved within species, is frequently used. most of the rgm currently known can be identified from re patterns generated from a 439 bp variable portion of the gene  <cit> . in pcr-sequencing, the hsp <dig> gene shows more variability among rgm species than the 16s rrna gene, the universally conserved gene chosen for the phylogenetic analysis of prokaryotes. thus, it is better than the latter for the identification of closely-related mycobacterial species  <cit> . other housekeeping genes that have been used in rgm studies, albeit at lower frequency, include the internal transcribed spacer  of the 16s-23s rrna gene  <cit> , the rpob  <cit> , soda  <cit> , seca  <cit> . reca  <cit>  and gyrb  <cit>  genes. commercially available reverse line probe hybridization assays  are increasingly being used as convenient molecular tools for rapid subspecies identification in diagnostic laboratories.

the conventional phylogenetic approach uses single or limited numbers of genes to infer phylogenetic relationships among the taxa of interest. classification of taxa can then be done on the basis of the topology of the inferred phylogenetic tree. a potential drawback of this method is that the optimality of phylogenetic signal in the genes used, as quantified using some suitable metric, is largely unknown because there is no systematic procedure to find suitable candidates from a population of genes. the recent introduction of next-generation sequencing has made it possible to use whole- genome sequence information for subspecies classification via phylogenomic clustering. an example is the phylogenomic reconstruction of lactic acid bacteria by zhang et al.  <cit> . the purpose of this study is to test the phylogenetic informativeness of five classical housekeeping genes: rpob, hsp <dig>  seca, reca and soda that are commonly used in m. abscessus subspecies classification. concurrently we wish to propose a phylogenomic approach to identify, to the subspecies level, 12 m. abscessus strains isolated from clinical samples, using a smaller set of genes that is at least as informative as the five classical genes for the purpose of inferring a high-confidence tree topology.

RESULTS
genome assembly, annotation and identification of orthologs
the draft genomes of our  <dig> m. abscessus strains, assembled using clc genomics workbench and annotated using rast, showed genome sizes ranging from  <dig> ,413 bp to  <dig> ,620 bp with an average of  <dig> ,711 bp. the number of putative coding sequences  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . with the use of blastclust on the putative cds from all genomes including those of the three reference strains and the three outgroup species,  <dig> orthologous genes were identified.

single and multiple gene-based subspecies classification
on comparing the phylogenetic trees constructed using the five common marker genes for m. abscessus subspecies classification, the single gene- based trees inferred using rpob, hsp <dig> and seca genes showed clear and consistent classification of each isolate into subspecies . the reca gene, however, gave a slightly different classification . for instance, the two reference strains, m. bolletii bdt and m. massiliense ccug 48898twere grouped together and strain m <dig> was grouped with m. abscessus atcc 19977t, instead of m. bolletii bdt as in the rpob-, hsp65- and seca-derived trees. the soda -based tree was also different in that strain m <dig> was identified as m. abscessus sensu stricto instead of m. massiliense as observed in the other trees . these results indicate that soda and reca marker genes, which are commonly used for mycobacterial classification, may not be suitable for m. abscessus subspecies identification.

the supermatrix tree obtained from the concatenation of the five genes has also revealed three clear subspecies grouping supported by strong bootstrap values of 93% for m. massiliense, 99% for m. bolletii and 100% for m. abscessus sensu stricto . the classification for our  <dig> strains was similar to those obtained with the rpob, hsp <dig> and seca genes.

phylogenomic approach to subspecies classification
the availability of whole-genome sequences enabled us to systematically evaluate the phylogenetic informativeness of a large pool of candidate genes and then select optimal ones for phylogenetic tree construction. for this evaluation, we used the same procedure to predict the open reading frames  in the  <dig> genomes sequenced in this study, as well as the genomes of the reference and outgroup species. on aligning the sequences of the  <dig> orthologous genes identified with blastclust, we found the msa produced using mafft  <cit>  to be more robust than that produced using muscle  <cit> . subsequently, we chose the mafft-aligned msa for downstream analysis. the phylogenetic informativeness of each gene was assessed and ranked based on calculated entropy values as described in the methods section. by using this systematic approach, we selected  <dig> median-ranked genes which would be the most phylogenetically optimal for the purpose of subspecies phylogeny inference. the functional analysis of these  <dig> median-ranked genes, as well as the  <dig> top-ranked and  <dig> bottom ranked genes showed that the majority of the bottom-ranked genes are involved in translational processes, whereas those of the top-ranked genes are mostly involved in enzyme metabolism . these results indicate that the ranking obtained using the relative entropy metric appears to be biologically reasonable.

in the phylogenomic tree constructed based on the selected  <dig> median-ranked genes , the classification of isolates inferred agreed with the one inferred using the five concatenated classical housekeeping genes. strains m <dig> to m <dig> were clustered with m. abscessus sensu stricto; m <dig> with m. bolletii and the others with m. massiliense.

to find a minimal set of genes capable of producing the same subspecies classification as that obtained using the  <dig> median-ranked genes, we iteratively removed genes from the left and right ends of the list of median-ranked genes, and used the remaining genes to construct the phylogenetic tree. the process was terminated when the classification implied by the tree topology changed. thus, we found that the minimum number of median-ranked genes needed for recovering similar subspecies classification  attained using the  <dig> median-ranked genes was three. these three genes were dna polymerase iii subunit alpha , 4-hydroxy-2-ketovalerate aldolase  and cell division protein ftsz . we confirmed the amplifiability of informative fragments from these three genes in m. abscessus atcc 19977t .

evidence to support the subspecies classification by phylogenomics analysis
examination of erm <dig> and 16s-23s rrna its genes
previous studies have shown that the erm <dig> and the 16s-23s rrna its genes could be used to differentiate the subspecies of m. abscessus  <cit> . we examined the sequences of these genes in all  <dig> strains and found seven strains  having deletions at the 64th and 65th positions and a large deletion from position 159th to 432nd in the erm <dig> gene , as well as an a to g substitution at position 60th and insertion of c at position 102nd in the its gene . since these features are typically found in m. massiliense, their presence in the seven strains further supported the classification of these strains as m. massiliense, as observed in the supermatrix analyses. however, m <dig> which was classified as m. massiliense in all the single gene-based and multiple gene-based approaches did not have these expected features.

classification of other m. abscessus strains from public database
at the end of our study, many m. abscessus genome sequences have been deposited in ncbi genbank database. to further test the reliability of the three selected gene markers, we used them to classify  <dig> m. abscessus genomes  and three outgroup genomes . the phylogenetic tree constructed using the minimal set of three genes clearly showed three major groups corresponding to the three m. abscessus subspecies . for example, the strains from 6g0125s to 4s0726rb were grouped into the m. abscessus sensu stricto cluster, whereas the strains from 47j <dig> to 5s <dig> were likely to be m. massiliense. none of the additional  <dig> strains were identified as m. bolletii. this classification was in accordance with and supported by the analysis of hsp <dig> and rpob gene sequences . the addition of  <dig> strains into this study did not change the classification of the  <dig> strains from our initial analysis. these results again support our belief that the three selected genes are reliable markers for the classification of m. abscessus subspecies.

other supporting evidence
recently, wong et al.  <cit>  showed that a variable-number tandem-repeat  typing assay for the m. abscessus species seemed to give good differentiation of m. abscessus strains. in their study, both the vntr assay and a multilocus sequence analysis assay  based on seven housekeeping genes  yielded subspecies clustering that is concordant  with the one inferred using the present phylogenomics approach.

in addition, the availability of whole genome sequences of the 12 m. abscessus strains allowed us to proceed with the reconstruction of a phylogenetic tree using single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the genomic regions that are conserved across all strains . the resulting snp-based tree showed that the classification of the  <dig> m. abscessus strains is similar to the classification obtained from the phylogenomics tree generated using our systemic data mining approach.

the classification results of the  <dig> sequenced genomes using different approaches are summarized in figure  <dig> 

discussion
using a proposed phylogenomic approach, we have successfully classified into subspecies,  <dig> sequenced genomes of m. abscessus strains isolated from clinical samples. the primary value of this approach is the use of a set of objectively selected genes for constructing a high confidence tree topology that can serve as a benchmark. subsequently, the classification implicit in the topology of the inferred tree can be used to guide the selection of a minimal gene set for practical, routine use. existing methods  are not able to produce such benchmarks, and their resulting classification accuracy may be largely a matter of luck rather than science. corroboration from the analysis of whole-genome snp data further convinces us of the usefulness of the phylogenomic approach to systematically discover a minimal gene set for subspecies classification, at least in m. abscessus.

our phylogenomic approach uncovered a set of genes detected using median–ranking that supports the subspecies classification inferred using the concatenation of the five classical genes. the set of median-ranked genes has good coverage of all important functional classes compared to the top and bottom-ranked genes, so using their concatenation for phylogenetic inference potentially avoids systematic biases that can be caused by having a concentration of genes in the ranked list for some particular functional class. further refinement resulted in a new, three-member gene set that preserves the similar classification. the three selected genes are biologically interesting and come from three different functional classes. the kegg database  <cit>  shows that dna polymerase iii subunit alpha  functions in dna replication; 4-hydroxy-2-ketovalerate aldolase is involved in phenylalanine metabolism, degradation of benzoate, dioxin and xylene; and cell division protein gene ftsz produces the ftsz gtp-binding cell division protein which is important for the cytoskeleton formation during cell wall synthesis. a brief survey of available literature shows that polc has been used as a phylogenetic marker in bacillus subtilis subspecies classification  <cit>  as well as lactic acid bacteria phylogeny  <cit> . in wolbachia phylogenetic studies, ftsz has been used in conjunction with other genes  <cit> .

in this study, we also assessed a set of genes commonly used by other workers for the subspecies classification of m. abscessus  and found inconsistent classification for certain strains with reca, soda, erm <dig> and its genes. it is well-known that the single gene-based approach is sensitive to the evolutionary history of the gene and not necessarily of the species, and may be limited by the lack of sufficient variation in a single gene sequence  <cit> . a multiple gene-based approach, if the genes are carefully chosen, may amplify the individual phylogenetic signals present in the genes and lead to an accurate inference of phylogenetic tree for subspecies classification  <cit> . this is seen in the superior robustness of our supermatrix trees whether they are based on the concatenation of five classical genes, core genome snps or our three gene markers.

of the  <dig> strains we isolated, m <dig> had the most ambiguous taxonomic identity. it was classified as m. massiliense in the current study and also in two recent publications  <cit>  using our m. abscessus genome sequences for comparative analyses. however, it had features of m. abscessus sensu stricto in the erm <dig> and its genes and was shown to cluster with m. abscessus in the mls and vntr assays reported by wong et al.  <cit> . additionally, it was identified as m. abscessus subsp. abscessus in the maldi biotyper system  that uses the maldi-tof  mass spectrometry to identify organisms by their molecular  fingerprints. the erm <dig> gene in m <dig> is intact but the minimum inhibitory concentration  of clarithromycin obtained with the epsilometer test  was  <dig>  mg/l even after prolonged incubation up to 14 days. this high level of in vitro susceptibility is more often seen among m. massiliense than m. abscessus or m. bolletii strains. in m <dig>  however, this low mic can be attributed to the c <dig> polymorphism in the erm <dig> gene which has been reported to prevent the expression of the inducible clarithromycin resistance conferred by an intact erm <dig> gene  <cit> .

the apparent incongruities in the subspecies classification of m <dig> could be because previous studies used insufficient numbers of strains to describe “typical” features associated with the different m. abscessus subspecies. more extensive sampling of m. abscessus populations from different geographical locations and clinical settings would help to resolve current taxonomic uncertainties.

CONCLUSIONS
whole-genome sequencing of medically important bacterial strains opens up new possibility for accurate subspecies classification via a phylogenomic approach. we have shown how a large pool of orthologs can be identified bioinformatically from the genomes of 12 m. abscessus isolates, assembled from fragments generated using illumina shotgun sequencing. we then introduced a method to rank the phylogenetic informativeness of the identified orthologs using the relative entropy metric. based on the set of  <dig> median-ranked genes, a benchmark phylogeny was obtained, and we used its topology to infer subspecies classification. we made the method practical by discovering a three-member minimal gene set that could return the same subspecies classification obtained using  <dig> median-ranked genes. the workflow here provides an objective means for the development of molecular-based classification method that was not possible with previous methods such as single gene, arbitrary multiple gene approaches, vntr as well as mlsa. our three gene set is at least as informative as classical markers commonly used by other researchers. its applicability can be further evaluated by testing it on a larger population of strains, from different clinical settings and geographical locations.

