BACKGROUND
due to the avalanche of protein sequences made available by high-throughput genome sequencing, complete manual annotation is unfeasible, leaving a large fraction of protein functions to be predicted by automatic functional annotation pipelines  <cit> . however, without experimental characterization, the quality of annotation is often questionable, owing to errors in automatic annotation transfer and lack of updates from new findings. in spite of recent advances in highly integrative functional prediction methods  <cit> , a recent investigation  <cit>  into the annotation quality of well-characterized enzyme families revealed that the average percentage of misannotation for the haloacid dehalogenase  superfamily in the three largest public databases, i.e. non-redundant   <cit> , trembl  <cit>  and kegg  <cit> , is over 60%. the possible causes of such annotation errors include multi-domain problems  <cit> , experimental data misinterpretations, threshold relativity problems, and paralog-ortholog misclassifications  <cit> . moreover, the simplified descriptions recorded in protein sequence and protein family databases are usually inadequate for understanding the precise function of a protein  <cit> .

such errors and omissions make database annotations insufficient for complete functional interpretation of a protein. a more accurate source of annotations is the ‘reference proteins’ closely related to the protein of interest. we define ‘reference, proteins’ as proteins that have been experimentally studied, manually curated, and reported in the literature. information about reference proteins is essential for accurate functional interpretation and experimental design. the cross-links between proteins, genes, and associated literature available from national center for biotechnology information  provide a basis for reference protein identification. however, it is not trivial to identify a good set of reference proteins and supporting literature because such reference proteins constitute only a small portion of protein databases. additionally, many proteins linked to large-scale studies  do not provide sufficient functional information.

we have developed a web server named seq2ref to assist the identification of applicable reference proteins. seq2ref employs blast  <cit>  to perform homology searches and exploits crosslinks created by ncbi between proteins and literature to detect reference proteins. homologs from the protein data bank   <cit>  and swiss-prot   <cit>  databases are detected as well, as these databases contain experimental data on 3d protein structures and manually curated annotation on sequence records, respectively. moreover, we developed a plurality-based rating system integrating reciprocal blast and multiple sequence comparisons  to rank the reference proteins. by retrieving homologous reference proteins, seq2ref can contribute to precisely inferring unknown protein function and developing detailed functional interpretation.

RESULTS
server interface
the input and output interfaces are shown in figure  <dig>  an email address and the query protein are the minimal requirements to initiate a job. options for blast search parameters and selection of server modes  are available in the parameters panel. we recommend manually selecting the organism of the input sequence for reciprocal blast if the input sequence is not in the nr database. the total run time is usually  <dig> to 15 min for fast mode and 1 hour or more for slow mode. when the job completes, an email notification will be sent to the address provided by the user.

the results page  lists the reference proteins and relevant information in a ranked order. reference proteins from three sources are shown, respectively, as:  a summary table containing protein definition, rating score and blast statistics ;  and a detailed description panel with the rating records, blast statistics and scores, and relevant database information. reference proteins are ranked first by the rating score and second by the expectation value; the publications associated with each protein are sorted by the publication date. as functional studies of remote homologs may not be applicable to the query protein, by default we do not display reference proteins with rating scores lower than  <dig> in the detailed description panel.

benchmark
to assess the performance of the seq2ref server, especially the ability of our plurality-based rating system to sort out the most relevant references, we applied our algorithm to the enolase superfamily, which has been thoroughly characterized and recorded in the structure-function linkage database   <cit> . the enolase superfamily contains seven subgroups, which are further divided into  <dig> families. proteins within one family share the same substrate specificity and can be considered orthologs; proteins within one subgroup share the same general base in the active site and have the similar catalytic mechanism  <cit> . for each family, we selected one representative sequence, usually the one with an available 3d structure , as the input for benchmark.

at each rating score cutoff, coverage and average accuracy were used as parameters to evaluate the performance of seq2ref . the coverage is defined as the percentage of tested sequences that detect reference proteins above the score cutoff. the accuracy is defined as the average of the true positive rates among tested sequences above the score cutoff. two criteria were used to define true positives:  in a stringent  context, a true positive hit must be from the same family as the query; and  in a broader  context, hits from the same subgroup but from different families are also considered true. as shown in table  <dig>  the accuracy is always 100% with score cutoffs no less than 4; when the cutoff drops to  <dig>  seq2ref reaches 100% coverage but starts to include those hits from the same subgroup but different families. although the biased dataset from only one family might cause overfitting of the statistics, the benchmark suggests that accurate functional interpretation at family level should be achieved by utilizing the reference proteins with a score no less than  <dig>  the information for marginal hits with scores between  <dig> and  <dig> is valuable to understand the broad function of the protein subgroup. however, one should not directly transfer the specific functions of marginal hits, such as substrate specificity, to the query.

1: accuracy calculated by averaging the family/subgroup true positive rates.

2: coverage calculated by taking the ratio of testing sequences that detect reference proteins above the score cutoff.

case study and examples
due to its ability to retrieve reference proteins and their relevant information in a ranked order, the seq2ref server is useful for finding pubmed references relevant to proteins of unknown function, as well as obtaining a deeper understanding of proteins than that revealed by short annotations, as illustrated by the following examples.

organizing new information for proteins of unknown function
hypothetical proteins of unknown function constitute a remarkably large portion of the database  <cit> . novel studies on uncharacterized proteins and their orthologs provide new insights about their functions, but sequence databases often do not incorporate this information in a timely manner. by retrieving literature, seq2ref helps to obtain the most recent information about proteins.

the macaca mulatta protein, corresponding to gi| <dig>  is annotated as a hypothetical protein egk_ <dig> in the ncbi protein database . this hypothetical protein contains three conserved domains of unknown function . our server detects one close homolog, a hypothetical protein  in human, which has been experimentally studied. the highly confident statistics in blast  and similar protein domain composition support an orthologous relationship between these two proteins. the human protein was recently  reported to be a tumor suppressor in gliomas. it was named ‘focadhesin’, due to its cellular localization at the focal adhesion of the cell membrane  <cit> . as a likely ortholog, the m. mulatta protein might also be a tumor suppressor and localized at the focal adhesion. thus, by finding a homolog with the latest experimental publication not yet incorporated in sequence databases, seq2ref can serve as a basis for reliable functional prediction of unknown proteins.

providing detailed information about a protein’s function
although conserved domains in proteins usually suggest their functions, overly broad descriptions of domain functions are less informative than more specific descriptions. by presenting reference proteins and associated literature, seq2ref can offer more definitive and reliable information about protein functions.

one example is the hlya gene product in cronobacter turicensis z <dig> . a search of the conserved domain database  merely suggests that this protein contains a ‘haemolytic domain’, with the most similar hit  annotated as a ‘hypothetical protein’ and one possible informative hit as ‘conserved hypothetical protein yidd’. the ‘conserved hypothetical protein yidd’ domain  shows neither functional studies nor a detailed functional description. the publication  <cit>  associated with a pfam domain record  in the cdd search result suggests that the name ‘haemolytic domain’ originated because one protein  containing this domain can cause cells to lyse in culture. unfortunately, this study failed to suggest a specific molecular function. seq2ref provided more information by detecting  the experimentally studied protein yidd from e. coli , which is identical to the ncbi nr database representative protein  from salmonella enterica. this orthology is reinforced by the common conserved genomic context  <cit>   and the clans  <cit>  protein similarity network, in which e. coli yidd and c. turicensis hlya cluster tightly together among their homologs . the reference  <cit>  associated with e. coli yidd detected by our server suggests that yidd assists yidc, the protein insertase, in insertion of inner membrane proteins. as a confident ortholog of e. coli yidd, the hlya gene from c. turicensis very likely shares the same function. thus, the homologous reference protein, detected by seq2ref, contributes to understanding the protein function more specifically.

limitations
as shown in the examples, the seq2ref server detects reference proteins, which can facilitate deeper understanding of the protein function. however, we should keep in mind the limitations. the main concern regards the quality of cross-links between the ncbi protein and pubmed databases. missing or wrong links defined by ncbi would result in the loss of or the inappropriate assignment of relevant literature. another concern is that although the top ranked reference proteins are very likely functionally similar to the query proteins, one should still be careful in directly transferring the information from the hit to the query, as verification of orthology requires additional diligent analysis. to come to the best conclusions about a protein’s function, one should critically inspect the relevance of the publications and the homology of the reference proteins to the query.

CONCLUSIONS
seq2ref is a homology-based tool to identify reference proteins from pubmed, pdb and sp databases. we have developed a plurality-based rating system that evaluates homologous relationships to indicate the degree of confidence one should have in transferring annotations from a well-studied reference protein to a similar new protein. thus, by retrieving both experimental studies and high-quality functional annotations of reference proteins, our server provides a solid basis for correct function interpretation of novel proteins.

