BACKGROUND
the major evolutionary mechanisms that have resulted in the neotropical region's extremely large and diverse fauna are not well understood. most phylogenetic studies have concentrated on radiations that have diversified within neotropical forests  <cit>  and a few have dealt with radiations centered in open habitats such as grasslands and open scrub  <cit> . these studies have found that the most recent speciation events have occurred between geographically isolated populations inhabiting the same habitat type, suggesting that allopatric isolation through vicariance has been a dominant speciation mechanism  <cit> . a limitation in extrapolating from these studies is that most research has focussed on lineages that occur in different microhabitats within one single habitat type . additionally, suitable methods for the reconstruction of habitat preferences of ancestral lineages have been limited until recently  <cit> . what is lacking is data on radiations that include opposite ends of a spectrum of habitats, such as dense forest and open savannah. such studies will provide insights into the evolutionary significance of habitat shifts following colonization of new habitats.

we investigated the evolutionary history of neotropical elaenia flycatchers  using both mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences. this genus is distributed over a range of forest and open habitats from mexico and hispaniola to the southern tip of south america  <cit>  . while largely avoiding tropical lowland rainforest during the breeding season, the genus is represented in a variety of other dense forest habitats. in addition, the genus is widespread in scrubby and open tree habitats in both the neotropical highlands and lowlands . austral long-distance migration is well represented in the genus  <cit> .

data from references  <cit> 

our study included samples of all but one currently recognised species  and focused on the reconstruction of ancestral habitat preferences using both parsimony and bayesian approaches. we traced the preferences for certain habitat types throughout the evolutionary history of the genus, namely forest, savannah, and riparian habitat, and estimated relative rates of transition between the occupancy of those habitats. additionally, we reconstructed migratory behavior of the ancestors of elaenia to trace the origin of austral long-distance migration in the genus and assess its role in the diversification of the genus. these data, in addition to molecular clock dating of speciation events, were then used to derive conclusions about modes of speciation and the evolution of habitat preference in elaenia.

literature references rather than genetic tissue numbers and institutions are given for samples from other studies; abbreviations: fmnh – field museum of natural history, chicago; amnh – american museum of natural history, new york; snmnh – smithsonian national museum of natural history, washington, d.c.; lsu – louisiana state university museum of natural history, baton rouge, louisiana; ku – kansas university museum of natural history, lawrence, kansas; ansp – academy of natural sciences in philadelphia; zk – zoological museum of the university of copenhagen; lgema – laboratório de genética e evolução molecular de aves, são paulo.

RESULTS
genetic characterization
the aligned fib <dig> sequences were  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp of which were variable among our samples and  <dig> bp of which emerged as parsimony-informative. we detected one 5-bp deletion in the sequence of capsiempis flaveola with respect to the in-group as well as eight indels within the in-group, five of which were parsimony-informative. four parsimony-informative in-group indels could readily be mapped onto our concatenated tree  as a single gain. the remaining indel constituted a 1-bp deletion in both samples of e. gigas, the sole sample of e.  sordida and the bolivian sample of e. flavogaster, and required three independent gains. however, the phylogenetic utility of 1-bp deletions has previously been shown to be low in tyrannids  <cit> .

the nd <dig> partition comprised  <dig> bp , with  <dig> bp being variable and  <dig> bp parsimony-informative. no anomalies were detected in the translations of the nd <dig> coding gene, suggesting that the nd <dig> sequences were of mitochondrial origin.

chi-square tests of homogeneity of base frequencies across taxa did not show any evidence for base compositional bias . pairwise uncorrected 'p' divergences were calculated for both partitions and those relevant for discussion are presented in table  <dig>  saturation graphs with pairwise divergences plotted against the number of transitions/transversions for fib <dig> and for all three codons of nd <dig>  did not reveal saturation.

phylogenetic relationships
bi searches of the nd <dig> partition yielded the tree depicted in figure  <dig>  the mp analysis arrived at a consensus topology that was fully congruent with the bi tree , although mp bootstrap support was often lower than bi posterior probabilities .

abbreviations: mp – most-parsimonious, n/a – not applicable

only a limited number of nodes received high support in the mp and bi analyses of the fib <dig> partition . in all but one case, nodes supported by mp bootstrap  values > <dig> were also supported by bi posterior probabilities  of  <dig> . none of the nodes supported by fib <dig> was in conflict with nodes in the nd <dig> tree .

in view of the low level of topological conflict between nd <dig> and fib <dig> partitions, we opted to concatenate both datasets. mp and bi searches of the concatenated dataset yielded a well-resolved tree  that displayed almost no conflict to any of the nodes recovered in the nd <dig> and fib <dig> analyses. the only exception involves the position of e. gigas, which is recovered as the sister group of the e. obscura/dayi super-species by bi analysis of the nd <dig> partition . however, neither mp analysis of that same partition , nor any type of analysis of the fib <dig> partition  identified such a placement. instead, concatenation of both partitions recovered e. gigas as basal to most other elaenia species including the e. obscura/dayi super-species . it has previously been shown in tyrant-flycatchers that single markers routinely contain hidden phylogenetic signal that only unfolds once additional markers are added  <cit> , and in view of the congruence of branch support between mp and bi analyses of the concatenated dataset, we suggest that the position of e. gigas as depicted in figure  <dig> reflects the most likely hypothesis based on our data. as a consequence of the strong topological agreement between the concatenated dataset and single partitions, phylogenetic discussion will be based on the tree resulting from the combined dataset .

ecological parameters and timing
mp and bi reconstructions of ancestral migratory behavior and preferences for habitat types are presented in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> and are explained more thoroughly in the discussion. transition rates between individual parameter states were not significant for any of the characters examined .

the likelihood score of the most likely tree computed under relaxed branch-length assumptions was not significantly different from that computed under conditions that enforce a molecular clock , which suggests that a molecular clock is a reasonable assumption for the evolution of elaenia flycatchers as sampled in this study . we estimated the ages of elaenia speciation events using a mitochondrial clock rate of 2% sequence divergence/my for reasons provided in the discussion. the temporal reconstruction of differentiation events in elaenia is depicted in figure  <dig> 

discussion
phylogenetic relationships within elaenia and taxonomic 
CONCLUSIONS
all analyses identified two primary clades:  the two savannah specialists e. ruficeps and e. cristata which received high posterior probability; and  the remaining species with moderate bayesian and parsimony support . within the large clade there was strong support from the concatenated data for placing e. gigas as sister to the rest, which contradicts vocal data and crest shape that instead suggest a close relationship with e. flavogaster  <cit> .

e. obscura, e. dayi and e. frantzii all lack the white coronal patch present in most other elaenia species, and consequently have been treated as a super-species complex by some authorities  <cit> . while our data corroborate the presumed close relationship between e. obscura and e. dayi  <cit> , they strongly reject the inclusion of e. frantzii in this complex. the mitochondrial divergences between andean e. o. obscura and atlantic e. o. sordida are comparable to those between sister species of elaenia , and are ten times higher than divergences within e. o. obscura sampled from along a  <dig> km andean transect. furthermore, e. o. obscura and e. o. sordida did not always form a monophyletic clade with respect to e. dayi  and are best treated as separate species: e. obscura and e. sordida.

our analyses confirmed the genetic distinctness of e.  brachyptera with respect to e.  albivertex and their treatment as separate species . deep genetic divisions were also observed in e. fallax. the level of nd <dig> divergence between jamaican e. f. fallax and hispaniolan e. f. cherriei exceeded that recorded between other species of elaenia, suggesting long-term separation and species-level treatment for e. cherriei .

e. parvirostris has usually been allied with e. albiceps, based on vocal and morphological grounds, and apparent hybridisation  <cit> . both mitochondrial and nuclear sequences placed the two in unrelated clades; e. parvirostris in a clade consisting primarily of migratory lowland species, and e. albiceps in a clade with e. pallatangae . given that e. parvirostris is also a lowland migratory species, its phylogenetic placement here is consistent with its ecology. furthermore, it also shares with other members of this clade  three  wing-bars. the placement of e. parvirostris and e. albiceps in two relatively distant clades calls for a re-examination of the potential hybrid zone in southern bolivia  <cit> .

e. albiceps is also thought to hybridise with e. pallatangae  <cit> . the five recognised subspecies of e. pallatangae are distributed over two discrete south american land areas: the andes and the venezuelan tepuis . all our venezuelan samples  formed a distinct clade closely related to a number of central american and caribbean elaenia species, while the andean samples  emerged in a clade with e. albiceps and were scarcely distinguishable from the latter in both mitochondrial and nuclear dna . clearly, more detailed sampling is needed to resolve this unusual phylogenetic pattern. future research may reveal that e. albiceps and e. pallatangae sensu stricto may be conspecific, or that genetic introgression has accounted for their similar mitochondrial dna, and the current taxonomic status of the latter two forms is best retained until such studies have been conducted. nevertheless, the phylogenetic divergence between e.  pallatangae and e.  olivina on both nuclear and mitochondrial dna indicates treatment of e. olivina as a species that is not particularly closely related to andean e. pallatangae.

some reasonably deep mitochondrial divergence was found between the cayman island subspecies caymanensis of e. martinica and the other two subspecies investigated . in contrast, samples of e. martinica riisii from puerto rico and e. m. martinica from st. vincent were barely distinguishable from one another on nd <dig> divergences . this suggests a close affinity of the latter two subspecies, which are geographically linked through the lesser antillean island chain. the cayman island race is geographically isolated, with sequence divergences typical of distinct tyrannid subspecies  <cit> .

habitat shifts in the evolutionary history of elaenia
our reconstructions of ancestral habitat requirements revealed pronounced differences not only in the timing of the emergence of certain habitat preferences, but also in the frequency of habitat shifts . in the following, we will examine these habitat shifts individually for each habitat considered.

savannah
elaenia includes two habitat specialists  that are closely tied to the occurrence of natural savannah and cerrado. our dna phylogeny  united these two in a clade that was sister to the remaining species of elaenia. zimmer  <cit>  also identified features of the wing formula and nostril structure that separated e. ruficeps and e. cristata from the rest of the genus. three other species regionally breed in savannah habitat, though they are more generalist in nature and occur in other habitat types as well . e. flavogaster and e. chiriquensis are widespread denizens of a variety of open habitats, while e. dayi is primarily a forest bird that also breeds in stunted tree savannah within its restricted range in the venezuelan tepuis  <cit> . these facultative savannah inhabitants did not form a clade and were positioned in different assemblages.

the finding that savannah specialists are sister to the rest of elaenia suggests that savannah would have constituted an important part of the neotropical landscape during the early diversification of the genus. although parameter state reconstructions are either equivocal  or argue against  a savannah-inhabiting ancestor of elaenia, savannah is likely to have been invaded by proto-ruficeps/cristata shortly after the initial divergence of elaenia .

forest interior
elaenia is widely distributed throughout neotropical edge habitats and other open vegetation and avoids tropical lowland rainforests  <cit> . nevertheless, a number of species are found primarily or secondarily in the interior of montane or otherwise temperate forest . even though nine species inhabit forest, both bayesian and parsimony state reconstructions showed that occurrence in forest interior arose on only two or three  occasions . within these assemblages of forest-inhabiting species, the prevailing pattern is one of allopatric distributions . this is consistent with the notion that geographical isolation rather than ecological divergence is the most common mode of speciation in neotropical birds  <cit> .

riparian habitats
almost half of the species of elaenia are either narrowly confined to riparian vegetation or have a regional preference for it. riparian habitat preferences can vary widely from montane streamside habitat  to cecropia stands on amazonian river-islands , but a frequent commonality of these habitats is that they constitute breaks in blocks of closed forest habitat or savannah/cerrado. both mp and bi reconstructions indicated that an association with riparian growth may have been prevalent in the main lineage of elaenia in very early stages of its diversification and may have been lost on at least two to four occasions . two of these secondary losses of riparian association involve lineages that subsequently colonized forest interior where they diversified extensively . river and stream association may have provided an evolutionary vehicle for lowland species of open habitat to move up the streams and colonize montane forest. this notion is further supported by the fact that the most basal riparian species e. gigas  is confined to the andean foothills while many subsequent speciation events gave rise to lineages that occur in elevationally higher regions.

it is intriguing that although the ancestor of elaenia was able to colonize montane forest, it never gained a foothold in tropical lowland forest. brumfield and edwards  <cit>  suggested that competitive interspecific interactions may limit colonization potential in the evolution of neotropical suboscines. accordingly, elaenia may have been able to exploit new montane forests formed by mountain uplift, while being excluded from the older lowland forests through competitive interactions with other flycatchers.

evolutionary history of migratory behavior in elaenia
some species of elaenia are austral migrants that breed in the temperate zone of the southern neotropics and move to the tropics in the austral winter . such migratory behavior is ordinarily displayed by the entire species , though in e. albiceps only the southern race e. a. chilensis migrates while more northerly races are sedentary. in addition, elaenia contains five "partially migratory species" that are sedentary over most parts of their range but do exhibit short-distance migratory behavior in some of their more temperate populations . mp and bi reconstructions both indicated a sedentary ancestor of elaenia with migratory and partial migratory behavior arising several times . this result is in agreement with joseph et al.'s  <cit>  phylogenetic analysis of migratory behavior in myiarchus flycatchers. the fact that austral long-distance migration exists in some populations of species that are otherwise sedentary, and the high incidence of partial migration in elaenia species, suggest that migratory behavior is evolutionarily labile in tyrannids.

from our phylogenetic reconstructions there is one possible example of speciation resulting from loss of migratory behaviour. e. pelzelni is the only sedentary habitat specialist of a clade that comprises either migratory or partially migratory habitat generalists . although neither mode of reconstruction unequivocally identified an austral migratory ancestor to this clade, ecological evidence suggests that e. pelzelni is likely derived from an austral migrant ancestor. e. pelzelni has very specific habitat requirements , and considering the migratory generalist life histories of all other members of this clade, it is very unlikely for the ancestor of e. pelzelni and e. spectabilis to have been a sedentary specialist. though dispersing widely, wintering populations of e. spectabilis avoid the interior of tropical rainforest, frequenting instead marginal and riparian habitats. an ancestor with a similar behaviour could therefore have easily given rise to a sedentary riparian e. pelzelni.

the timing of elaenia diversification
dating of evolutionary events has presented major difficulties in phylogeographic studies of birds. the sparse avian fossil record  complicates the assessment of the age of certain lineages. instead, phylogeneticists have resorted to the notion of a molecular clock to date speciation events . however, the constancy and universality of a traditional avian mitochondrial molecular clock of c. 2% divergence/my has been questioned  <cit> , and rate constancy has been contradicted by bayesian reconstructions using calibrations at the level of avian orders and vertebrate classes  <cit> . nevertheless, a large number of avian clock calibrations provided for phylogeographic studies at the genus level seem to converge at around 2%/my . more importantly, weir and schluter  <cit>  used cross-validation techniques to compare  <dig> candidate avian clock calibrations dating back overwhelmingly to the genus level and found strong support for a  <dig> %/my clock rate constant over the last  <dig> my and universal across twelve bird orders. in tyrannid flycatchers in particular, rheindt et al.  compared mitochondrial molecular clock rates from the literature with paleogeographic calibrations of nd <dig> sequences within a closely related elaeniid flycatcher genus , and found that the traditional avian molecular clock of 2% mtdna divergence/my is a reasonable assumption for elaeniid nd <dig> sequences. based on these considerations, we have used a mitochondrial clock rate of 2%/my to date speciation events in elaenia . we emphasize that these dating estimates can only be viewed as an approximation, and we only discuss them in the rough timeframe of earth-historical epochs.

according to our reconstructions, the earliest divergences occurred in rapid succession in the late miocene . arising during this period were the two savannah specialists as well as e. gigas, e. strepera, the e. obscura/dayi complex, the migratory lowland clade , and the lineage comprising all the remaining species. the amazon lowlands at that time were intermittently flooded by "lago amazonas", an extensive spatially and temporally variable freshwater lake system that drained into the caribbean . the landscape constituted "...a vast complex of shallow mega-lakes surrounded by swampy grassland savanna..." interspersed with forest . such a dynamic savannah-forest landscape with water barriers rapidly changing in extent was likely conducive for vicariant speciation events such as those that led to the two savannah specialists and the migratory lowland lineage . the andes at that time were only about a third to half of their current elevation  <cit> . consequently, the montane elaenia lineages that had emerged by that time were either andean foothill species  as opposed to andean highland species, or were clades from ancient neotropical mountain shields such as e. dayi from the tepuis or e. sordida from the brazilian shield, which may have given rise to andean e. obscura at a much later date.

with the onset of the pliocene at c.  <dig> mya, there was a second wave of speciation events which commenced with the differentiation of the lowland migratory clade  into its three main lineages, two of which include austral breeders that annually migrate into the tropics . this and a similar lowland speciation event between e. mesoleuca and the e. chiriquensis complex fell within a period of global warming  <cit>  and concomitant sea level rises of up to  <dig> m  <cit>  which led to pronounced marine incursions into the río de la plata basin in the south and the amazon in the north. such marine incursions or the continuing spatio-temporal dynamics of lago amazonas further inland, or a combination thereof, were presumably the driving forces for these lowland speciation events.

the mid to late pliocene from c.  <dig> mya onwards sees the emergence and rapid differentiation of the "montane forest clade" , giving rise to a suite of highland species. this coincides with a period of rapid andean uplift between  <dig> and  <dig> mya  <cit> . the central american mountains were colonized by e. frantzii immediately after the closure of the panamanian isthmus at c.  <dig>  mya  <cit> . starting around the same time, the caribbean was invaded by e. fallax, e. cherriei and e. martinica, though we are unable to specify whether one or two colonization events were involved. dispersal must certainly have played a role in the diversification of the montane clade, as neither the caribbean islands nor the venezuelan tepuis  have ever been connected to the andes. the andes likely played a role in isolating the chocó endemic e. brachyptera from cis-andean e. chiriquensis around the late pliocene.

