BACKGROUND
nucleosomes are dna-protein complexes that form the building blocks of eukaryotic chromatin. they are involved in genome condensation, and play a major role in the regulation of gene expression  <cit> . each nucleosome is made up of eight histone proteins that together form a structural unit able to accommodate  <dig> base pairs of dna wound around it. the dna sequence has to have the flexibility and curvature that allows it to circle around a nucleosome  <cit> . empirical and theoretical studies have both shown that there are certain dna sequence patterns that are too rigid to form such loops  <cit> . these patterns include gc-rich motifs as well as poly-a and poly-t tracts, and we have previously compiled them into nxsensor, a web tool that predicts which dna sequences would not be conducive to nucleosome binding; we called these motifs nucleosome exclusion sequences  <cit> .

transcriptional regulation in eukaryotes is a complex process, as exemplified by recent publications  <cit> . the formation and positioning of nucleosomes are crucial steps in gene regulation, in that they influence access to dna by the transcriptional machinery. experimental work on nucleosome positioning in yeast  <cit>  and fly  <cit>  has yielded significant results, and technological progress is such that we are quickly learning more about nucleosome positioning in the human genome  <cit> .

experimental work that verifies where a nucleosome is positioned is dependent upon when the cells were sampled, and on which tissue or cell line the analysis was carried out. in addition, it is known that nucleosomes slide to allow certain regulatory mechanisms to take place  <cit> , and it has been shown in yeast that nucleosomes are only occasionally positioned by intrinsic sequence signals  <cit> . we therefore chose nucleosome exclusion sequences as our predictive method, rather than nucleosome positioning sequences. we can with a certain level of certainty predict where nucleosomes would not bind, and it is therefore inferred that they can, and probably do, bind elsewhere.

reported studies in  <cit>  observed certain trends in the nucleosome exclusion patterns of promoter regions. both studies showed that there is a peak of nucleosome exclusion sequences just upstream of the transcriptional start site of genes. this pattern has subsequently been found to be true also in yeast  <cit> . the studies in  <cit>  found that widely expressed genes, sometimes referred to as housekeeping genes, had a higher nucleosome exclusion potential than did tissue specific genes. this implies that the promoter regions of widely expressed genes were less likely to have nucleosomes in them than were the promoter regions of genes that had a narrow tissue distribution. this may allow easy access of the transcriptional machinery to the dna of ubiquitously expressed genes. however, these studies had taken relatively small numbers of carefully selected human genes:  <dig> of each category in the case of  <cit> , and  <dig> each in  <cit> , and they both relied on manual selection and categorization of genes. the question remained whether there is a genome-wide trend of a gradient of nucleosome positioning potentials, and what implications this may have for the specificity of gene expression. these were the initial questions that we set out to answer in this study.

the objective of the present study, therefore, was to carry out a whole genome annotation of nucleosome exclusion regions  in the human genome, and to correlate the results with tissue specificity, gene expression levels, and dnasei hypersensitive sites. we calculated nucleosome exclusion scores  across the whole genome, and observed nxscore trends in promoter regions. we classified tissue specific and widely expressed genes according to a new method proposed here based on grubbs' outliers test, and validated the results using a previously described method based on shannon's entropy  <cit> . from a computational perspective, patterns such as nxrs and nxss are fuzzy, non-exact, and overlapping, which poses a challenge for the analysis of all  <dig>  billion base pairs of the whole human genome. we therefore developed a pilot grid architecture that can carry out such computationally intensive tasks. in this paper we report our results in the context of the regulation of gene expression.

RESULTS
nucleosome exclusion landscape
first we constructed a whole genome landscape of nucleosome exclusion regions and calculated their exclusion scores. the results were compiled as gff  <cit>  and wiggle  <cit>  files for each of the human chromosomes, and are made available in additional files  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> & <dig>  this data is being made publicly available by the ucsc genome browser under their custom tracks page  <cit> . immediately obvious from the data is the fact that nxscores increase significantly at and around the transcriptional start sites  of genes . this confirms previous observations that, regardless of how many nucleosomes there may be in a given promoter region, nucleosomes are preferentially excluded from the immediate area where the transcriptional machinery needs easy access to the dna  <cit> . the sections below highlight other observations and correlations we found.

correlation with gene density
we observed a genome-wide correlation between nxscores and gene density, such that gene-rich areas have high nxscores . to validate this observation, we calculated the mean nxscore for each of the encode regions  <cit>  . we then counted the number of refseq genes in each region, and normalized that number by the size of the corresponding encode region. figure 2b shows the mean nxscore and the density of gene number for each encode region. the data sets exhibit a strong positive correlation  based on a pearson product-moment correlation coefficient. this confirms the observation that gene-rich areas have high nxscores. figure 2a illustrates this trend using chromosome  <dig>  similar figures for all the human chromosomes are available in the supplementary data files.

correlation with tissue specificity
we obtained the gene expression profiles of  <dig> genes and developed a new method for ranking the tissue specificity of those genes. the available symatlas "tissue list" includes  <dig> cell types, tissues and organs, which makes it difficult to classify genes categorically into tissue specific groups. furthermore, genes that have been classified as tissue specific by other researchers were often expressed equally in three or four different tissues. in order to overcome this problem, we refer to genes as having a wide tissue distribution if they are expressed at relatively equal levels in five tissues or more, and as having a narrow distribution if they are expressed at relatively equal levels in only one or two tissues. to follow this idea through, we needed a method of ranking genes according to their tissue distribution, so that we could correlate this with nxscores.

the refseq-annotated transcriptional start site  was used to identify the promoter region of each gene, and nxscores were calculated for the region tss- <dig> to tss+ <dig>  the resulting values were used to sort the  <dig> genes in ascending order . the sorted list was then divided into n groups. the mean tissue specificity for each of these groups was calculated using a method we developed based on grubbs' test  <cit> , and we validated this method using an already established method for ranking tissue specificity based on shannon entropy  <cit> .

grouping genes facilitated the inspection of the general trends among gene groups while filtering noise and extraneous behavior that maybe associated with specific limited number of genes . hence, the number of groups n served as a zooming parameter for inspecting and visualizing such trends. figure  <dig> shows the results for n =  <dig>  illustrating the correlation between the tissue specificity of gene expression and nxscores. to provide a closer inspection of these trends, figures are made available in additional file  <dig> for the results of groups of n =  <dig> , n =  <dig> , and n =  <dig> .

the results show that previous localized findings  <cit>  are valid on a whole genome level. there is a direct correlation between the nxscores in the promoter region and tissue specificity. the higher the nxscore of a promoter sequence, the less likely it is to include a nucleosome, and the less tissue specific the associated gene is. given the complexity of transcriptional regulation in the eukaryotic system, there may be a few exceptions to this, but the genome-wide trend is clearly observed from our results. one could deduce from this that the transcriptional machinery has relatively unimpeded access to the tsss of widely expressed genes. it is expected that the types of transcription factors that switch on widely expressed genes are generally not those that can tolerate the dna being wound around a nucleosome.

to take a closer look at the promoter region, the genes were sorted according to their measure of tissue specificity, then grouped into three groups; group  <dig> constitutes the top 10% tissue specific genes, group  <dig> constitutes the top 20% tissue specific genes, while group  <dig> constitutes the whole collection of  <dig> genes under inspection. for every gene, the nxscore for each base pair in the promoter region was calculated and then averaged separately for genes of each group. the objective was to inspect promoter nxscores profiles among genes with varying tissue specificity levels. again, note that groups and averaging were used to inspect general trends while filtering noise and extraneous behavior that may be associated with a limited number of genes within each group. the results  show that the nxscore peak is approximately  <dig> bases upstream of the tss, and that there is a shoulder immediately downstream from the tss, extending approximately  <dig> bases into the gene. there is thus a tendency for the region surrounding the tss to be nucleosome-free, regardless of whether the gene is widely or narrowly expressed. this presumably helps maintain the momentum of the transcriptional machinery as it moves from the tss through the first part of the gene. after that point, there is a significant decrease in mean nxscore before it levels out, implying that the remainder of the gene is more likely occupied by nucleosomes. this is in agreement with encode findings that regulatory sequences that surround transcription start sites are symmetrically distributed  <cit> .

our results indicate that there is a gradually increasing tendency for the promoter to be nucleosome-free the closer one gets to the tss . we used the refseq gene-annotations of transcriptional start sites , and found the average nxscore to peak about  <dig> bp upstream from the refseq-tss. however, we also found that the refseq-tsss themselves are often 20– <dig> bp downstream from the tsss determined by experimental methods  <cit> . therefore the peak of nucleosome exclusion seen in our results appears, on average, to be centered on the transcriptional start site. this is in agreement with the findings of  <cit> , who provided experimental evidence that the region around the tss in humans was relatively nucleosome-free.

correlation with gene expression level
nxscores for each gene were calculated from the refseq-annotated tss to the refseq-annotated 3'utr end of the gene, including all exons and introns. then the median expression level was calculated for each gene using the symatlas gene expression profiles  <cit> . we calculated the median in order to filter very high or very low expression levels that may be associated with specific tissues, since our objective for this analysis was to capture expression levels across each gene irrespective of tissue specificity. the genes were then sorted according to increasing nxscore, the sorted list was equally divided into  <dig> groups, and the mean expression level was calculated for each group. this grouping and the calculations undertaken were used to inspect general trends while filtering noise that may be associated with a limited number of genes within each group.

the data show that gene expression level is positively correlated with high nxscore , and that expression level drops with very high nxscores. this can be clearly seen if we zoom in slightly and divide the data set into  <dig> groups, as illustrated in figure 5b. in other words, the peak in expression level is around moderate nxscores: expression is lower when there are a lot of nucleosomes present , and it is also lower when there are hardly any nucleosomes present . nxscores are calculated using g/c-rich sequence patterns  <cit> , and g-c pairing involves three hydrogen bonds, whereas a-t pairing involves only two, which allows us to speculate that the lower expression levels of genes with the very high nxscores may reflect slower movement of the transcription machinery through regions of very high g-c content.

experimental validation
thus far all our observations have been in silico. to validate our annotations, we compared our scores to conserved nucleosome locations that have been reported in recent studies  <cit> . the study in  <cit>  reported nucleosome occupancy on the promoter regions of several human genes, and we looked at the nxscores of those exact sequences. for further validation, we ran the nxscores algorithm on selected regions of the saccharomyces cereviciae genome, namely those used in  <cit> , to report experimentally verified nucleosome positions.

it is evident from figure  <dig>  that although our nucleosome exclusion predictions and the experimentally verified nucleosome positions correlate well, they do not correlate exactly. in some cases, nxscores did not predict nucleosome depletion in a region where no nucleosomes were found. the results constitute a 7% false negative error margin, and for this we have two possible explanations. firstly, we suggest that the sequences not picked up by nxscores may be regions to which nucleosomes slide according to the transcriptional activity state of the promoter at any given time. more importantly, however, these discrepancies highlight the fact that we were stringent in our choice of nucleosome exclusion sequences for our algorithm. we did not use weaker nucleosome exclusion sequences that have been reported in the literature because we wanted to have a certain level of confidence in predicting where nucleosomes will not bind, and assume that they may, at some developmental or physiological state, bind on the weaker exclusion signals  <cit> .

the study in  <cit>  calculated the average log <dig> data of  <dig> mitf-bound promoters in the human genome. we compared these results with our calculated average nxscores promoter profile for the  <dig> genes under inspection , and obtained a medium-to-strong negative correlation . this correlation is satisfactory keeping in mind that nucleosomes can slide according to the transcriptional activity of the promoter, and that our profile was calculated as a consensus promoter profile representing the  <dig> genes, while the nucleosome positioning results were obtained using  <dig> mitf-bound promoters. in fact, overall, there were almost no examples where nxscores were high on areas that were experimentally shown to be occupied by nucleosomes.

correlation with dnasei hypersensitive sites
as a final comparison, we looked at whether nucleosome exclusion scores would correlate with dnasei hypersensitive sites . it is known that nucleosome-free areas are more prone to digestion by dnasei, and it was reported in  <cit>  that ubiquitous dhss, shared by  <dig> cell lines, were found near the transcriptional start sites of some genes, implying a wide usage of that gene, or at least of that promoter. the study in  <cit>  predicted the hydroxyl radical cleavage intensity on naked dna for each nucleotide in the encode regions. we downloaded this data for the whole set of hg <dig> encode regions from the ucsc genome browser, and calculated the mean value of the predicted cleavage intensity for each region. the objective of this analysis was to investigate whether regions with high nxscores would have a high predicted cleavage intensity.

first, we calculate the nxscores for each region, and took the locations for nxscore peaks that had nxscores higher than p, where p = μ + . μ and s are the mean and standard deviation of the nxscores across the region, respectively. τ is a parameter for determining the height of the calculated peaks, such that the higher the τ value, the higher the peak value and fewer the number of the peaks across the regions, and vice versa. next, for each peak location, we calculated the mean predicted cleavage intensity of a  <dig> bps neighborhood centered at the peak, and we averaged these values for all peak locations in a specific region for a specific τ.

in this way we were able to show that the mean predicted cleavage intensity around the peaks is higher than the mean intensity across the whole region, thus proving that regions with a high nxscore also have a high cleavage intensity.

to further investigate this, we varied τ from  <dig> to  <dig> and reported the results for each τ. as expected, the higher the τ, the higher the mean predicted cleavage intensity. figure 7a shows the ratio between the average calculated cleavage intensity around the peaks and the average cleavage intensity for that whole region, for all encode regions at different τ values. when τ =  <dig>  the mean intensity increased by approximately 26%, and the intensity increased with increasing τ, reaching a 61% increase when τ =  <dig>  figure 7b illustrates this correlation for encode region enr <dig>  the table in figure  <dig> shows a detailed account of these calculations for each encode region.

CONCLUSIONS
a grid computing architecture was used to conduct a whole genome annotation for nucleosome exclusion regions , and to calculate nucleosome exclusion scores  per nucleotide across the entire human genome. the results, which are made available here, provide a measure of how likely a particular nucleotide neighborhood impairs nucleosome formation. we confirmed previous reports that nucleosomes tend to be excluded from the area surrounding the tss of genes. we developed a new method for ranking the tissue specificity of gene use, and found that, generally speaking, the wider the tissue distribution of a gene, the fewer nucleosomes are likely to be found in the promoter region of that gene. in addition, we found that high nxscores were correlated with moderate gene expression levels, and with the presence of dnasei hypersensitive sites.

there is increasing evidence in the literature that chromatin structure plays a crucial role in gene regulation  <cit> . these results contribute to our understanding of the relationships between nucleosome distribution and gene regulation.

