BACKGROUND
legionellosis is acquired by inhalation or aspiration of legionella spp. from a contaminated environmental source. thus, when a case of legionellosis is recognized others may become infected from the same source if appropriate control measures are not taken to reduce the risk of further transmission. the source of the outbreak or incident can be determined by epidemiological investigation together with characterization of legionellae isolated from patients and putative environmental sources
 <cit> .

as the vast majority of cases of legionellosis are caused by legionella pneumophila, and this species is very common in the environment, discriminatory typing methods are needed to differentiate between isolates if a convincing epidemiological link between patient and source is to be established. consequently a large number of molecular methods have been investigated for epidemiological typing purposes and one of these, devised by members of the european working group for legionella infections  and termed sequence-based typing , has become established internationally as the typing method of choice
 <cit> . this method is a variant of the classic multi-locus sequence typing  schemes used to identify bacterial lineages, the utility of which has been previously described
 <cit> .

the availability of a substantial quantity of international sbt typing data has led to the recognition that the majority of legionellosis is caused by a relatively small subset of all strains recovered from the environment
 <cit> . this poses the question of whether some clonal lineages have characteristics that make them more likely to cause human infection than others that are more, or equally, prevalent in the environment
 <cit> . requirements to answer this question are; a means to subdivide the l. pneumophila population into clusters which are genetically similar so that we can describe the shared phenotypes of these clusters, and knowledge of the frequency of horizontal gene transfer  and recombination. this latter is crucial since these molecular events may result in the rapid development of novel phenotypes previously unseen in a clonal lineage and high levels of recombination may make clustering of organisms into related groups problematic
 <cit> .

early studies using electrophoretic analysis of protein polymorphism  described  <dig> electrophoretic types and concluded that l. pneumophila was clonal in nature
 <cit> . more recently a study examining four genes in the dot/icm complex
 <cit>  demonstrated clear evidence of intraspecific genetic exchange in l. pneumophila. whilst initial studies using sbt data
 <cit>  supported evidence for the clonal nature of l.pneumophila, it was acknowledged that intergenic recombination events could not be ruled out. subsequent work analysing intragenic recombination in the six sbt loci and additional non-coding loci concluded that recombination was frequent in legionella spp.
 <cit> . research which concentrated on the genes involved in the type ii secretion system concluded that intragenic recombination was a rare event but there was good evidence for intergenic recombination
 <cit> . recent analysis that looked for recombination throughout the whole genome revealed significant levels of hgt both within the species l. pneumophila and from other gamma-proteobacteria especially those, that like legionellae, are associated with amoebae
 <cit> . a comprehensive review of the current knowledge about the population genetics, phylogenetics and genome of l. pneumophila concluded that recombination is playing a role in diversifying the species but this may have been more significant in the past than is seen with the current population of the species
 <cit> .

the ewgli sbt database has now grown significantly since the work described in earlier publications with the addition of a seventh allele  and the designation of sequence types 
 <cit> . the database contained  <dig> distinct sequence types at the time of this study and these were derived from strains isolated from worldwide locations in contrast to other studies that used more localised samples sets.

therefore, in light of this large increase in novel sts, the aims of this study were;

1) to evaluate this global dataset and assess the relative contribution of recombination mediated by hgt and mutation to genome evolution.

2) to derive a method to cluster strains of similar genotype based on the type of population structure found in the first part of this study. this would provide a set of pragmatic groups that could be labelled and referred to using a common terminology within the legionella scientific community.

3) to sequence the genomes of isolates representative of these major clusters within the population and provide an overview of the population structure. this would enable comparison of the genetic types determined by sbt with that derived by examining the diversity within the whole genome.

4) the ultimate aim was to provide a set of sequenced strains, which adequately represent the l. pneumophila pan genome. this will enable further studies where strains within a cluster are investigated in more detail, and allow testing of the hypothesis that clusters of strains are likely to share a common lineage and therefore some phenotypic similarities.

RESULTS
sequence based typing analysis: recombination tests
choice of the best algorithm with which to cluster the sequence types of l. pneumophila will be informed by the population structure of the species, which will in turn be influenced by the relative contributions of recombination and mutation to sequence evolution. therefore the frequencies of intergenic and intragenic recombination in l. pneumophila were investigated and compared to those for staphlococcus aureus , streptococcus pneumoniae  and neisseria meningitidis .

intergenic recombination is an event by which one allele of a locus can be replaced by another by horizontal gene transfer. the standardised index of association  is a commonly used measure of intergenic recombination. another measure of recombination over more than just one locus is the r/m ratio. this is the ratio of probabilities that a base change occurs by recombination or mutation.

the results for these two tests  are in agreement for each of the four species apart from n. meningitidis where the value of
isa is anomalous being higher than that for s. pneumoniae. there has been the suggestion that sample bias may cause dramatic effects on the value for
isa giving a distorted value. this effect may be diminished by including just a single example of each sequence type but the removal of many isolates can reduce the ability to estimate the extent of recombination from linkage disequilibrium
 <cit> . our analysis included just one example of each st, but the
isa value for n. meningitidis is still higher than would be expected. as noted by others
 <cit>  a high
isa value does not necessarily infer clonality since linkage disequilibrium can still be observed in species that are highly recombining due to population structuring as observed in helicobacter pylori for example
 <cit> . therefore the high value of
isa for n. meningitidis may indicate a highly structured population such that the epidemic epidemiology leads to a superficially clonal population
 <cit> . based on these results overall l. pneumophila has intermediate levels of recombination between those of s. aureus and n. meningitidis. the value of
isa indicates a population that tends towards being clonal, although again this may be due to a very structured population.

based on the sequences from sbt a reticulate network tree was drawn using the neighbor-net algorithm of splitstree. reticulate networks attempt to provide a more ‘explicit’ representation of evolutionary history than traditional phylogenetic trees such as phylograms. they are often depicted as a phylogenetic tree with additional edges. the internal nodes in this network represent ancestral species, and nodes with more than two parents correspond to ‘reticulate’ events such as recombination: the more splits in the branches seen in the resulting tree the more recombination or hgt is likely to have taken place. the splitstree computed from the l. pneumophila data  gives strong evidence for significant recombination between a subset of the lineages present within the tree and yields a highly significant phi test .

the results of the tests for examining intragenic recombination  are summarised in table 
 <dig>  for each test the number of loci that were positive for recombination is recorded. for rdp at least two of the individual tests in the suite had to be positive in order for the locus to be scored positive overall.

both the sawyer’s run test and rdp show l. pneumophila has an intermediate rate of intragenic recombination when compared with other bacterial species.

overall the collected evidence from this and several previous studies
 <cit>  strongly suggest that l. pneumophila is not a purely clonal organism but also undergoes significant recombination. the results presented here suggest that l. pneumophila retains evidence for a clonal vertical inheritance of genetic material whilst also demonstrating strong evidence of recombination by horizontal transfer of genetic loci. although there was some evidence for recombination within the sbt genes, the frequency was low and this indicates that new alleles are most likely to be generated by point mutations rather than recombination. the signal from vertical inheritance of genetic material through clonal lineages is still evident when examining the genetic information contained from seven l. pneumophila loci. however it is also clear that recombination happens often enough so that it is a significant force in shaping the population structure. this does not alter the utility of sbt as a means to discriminate between isolates of l. pneumophila, particularly for outbreak investigation, since the results indicate that it is far from being a panmictic organism. although we cannot infer a rate of recombination from this study, the relatively low frequency of recombination suggests that recombination would be unlikely to take place in the timescale of an outbreak and therefore the st of isolates involved in an outbreak is also unlikely to change.

sequence based typing analysis: clustering
since the ultimate aim of this work was to find a practical way to cluster l. pneumophila isolates, a method of determining which clustering method resulted in the most accurate sub-groups was required. given that the recombination analysis above indicates that clonal vertical inheritance plays a major role in the evolution of l. pneumophila, a phylogenetic tree based on the genetic distance between the concatenated sequences from the sbt loci will provide an approximate representation of the evolutionary history. therefore a maximum likelihood  tree was produced  using raxml
 <cit> , however bootstrapping proved computationally difficult given the sequence length and number of sequences. therefore in order to obtain local support values for the branch split points the same data were used to produce an approximate ml tree with local support values using fasttree 2
 <cit> . this tree had almost identical topology to the raxml tree and the majority of split points had local support values of >  <dig> . the same sequence data used to generate the tree were clustered using three methodologies; eburst, baps of allelic data and baps of sequence data .

eburst analysis
eburst uses the burst algorithm to identify mutually exclusive groups of related genotypes in the population, to identify the founding genotype of each group and to predict the descent from the predicted founding genotype to the other genotypes in the group
 <cit> . the algorithm assumes that each allele is equally related to all other alleles of the same locus and as such assumes that recombination is a frequent event. eburst clustering produced  <dig> groups,  <dig> of which contained just two sts, and  <dig> singletons.

bayesian analysis of population structure 
baps is a tool for the detection and representation of recombination between populations
 <cit> . the baps mixture model is derived using novel bayesian predictive classification theory, applied to the population genetics context. a variety of different prior assumptions about the data can be utilized in baps to make inferences, however it does not require either a prior model of clonality versus recombination, or a pre-defined number of clusters. baps can be used to determine the population structure, to determine gene flow within a population, to determine the amount of admixture in an individual, and to divide the population into clusters
 <cit> . the data required for baps population analysis can be in several formats.

the first analysis performed used allelelic data identical to that for the burst analysis but saved in genepop format. those sts that had significant  admixture  were not assigned to a cluster. with the maximum permissible number of clusters set at  <dig> clusters, the optimal partitioning of the  <dig> sts resolved them into  <dig> clusters with a mean number of sts of  <dig>  and a standard deviation of  <dig> . however  <dig> sequence types had significant admixture and were excluded from clusters.

baps analysis was also performed using molecular sequence data. both cluster and admixture analyses were carried out. as previously, those sts that had significant  admixture were not assigned to a cluster. with the maximum clusters set at  <dig>  the optimal partitioning of the sequence types was again found to be  <dig> clusters with a mean number of sts of  <dig>  with a standard deviation of  <dig> . however in this analysis,  <dig> sequence types had significant admixture and were thus excluded from clusters.

the assignment of sequence types to clusters as determined by the three methods was visualised by colouring the nodes  of a radial phylogram drawn by dendroscope
 <cit>  according to the cluster the st belongs to .

by comparing different clustering methodologies we aimed to identify one that would best fit the type of population seen in the species. the data presented show that both vertical inheritance of mutation and hgt/recombination play significant roles in shaping the genetics of l. pneumophila thus an appropriate method to sub-divide the population must take both into account. it was therefore anticipated that clustering methods deriving distance between strains based on sequence identity and allowing for admixture would most accurately divide the population into clusters that reflect the true origin of the members of the cluster.

based on the ml tree, clustering using baps linked sequence analysis demonstrates the most consistent mapping of clusters to the topology of the clades within the tree. on one hand this is not surprising since the baps analysis and ml tree both have the same input data . however it does illustrate that clustering based on allelic data alone, and assuming linkage equilibrium, produces very different results from that when the sequence is taken into consideration: baps analysis using sequence data takes into account both the evolution of sequence and the flow of genetic information between populations. therefore we consider baps to represent a reasonable compromise between clustering based on standard phylogenetic techniques that assume linear evolution of sequences by mutation and clustering using the burst algorithm that assumes a freely recombining population. based on the baps linked-sequence clustering  <dig> clusters formed the most likely partition.

genome sequencing
to assess if this baps analysis and clustering of the st data remained valid when whole-genome data were considered, a rational approach was used to select isolates representative of each of the  <dig> clusters. these were sequenced using high throughput sequencing technologies . these genomes should give a good overview of the diversity in the pan-genome of the species. the mean depth of reads using the illumina technology is reported in table 
 <dig>  in all cases the depth was above the figure of  <dig> that is generally recommended for both snp calling and de novo assembly using illumina data.
legionella pneumophila 
strains used in the study

asterisks designate strains that are likely to have plasmids based on the analysis described in the methods section of this manuscript. the sequence data described can be obtained using the european nucleotide archive accession number listed in the table.

de novo assembly
the reads were assembled de novo into scaffolds. the genomic content of these scaffolds was assessed using blast ring image generator
 <cit>  where the scaffolds were the query sequences and the reference sequence was the genome from the corby strain . corby was chosen since it is known to be virulent in both humans and animal models and has extra mobile genetic elements not seen to date in the other sequenced legionella genomes
 <cit> . regions showing a high level of variability compared to the corby genome were investigated further by looking at the gene content of those regions .

the graphical output from the brig analysis comparing the genomes to the corby sequence displays an overview of the major regions of variability among these genomes such that  <dig> regions of substantial variation were observed . many of the genes present in these regions are phage or transposable-element associated, suggesting that much of this variability is driven by mobile elements. many of these regions are adjacent to or have a trna sequence within them, a common location for mobile element integration
 <cit> . several of the variable regions have genes involved in a conjugation/type iv secretion system . the excision, transfer and re-integration of genetic loci by this class of genes has been implicated in hgt
 <cit> . variability in t4ss genes has been shown previously to be a major contributor to the genome plasticity of l. pneumophila <cit> . other classes of genes include those encoding transporter/eflux proteins, proteins involved in glycosylation, putative virulence proteins, restriction endonuclease system proteins, and antibiotic resistance proteins. none of these proteins are involved in core metabolic functions and variability in the presence and absence of these genes is likely to result in phenotypic changes that alter the ability of the organism to survive within its environment.

plasmid analysis
apart from acquisition of genomic islands another common way that bacteria gain genetic elements that confer phenotypic differences is by plasmid acquisition. in order to investigate the presence of plasmids in the genomes the plasmids of the lens and paris genomes were compared. a shared  <dig>  kb region was used to query both the assembled and genbank genomes. although there may be plasmids circulating in the population that do not contain this shared locus, the same sequence is also present in the plasmid of another legionella species, legionella longbeachae  suggesting that this is a conserved sequence present in at least some of plasmids of the legionella genus. blast analysis detected this conserved plasmid sequence in a small proportion of the strains  and the plasmids sequence itself was variable. the following genomes produced a hit whose e-score was less than 1x10-20: lens: , paris: , st154: , st336: , st44: , st54: , st707: , st74: , st78: . it can be seen that there are some closely related strains  that share a very similar plasmid whereas other closely related strains  have different plasmid content. it is likely therefore that the plasmids are exchanged horizontally between strains and have a different heredity to the chromosome. it should be noted that since the sequencing in this project is only draft sequence it is not possible to derive the complete plasmid sequences and hence their content. it is probable that the small amount of matching sequence in the st <dig> strain is not from a plasmid.

phylogeny based on gene content
to assess variation among the genomes based on differences in gene content between the genomes, putative genes from all the genomes were grouped using cd-hit into clusters where each cluster member is homologous to one another. the clusters represent proteins shared between the genomes, and the presence of a member within these clusters for a particular strain represents the existence of the gene for this protein within the genome of that strain. there were  <dig> clusters containing members from every strain sequenced  corresponding to, on average,  <dig> % of the total number of genes in each genome. the mean percentage of genes shared between clusters was  <dig> %  and a range of  <dig> % to  <dig> %. the clusters were used to generate a matrix of  <dig> and 0 s corresponding to the presence or absence of a gene in each of the strains. this matrix was used as the input for a parsimony analysis, which generated a tree with the most parsimonious representation of the data .

phylogeny based on snp variation
an alternative way to assess variation among the genomes is to examine single base polymorphisms. to achieve this illumina reads, or synthetic wgsim reads, were mapped to the corby genome and high quality snps extracted for those positions conserved in all genomes. the nucleotides present in each strain at all snp positions were concatenated and used to generate a maximum likelihood tree . the same snp data was used as input for the splits tree program and a reticulate network tree was drawn using the neighbor-net algorithm .
http://purl.org/phylo/treebase/phylows/study/tb2:s <dig> 

a number of observations are pertinent when examining these data. two isolates  were sequenced with different technologies. h <dig> with illumina paired end, illumina mate-paired and roche  <dig>  h <dig> with illumina paired end and illumina mate-paired. there were no snp differences between the sequences of these replicate samples demonstrating that the protocol used for calling snp variants is both robust and consistent. there were three isolates of st <dig> , two from the uk and one from france, each isolated in a different year between  <dig> and  <dig>  these differed by just four snps. two st <dig> isolates, from the uk and usa , were isolated 20 years apart and only exhibited  <dig> snp differences. in contrast two st <dig> isolates, a representative of the ‘paris’ strain and a uk strain sequenced as part of another study, were isolated within 2 years of each other yet these exhibited  <dig> snp differences.

these results show that lineages of l. pneumophila contain differing levels of observable diversity. there are several evolutionary scenarios that could be postulated as explanations for these observed differences. a lineage that occupies a niche where there is strong purifying selection will be less diverse. conversely a lineage that is the result of rapid expansion within a previously unoccupied niche will tend to be more diverse. one likely scenario is that st <dig> is a successful clonal lineage that emerged before the st <dig> lineage and therefore has had more time to diversify by genetic drift. it is also possible that each lineage of l. pneumophila will be subject to differing selection pressures when infecting a human host, even though this is effectively an evolutionary dead-end. one possible scenario is that the majority of st <dig> strains and a limited number of sub-lineages of st <dig> cause disease in humans. if this is the case then a likely explanation is that the common ancestor of the st <dig> lineage was able to infect the human species and the ancestor of the st <dig> lineage did not replicate effectively in a human host. subsequently a minority of descendents of the st <dig> lineage have acquired the ability  to cause human infection. differentiating between these putative evolutionary scenarios will be difficult and will require a greater understanding of the effects of diversity within the lineages of l. pneumophila sampled from the environment and human infections.

when examining the output from the splits tree analysis, the more splits observed, the more recombination or hgt is likely to have taken place. the majority of clades in the tree show a branching network structure suggestive of frequent recombination. the phi test for recombination as implemented in splitstree also showed evidence for recombination . the exceptions are the clade containing st136/ <dig> and st <dig>  the st136/ <dig> clusters contain members of the sub-species l. pneumophila subsp. fraseri. this would explain the long branch length for this cluster and the genetic diversity among these strains and the rest of the population could be responsible for the low levels of horizontal exchange and recombination with the remainder of the l. pneumophila strains.

the maximum likelihood tree based on snps and the maximum parsimony tree based on gene presence can be used to compare clustering based on whole genome data with that based on the sbt data. in both genome trees the strains making up the majority of clusters identified by baps analysis of the seven sbt loci group together. this is most evident in the tree resulting from the snp analysis. this tree and its branch lengths is mostly likely to match the true evolutionary history of the strains since, for all but the most panmictic organisms, the well understood evolutionary mechanisms causing mutations in the genome will be summarised by the snps occurring in positions sampled across the genome. the selection of core snps  for analysis obviates the problems associated with using snps that are in genes that are variably present in different genomes and in loci associated with transposable elements. some of the snps will be in loci that have acquired by hgt/recombination and will not match the evolutionary history of the core genome. the reason for this is that a large number of snps, that would have taken considerable time to arise by the process of dna mutation, can be introduced by a single hgt event. however since l. pneumophila only shows moderate recombination there should be enough ‘signal’ from the snps in loci that have not undergone hgt to mask the ‘noisy’ data arising from snps arising from hgt. in the tree derived from the presence of genes in the different genomes  there is more evidence for strains from baps clusters being split over more than one branch of the tree. this is likely to be due to the fact that hgt of genes can result in large changes in presence and absence data and this tree reflects the fluid nature of the l. pneumophila genome, especially the non- core genome. one reason that may explain differences between the sbt and genome-based trees is that several of the genes that make up the sbt scheme are possibly under positive selective pressure. these include genes encoding surface proteins  and factors that may be involved in virulence 
 <cit> . this is in contrast to the majority of genes in the genome which will be evolving neutrally. however although there are clear differences between the two trees, particularly in terms of the branch lengths, the overall topologies are broadly similar as measured by the groups of strains found within clades.

admixture analysis
in both trees strains from baps clusters  <dig> and  <dig> are split across sometimes quite distant branches of the tree. re-examination of the data from the original baps analysis shows that these results may reflect admixture of the genetic material of some of the strains from these clusters. admixture refers to the process by which two discrete populations exchange genetic material resulting in organisms that have a genome that is sourced from two different origins.

baps analysis will, for each sequence, estimate the proportion of genetic material arising from organisms from each of the clusters that are derived as part of the analysis. it will also assign a p value to the likelihood of an organism being admixed. the data shows that it is likely that strains belonging to sts  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> have significant admixture and that there was not enough information in the seven loci to show this when performing the initial baps clustering.

this hypothesis was tested further by applying the same baps sequence-based clustering that was originally used to generate the clusters from  <dig> st to a larger dataset which became available at the end of the study . these data are reported for the sts found in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> . with the increased data available from  <dig> sts the probability of these sts being admixed is now significant and it would not be possible to assign these sts to a cluster with statistical confidence. however for both st <dig> and st <dig> there is no significant admixture within either of the data sets and it is likely therefore that these are good representative strains for clusters  <dig> and  <dig> respectively.
of legionella pneumophila 
strains

the clusters listed are those that show aberrant clustering on both trees derived from whole genome data. only those clusters  that contribute more than  <dig>  of the genetic material of a strain are reported.

in the original baps analysis sts  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were all assigned to cluster  <dig> with no significant admixture despite st <dig> being in a separate clade on the phylogenetic tree derived from the seven locus sequence data. the prediction from this data was that whole genome data would show these strains to have similar ancestral origins. both whole genome trees show this to be the case with all three sts clustering tightly in one branch of the tree.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper describes the sequencing of multiple genomes from strains representing most of the diversity present in the l. pneumophila population sampled from both environmental sources associated with human habitation and from patients with legionnaires’ disease. based on genome comparison  <dig> genes  are conserved in all strains which is less than that reported previously 
 <cit> . this is probably due to the samples representing a wider breadth of the population than the genomes used to calculate the core genome size in previous studies. the remaining 30% of the genome, often known as the accessory genome, is composed of many classes of genes but common themes include those that encode for functions that can mobilise dna and those that are involved in protein transport/secretion. the former may be responsible for driving a dynamic genome in the species by permitting many mechanisms for horizontal gene transfer. the latter could be involved with niche adaptation. this and other studies have shown that recombination is a significant driver of evolution of the l. pneumophila genome. however we show that the genetic signal contained in the seven loci of the sbt scheme is generally indicative of its genomic heritage. some sts appear to have been derived from recombination between strains of two different genetic backgrounds. however by clustering sts using baps we can determine which sts are likely to exhibit admixture and therefore cannot be confidently assigned to a cluster. future studies will include looking at strains within and between clusters to determine phenotypes that are shared within a cluster but differ between clusters, and subsequently to search for the genetic differences that correlate with these phenotypes.

