BACKGROUND
genome-scale metabolic network models have proved to be useful in aiding biological and biotechnological research by providing large-scale predications, and their scope of applications is still expanding  <cit> . they predict gene targets to manipulate in metabolic engineering for overproduction of industrially valuable chemicals  <cit> , or predict drug targets for drug discovery  <cit> . these metabolic network models are a coherently organized set of metabolites whose relationships are stoichiometrically defined and mass-balanced through biochemical reactions  <cit> . they are often simulated with constraints-based flux analysis that employs optimization-based techniques with an objective function, typically maximizing biomass formation rate, and constraints that reflect biophysical conditions affecting the cellular physiology  <cit> . due to their importance, the number of currently reported genome-scale metabolic networks is constantly increasing, spanning archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes  <cit> .

reconstruction of metabolic network models has been accompanied by systematic characterization of their network properties for appropriate analysis of the prediction outcomes  <cit> . some noteworthy constraints-based approaches for elucidating correlations among intracellular reactions include flux coupling analysis  <cit> , assessment of alternative sets of reactions for the optimal solutions  <cit> , uniform random sampling  <cit> , and elucidation of metabolic core reactions  <cit> . as an extension of these studies, correlations among metabolic modules that behave in a synchronized manner in the solution space allowed under the specific condition attracted attention for further investigations. for this, application of clustering  and bayesian network  analysis to metabolic network models and their flux data was considered in this study in order to reveal other complementary aspects of the cell that are statistically and biologically important under the perturbation condition – modular-level behaviour of metabolism.

clustering has succeeded in revealing key components and their correlations, contributing to our understanding of biological systems through a systemic concept of module  <cit> . modularization of biological network, which is based on clustering algorithms, elucidates topological design of biological system, from which evolutionary and functional clues can be inferred  <cit> . metabolic network can also be clustered based on the characteristics of its metabolic fluxes, which are defined as the cellular phenotype derived from interplays of many factors, including transcription, translation, enzyme activity, and metabolite concentration, and revealed as reaction rates at steady state in metabolic pathways  <cit> . therefore, modularization of metabolic network based on pattern of metabolic flux variation would cluster biochemical reactions, which can then be considered as functional units, and simplify subsequent computational analyses.

bn analysis is increasingly adopted to extract useful information from messy high-throughput biological data  <cit> . it is a probabilistic graphical model that reveals changes that each variable causes in another variables, so called causal relationship, in the form of a directed acyclic graph, and has successfully been applied to reverse engineering of various biological networks from large datasets, including transcriptome and proteome data  <cit> . bn analysis, in this study, was used to predict causal relationships among reactions and subsequently their metabolic modules based on their metabolic fluxes.

with these tools, we herein conceptualized a framework for network modularization and bayesian network analysis  in order to investigate the effects of specific perturbation on metabolism and to explore other complementary features of the perturbed cell in the context of metabolism, which other currently available high-throughput techniques do not provide. this framework analyzes a biological system subjected to the specific perturbation by clustering reactions of similar functions , and graphically displaying direction of influences among these clusters as a result of the specific perturbation. for this, fmb employs constraints-based flux analysis, hierarchical clustering and bn analysis in sequence. for a demonstration, fmb was applied to the genetically perturbed escherichia coli metabolism using its genome-scale metabolic network model  <cit> . the final outcome is a bn that is a causal network that shows influential correlations among reactions and their metabolic modules that are critical to the metabolic adjustment in response to the specific perturbation.

RESULTS
fmb was utilized in this study to systematically assess the effects of specific perturbation on metabolism at global scale . the goal is to learn causal relationships among clusters of metabolic fluxes in response to a specific perturbation. here, considerations are that the bn analysis requires many samples or observations of the system of interest, and the number of events or nodes that can be handled by bn analysis is limited, usually to the order of tens  <cit> . hence, given a genome-scale metabolic network model , many samples of genome-scale metabolic flux data need to be generated under the condition of interest, by introducing random errors to each flux value . in this framework, metabolic flux data obtained from wild-type  and its genetic mutant  were treated together . then, the number of reactions was gradually reduced to the level suitable for bn analysis; for this, so called core reactions were selected, which are most influenced by specific perturbation, and yet almost always active in the observed samples of either control or perturbed condition  <cit>  . next, the metabolic network was modularized based on flux variation pattern of core reactions in order to group functionally correlated reactions . in so doing, reactions clustered in a module were treated as a functional unit. finally, selecting representative reaction from each module, which is the most influential one in the module, leaves adequate number of reactions that can be subjected to bn . each of these steps is considered in detail as follows.

step a-c: generation of many samples of genome-scale metabolic flux data
generation of genome-scale metabolic flux data in the first step of the fmb aims at two purposes: the first is to calculate reliable genome-scale metabolic fluxes under specific conditions, and the other is to get a large number of data samples for statistically reliable conclusions through bn analysis. first, fluxes for the branching reactions were constrained with metabolic flux data from 13c-based metabolic flux analysis   <cit>  in order to obtain reliable intracellular metabolic flux distribution under specific conditions; metabolic fluxes predicted from 13c-based mfa are considered to be more reliable than those purely predicted by constraints-based flux analysis. reactions constrained with experimental data are listed in table  <dig> and methods.

v

13
c
or v
fmt

mean values  of physiological constraints are based on 13c-based metabolic flux and cell culture data for the wild-type and lpda knockout mutant of e. coli, both grown in continuous culture at dilution rate  <dig>  h- <dig> <cit> . standard deviations  were calculated by multiplying these mean values with average error percentage associated with each reaction, taken from  <cit> . in addition to these, flux values of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and glycine cleavage system were additionally constrained to zero due to the knockout of lpda gene.

subsequently, randomly generated errors were introduced to the 13c-based metabolic flux and cell culture data constraining the reactions, and constraints-based flux analysis was iteratively performed with these randomly adjusted experimental constraints in order to generate a large number of data samples; as a result, constraints-based flux analysis produces a different solution every time it is performed, satisfying the requirement that statistically reliable bns demand many observations of the target system . infeasibility of optimization problem from applying too many constraints was handled with least absolute deviation method . in this study, a total of  <dig>  samples were generated at the end, each  <dig>  sets of data from the wild-type  and its genetic mutant , respectively. the resulting matrix, n-by-m, is named flux matrix in this study, where n is the number of reactions and m is the number of samples; m is  <dig>  in this study . it is important to note that flux data samples generated for the two different conditions are combined into a single flux matrix in order to reflect the effects of perturbation on the metabolic flux distribution, which enables bn analysis to more reliably infer the directionality of causal relationships among reactions and their modules  <cit> .

step d: selection of core reactions
in the flux matrix generated, the number of reactions needs to be reduced to the size that can be handled by bn analysis because only a fraction of reactions, namely metabolic core reactions, govern the metabolic activity  <cit> , and the network model has many functionally duplicating reactions that show exactly the same metabolic flux values under all circumstances, and do not contribute to additional information. for this, a series of reduction processes were performed to select only the core reactions from the flux matrix . the definition of core reaction in this study includes 1) a feature of significant flux variations accompanied by specific perturbation and 2) being almost always active under all samples of either control or perturbation condition  <cit> . here, being almost always active refers to having non-zero fluxes for a reaction in more than 95% of samples under either control or perturbed condition, thereby becoming a core reaction. this shows a slight contrast with the previous definition that the core reactions be always active under all circumstances  <cit> . this new definition was to sufficiently cover the number of reactions suitable for bn analysis.

with this in mind, reactions were first selected, which were highly influenced by perturbation in terms of variation in flux values using a paired t-test; two sets of  <dig>  flux values from control and perturbation condition were compared for each reaction. reactions with p < 10- <dig> were considered to be significantly influenced by the perturbation. among significantly influenced reactions, reactions that have non-zero fluxes in more than 95% of samples under control or perturbed condition were selected, based on the aforementioned definition of core reaction, by which they coordinate and significantly contribute to the metabolic integrity  <cit> . next, for duplicate reactions, reactions that have exactly the same flux values in all samples, only one of them was selected because they do not contribute to the robust statistical conclusion, but only increase the data volume . the removed duplicate reactions were considered in the later stage of data analysis after all statistical calculations. the final remaining reactions, core reactions, are the major fluxes operating the cell metabolism, and significantly influenced by given perturbation . core reactions were then subjected to subsequent modularization and bn analysis.

step e and f: modularization of metabolic network based on flux variation pattern
metabolism was then modularized by grouping core reactions with metabolically correlated functions using hierarchical clustering; this modularization enables us to look at modules of reactions as functional unities instead of individual reactions, thereby simplifying our subsequent analysis . here, flux variation was used as a criterion for clustering, such that reactions that have similar pattern of flux variation from sample to sample were grouped. this is analogous to clustering of genes based on their expression level in transcriptome data  <cit> . specifically, the reduced flux matrix containing only the core reactions was converted to a flux-pattern matrix that represents the flux variation pattern from one sample to another  . as a result, reactions in a cluster show synchronized patterns of increases  and decreases  in flux values in response to the perturbation, implying that they pursue correlative biological functions . be noted that the term cluster and module are interchangeably used to discuss the results henceforth.

step g and h: bayesian network analysis of metabolic modules
finally, bn analysis was employed to predict causal relationships of reactions at local and global scale. at local scale, bn of reactions in a cluster was first inferred , and representative reactions that most heavily influence other reactions in each metabolic cluster were identified by using the concept of mutual information   <cit>  and total mutual information   <cit> ; representative reactions have the highest value of tmi, and this procedure is detailed in methods. selected representative reactions from each module were then subjected to another round of bn analysis, yielding a global scale bn . because reactions in each module possess positively correlated functional features, or flux variation pattern, we speculate that bn with representative reactions would reveal a reasonable system-wide causal network that shows correlations among their corresponding metabolic modules as well in response to specific perturbations.

although the fmb looks into correlations that exist in metabolism system, it is distinct from previously established relevant approaches, for instance flux coupling analysis  <cit> , and uniform random sampling and subsequent calculation of correlation coefficients among reactions  <cit>  in several aspects:  fmb reveals correlations among metabolic modules in addition to individual reactions by considering flux variation patterns of reactions using clustering, thereby showing modular-level behaviours under specific condition;  causal relationships predicted from the fmb are graphically shown with arrows, which provides better readability;  fmb is more oriented to context-specific biological issues, such as specific gene knockout, by imposing constraints of mutant-specific 13c-based metabolic flux and cell culture data. these distinctions of fmb would provide complementary aspects of the cell that the previously reported approaches do not provide.

application of fmb to lpda gene knockout mutant of e. coli
as a demonstration of the framework fmb, it was applied to the wild-type and lpda mutant of e. coli to systematically evaluate how the genetic perturbation, lpda gene knockout, affects e. coli metabolism, cultured in defined minimal media with glucose  <cit> . this lpda gene encodes lipoamide dehydrogenase, which is an important component of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and glycine cleavage system  <cit> . therefore, lpda assumes an important biological role in metabolism at broad scope as a component of enzyme complexes: pyruvate dehydrogenase complex for connecting glycolysis and tca cycle, and producing acetyl-coa and co <dig> under aerobic condition, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase for generating nadh from the operation of tca cycle, and glycine cleavage system for one carbon metabolism that is associated with nucleotides and cofactors  <cit> . consequently, such biological importance and global effects that lpda is likely to exert on the cellular physiology made this enzyme component an ideal target for the application of fmb. results of each step in fmb are represented as follows.

step a-c: generation of flux matrix from metabolic network model
flux matrix containing  <dig> reactions and  <dig>  data samples were first generated from constraints-based flux analysis with constraints of 13c-based metabolic flux and cell culture data under control and perturbation conditions, combined with random errors . it should be noted that flux values from lpda knockout mutant were obtained by additionally constraining the flux values of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and glycine cleavage system to zero in order to reflect the knockout of lpda gene.

step d: selection of core reactions
flux matrix was then subjected to a series of filtering processes; initial  <dig> reactions were reduced to  <dig> reactions from t-test,  <dig> reactions after filtering reactions that have non-zero fluxes in more than 95% of samples in either conditions, and finally  <dig> core reactions after removing duplicate reactions and selecting one of them for subsequent analysis .

step e and f: modularization of metabolic network from flux-pattern matrices
the reduced flux matrix was next converted to flux-pattern matrices , and hierarchical clustering was performed . a total of  <dig> clusters, or metabolic modules, were created with size of each cluster ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> reactions . duplicate reactions that were previously filtered in the flux matrix were also considered at this stage by inserting all duplicate reactions in the same cluster. overall, reactions involved in the same submetabolism were grouped into the same cluster, partially demonstrating that flux variation pattern employed as a criterion for hierarchical clustering does well represent the functional aspect of reactions. cluster  <dig> , cluster  <dig> , and cluster  <dig>  are the exemplary clusters that have reactions from the same submetabolism. for clusters having reactions from different submetabolisms, biochemical link that connects these reactions together can be inferred. cluster  <dig> belongs to this case; reactions from tca cycle, such as succinate dehydrogenase, and those from oxidative phosphorylation, including cytochrome oxidase and atp synthase, as well as oxygen transporter are clustered in the same module as they all are linked through aerobic electron transfer for respiration. likewise, reactions from cell envelope biosynthesis and membrane lipid metabolism tend to be clustered together because fatty acids created from membrane lipid metabolism are fed into the biosynthesis of cell envelope. cluster  <dig> is such a case, and has, in addition, arabinose-5-phosphate isomerase that produces arabinose-5-phosphate critical for lipopolysaccharide and alanine racemase that converts l-alanine to d-alanine, an essential building block of peptidoglycan. all these examples so far discussed indicate that reactions can be grouped together based on their functional characteristic that is flux variation pattern from sample to sample. because each cluster represents functionally similar reactions, this modularization process will ease our subsequent interpretation of the data.

step g and h: generation of a global scale bayesian network using representative reactions
once the e. coli metabolism was modularized, representative reaction for each cluster was selected , and bn analysis was applied to them in order to investigate the causal relationships existing among these clusters at global scale . because each module is presented as a representative reaction in the global scale bn, other reactions in their corresponding cluster should also be considered during interpretation. good starting point for the detailed interpretation would be nodes that contain reactions directly perturbed, genetically or environmentally, or those that have the highest number of links influencing others.

analysis of the results from fmb
the resulting global scale bn of representative reactions from the metabolic flux data of wild-type and lpda mutant of e. coli is shown in figure  <dig>  of our primary interest is cluster  <dig> that contains pyruvate dehydrogenase whose activity is directly disrupted by removal of lpda gene . cluster  <dig> consists of reactions associated with glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, pentose phosphate pathway and transport of glucose via phosphotransferase system, and has transketolase-catalyzed reaction as a representative reaction . this cluster was predicted to directly influence following metabolic clusters: cluster  <dig> ,  <dig>  carboxylase),  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . size of these clusters is relatively small, and their reactions are mainly associated with central carbon metabolism with exception of cluster  <dig>  this influential network is biologically reasonable as most of reactions in these clusters are connected through pep and pyruvate or within their proximity. hence, genetic perturbation of lpda redistributes the fluxes of its nearby reactions in central carbon metabolism through cluster  <dig> 

metabolic cluster  <dig> that has a reaction for cell growth rate as a representative reaction was also shown to influence high number of other clusters: cluster  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . unlike cluster  <dig>  cluster  <dig> influences metabolically wider range of reactions, mostly related with amino acid biosynthesis . cluster  <dig> itself is also composed of many amino acid-metabolic reactions. these evidences manifest that amino acid biosynthesis is a major submetabolism affected by changes in cell growth rate. this becomes obvious, considering the fact that protein constitutes more than half of total e. coli dry cellular weight  <cit> . appearance of transporter for sulfate in cluster  <dig> and phosphate in cluster  <dig> is also notable as biosynthesis of some amino acids requires these two inorganic molecules.

as cell growth rate is reduced upon knockout of lpda  <cit> , it is noteworthy to observe how the cluster  <dig> and  <dig>  which contain reactions of cell growth rate and pyruvate dehydrogenase, respectively, are correlated in the global scale bn . although these two clusters were both shown to influence cluster  <dig>  and there is no direct influential path from cluster  <dig> to  <dig> or vice versa, we presume that reduction of the cell growth rate and fluxes of other functionally coordinated reactions in the cluster  <dig> were initially caused by the negatively affected reactions of cluster  <dig>  this causal relationship becomes clearer when we consider the fact that phosphoglucomutase is the representative reaction of cluster  <dig>  which converts glucose-6-phosphate to glucose-1-phosphate that is a precursor of glycogen and cell envelope, and highly associated with biomass formation. it was reported that excessive accumulation of glycogen in e. coli resulted in increased biomass formation, which, in some part, experimentally supports the correlation between cluster  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . in turn, cluster  <dig> seems to have been affected by cluster  <dig> as inferred in the global scale bn because lpda knockout mutant cannot efficiently generate energy for biosynthesis of biomass components, compared to the wild-type, due to the blocked pyruvate dehydrogenase that hinders further oxidation of glucose for oxidative phosphorylation . here, it should be noted that, along with glycogen, enzymes involved in rather wider range of metabolisms, including amino acids, cell envelope, and nucleotides in cluster  <dig>  indicate that various spots in the metabolic network are likely to be influenced by the removal of lpda, which, in turn, might have negatively affected the cell growth rate. as a result, the global scale bn reveals closer positioning of cluster  <dig> and  <dig> through cluster  <dig> 

finally, essentiality of reactions calculated with constraints-based flux analysis provided additional complementary information on the clusters; essentiality has a scale of  <dig> to  <dig>  and reactions with greater essentiality receives the value closer to  <dig> . first, reactions involved in clusters  <dig> to  <dig> had average essentiality of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the wild-type and lpda knockout mutant, respectively, while average essentiality of whole reactions was  <dig>  and  <dig>  under respective condition. this indicates that reactions collected into the clusters are heavily associated with cellular energy production, in comparison with those not included in the clusters. closer examination of these clustered reactions reveals that clusters surrounding cluster  <dig> have relatively low essentiality , indicating that they are likely to be more committed to flux redistribution upon lpda knockout than creating essential biomass constituents. this observation is consistent with the previous report, in that a set of reactions responsible for carbon flux distribution in e. coli are consistently included in cluster  <dig> and its surrounding clusters  <cit> . on the contrary, cluster  <dig> has higher number of surrounding clusters that have complete essentiality , which shows that they are more directly associated with biomass formation . interestingly, although reactions in these  <dig> clusters cover most of the reactions in the metabolic core previously reported in almaas et al., which are defined to be always active under all examined circumstances  <cit> , most of those overlapping reactions were gathered in the clusters that are not under direct influence of the cluster  <dig> and  <dig>  from this, it can be considered that fmb in this study identifies reactions that are under direct influence of the specific perturbation, lpda knockout in this case, in addition to the reactions required for the survival of the organism, which corresponds to the metabolic core  <cit> .

taken together, fmb provides theoretical evidences for the possible correlations among metabolic modules in response to the perturbation, as exemplified by cluster  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in this study. this study would consequently reveal additional pictures of the cellular physiology that could complement conventionally available biological information.

CONCLUSIONS
fmb developed in this study groups functionally similar reactions, and subsequently investigates the causal patterns among metabolic clusters in response to specific perturbation. this newly generated knowledge of causal patterns enables us to capture significant changes in metabolism at the level of metabolic modules, which distinguishes itself from conventional mfa. hence, it could be used as another tool for examining the microbial physiology in addition to currently available genome-wide high-throughput techniques  <cit> . furthermore, this fmb could be applied to interpreting different types of specific perturbations, including multiple gene knockouts and environmental stresses.

