BACKGROUND
longevity depends on effective immune defence against the multitude of pathogens that an individual encounters over its lifetime. increased heterozygosity, or specific alleles at immune loci, are therefore expected to be important for individual survival. key molecules in directing important parts of the adaptive immune response are encoded by the mhc class i and class ii genes. these highly polymorphic mhc genes express molecules that present antigenic peptides on the cell surface to t-cells, thereby initiating the t-cell mediated immune responses in vertebrates. mhc molecules also play a key role in directing and shaping the t-cell receptor repertoire during t-cell maturation . heterozygosity at mhc loci may therefore enhance resistance to infectious diseases by binding and presenting a wider range of antigens to t-cells on the one hand  <cit> , while on the other, generating a more diverse t-cell receptor repertoire during t-cell maturation  <cit> . as a result, mhc heterozygous individuals are thought to have enhanced immunity to environmental pathogens  . in fact, there is substantial evidence that pathogen-driven selection enhances mhc diversity. mhc heterozygosity has been associated with a more effective clearance rate of infection  <cit> , reduced parasite load and spectrum  <cit> , higher reproductive ability  <cit> , and higher survival  <cit> . in contrast, other studies have found allele-specific associations with parasite load and no benefits for heterozygosity per se  <cit> . an efficient immune response will favor the spread of new, less detectable strains of a pathogen. as a result, previously rare, and presumably less effective, mhc variants may combat these new strains better than previously selected alleles . this selection scenario is expected to cause cyclic selection, driving rare alleles to relatively high frequency before they are selected against  <cit> .

in mammals, including humans, males typically have shorter lives than females  <cit> . in particular, males of polygynous mammals show higher rates of mortality than females. this difference is thought to be due to high energy expenditure while competing for access to females that impairs subsequent survival  <cit> . in particular, the immune function may be impaired in males by activities associated with reproductive effort. indeed, in many species, males show higher parasite burden than females  <cit> . consequently, selective pressures on immune genes, such as mhc genes, may differ between males and females. however, whether males in natural populations benefit more from mhc heterozygosity than females has rarely been studied.

we investigated this question in a long-term study of free-living alpine chamois , a highly polygynous mountain ungulate, which belongs to the bovidae family and caprinae subfamily. this species preferentially inhabits alpine pastures and rocky areas in diverse mountain regions of europe and the middle east. chamois rut at the beginning of winter and reproductively active males are believed to have high energy expenditure which depletes body fat stores that are pivotal for surviving the harsh and long alpine winter  <cit> . the life expectancy in free-living chamois is about 16- <dig> years  <cit> . males and females show, in large part, overlapping survival curves but male survival decreases appreciably at the age of  <dig> years  <cit> . similarly, in the closely related pyrenean chamois  survival was found to be lower in males than females and this gender difference increased also with age  <cit>  .

the most severe parasitosis affecting alpine chamois is sarcoptic mange or scabies. this highly contagious disease, caused by a submacroscopic ectoparasite  that burrows into the skin causing intense itching, hyperkeratosis, severe skin lesions, subsequent bacterial infections and eventually death  <cit> . this disease is usually transmitted directly by skin-to-skin contact with individuals already infested with the mites. scabies epidemics occur in more or less regular waves across large parts of the eastern alps  and can play an important role in the dynamics of chamois populations with local mortality rates of up to 80%  <cit> . mortalities occur mainly at the end of the harsh alpine winter when the animals, and hence their immune defences, are weakened after months of cold temperatures and restricted food supplies  <cit> . the immune response to sarcoptic mange infestation is complex and still poorly understood, however scabies infection appears to initiate a specific and strong antibody response, indicating the activation of the adaptive immune system  <cit> . the immune response of chamois to this parasite infection may also vary in intensity, depending on the individual mhc variability. chamois expresses a single polymorphic mhc class ii drb gene  <cit> . codon-based tests for selection showed that the peptide-binding region  of this gene contains a significantly higher rate of non-synonymous than synonymous substitutions , indicating strong positive selection for diversity on a large evolutionary time scale  <cit> .

in the present study, we examined whether individual survival of males and females differed in chamois populations that had been exposed to scabies epidemics historically and during the timeframe of our study, or were thought to be never affected by scabies , and whether mortality was associated with variability at the mhc class ii drb locus. to control for potentially confounding differences in overall genetic variability, we additionally screened genetic variation at  <dig> microsatellite loci. we further examined energetic costs of rutting in this species to investigate whether these costs could influence survival rates in males and females.

RESULTS
mhc and microsatellite variability
we detected  <dig> mhc class ii drb alleles that varied considerably in frequency . the corresponding nucleotide sequences  can be found in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the mean expected heterozygosity  for the mhc class ii drb locus was  <dig>   and for the  <dig> analyzed microsatellite loci  <dig>  . we did not find significant linkage between the mhc locus and the microsatellite loci . genetic diversity at the mhc locus was significantly  lower for chamois populations affected by scabies  than for those unaffected by scabies . however, lower genetic diversity in populations where scabies had occurred was unlikely to be the result of merely genetic drift, as indicated by the much higher fst value of the mhc locus  compared to that of the twelve microsatellite loci . the identified mhc alleles differed profoundly in frequencies between chamois populations exposed to scabies and those where scabies epidemics have never been reported . particularly, the frequency of the most dominant allele  was about two times higher in scabies affected populations, which may explain why heterozygosity at the mhc locus was lower in these populations . except for allele  <dig>  only allele  <dig> differed significantly in frequency between populations affected by scabies or not .

selection at the mhc class ii drb
to examine for age-related changes in frequency of mhc class ii drb genotypes, indicating an association with survival, we regressed in a generalized linear model  the binomially coded mhc genotypes  against age . we further included sex in the model to test for potential differences between males and females, and average individual heterozygosity at the microsatellite loci to control for background genetic variability. the most parsimonious model found with our model averaging approach  contained only one significant term, the interaction of sex and age . separate glms for both sexes revealed an increase of mhc heterozygosity with age in males , but not in females . the median age at death for mhc homozygous males was  <dig> years and for mhc heterozygous males  <dig> years. average heterozygosity at the microsatellite loci did not change significantly with age in either sex  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; females: f =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; figure 3c,d). however, specific mhc alleles, and not heterozygosity per se, could be responsible for enhanced immune defence. we therefore tested each identified mhc allele for an increase in frequency with age, but found no statistical evidence for an association of certain mhc alleles and increased age in either males or females.

energetic cost of rutting and survival rate
firstly, we checked, with cox's proportional hazards analysis, whether the age structure in our sample of hunted chamois reflected natural mortality by comparing it with  <dig> male and  <dig> female age-known carcasses found during a study in the western alps  in italy  <cit>  . hunting is banned in this park and scabies has never occurred there. thus, all of these individuals had died naturally but not from scabies. survivorship curves for males older than  <dig> years from this sample did not differ significantly from our sample of populations affected by scabies , nor from that for populations where scabies had presumably never occurred . in contrast, survival of females older than  <dig> years from the maritime alps population was lower than that of females in our sample  . secondly, modeling the annual course of body mass and body fat reserves we found nadirs at the end of winter , with reproductively active males  reaching lowest body mass  =  <dig> - <dig> ) about six weeks before females . this was most likely due to the high energy expenses of these males during the rut in early winter, as younger males, which typically are not engaged in rutting, had seasonal body mass and body reserve trajectories more similar to females . as a result, survival of reproductively active males was significantly lower, but only in populations affected by scabies . in contrast, survival of females did not differ significantly according to presence or absence of scabies , and was similar to that of males in populations thought to have never been affected by scabies .

discussion
both the survival analysis and genetic data from our study demonstrate higher mortality for reproductively active males compared to females and younger males. we showed that heterozygosity at the mhc class ii drb locus increased with age in males, but not in females. this difference between the sexes was significant and independent from background genetic variability  . the mutational processes for mhc and microsatellites are different and therefore allelic diversity of these genetic markers cannot be compared directly. however, their extent of heterozygote excess can be compared across age classes  <cit> . the observed differences of heterozygosity of the mhc and microsatellites in the different sexes and across age classes are thus more likely to reflect survival advantage of mhc drb heterozygous males than an effect of population dynamics. similarly, in wild baboons  older individuals had higher mhc class ii drb heterozygosity than younger individuals, independent from microsatellite heterozygosity, and drb heterozygosity was greater in males than in females  <cit> . in many ungulates, males expend a substantial part of their fat reserve in the autumn rut. less energy available for allocation to immune defense  <cit>  together with adverse effects of testosterone  <cit>  is the most likely explanation for the higher susceptibility of reproductively active males to pathogens. in chamois, increased susceptibility to scabies in sexually active males, as indicated by lower survival of these males in populations affected by scabies , is thus likely linked to their exhaustive depletion of energy reserves during the early-winter rut when they defend mating territories and compete heavily for access to females  <cit> . indeed, our data confirmed a significant negative energy balance in chamois during winter, evident via a large decrease in body mass.

further our analysis revealed a previously unknown but important detail: reproductively active males reached their lowest body mass as early as february, about six weeks before females, whereas younger males had a seasonal body mass trajectory more similar to that of females. this is in line with the mortality data: reproductively active males were less likely to survive than same-aged females, a difference that was not found among younger individuals. this sex difference in mortality was more pronounced in populations that had been affected by scabies . while our data does not demonstrate a direct link between mhc variation and body condition, this correlation strongly suggests that towards the end of winter males rely on an efficient mhc-mediated immune response to combat scabies infection. a higher susceptibility of rutting males to scabies is also supported by the fact that male chamois generally carry a higher parasite burden  <cit> .

when comparing the mhc class ii drb allele frequencies between chamois populations exposed to scabies with those in which scabies epidemics have never been reported, we found that the mhc alleles profoundly differed in frequency . such a variable distribution is unlikely to be the result of geographical differences as previous population genetic work has shown that the overall nuclear genetic differentiation is rather low among chamois populations in the eastern alps  <cit> . scabies epidemics usually occur in waves interrupted by periods of low prevalence  <cit> . in the province of styria  the two most recent peaks of the epidemic occurred between  <dig> and  <dig> and 1983- <dig>  respectively  <cit> . in the province of south tyrol  , the epidemic has recently peaked again after the previous episode lasting from 1980- <dig>  <cit> . therefore, most of our samples for genotyping were obtained after the last significant waves had waned. however, the frequency of the most dominant allele  was about two times higher in the scabies-exposed populations, which may explain why heterozygosity at the mhc locus was lower in these areas. the high abundance of allele  <dig> in populations known to have been affected by scabies in the past, together with the evidence for selection at the mhc class ii drb locus  <cit> , suggests that carriers of this allele were less susceptible to scabies. as a consequence, allele  <dig> is likely to have increased in frequency, mostly at the expense of allele  <dig>  furthermore, a previous study reported that chamois herds in an area of north-eastern italy recovered quite fast after a severe scabies infection and two subsequent scabies epizootics had a less severe impact on the population  <cit> , suggesting a superior immunogenetic status of chamois that survived the initial scabies outbreak. interestingly, the oldest females  in our study were all homozygous carrying the allele  <dig>  this allele, which corresponds to the putative amino acid sequence ruru-drb* <dig> , was found to be one of the most frequent alleles in closely related pyrenean chamois  <cit> , a species also known to be affected by scabies  <cit> . the mhc allele  <dig>  which corresponded to the putative amino acid sequence ruru-drb* <dig> , has not been detected in the pyrenean chamois or may not occur at all in that species. these two alleles differ at  <dig> amino acid positions, all of them are located specifically at antigen binding sites   <cit> . these specific amino acid positions in the exon  <dig> of that locus were also found to be under strong positive selection in various other ungulate species  <cit> . however, in our study we did not find any statistically significant association of mhc alleles and individual survival rate in scabies and non-scabies populations. certainly, chamois are affected by a plethora of pathogens  <cit>  and hence high mhc heterozygosity may result from the advantage of allelic variation to combat this range of simultaneously occurring pathogens. however, the evolutionary arms race between the host's immune defences and various parasite adaptation strategies may prevent fixation of specific mhc alleles. in soay sheep  a reported association between mhc variation, parasite resistance, and juvenile survival rate suggests that different mhc alleles may exhibit different associations with parasites at various stages during individual lifespan  <cit> . in fact, experimental infection of mice with multiple strains of salmonella has shown that mhc heterozygotes have enhanced clearance rates of infections, but this benefit was due to resistance being dominant rather than overdominant  <cit> . we therefore suggest, based on our current data, that the heterozygosity affect in chamois may be due to dominance rather than overdominance at the mhc.

a potential confound of our study could be that the higher mortality detected for reproductively active males compared to females and younger males results from hunting practices . however, hunting is unlikely to have been selective with respect to mhc genotype and hunting practices most likely do not profoundly differ in the eastern alps in populations affected by scabies or not. in addition, longevity of males older than four years from the eastern alps populations where scabies had never occurred was not different from females and similar to that reported for the maritime alps regional park  population  <cit> . therefore, impaired survival of reproductively active males in scabies affected areas is better explained by the higher susceptibility of individuals in poor body condition at the end of the winter season and potentially in combination with other factors such as mhc variability.

CONCLUSIONS
the survival advantage for chamois males heterozygous at the mhc class ii drb locus suggests a fitness benefit in terms of parasite resistance , particularly for reproductively active males with depleted energy reserves due to rutting behaviour. as a consequence, mhc heterozygous males live longer than homozygotes. this scenario renders the mhc-mediated immune response more important for males than for females, which implies a relatively stronger selection pressure on mhc genes in males than in females. similar scenarios are likely to exist in other species. therefore, considering sex-specific effects of mhc alleles may help to clarify the often inconsistent empirical evidence about the adaptive value of mhc variability.

