BACKGROUND
new and emerging model organisms occupy an increasingly important part of the developmental biology and developmental genetics research landscape. while studying a huge diversity of animals has long been the norm in the classical fields of experimental embryology and functional morphology , the molecular biology revolution and the advent of the "model system" concept  <cit>  created demand for a small number of highly genetically manipulable organisms that could be intensively studied  <cit> . research on these "big six"  genetic model organisms has led to enormous advances in our understanding of general principles of embryogenesis. however, placing these general principles in an evolutionary context requires broader taxonomic sampling. many researchers have highlighted the need for developing new model organisms for specific comparative, evolutionary and ecological questions  <cit> . it has also been suggested, however, that the single gene expression approach of the last several decades of evolutionary developmental biology  has outlived its usefulness, and that what are needed are not more model organisms, but rather a smaller number of groups chosen for the ability to functionally manipulate genes  <cit> . sophisticated gene expression techniques and even stable germline transgenesis have been developed in a large array of models outside of the "big six" . the ancient history of the small rna processing machinery  <cit>  means that gene knockdown is a feasible goal for most organisms, as long as the sequences of genes of interest are available.

while whole genome sequencing is an increasingly viable option for some organisms, many new models, particularly within the arthropods, lack the large community resources necessary to finance and maintain annotation of a genome. for these reasons, many researchers studying non-traditional model organisms have turned to sanger-sequenced est libraries . in principle this method of gene discovery can lead to high-throughput expression and functional genetic analyses of multiple genes . in practice, however, most non-traditional organism studies are still subject to a gene discovery bottleneck. this is largely because at the scale needed to uncover rare developmental transcripts, sanger-based est sequencing quickly becomes technically and financially prohibitive for many labs working on organisms with smaller research communities. in addition, those smaller-scale est projects that have been carried out are often not publically available in easily searchable formats, and their potential contribution to the developmental and evolutionary biology fields is thus limited.

next-generation sequencing  offers comparative and evolutionary developmental biologists a way to obtain orders of magnitude more developmental gene data than ever before, at a fraction of its former cost. several studies have demonstrated the feasibility of ngs for identifying snps for population studies and gene sequences for use as phylogenetic markers  <cit> . unfortunately, the lack of suitable protocols for cdna preparation, and of established pipelines for analysis have left this tool under-utilized by many evo-devo researchers. furthermore, according to some estimates  <cit> , few of these studies have been carried out at a scale large enough to provide significant recovery of rare transcripts, and therefore of developmental genes. here we present an optimized protocol for synthesizing cdna for  <dig> titanium pyrosequencing, as well as a simple workflow for de novo assembly of the data without a reference genome, annotation and analysis of the dataset, and a demonstration of its utility for comparative developmental genetics.

a large body of literature is dedicated to the development and genomics of holometabolous insects . tens of holometabolous insect genomes are now available, thanks largely to work on drosophila melanogaster, other drosophilids, and dipteran disease vectors  <cit> . in contrast, relatively little is known about the development of hemimetabolous insects, which undergo incomplete metamorphosis. although several of these insects are amenable to laboratory culture and a variety of experimental manipulations, molecular developmental studies are scarce, and gene discovery rates remain low. notable exceptions among the hemiptera are the aphid acyrthosiphon pisum and the chagas' disease vector rhodnius prolixus, whose genomes are completed and in progress respectively  <cit> . however, the aphid genome has undergone extensive duplications and gene loss, possibly due to its unusual reproductive and ecological characteristics  <cit> . the mammalian blood feeding needs of r. prolixus make it a sub-optimal organism for developmental studies.

the milkweed bug oncopeltus fasciatus  has emerged as a promising hemipteran system for studying the molecular development of hemimetabolous insects  <cit> . it can be reared easily and cheaply in the laboratory, and has a long history as a laboratory animal for classical embryology and pattern formation studies  <cit> . more recently, robust protocols for in situ hybridization, live imaging of embryogenesis, and rnai-mediated gene knockdown have been developed and successfully applied to the study of the evolution of development .

here we present the results of the sequencing and de novo assembly of the oncopeltus ovarian and early embryonic transcriptome. we outline an assembly and analysis framework using a combination of existing tools and freely available custom-made command line computational tools, which we hope will make this approach to gene discovery accessible to comparative developmental biologists. we identify homologues of genes involved in all major signaling pathways and developmental processes, including biologically verified splicing isoforms for some genes. we also address the need for library normalization in these studies, and show that at large enough scales of ngs, large numbers of developmental genes can be discovered even with omission of a normalization step.

RESULTS
assembling the ovarian and embryonic transcriptome of o. fasciatus
we prepared cdna from ovaries and early to mid-staged embryos of o. fasciatus, covering oogenesis and all major stages of embryonic patterning . these cdna samples were prepared using a protocol optimized for preparation of small or limiting samples for  <dig> pyrosequencing . from these libraries, we generated a total of  <dig> , <dig> sequence reads . this includes reads generated using gs-flx technology as well as both normalized  and non-normalized  cdna sequenced using the gs-flx titanium platform. as expected, the reads generated using gs-flx titanium technology were substantially longer than those generated using gs-flx technology . however, the n sample gave an unexpectedly low number of reads, which were on average shorter than those generated by the nn sample . given that a pilot run of one lane  of this same normalized cdna sample generated roughly equal number and size-distribution as a nn pilot study , we suspect that a technical error reduced the sequencing efficiency of this plate. despite the comparatively low yield of this normalized cdna, it still generated more than  <dig>  high quality reads that we therefore included in subsequent analyses.

we used the cdna assembly algorithm of newbler v <dig>   to screen the reads for adaptor sequence and then assemble the cleaned reads . after quality trimming and adapter screening,  <dig> , <dig> reads  were used in the assembly. of these,  <dig> , <dig>  assembled either wholly or partially into contigs, and  <dig>   remained as singletons. the remaining reads were excluded as either originating from repeat regions , outliers , or too short .

to our knowledge, newbler v <dig>  and higher are the only assembly programs that address alternative splicing and can output multiple isoforms per gene. newbler v <dig>  explicitly accounts for alternative splicing by creating a hierarchical assembly composed of three elements: contigs, isotigs, and isogroups. for consistency, we follow their terminology. contigs are stretches of assembled reads that are free of branching conflicts. in other words, contigs can be thought of as exons or sets of exons that are always co-transcribed. isotigs represent a particular continuous path through a set of contigs, i.e. a transcript. an isogroup is the set of isotigs arising from the same set of contigs, i.e. a gene. different isotigs within an isogroup are thought to represent alternative isoforms of the same gene. note that it is possible for an isogroup to contain only one isotig, and it is also possible for an isotig to be composed of only one contig.

after the initial newbler assembly, we noticed substantial redundancy among the singletons. we therefore subjected the  <dig>  unassembled singletons to a secondary assembly with cap <dig>  <cit> . this secondary assembly reduced the number of singletons from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . thus, in total, our assembly generated a total of  <dig>  sequences, including isotigs, cap3_contigs and cap3_singlets .

to enable comparison, we equalized individual assemblies of normalized and non-normalized samples to contain the same number of base pairs before assembly.

our data assembled into  <dig>  contigs, organized among  <dig>  isotigs . the isotig n <dig> length was  <dig>  bp , and  <dig>   of the isotigs contained only one contig. the  <dig>  isotigs fell into  <dig>  isogroups, of which  <dig>   contain only one isotig .

the average coverage among contigs was  <dig>  reads/bp  . this coverage value is more than twice as high as the highest reported value from a de novo transcriptome assembly to date . such deep coverage should be helpful for overcoming the presence of insertion/deletion errors in the individual raw reads  <cit> .

to test whether our assembly would have been aided by the inclusion of nucleotide sequence from rhodnius prolixus, the most closely related hemipteran to o. fasciatus whose genome is currently being sequenced  <cit> , we used the blastn algorithm to compare our isotigs  with the published ests of r. prolixus with an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  consistent with previous observations of extremely low levels of conservation between insect genomes  <cit>  we found that only  <dig> out of  <dig>  isotigs had hits to r. prolixus ests on the nucleotide level. these results suggest that de novo sequencing and assembling efforts will be necessary for most insect species, even when sequence data are available for other members of the same order. we note, however, that a recent study  <cit>  has shown that it may be possible to incorporate est data from different species into a de novo assembly by using amino acid sequence rather than nucleotide sequence.

validation of predicted alternate isoforms
to examine whether the alternative isoforms predicted by newbler v <dig>  are in fact present in developing embryos of o. fasciatus, we first focused on a gene of particular interest to developmental biologists, nanos. this conserved metazoan gene was first described as a loss of function mutation in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> , and is necessary for germ cell and posterior somatic development . newbler v <dig>  predicted this gene to encode two alternative isotigs within a single isogroup . the two isotigs differ in that the longer contains an additional 100-bp exon that is absent from the shorter . we designed pcr primers against sequences present in both isotigs , which amplified two bands differing by ~ <dig> bp from a pool of embryonic cdna . sequencing of these two bands confirmed that they differ exactly as predicted by newbler v <dig>  .

importantly, a previous version of newbler , which does not account for alternative splicing, failed to join together the three fragments which were linked by newbler v <dig>  . because of this, newbler v <dig>   predicted three separate contigs, only one of which could be identified as nanos with blastx, as the others fall in poorly conserved regions of the gene. thus, the ability of newbler <dig>  to handle branching conflicts between reads allows this program to assemble longer continuous sequences, which are therefore in turn more easily annotated using blast.

to further characterize the accuracy of newbler's predictions of alternative transcript isoforms, we randomly selected  <dig> isogroups that contained exactly two alternative isotigs differing by the presence/absence of a single contig . as we did for nanos, we designed primers to flank the region differing between the two predicted isoforms , and performed rt-pcr on o. fasciatus embryonic cdna. in eight of ten instances, we observed bands of the predicted sizes following agarose gel electrophoresis . however, in four of the eight positive cases, additional, unpredicted bands were present . in one of the ten cases, we observed two rt-pcr products, but only one of them was of the predicted size . taken together, these results suggest that newbler v <dig>  has a low rate of false positives in the prediction of multiple splicing isoforms. including our investigation of nanos, only one of  <dig> test cases  produced a single rt-pcr product where newbler v <dig>  had predicted multiple products. however, we observed that roughly half of the time, newbler v <dig>  failed to predict all of the isoforms identified via rt-pcr.

transcriptome annotation
a blastn search of our dataset for the  <dig> existing genbank accessions for o. fasciatus sequences yielded a hit result for 56% of the accessions, with an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  this result may be due in part to the short length of some of the genbank sequences. accordingly, we found that accessions with hits in the database were significantly longer  than accessions without hits  . of greater relevance to developmental applications of this dataset, however, was our finding that 85% of o. fasciatus developmental genes with existing genbank accessions  are represented in our transcriptome.

we then used blastx to map the  <dig>  o. fasciatus sequences  against the entire refseq protein database with an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  to simplify these statistics, we report only the blast results for the longest isotig per isogroup, under the assumption that all isotigs within an isogroup share nearly identical blast results. of  <dig>  isotigs,  <dig>   had at least one hit. of the  <dig>  cap3_contigs,  <dig>   had hits, and of the  <dig>  cap3_singlets,  <dig>   had hits. these values are higher than comparable blast statistics of most other published studies of 454-generated de novo transcriptomes  <cit> , likely because deeper sequencing increases the length of assembled sequences and thereby makes these sequences more likely to be identified via blast. the unidentifiable sequences likely originate from utrs or non-conserved portions of protein-coding sequences. of the top blast hits,  <dig> % were genes from arthropod sequences . of the  <dig>  o. fasciatus sequences with blast hits,  <dig>  hit non-overlapping segments of the same top blast hit , and  <dig> hit overlapping segments of the same top blast hit . excluding those  <dig>  potentially double-counted blast hits, our transcriptome identified a total of  <dig>  genes. the assembled sequences generated in this study, as well as pre-computed blast results, are available as flat files from the authors upon request.

to explore and summarize the functional categories of the genes sequenced in this study, we obtained the gene ontology  terms associated with the top  <dig> blast hits of each sequence using blast2go  <cit> . among the  <dig>  genes for which we obtained go terms, we observed a wide diversity of functional categories represented on all levels of the gene ontology database . the o. fasciatus sequences fall into go categories with a roughly similar distribution to that of the well-annotated drosophila melanogaster genome, suggesting that our sequence data contain a large diversity of genes involved in a variety of biological processes, and do not contain any notable biases towards particular categories of genes.

assessing coverage of the o. fasciatus transcriptome
we wished to know how thoroughly our sequencing efforts sampled the true diversity of transcripts present in our cdna samples. this is a two-part question: first, of the genes truly expressed during o. fasciatus oogenesis and embryogenesis, how many did we identify? and second, of these identified genes, how thoroughly had we assembled their full-length transcripts?

to address the first question, we created eight separate assemblies of progressively larger sub-samples of our total reads and tallied the total number of genes identified via blastx. the number of newly discovered genes began to plateau after ~ <dig> m reads  . however, the n <dig> isotig length continued to increase roughly linearly over this range of reads . these results suggest that additional sequencing of this sample is unlikely to identify substantially more genes, but may continue to lengthen the existing sequences. although in the absence of a sequenced genome it is not possible to accurately estimate how many genes are in fact present in the o. fasciatus transcriptome, we note that while several developmental genes of interest were identified in this study, others were not. . because these data suggest that we have sequenced these specific cdna samples quite deeply, some form of specific target enrichment may be necessary for future attempts to discover additional genes not identified in this dataset.

hit id indicates if gene hits were found among isotigs , cap3-assembled contigs , or unassembled singletons . sequence length  indicates the shortest and longest s, c or i hit sequences for each gene. these results were generated by blasting the raw reads from the n and nn samples against the full assembly. when multiple sequences were obtained via name search, they were tested to see whether they could be made to form a contig with sequencher or clc combined workbench . asterisk indicates hits only present in normalized gs-flx reads. x indicates that the x sequences with hits could be assembled into y contigs.

hit id indicates if gene hits were found among isotigs , cap3-assembled contigs , or unassembled singletons . sequence length  indicates the shortest and longest s, c or i hit sequences for each gene. these results were generated by blasting the raw reads from the n and nn samples against the full assembly. when multiple sequences were obtained via name search, they were tested to see whether they could be made to form a contig with sequencher or clc combined workbench . asterisk indicates hits only present in normalized gs-flx reads. x indicates that the x sequences with hits could be assembled into y contigs. boldface indicates genes also present in table  <dig> 

to address the second question, we employed a method proposed by o'neil and colleagues  <cit>  for addressing the question of how closely our sequences approached full-length transcripts. their metric, the "ortholog hit ratio," compares the length of the newly discovered sequence that obtains a blast hit versus the full length of its top hit  <cit> . thus, an ortholog hit ratio of one implies that a transcript has been assembled to its true full length, while values over one suggest insertions in the query sequence relative to its top blast hit. we note the caveat that many genes contain relatively poorly conserved regions that may fail to obtain a blast hit at all, causing the ortholog hit ratio to be an underestimate in these cases . in our dataset, many of the o. fasciatus isotigs appear to be nearly fully assembled, while the singletons predictably tend to represent small portions of their top blast hit in refseq . in total, of the  <dig>  isotigs with blast hits,  <dig>   had ratios >  <dig>  and  <dig>   had ratios >  <dig> .

we also asked, for those o. fasciatus sequences of developmental genes already present in genbank that overlapped with transcriptome hits , whether our transcriptome data provided any net gain in transcript sequence compared to the genbank accession sequence. in 15/ <dig> cases , the transcriptome data extended the known sequence beyond that reported in genbank by an average of  <dig> bp . in most cases, additional 3' sequence was obtained .

assessing the value of cdna normalization
reducing the representation of highly abundant transcripts  is often considered essential to capture sequence from genes expressed at lower levels, including many important developmental genes . however, we hypothesized that current next-generation sequencing technologies could provide sufficiently deep sequence to render normalization largely unnecessary for construction of de novo transcriptomes for comparative developmental biologists. to address this question, we assessed the relative contribution of the n and nn cdna to our final assembly using several strategies.

first, to test whether our normalization protocol successfully reduced the presence of highly abundant transcripts, we created separate assemblies from the n and nn cdna samples . the n assembly contained a greater number of isotigs that were shorter on average than those in the nn assembly . additionally, more singletons were generated in the n assembly relative to the nn assembly . further, similar to the results obtained by bellin and colleagues  <cit> , we observed the predicted decrease in the maximum number of reads per contig in the n assembly compared to the nn assembly , demonstrating that the normalization procedure successfully reduced the sequencing of highly abundant transcripts. these statistics, which could be interpreted to suggest that the n reads generated an inferior assembly, may result from the shorter average length of reads in the n sample . indeed, newbler rejected  <dig> %  of the n reads as too short, compared to only 1%  of the nn reads. however, these assembly statistics could also indicate greater heterogeneity in the n sample, which would suggest that normalization might increase the number of new genes identified.

to discriminate between these possibilities, we explored the contribution of the n and nn reads to the genes discovered in our full assembly. we used blastn to map one plate's worth of raw reads from the n sample and from the nn sample  against the complete assembled transcriptome, with an e-value cut-off of 1e- <dig>  we then explored the go annotation of those genes hit exclusively by only one of these two samples. we observed similar overall go term distributions between the n and nn samples . we found that a small number of go terms  were significantly differentially represented in the two samples, albeit generally with very few sequences in each go term . for example, we were surprised to see that three of the four terms statistically over-represented in the n sample were related to ribosome function  of the n hits were annotated with 'ribosomal subunit', compared to 1/ <dig>  nn hits; fdr-corrected p-value =  <dig> ). in contrast, several terms related to active transmembrane transport were over-represented in the nn sample  possibly indicating that normalization may have reduced the representation of genes involved in certain basic metabolic processes.

as an additional way to investigate the contribution of the n and nn samples to identifying specific genes of interest for our studies, we manually examined the results of mapping the n and nn samples to the fully assembled transcriptome. of the  <dig> genes of interest that we investigated, four  were uniquely present in the n sample, whereas nine  were uniquely present in the nn sample, and the remaining  <dig>  were present in reads of both the n and nn samples . although this may be an artifact of sequencing depth , our data suggest that the normalized cdna sample did not contribute disproportionately to gene discovery.

gene discovery for developmental studies
the ultimate goal of this sequencing project was to identify a wide diversity of candidate genes involved in developmental processes. traditionally, such gene discovery in "non-model" organisms has required degenerate pcr, which is labor-intensive, expensive, and prone to failure. the annotated transcriptome assembly we present here allows researchers to identify genes of interest via simple text searches, or via blast searches. to demonstrate the usefulness of these data for large-scale gene discovery, we report here the identification of several components from each of the seven widely studied metazoan signaling pathways  as well as many genes involved in specific developmental processes . we note that the majority of these gene fragments are of suitable length for immediate application of such widely used techniques as in situ hybridization and rnai-based functional knockdown. in cases of functional experiments where full-length proteins are desirable, such as protein overexpression, race pcr will likely be required. importantly, we note that many genes of interest were present among the singletons, many of which are long enough for immediate use as sequences for in situ hybridization probes or rnai templates, emphasizing the importance of including these in ngs gene discovery studies.

although we identified a diverse array of genes, some well-studied genes known to be expressed during embryogenesis were not easily identified in this study. for example, our blast results only contained three genes from the hox cluster , although orthologs of all the canonical arthropod hox genes are known to be present in o. fasciatus  <cit> . however, using the o. fasciatus hox gene sequence fragments available from ncbi as a blast query against our transcriptome did reveal sequences for all hox genes except sex combs reduced. it is possible that these genes are expressed at very low levels during the developmental stages sampled here, suggesting that enrichment techniques may be necessary to more easily identify certain genes of interest. we do note, however, that fushi tarazu, the only hox cluster gene not previously identified in o. fasciatus, was identified in both n and nn samples of this transcriptome dataset .

case study: gene discovery for endocrine regulation of development
in addition to surveying the transcriptome for genes involved in embryonic patterning and other developmental processes, we asked whether we could also identify genes known to be employed in biological processes during postembryonic development of holometabolous insects. recent studies have suggested that many of the genes used during holometabolous insect metamorphosis may also play important roles during embryogenesis in hemimetabolous insects  <cit> . to investigate this, we searched the o. fasciatus transcriptome for expression of key ecdysteroid- and juvenile hormone -related genes. we identified transcripts for many of the known ecdysteroid biosynthesis genes, including cytochrome p <dig> genes encoded by the drosophila halloween family, such as shade , shadow , phantom  and disembodied  . we also detected expression of ecdysone response genes. in particular, we identified many of the ecdysone-regulated genes that play key roles during molting and metamorphosis, including e <dig>  hr <dig>  and hr <dig> . the presence of these genes in the ovaries and early embryos of o. fasciatus corroborates recent studies that implicate ecdysone-response genes in key developmental processes during embryogenesis  <cit> . as might be expected for a situation where ecdysone regulates embryonic development but not molting, transcripts encoding insect peptide hormones implicated in eclosion behavior, such as ecdysis-triggering hormone, eclosion hormone and crustacean cardioactive peptide, were not detected. jh biosynthesis and response genes were also isolated . jh has been shown to play a role in promoting embryonic development and tissue maturation  <cit> . the expression of these genes, together with that of jh esterase and jh binding proteins, is consistent with previous studies implicating tight control of jh during embryogenesis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have used  <dig> pyrosequencing to create an early developmental transcriptome for the milkweed bug o. fasciatus in the absence of a reference genome. although genomic sequence data will be necessary in the future for linkage or cis-regulatory analyses, at the early stages of establishing new model organisms, one of the most important goals is often gene discovery. in this regard, while no transcriptome generated in this way can realistically be "complete" in the sense of containing full length transcripts for all expressed genes, we propose that for many evolutionary developmental biology studies, the approach described here is a useful one for fast, high-throughput gene discovery. a high priority for comparative developmental biology research is gene expression and function analyses. by sequencing at great depth and testing a variety of cdna preparation methods , we have generated tens of thousands of gene sequences of sufficient lengths for the commonly used developmental techniques of in situ hybridization and rnai-mediated gene knockdown. these data can also be used for phylogenetic, population genetic, and functional genomic applications, provide a starting point for identification of genomic regulatory sequences, and assist with assembly of hemipteran genomes sequenced in the future.

note added in proof
while this article was in review, kumar and blaxter  <cit>  published a comparison of de novo assemblers for  <dig> transcriptome data, and reported important shortcomings of newbler v <dig>  compared to other available assemblers. specifically, the authors reported that newbler v <dig>  produced the smallest assembly  of the assemblers tested. the authors argue that this poor performance is likely because newbler v <dig>  inexplicably discards portions of read overlap information. in contrast, a newer, currently unreleased version of newbler, v <dig> , produced the most complete assembly of all those tested. kumar and blaxter  therefore strongly advise all de novo  <dig> transcriptome assembly projects which have used newbler v <dig>  to recompute their assemblies with newbler v <dig> .

to address this concern, we obtained a pre-release version of newbler v <dig>  from roche and reassembled the o. fasciatus data, again using the -nosplit flag. in contrast to kumar and blaxter , we observed much less dramatic differences between the assemblies produced by newbler v <dig>  and newbler v <dig>  . for example, kumar and blaxter  report that newbler v <dig>  increased their total assembly size by 39% compared to newbler v <dig> . for the o. fasciatus data analyzed here, newbler v <dig>  increased the total assembly size by less than 1% . further, we observed very similar numbers of isogroups, isotigs, and singletons between the two assemblies . we did observe a 16% increase in the number of contigs reported by newbler v <dig> , but this difference was markedly less than the 80% increase observed in the data analyzed by kumar and blaxter . after blasting all of the assembled isotigs and cap3-assembled singletons against the refseq database, we identified a total of  <dig>  unique blast hits, compared to  <dig>  genes identified using newbler v <dig> .

these results suggest that, although we did observe a modest increase in assembly size using newbler v <dig> , the analyses presented in the current study are largely robust against differences between currently available versions of newbler. one possible explanation for the difference between these results and those observed by kumar and blaxter , is the greater sequencing depth performed in the current study. if in fact the poor performance of newbler v <dig>  involves discarding information in regions of low coverage, the fact that our dataset includes ~ <dig> x more reads than that analyzed by kumar and blaxter  may explain the reduced improvement that newbler v <dig>  provided our dataset. we also suggest that the reduced number of genes identified via blast observed by kumar and blaxter  may result from the fact that the authors excluded singletons from their analyses. if newbler v <dig>  indeed fails to assemble regions of low coverage and instead retains those reads as singletons, many genes of interest may only be present as singletons. indeed, we observed many genes of interest exclusively represented as singletons . thus, for the purpose of gene discovery, we emphasize that future de novo transcriptome projects should analyze singletons as an important source of useful gene sequence.

although our results do not appear to be greatly sensitive to which version of newbler is used, we agree with kumar and blaxter  that future transcriptome project should use utilize the most current available version of newbler, or whichever assembler algorithm they find most useful for their data.

