BACKGROUND
comparative whole-genome analyses have demonstrated that horizontal gene transfer  provides a significant contribution to prokaryotic genome evolution/innovation. in fact, it is very likely that a significant proportion of the genetic diversity exhibited by extant bacteria might be the result of the acquisition of sequences from more or less distantly related organisms  <cit> . indeed, hgt gives a venue for bacterial diversification by the reassortment of existing capabilities  <cit>  and this formidable sexual promiscuity has given bacteria a great advantage, providing an awesome mechanism for ongoing adaptive evolution, a sort of permanently and rapidly evolving communal genome  <cit> .

during evolution, hgt and recombination have shaped bacterial genomes, which today appear as complex mosaics of genes from different lineages, species, and genera  <cit> .

in this picture, plasmids , might have played  a major role because they can be transferred between microorganisms, thus representing natural vectors for the transfer of genes and the functions they code for  <cit> . moreover, it can be suggested that, during their evolutionary history, plasmids can undergo genetic rearrangements with either plasmids and/or cromosome residing the same cytoplasm and/or with phages infecting the same cell. as a consequence, newly acquired genes can be integrated on plasmids and  be maintained.

in general, three major processes can mediate hgt among bacteria: transformation , transduction  and conjugation   <cit> . however, regardless of the transfer mechanism, once that dna has entered the recipient cell it can undergo homologous recombination or homology-facilitated illegitimate recombination and can be successfully integrated into the genome of the new host. lastly, if the newly acquired dna confers a selective advantage to the host, it can be maintained and, possibly, spread again through the bacterial population. importantly, it can be surmised that, at least in the first stages following the integration event , exogenous sequences maintain their own peculiar compositional features  that usually differ from the rest of the "new" hosting molecule; for this reason these sequences are often defined "atypical".

atypical  genes detection can be pursued by composition-based methods  <cit>  that involve alignment-free features, such as gc% content and/or δ*  <cit> . compositionally oriented methods rely on the observation that some genome features  are typical for a given bacterial genome and similar between closely related genomes. accordingly, recently acquired genes are likely to display anomalous composition, especially when they originated in distantly related species; moreover a different composition will also be observed in those cases in which amelioration process has been retarded. interestingly, it has been proposed that the genome signature  of plasmids does not resemble that of their host genome, probably indicating either absence of amelioration or a less stable relationship between plasmids and their host  <cit> .

based on composition-oriented strategies, recent analyses on large sets of bacterial and archaeal chromosomes have revealed their mosaic structure, since considerable proportions of most of them consist of horizontally acquired genes  <cit> . for example, applying a bayesian method on  <dig> prokaryotic complete genomes, nakamura et al  found that the average proportion of horizontally transferred genes per genome was about 12% of all orfs, ranging from  <dig> % to 25%. similarly cortez et al. , analysing a set of  <dig> bacterial and archaeal chromosomes , found that a large fraction of them was populated by atypical genes  . hence, this strongly indicates that archaeal and bacterial chromosomes contain an impressive proportion of recently acquired foreign genes  coming from a still largely unexplored reservoirs  <cit> . finally, the same authors found that among the identified cags, a large number were likely of plasmid origin  <cit> . these lines of evidence suggest that genetic mobility should not be merely interpreted in terms of transportation of genes bypassing the cell barriers of prokaryotes, but rather as a perpetual flow between discrete reproductive units  <cit> , i.e chromosomes and/or mge, including plasmids. in fact, an emerging view suggests that plasmids  should be considered as mosaics of functional blocks  of genes  <cit> . remarkably, in a few cases, the mosaic structure of plasmids  has been demonstrated  <cit>  revealing interesting insights on the dissemination of key biological traits such as antibiotic resistance, virulence and heavy metal detoxification. accordingly, it is reasonable that the identification and the analysis of plasmid atypical genes  might reveal interesting insights in the  network of intra- and inter-cellular gene transfer that plasmids can face during their evolution. indeed, pags might be either the outcome of  hgt or of internal recombination events with chromosome residing the same cytoplasm but possessing different compositional signatures.

however, to the best of our knowledge, a massive analysis of alien modules that may reside on plasmid molecules has not been undertaken up to now. therefore, the aim of this work was to develop a statistically validated computational strategy that integrates two distinct compositional measures  to scan nearly  <dig> archaeal and bacterial plasmids for the presence of pags. finally retrieved pags datasets have been analyzed, revealing interesting trends in the overall plasmid gene exchange network.

methods
analyzed genomes
all the available complete plasmids, phages and chromosome sequences were downloaded from ncbi ftp site at . concerning plasmids, we focused our attention only on those longer than  <dig> kb and harboring at least  <dig> orfs, in order to be able to detect δ* and differences in gc% content among all the genes. this allowed to assemble a dataset of  <dig> plasmids for a total of  <dig>  orfs. the complete list of plasmids analyzed in this work  is available as additional file  <dig> 

atypical genes detection
classically, atypical genes detection has been pursued either by i) phylogenetic methods based on sequence alignment) and/or ii) by composition-based methods that involve alignment-free features such as gc% content, synonymous codon usage or the frequencies of overlapping short oligomers  <cit> . several in silico based methods have been conceived in the past few years to identify foreign genes that were recently acquired by chromosomes  <cit> . however, it is not possible to discriminate between plasmids atypical or native genes using phylogeny-oriented methods since a set of homologous and universally shared sequences  are often unavailable. furthermore, the absence of a universally shared "core" of genes  when analysing plasmids sequences does not allow the use of classical statistics methods , which require the presence of a set of native genes in order to identify those orfs that have a signifcant different composition. hence, in this work, we have developed a computational strategy  that combines two compositional measures  in order to identify putative pags within a dataset of  <dig> plasmids. briefly, gc content is calculated as /, where g, c, a and t is the number of guanines, cytosine, adenines and thymines, respectively. conversely, δ* between two sequences a and b  is calculated as δ∗ = ∑xy|ρ*xy−ρ*xy| where the sum extends over all possible xy dinucleotides and where ρxy = fxy /fxfy, with fxy representing the frequency of the dinucleotide xy in the genome.

hence, for each of the  <dig>  orfs of the  <dig> plasmids , we estimated both the δ* and the gc content difference  in respect to the corresponding source plasmid . since the distributions of these values did not follow a normal distribution , we used a distribution-independent procedure to evaluate the probability of each point of these distributions. performing a bootstrap sampling  of all the obtained values. in other words, a probability was assigned to each of the values  of these two distributions computing it as p = n/n, where n is the number of times in which the observed value  was greater than the other  values after n samplings. by doing so, two distinct p-values  were associated to each sequence of the dataset: the first accounting for the probability of a gene to be atypical in terms of δ∗ and the other accounting for the probability of a gene to be atypical in terms of Δgc. further on, these two distinct p-values were integrated in a single one according to the fisher method  <cit> . in its basic form, the fisher method is used to combine the results from two  tests bearing upon the same overall null hypothesis. in other words, fisher's method combines p-values into one test statistic  using the formula: x <dig> = -2∑loge, where pi is the p-value for the ith hypothesis test. accordingly,  only those sequences identified at a confidence interval  greater than 95% were considered pags. moreover, in order to explore different ci thresholds, we also collected gene sets that were identified as atypical with lower confidence values . the whole pipeline has been implemented in perl codes and is available upon request. as it might be expected, lower ci thresholds allowed the assembly of larger pags dataset, ranging from  <dig>  to almost  <dig>  .

identification of pags source molecules
in order to identify the most likely source molecule of identified pags we developed a similarity-oriented computational pipeline according to which each of the identified pag was used as a query for a blast  <cit>  search against three different databases, each of which embedding  <dig> sequences retrieved from ncbi plasmid, phage and chromosome databases , respectively. for each of the blast searches, only the best blast hit was considered, in order to reduce any possible bias due to the presence of closely related sequences in the database that would falsely increase the number of homologs for a given orf. this strategy was repeated  <dig> times for each pag and, for each of the  <dig> runs, new plasmid, chromosome and phage databases were assembled, randomly sampling  <dig> sequences from the ncbi databases. finally, the putative source molecule was identified according to the database  that produced the highest number of best hits after  <dig> blast probings.

statistics
all statistical tests were performed with the r package  <cit> . all other statistical analyses were performed using in-house developed perl scripts.

RESULTS
pags general feaures
pags distribution
we applied the computational pipeline described in methods  to  <dig> archaeal  and bacterial  plasmids  in order to explore their mosaic structure, using a confidence value of 95% . in this way we were able to collect  <dig> compositionally atypical orfs, denominated pags  distributed through  <dig> plasmid molecules . the remaining plasmids  do not possess any atypical gene at all. the fasta format of pags sequences  is available as additional file  <dig>  the analysis of the distribution of pags  within the assembled plasmid dataset revealed that they are not evenly distributed , ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> pag . overall the distribution of pags across the microbial dataset showed that a high number of plasmids possess a small number of pags  whereas only a few of them possess higher number of atypical orfs . importantly, the same trend was observed with pags dataset retrieved at lower ci, i.e. 70%, 80% and 90% .

to find possible correlations between pags distribution and the taxonomy of their hosting cells, we evaluated the percentage of pags for each of the genera embedded in our dataset. for clarity purposes, in figure  <dig> we report only results concerning those genera for which it was possible to retrieve at least  <dig> plasmids during dataset assembly procedures ; complete results are provided in additional file  <dig>  overall, we found that pags number varies greatly among the different genera . besides, since the taxonomical distribution of pags might be strongly influenced by the overall number of sampled sequences from each genus, we evaluated the statistical significance of this distribution by comparing them with  <dig> randomly assembled ones, obtained re-shuffling the  <dig> pags within the entire plasmids dataset and counting the fraction of times each genus possessed a number of pags greater or lower than the observed one. this gives a p-value accounting for the statistical significance of the number of pags retrieved within each genus in respect to our data model, i.e. that pags were randomly distributed within the plasmids.

overall we found that  <dig>  genera possessed an amount of pags that was higher  or lower  than that expected to occur by chance .

the two best-scoring genera in terms of pags content were acaryochloris and shigella ; in both cases pags enrichment was shown to be statistically significant. interestingly, plasmids from a. marina were already shown to possess metabolic capabilitities that were probably acquired hgt transfer  <cit> , thus confirming their mosaic structure assessed by pags analysis. similarly, the mosaicism of shigella plasmids is a well known issue  <cit>  and has been demonstrated to be biologically relevant since it has probably allowed these strains to acquire pathogenic adaptation  <cit> .

both genera resulted pags enriched also when lower ci thresholds were applied  although lowering ci values below 80% resulted in statistical inconsistency, likely due to the inclusion of too many false positives in the dataset.

at all ci thresholds analyzed, also pags depleted plasmids span over a large taxonomic range, comprising actinobacteria, firmicutes, proteobacteria and cyanobacteria. interestingly, we found that α-proteobacterial plasmids  are higlhy represented within pags-depleted plasmids, suggesting that plasmids hosted by representatives of this taxonomic unit might undergo recombination/hgt events less frequently than the others. the finding that these bacteria harbor a lower number of pags than that expected by chance, might be accounted for by the fact that these are mainly soil inhabiting microorganisms. indeed, it has been proposed that bacteria inhabiting this ecological niche might represent a less connected component of the overall plasmids-mediated hgt network  <cit> . accordingly, this might partially explain their lower number of pags. alternatively, since it has been suggested that there is considerable gene flow between replicons in the rhizobiaceae  <cit> , it can be surmised that these bacteria frequently undergo recombination with the chromosomes of their hosting cells. however it is noteworthy that, in most cases, compositional features of rhizobiaceae replicons are pretty similar  in sinorhizobium and rhizobium representatives along all the replicons inhabiting the same cell). thus, it is absolutely possbile that a fraction of this internal recombination event may remain obscure due to the composition-oriented pipeline developed in this work. interestingly, for what concerns identified pags  we found that in alpha-proteobacteria chromosomal origin pags are more represented in respect to the whole dataset , suggesting that plasmids from these microorganisms might really have more genes of chromosomal origin that what is seen in other species.

pags and plasmids size
in principle, the acquisition and the maintainance of exogeneous dna by a plasmid molecule might lead to the expansion of its coding capabilities and, parallely, to an increase of its size. moreover, it might be expected that larger plasmids possess a higher number of "entry points" for exogeneous dna in respect to smaller ones, thus somehow promoting the acquisition of novel genetic material. to test these hypotheses, we compared the number of pags possessed by each plasmid with its size . we found only a slightly positive correlation  between the length  of each plasmid and its pags content. indeed, within our dataset we retrieved plasmids completely riddled in pags as, for example, far04_lp28- <dig> plasmid from borrelia garinii far <dig>  where we found almost 80% of atypical genes. conversely, in a plasmid of similar size  we were not able to detect any pag. this finding might suggest that plasmids can undergo recombination with other informative molecules and/or hgt regardless of their size. moreover, this might also indicate that, the acquisition of foreign dna might not be the only force driving the growth and the expansion of plasmids coding capabilities and that other molecular mechanisms  might play a certain role. similar trends  also when pags dataset retrieved with lower ci thresholds were analyzed .

pags functions
we aimed at identifying the most represented functions performed by pags. to fulfill this task we adopted the computational pipeline implemented in blast2go   <cit>  and performed an automated functional annotation. for most of pags it was not possible to identify any associated function. this was somehow expected, since it has already been shown  <cit>  that the function of most of the plasmid encoded proteins is still unknown. specifically, on a total of  <dig> sequences used as input for b2go,  <dig> pags did not retrieve any blast hit and  <dig> retrieved an hypothetical ortholog in the database  but did not produce any mapping to a known biological function. hence, overall, an important fraction of pags  could not be linked to any hit in functional databases and, as a consequence, to any known biological function. for the remaining  <dig>  it was possible to retrieve a putative biological process. for clarity purposes, we show only those biological process that possessed at least  <dig> representatives within the pags dataset .

as shown in figure  <dig>  most of the pags encoded proteins  are associated to those molecular functions that are able to catalyze the movement of dna among and within informative molecules, that is dna integration, transposition and conjugation . notably, this result partially validates the applied approach for pags detection, since genes that are able to move across different molecules are also expected to differ from a compositional viewpoint from the correspondig hosting molecule. moreover, we found that another important fraction  is represented by proteins involved in transcription regulation . a further investigation revealed that these proteins are mainly involved in important biological processes that are usually associated to plasmids and\or trasposons and that have a  long documentated history of hgts, such as mercury detoxification , tetracycline resistance  and virulence . the presence of such proteins within the assembled pags dataset is intriguing. indeed, it might be expected that the introgression of proteins capable of interfering with the overall  regulatory network of the cell might be  "dangerous"  and prone to be counterselected by the novel hosting cell. however, further analyses  revealed that, a considerable amount of pags are embedded in more or less compact clusters, involved in processes that are known to be often spread by hgt . accordingly, atypical trascriptional regulators might be part of this gene clusters and, consequently, might be involved in the regulation of the flanking regions. alternatively, it can be surmised that, after the introgression of the atypical transcriptional regulator, some modifications  might have occurred, rendering the newly acquired sequence compatible with the overall "new" regulatory network, that is more easily recognizable by the transcriptional apparatus of the host cell, as experimentally demonstrated  <cit> . after these two biological processes, we found that pathogenesis- and antibiotic resistance-related sequences are the most abundant among annotated pags . remarkably, the finding that these two biological processes are highly represented among atypical genes underlines the key role that hgt possesses in the spreading of these two important biological features within the microbial world.

finally, the high percentage of pags that did not retrieve any blast hit during the b2go searches, might speak towards the presence of an important fraction of pseudogenes within our pags dataset. accordingly, these genes might represent aberrant sequences that, in the absence of strong selective pressure, have accumulated a great number of mutations and have evolved beyond recognition. the fact that we identified them as pags might rely on the observation that pseudogenes are often originated from failed hgt events between two different source molecules  <cit> . interestingly, also premature stop codons  have been indicated as a typical characteristic of pseudogenes that, in turn, are known to originate  from failed hgt  <cit> . indeed, pags encoded proteins are, on average, shorter  than not-atypical ones , suggesting that part of the pags retrieved might indeed be pseudogenes, probably originated from unsuccessful integration in the host plasmids. notably, pags datasests retrieved at different thresholds followed the same overall trend .

pags source molecules
as previously pointed out, pags may derive from homologous recombination or homology-facilitated illegitimate recombination between a given plasmid and/or other informative molecules, that is phages, chromosomes or other plasmids. hence, we aimed at identifying the putative source molecule of pags. to this purpose, we have developed a computational approach  that, on the basis of the number of orthologs present in different  plasmid, chromosome and phage databases allows to assign the most likely source molecule to a set of sequences . it must be stated clear that this kind of strategy has only an explorative purpose and might be strongly influenced by the present content of public databases that, undoubtedly, represents just a glimpse of the real biodiversity present in nature. for this reason, the reliability of the developed approach was firstly revealed by a test on a set of  <dig> likely chromosomal native sequences retrieved by cortez et al.  <cit>  from a set of  <dig> bacterial and archaeal chromosomes. indeed, results of this preliminar screening showed that almost 90% of the probed sequences were correctly annotated, i.e. resulted to possess a putative chromosome origin. furthermore, we sought to test the implemented strategy on a set of sequences of plasmid and phage origin. however, as already pointed out, in these cases a set of "core" sequences is very difficult  to be retrieved. hence, the previously described pipeline was applied on two distinct randomly assembled datasets of viral and plasmids sequences, embedding  <dig> sequences each. results similar to those obtained with  chromosome native sequences were obtained  thus suggesting that, in most cases, the implemented strategy is able to detect the correct source molecule of a given sequence.

applying the described strategy to our pags dataset revealed that, as shown in figure  <dig>  most of the identified pags  are of likely plasmid origin. on the contrary, chromosome and phage sequences appear to be much rarer, being represented by  <dig> % and  <dig> % of pags, respectively. remarkably, almost 13% of all the probed pags , did not retrieve a clear corresponding match in the plasmid, chromosome and phage databases and, for this reason, their origin remained "undetermined" . finally, less than 1% of the pags did not retrieve any match in any of the databases during our blast probings and were labelled as "not found" in figure  <dig>  again, also sequences retrieved with lower ci thresholds showed the same hypothetical origin, with likely plasmid orgin sequences being largely over-represented . taken together these results indicate that most of the pags are likely to appear only in plasmids rather than begin shared among different types of informative molecules. we speculate here that most of retrieved pags likely derive from plasmid-plasmid gene exchanges and that, vice versa, integrations following virus-plasmid and/or chromosome-plasmid gene exchange appear to be less frequent. remarkably, this finding fits with previous analyses  <cit>  on the structure of the overall dna-exchange network and that suggested that dna families are mostly exchanged among the same type of dna carriers . our analyses indicate that this might hold true  in the case of plasmid molecules.

clusters of pags
chromosomal atypical genes are often organized in  tight clusters. these chromosomal regions, named genomic islands  <cit> , embeds, for example, genes involved in pilus and fimbriae formation, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis or virulence and have been shown to have played a crucial role in microbial evolution  <cit> . similarly, pags might either stand alone or be embedded in  clusters on their source molecule representing, for example, successfully integrated transposons and/or integrons. hence, we investigated this issue and evaluated if retrieved pags lied in clusters or were scattered throughout the corresponding plasmid. we estimated gene clustering at three different gene distance thresholds, that is  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp. results shown below refer to genes that are not separated by more than  <dig> bp . overall we found that  <dig> pags  are embedded in  <dig> clusters of different size . the complete list of all identified pags clusters, together with their corresponding organisms and gi codes, are provided as additional material . most of them  are bi-cistronic clusters, while another important fraction  is represented by arrays of three genes. longer clusters were quite rare and we found only  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> clusters embedding  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively. this trend is in partial agreement with previous findings on cromosomal clusters of atypical genes  <cit>  and suggests that pags clusters are quickly fragmented and/or eroded following integration. alternatively, this could suggest that the transfer and integration of shorter clusters is somehow favoured in respect to longer ones. finally, as shown in additional file  <dig>  short gene arrays seem to be more frequent also when pags were retrieved al lower cis.

among identified pags clusters, some possess a partially documented evolutionary history, mainly driven by hgt/recombination events as, for example, mercury resistance gene cluster. in fact, mercury resistance genes  have been usually found embedded in a single compact operon  <cit>  that, in turn, has been suggested to represent an aberrant mercury resistance transposon  that, in some cases, has lost those genes responsible for its transposition  <cit> . the analysis of pags clusters allowed the identification of   <dig> different mer clusters  that showed a different composition in respect to the source molecule, thus revealing the pivotal role of hgt in the spreading of this metabolic ability across bacteria belonging to  very different taxonomical units and inhabiting separate ecological niches. moreover, other gene clusters  coding for important biological traits  were retrieved. for example invasion-associated genes encoding proteins involved in invasion of mammalian cells were found in atypical clusters on plasmids retrieved from different specie of shigella genus  providing further support to the idea that one  hgt envent played a role in spreading this feature within representatives of this genus  <cit> . similarly, plasmid mediated hgt seems to have contributed to the spreading of other key metabolic traits in microbial representatives, as, for example, cobalamin biosynthesis  <cit>  and tetracycline resistance for which very similar  gene clusters were retrieved from very distantly related microorganisms, including geobacter, halorubrum, methylibium, methylobacterium and deinococcus representatives in the case of cobalamin biosynthesis and escherichia, klebsiella, aeromonas, serratia, yersinia and enterobacter in the case of tet genes .

pags and conjugative plasmids
among plasmids, conjugative ones have been defined "vessels" of the communal gene pool  <cit> . indeed, this class of plasmids possesses the ability to "visit" different cells and, in principle, undergo genetic rearrangements  with other plasmids and/or other informative molecules . for this reason, conjugative plasmids might be expected to possess a higher amount of atypical genes in respect to plasmids that are not  mobilizable. to test this hypothesis, we performed a comparative analysis of the amount of pags belonging to conjugative and non-conjugative plasmids. the conjugative/mobilizable plasmids  embedded in our dataset were identified by searching for their propagation-related genes adopting the following strategy: 1) a dataset of genes involved in the propagation of conjugative plasmids  was assembled probing a search on the aclame database http://aclame.ulb.ac.be/; 2) a blast search with each of the sequence of our dataset against the tra/mob-like database previously assembled  was carried out and then 3) the number of tra/mob-like genes was determined for each plasmid. in this way we were able to divide our plasmid dataset into  conjugative/mobilizable plasmids  and  not conjugative/mobilizable plasmids . data obtained revealed that, on average, cmps harbor a higher number of pags than that exhibited by ncmps and that the distribution of pags in these two classes of plasmids were significantly different . indeed, cmps possess, on average,  <dig>  pags, whereas ncmps posssess only  <dig>  atypical orfs for each plasmid. data obtained are summarized in figure  <dig> which shows the different trends for cmps and ncmps. this holds true also when pags dataset retrieved at lower thresholds  were analyzed 

the high number of pags retrieved in cmps provide strong support to the idea that plasmids have played  a central role in microbial evolution  <cit> . in fact, our data suggest that, by visiting different cells, cmps can undergo recombination event with the host's dna molecules more frequently than ncmps; consequently, they can probably acquire pieces of exogeneuos dna that, in turn, can be further spread within the whole microbial communities. this idea is also partially supported by the finding that cmps, on average, possess more and longer pags clusters in respect to ncmps as reported in additional file  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
within the complex evolutionary network of plasmids, new functional blocks are added and exchanged. however, to date, information on plasmids atypical regions is available only for a very limited number of plasmids and/or microorganisms.

in this work we have developed a computational pipeline to detect compositionally atypical orfs that reside on plasmids and performed a large scale analysis of them. implementing our strategy on a dataset of nearly  <dig> plasmids we have identified  <dig> pags, almost 6% of all the analyzed orfs. accordingly, these pags are likely the outcome of  hgt event, although it must be mentioned the hypothesis that, at least part of them, may derive from events of internal recombination with chromosome inhabiting the same cytoplasms but that, in some cases, may possess different compositional features in respect to the corresponding plasmids .

it is worth of noticing that the total amount of retrieved pags is, on average, lower than that estimated for chromosomes   <cit> . this might be due to the high confidence interval  applied during our pags retrieval pipeline , that might have led to a partial understimatation of the actual amount of atypical orfs that are integrated on plasmids. indeed, applying the same pipeline for pags retrieval with lower ci thresholds allowed to assemble larger pags datasets . nevertheless analyses on these  assembled datasets revealed overlapping trends, suggesting that the possible exclusion of some false negatives did not influence the general conclusions that can be drawn on pags and, more in general, on plasmid-mediated hgt. overall, we found that pags are not uniformly distributed among the sampled plasmids dataset. indeed most of the plasmids harbor a few atypical genes or do not possess any atypical gene at all, wehreas pags enriched plasmids are progressively more rare. this finding is in partial agreement with previous findings on horizontal flow of plasmid genes  <cit>  and suggests that all plasmids may not contribute equally to the overall horizontal flow of genes but, instead, some of them may occupy more central positions in the overall network of hgt events. in particular, this role might be covered by conjugative plasmids that have been shown to possess, on average, a higher amount of atypical regions in respect to not mobilizable ones.

interestingly, plasmids size does not sensibly correlate with pags content. this result may provide important evolutionary insights, suggesting that the acquisition of exogeneous dna  might not be the only force driving the plasmids assembly and the expansion of their coding capabilities. indeed, it might be possible that other molecular mechanisms play a role in this process, such as gene duplication  . moreover, the fact that for a fraction of the identified pags it was not possible to retrieve an associated function, together with the observation that pags encoded proteins are, on average, shorter than not-atypical ones, points towards the presence of a fraction of pseudogenes within pags. accordingly, these might have originated from unsuccessful hgt events, one of the most likely source of pseudogenes within prokaryotic genomes  <cit> .

the automated functional annotation we have performed has revealed that, among the annotated pags, most are involved in the overall process of dna mobilization, although other biologically relevant functions have been identified, such as transcription, pathogenesis and antibiotic resistance. the fact that we have retrieved the genes encoding for these functions associated to atypical dna regions has important biological drawbacks, underlining the important role of hgt in the bacterial sharing of these key traits. importantly pags are often found in multi-cistronic clusters embedding two or more genes. however, the fact that shorter plasmids  are much more frequent than longer ones, probably indicates that pags clusters are fragmented following thier integration or that, alternatively, the transfer of shorter clusters is favoured in respect to longer gene arrays.

finally, our analysis revealed that most of the pags might be of plasmid origin suggesting that plasmid-plasmid gene exchange might be favoured in respect to phage-plasmid and chromosome-plasmid ones. this is in partial agreement with previous findings  <cit>  and reveals that a sort of preferential gene flow between vehicles of the same type  might exist.

authors' contributions
mf conceived of the study and wrote the perl codes for the analyses. mf and eb performed the analyses. mf and rf interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
analyzed plasmds dataset. table with the information concerning the  <dig> analyzed plasmids, including their name, their accession number and pags content at different ci thresholds.

click here for file

 additional file 2
all pags sequences. fasta files embedding all the sequences identified as pags at the different ci values.

click here for file

 additional file 3
lower confidence pags distribution. pags  ditribution across the plasmids composing the dataset.

click here for file

 additional file 4
pags and taxonomy. full taxonomical distribution of pags.

click here for file

 additional file 5
lower confidence pags and plasmids size for lower ci values. scatterplots illustrating the low positive correlation existing between plasmids size and their pags content, with three different pags datasets retrieved at a) 70%, b) 80% and c) 90%.

click here for file

 additional file 6
lower confidence pags functional annotation. a) full cog http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/cog functional annotation of pags retrieved at 70%, 80% and 90% cis. in particular, the function each of the sequences embedded in these datasets was inferred according to the one assigned to the best blast hit of cog database. b) full blast2go functional annotation of pags retrieved at 95% ci.

click here for file

 additional file 7
lower confidence pags length. the length of lower confidence pags encoded proteins.

click here for file

 additional file 8
clusters of lower confidence pags. results of gene clusters analysis for a)  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> bp gene distance threshold and b) for pags retrieved at 70%, 80% and 90% cis.

click here for file

 additional file 9
complete pags clusters accession codes. the complete list of all identified pags  clusters , together with their corresponding organisms and gi codes.

click here for file

 additional file 10
the atypical mer, tet, maxi and cbi clusters. schematic representation of the atypical mer, tet, maxi and cbi clusters found in different plasmids of different microorganisms.

click here for file

 additional file 11
lower confidence pags in cmps and ncmps. distribution of lower confidence pags among cmps and ncmps

click here for file

 additional file 12
pags clusters in cmps and ncmps. distribution and length of pags clusters in cmps and ncmps.

click here for file

 acknowledgements and funding
mf is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from "fondazione adriano buzzati-traverso". we are grateful to three anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions that greatly improved the manuscript.
