BACKGROUND
in natural communities, cyclically parthenogenetic reproduction is a complex and adaptable reproductive strategy with strong implications for ecological and evolutionary processes, such as genetic diversity, clonal erosion, interspecific hybridization and gene flow. in this mode of reproduction, one or more generations of parthenogenetically produced females alternate with a sexual generation formed by males producing sperm, and females producing haploid eggs. in cladoceran daphnia, for example, females usually clone themselves by producing parthenogenetic daughters. only when unfavourable conditions arise, such as food shortage, overcrowding, or change in temperature , do daphnia individuals switch to the production of males and sexual haploid eggs that require fertilization, and then diapause. the general advantages of this reproductive mode are, on the one hand, enhanced genotypic diversity after sexual recombination and, on the other, high population growth rates during asexual periods .

the sexual phase of daphnia’s reproductive cycle results not only in the production of new genotypes, but also in the formation of interspecific hybrids if closely related species co-occur . via asexual propagation, these hybrids can then sometimes reach high abundances . such hybridization is especially common among the members of the daphnia longispina complex and widespread among the species d. galeata and d. longispina . most previous work on spatial patterns in the d. longispina complex explored daphnia communities across large geographical regions . for example, keller et al.  <cit>  found that although d. galeata and d. longispina are present on both sides of the alps, d. galeata is more common in lakes south of the alps, whereas d. longispina dominates in the north. in addition to this apparent geographical gradient, differences in environmental conditions also play a role  <cit> . however, little is known about spatial variation in the hybridizing d. longispina complex over small scales, where dispersal among neighbouring habitats might be of great importance. the main stage for daphnia’s passive dispersal involves sexual diapause eggs being carried by water birds or transported by wind  <cit> . since parental species produce more conspecific- than interspecific-crosses , and since the “hatching success” of hybrid diapause eggs is inherently lower than of parental offspring  <cit> , parental species are expected to have higher gene flow capacities than hybrids  <cit> .

in cyclical parthenogens, long periods of strict asexual reproduction might result in declines of clonal diversity. this process has been described in life history models as “clonal erosion”  <cit> . in the field, such a decrease in clonal diversity over the growing season has been reported for populations of daphnia magna  and of cyclically parthenogenetic rotifers . with respect to daphnia, evidence for clonal erosion comes from populations inhabiting temporary ponds . in these habitats, sexual and asexual periods are strictly separated, with sexually produced offspring hatching from diapause eggs mainly in spring, giving rise to a large number of clonal lineages. due to subsequent clonal competition, genetic diversity decreases gradually. in contrast, previous studies of daphnia populations from permanent lakes did not detect a consistent decrease in clonal diversity over a growing season . in these and many other studies, however, the “clones” were defined by few allozyme loci and might actually have represented clonal groups instead of single lineages  <cit> . this methodological constraint could bias the results in such a way that a potential decrease in genotypic diversity might have been undetectable. indeed, clonal erosion might also shape the genetic structure in overwintering daphnia populations, as argued in a study applying higher resolution microsatellite markers  <cit> . however, this conclusion remains speculative, because it was derived from an analysis of genotypic structure of daphnia populations only at the end of the growing season. in a more detailed summer-autumn field survey of the d. longispina complex in two large lakes, clonal diversity was traced over time by genotyping daphnia at  <dig> polymorphic microsatellite loci  <cit> . this set of markers is able to detect true clonal lineages  <cit> , and the clonal diversity was found to be roughly constant  <cit> . in that study  <cit> , the exclusion of the spring period, during which thousands of new genotypes are expected to hatch from diapause eggs, may have prevented the detection of an initial drop in diversity . consequently, to rigorously test for clonal erosion in permanent habitats, a survey must start early in the year when genetic diversity is expected to be highest, and changes must be followed over the whole growing season until late autumn, otherwise a decline might remain undetected.

in the present study, we explored spatial patterns and temporal dynamics in the genotypic structure of daphnia communities from several lakes inhabited by taxa of the d. longispina complex. this was undertaken over a small spatial scale, with study sites separated by 30 km at most. we applied high-resolution genotyping . specifically, we tested if the relative frequencies of parental species and their hybrids correspond with the geographical proximity and/or environmental descriptors of the lakes. then, we looked for changes in taxon composition between spring and autumn seasons. in addition, we estimated gene flow and compared genotypic similarities among populations belonging to either parental species or hybrids, in order to find evidence for invasiveness and/or local production of hybrid taxa. finally, some lakes were tracked throughout one growing season to determine if clonal diversity decreases over time .

RESULTS
taxon assignment
the  <dig> daphnia sampled from ten small lakes  in and around munich belonged to d. galeata, d. longispina or d. galeata × d. longispina hybrids. this was based on their position in the factorial correspondence analysis  in relation to the clusters formed by  <dig> well-defined reference genotypes representing three parental species or their respective hybrids . to increase the resolution among genotypes, a separate fca was run using reference genotypes from d. galeata, d. longispina and d. galeata × d. longispina hybrids . the fca revealed that d. galeata originating from four lakes  clustered together. meanwhile, d. longispina from olch formed a separate cluster in relation to d. longispina originating from four other lakes . taxon identity was further confirmed by newhybrids  <cit> , which assigned daphnia genotypes to four of six possible classes: d. galeata , d. longispina , f <dig>  and f <dig> hybrids ; no backcrosses were detected. eleven individuals  could not be assigned, within a given 95% posterior probability, to any of the classes .

spatial patterns in taxon composition
across the sampling period , only one parental species was present within a given lake, with the exception of fasa may sample  and lerc september sample . these were, however, the single sampling dates when d. longispina was detected in these otherwise d. galeata-dominated communities. notably, there was a significant relationship between geographical distance and differences in the spring taxon composition, when calculated for presence/absence data , but not for frequency data . specifically, the lakes north and east of munich were dominated by d. galeata or hybrids , whereas the lakes north-west and west of munich were dominated by d. longispina or hybrids .

environmental preferences of parental taxa
two main principal components were extracted from six variables  by eigenvalue >  <dig>  the first component pc <dig>  reflected mainly the trophic status and age of the lake; the higher the scores, the more eutrophic  and older the lakes were. the second principal component pc <dig>  was associated mainly with high lake depth and low nitrogen concentration . overall, lakes inhabited by different daphnia species were characterized by opposite component loadings on the first principal components analysis  axis. thus, lakes inhabited by d. galeata were more eutrophic and older , while most lakes inhabited by d. longispina were of lower trophic level and younger . moreover, when fasa and lerc were scored as lakes without d. longispina  and  <dig> % , respectively – all samples pooled), the difference in mean component loadings on the pc <dig> axis was significant for this species also . in contrast, neither lake depth nor nitrogen concentration  had any influence on species abundance .

temporal changes in taxon composition
over time, daphnia taxon composition changed significantly between spring and autumn in two of the seven lakes tested. in feld, the community changed from complete dominance by f <dig> hybrids to complete dominance by d. galeata; in luss, d. longispina increased its abundance in comparison to the f <dig> hybrids .

genetic distances among spatially and temporally isolated populations of parental species and hybrids
similarities among populations from different lakes and sampling dates are illustrated by unweighted pair-group method with arithmetic mean  dendrograms based on nei’s genetic distance  <cit> . in general, populations from the same lake  clustered together . there were four exceptions to this pattern: d. galeata from lerc july sample, d. galeata from fasa april and may samples , and d. longispina from wald may sample . these particular samples were distinct from others from the respective lakes, because the genotypes which were dominant in these samples were not present in other periods . for d. galeata and d. longispina, the genetic similarities among populations corresponded well with the geographical distribution of populations. specifically, d. galeata from fasa, feld and lerc  clustered together but were otherwise isolated from heim, a lake which is 15 km away . d. longispina from luss and lang  clustered, but were isolated from d. longispina from lerc, wald or olch, lakes separated by a distance of > 6 km . in contrast, the clustering of hybrid populations did not correspond to their geographical position: hybrids from feri and luss were the closest on the dendrogram, but the most isolated geographically . overall, the genetic distance between the most isolated populations within a given taxon was highest for hybrids , half as great for d. longispina , and one-tenth as great for d. galeata .

gene flow and local production of hybrids
the mean number of migrants among lakes  differed between the parental species and hybrids . specifically, there were significantly more migrants among d. galeata populations  than among d. longispina  or hybrids , meaning that gene flow was largest for d. galeata . then, evidence for local production of hybrids was found. specifically, the hybrids from luss  were more likely assigned to the respective local parental d. longispina population than to populations of d. longispina from other lakes .

test for clonality
among  <dig> individuals with complete multilocus genotypes  profiles   <dig> unique mlgs were detected. the hypothesis that individuals sharing identical mlgs were of sexual origin was rejected , indicating that individuals with identical mlgs can be treated as the same clone.

temporal changes in clonal composition
the most striking change was observed in feld, where in may the community was dominated by only one hybrid clone. after the community crash, hybrids disappeared and multiple d. galeata clones were detected in september . regarding the three populations for which it was possible to study changes in clonal composition in more detail , a few common clones were present over a longer period of time, however the frequencies of these clones fluctuated greatly . furthermore, differences in clonal composition increased significantly with the time interval between sampling dates  for d. galeata from fasa  and d. galeata from lerc , but not for d. longispina from wald . there was no indication of clonal erosion in any of these three populations; genetic diversity  did not decrease over time .

discussion
in the present study, we surveyed spatio-temporal dynamics in hybridizing communities of daphnia originating from ten neighbouring lakes. this is a first insight into genetic diversity, clonal erosion, hybridization and gene flow on such a small spatial scale which is tightly linked to the adaptable reproductive strategy in species complexes formed by cyclical parthenogens.

spatial pattern and importance of environmental factors on taxon composition
a geographical separation was observed between communities dominated by d. galeata or d. longispina despite presumably ongoing dispersal between the neighbouring lakes. in a first step, lakes have been possibly colonized by extant neighbouring populations in the past. for example, lußsee  could have been colonized by d. longispina from langwieder see , a lake created six decades earlier, and only 100 m away . in daphnia, and other zooplankton species, the advantage of first arrivals is relatively strong, due to their rapid population growth rate . indeed, from studies of the colonization of artificial ponds, it has been reported that daphnia populations were founded by only a few genotypes  <cit> . moreover, after initial colonization, no new alleles were observed in these populations, indicating limited establishment success for genotypes arriving later  <cit> . however, it has also been observed that changes in environmental conditions might result in species shifts, especially in the d. longispina communities . thus, independent from geographical proximity, differences in lake environmental conditions may explain part of the observed spatial variation in taxon composition. indeed, pca and corresponding statistical tests showed that d. galeata occurred in more eutrophic  habitats, and d. longispina in less eutrophic  ones. this pattern is consistent with a postulate of flößner and kraus  <cit>  that d. galeata is promoted by eutrophication. moreover, by comparing the physical parameters and water quality of several lakes, keller et al.  <cit>  concluded that d. longispina prefers habitats with low phosphorus load. species-specific contrasting preferences were confirmed by the detection of a gradual replacement of d. longispina with d. galeata during periods of eutrophication  <cit> , and by follow-up experimental tests showing differential fitness of these two parental species under various phosphorus loads  <cit> .

surprisingly, although d. galeata occurred exclusively in the oldest lakes, the genetic distance among populations of d. galeata was ~1/5th of that among populations of d. longispina, implying lower divergence time for d. galeata. this could possibly be explained by the fact that d. galeata spread later and, being more invasive and a better colonizer as suggested by the highest number of migrants, replaced former residents. assuming that newly established artificial lake habitats are oligotrophic in the beginning and therefore first colonized by d. longispina, eutrophication might have allowed d. galeata to invade . overall, in our system the geographical separation between d. galeata and d. longispina dominated communities is consistent with the environmental conditions of the occupied habitats. thus, geographical and environmental forces are not exclusive, and both most likely play a role in shaping daphnia hybridizing communities.

temporal pattern and lack of clonal erosion
the relative proportion of daphnia taxa changed significantly between spring and autumn in two of the seven tested lakes. in addition, there was significant replacement of clones over time in two out of the three lakes for which a complete set of time series data was available. the observed changes may be due to the impact of environmental variation on the relative fitness of parental species and hybrids, as well as the fitness of specific clones within species, as has been shown in previous experimental surveys . however, although extinction of clones due to selection and random events should lead to an overall decrease in clonal diversity towards the end of the growing season  <cit> , no signs of clonal erosion were detected in our study. consistent with previous reports for permanent lakes , in our system the indices for clonal diversity remained roughly constant over the growing season, both for d. galeata and d. longispina populations . the presence of clonal erosion in daphnia populations may thus depend on the habitat type  <cit> . specifically, in contrast to temporary pond populations with clear separation of sexual and asexual phases in the daphnia reproductive cycle , and for which the importance of clonal erosion has been documented , the two modes of reproduction often overlap in the larger permanent lakes . this can contribute to the maintenance of high clonal diversity throughout the year. moreover, given that fitness of genotypes in the d. longispina complex varies strongly with environment , seasonal environmental changes may favour the maintenance of a high number of genotypes through fluctuating selection pressures.

local production of hybrids
in contrast to parental species, neither the frequency of hybrids in the community, nor the clonal composition of hybrid populations was associated with the geographical neighbourhood of the lakes. also, the upgma analysis showed that the highest genetic distance was detected among populations belonging to hybrids. gene flow among hybrids was negligible and hybrids were more related to parents from the same lake than to parents from other lakes. these results complement evidence from previous studies showing that d. galeata × d. longispina hybrids have impaired hatching success from diapause eggs  <cit> , possibly restricting their gene flow. this all suggests that these hybrids are rather locally produced, by multiple hybridization events  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, by applying high-resolution microsatellite markers, we addressed spatial and temporal patterns in the hybridizing d. longispina complex on a small scale, in ten recently established lakes. we found that the distribution and genotypic structure of parental daphnia species was consistent with the geographical position and the differences in environmental attributes of the lakes; in particular, the presence of d. galeata was related to higher phosphorous load. furthermore, the genetic distance among populations of d. galeata was lower than among populations of d. longispina, implying lower divergence time for d. galeata. the explanation for this may be that d. galeata spread later, being more invasive and a better colonizer, and then replaced former residents in lakes with high trophy level. finally, no clonal erosion was detected across the studied lakes, suggesting that this phenomenon may depend on the habitat type and the extent of hatching of sexual offspring. overall, the daphnia system is a useful model to gain a better understanding of dynamics in hybridizing communities formed by cyclical parthenogens.

