BACKGROUND
the coxsackie and adenovirus receptor   <cit> , a transmembrane protein of the immunoglobulin super-family, serves as a receptor for adenovirus  subgroups a, c, d, e and f  <cit>  as well as coxsackie b viruses   <cit> . car is a highly conserved protein with two predominant isoforms, produced through differential splicing, and having cytoplasmic domains of either  <dig> residues  or  <dig> residues   <cit> . the extracellular domain mediates homophilic cell adhesion  <cit>  and ectopically-expressed car localizes to homotypic intercellular contacts  <cit> . the expression of car is regulated developmentally  <cit>  as well as in a tissue-specific manner  <cit> . to date, most studies on car expression in the adult have resorted to analysis of transcript levels. these have revealed that the pattern of tissue-specific expression differs between humans and mice. in humans, a predominant transcript of ~ <dig> –  <dig>  kb is observed in heart, testis, prostate and pancreas while much less expression is detected in liver, brain, colon and small intestine. in the mouse on the other hand, the most abundant expression is in liver, kidney, lung and heart.

interest in car stems from its function as the primary high affinity receptor for ad serotype  <dig>  the most commonly used adenoviral vector in gene therapy protocols. car expression is the main determinant in gene transfer to normal tissue as ectopic expression of car in transgenic mice leads to several magnitudes of increase in adenovirus transducibility of tissues that are otherwise refractory to ad-mediated gene expression  <cit> . as well, although decay accelerating factor  was the first described cvb receptor  <cit> , car is necessary and sufficient for cvb infection in vitro  <cit> . thus, the expression levels of car may also govern the susceptibility to cvb diseases and the pathological consequences of cvb viral infection. in this context, acute viral myocarditis and myositis are inflammatory diseases affecting cardiac and skeletal muscle that can result from infection by the coxsackie b virus. in both humans and rodents, heart is among the tissues showing the greatest abundance of car transcript while its transcripts are barely detectable in skeletal muscle even with the more sensitive reverse-transcriptase -pcr-based assay  <cit> . in contrast to heart, daf expression is absent in mature skeletal muscle  <cit> . despite the absence of daf and low car transcript levels, skeletal muscle is nevertheless susceptible to coxsackie virus-induced myositis. indeed, human patients suffering from inflammatory muscle diseases have tested positive for cbv rna  <cit> . this suggests that the low car transcript level in skeletal muscle may produce functional receptor. therefore, to examine car localization in skeletal and cardiac muscle, we used antibodies directed against the extracellular domain of car  <cit>  as well as antibodies that can differentiate between the two major car isoforms  <cit>  with alternate 3' splicing   <cit>  .

RESULTS
to immunolocalize car, frozen sections of normal human muscle biopsies were probed with polyclonal antibodies raised against the extracellular domain of car  <cit>  , or against the cytoplasmic tail, antibodies which specifically recognize the two predominant isoforms of human car   <cit> . we localized car exclusively to the neuromuscular junction in human skeletal muscle  where car immunoreactivity coincided with acetylcholine receptors as revealed by α-bungarotoxin binding. similarly, in mature murine skeletal muscle, car expression was restricted to the neuromuscular junction . interestingly, we find car expression at the neuromuscular junction to be isoform specific, with the car siv isoform accounting for all car immunoreactivity . in contrast, the tvv isoform is present in the vasculature . car is therefore identified as a novel component of the adult neuromuscular junction, joining other homotypic cell adhesion molecules such as n-cadherin and neural cell adhesion molecule  which have been localized previously to this specialized site. as with ncam  <cit> , although car is uniformly expressed in immature mouse muscle , its expression becomes downregulated within a few weeks of birth  <cit>  and its localization is confined to the neuromuscular junction. as well, in skeletal muscle undergoing regeneration, as is the case in the dystrophic mdx mouse, car is re-expressed  <cit>  as is ncam  <cit> .

car has been suggested to serve as a structural component at the intercalated discs in murine cardiac muscle  <cit>  and recently confirmed to reside primarily at the intercalated discs in both rat heart and neonatal cultured cardiomyocytes of the rodent  <cit> . using antibodies directed to the specific siv and tvv isoforms of the receptor as described above, we localized car to the intercalated discs , demonstrating for the first time expression of both receptor isoforms in human and murine heart. to confirm the presence of both isoforms, murine cardiac muscle homogenates were analyzed by sds-page followed by electrotransfer to nitrocellulose membranes. this immunoblot analysis revealed the presence of both the siv and tvv isoforms . furthermore, when murine cardiac muscle homogenates were immunoprecipitated with either rp <dig> or rp  <dig> rabbit polyclonal antibodies, western blot analysis of the resultant fractions with a chicken antibody against car c-terminal domain showed a single  <dig> kda band , confirming the specificity of the antibodies for car.

both of the cytoplasmic variants contain a pdz recognition motif at their distal end, implicating car as a putative member of multiprotein complexes. this is indeed the case in polarized epithelial cells in which car is expressed at the tight junction where it associates with the tight junction scaffolding protein zo- <dig>  <cit>  and contributes to maintenance of transepithelial resistance. the localization of car to cardiac intercalated discs is in agreement with car having a structural or regulatory role as a transmembrane member of junctional complexes. the intercalated discs are composed of at least three structurally distinct cellular junctions – desmosomes, the adherens junctions, and gap junctions  <cit> . the siv and tvv isoforms may localize to separate components of the intercalated disc, or given that car has been implicated as a transmembrane component in tight junctions  <cit> , both isoforms may be localized to the adherens junction, a structure analogous to tight junctions.

it is interesting that a correlation can be drawn between disease incidence and expression levels of the car receptor. cases of viral myocarditis in the human population outnumber those of myositis. this may be attributable to the difference of endogenous car expression between the two tissues. considering that induction of car accompanies myocarditis  <cit>  and its dramatic upregulation has recently been demonstrated in patients suffering from multiple diseases of the heart  <cit>  including dilated cardiomyopathy, a pathological phenotype linked to persistent acute myocarditis, upregulation of the receptor may render the heart even more susceptible to further viral infection. conversely, the low level of endogenous car expression in skeletal muscle may safeguard against the wide-spread viral infection seen in myocarditis and may be responsible for the less severe clinical features of myositis.

CONCLUSIONS
car is a novel member of the neuromuscular junction. in cardiac muscle, both car isoforms are found at the intercalated discs. the localization of car to these important junctional complexes suggests that car may play both a structural and a regulatory role in skeletal and cardiac muscle, and that these complexes may serve as a point of entry for coxsackie b virus.

