BACKGROUND
in general, lateral gene transfer  can be defined as the transfer of dna between organisms that does not result from sexual reproduction. it can allow organisms to acquire novel traits that are unique from those that are vertically inherited and occasionally results in higher fitness. however, since the transferred dna has little to no effect on fitness in most cases, it is often lost from the population shortly after the transfer has occurred. although lgt has been described in many different organisms over the last decades, relatively fewer cases have been found in animals compared to many other taxa. however, when identified in animals, the donors are often cytoplasmic inhabitants, such as mitochondria or intracellular bacteria. for example, nuclear mitochondrial transfers  have been found in nearly every eukaryotic genome and typically represent  <dig> % of the genome  <cit> . in animals, most of the lgt events identified as originating from bacteria have occurred between wolbachia bacteria and their various hosts.

wolbachia endosymbionts are bacteria that colonize filarial nematodes and several different arthropods, including >20% of insect species . while obligate mutualists in nematodes, wolbachia are best known for the ability to manipulate host reproduction in arthropods in various ways which include induction of parthenogenesis, feminization, male killing, and cytoplasmic incompatibility  <cit> . in general, wolbachia bacteria are intracellular and maternally inherited through the egg cytoplasm  <cit> . as some strains have also been shown to specifically target the germline stem cell niche  <cit> , these endosymbionts are ideally located to bring about heritable lgt to eukaryotic genomes  <cit> , since they colonize the cells that will give rise to the germ line and therefore offspring.

wolbachia-host lgt events are termed nuwts  <cit>  for nuclear wolbachia transfers  following the established nomenclature for numts and nupts, nuclear plastid transfers. the first nuwt described was found in the bean beetle callosobruchus chinensis <cit>  that contains ~30% of a wolbachia genome on the x-chromosome, and where about half of the genes examined showed low level transcription  <cit> . nuwts have now been identified in the genomes of many diverse invertebrate taxa  and several transfers of large segments of the wolbachia genome have been described, e.g. in monochanus alternatus   <cit>  and glossinia morsitans morsitans   <cit> . furthermore, ~20% of the nematode and arthropod species where whole genome sequence data is available have evidence supporting the presence of nuwts  <cit> , and 80% of the genomes of all known wolbachia hosts have some evidence indicating the presence of nuwts  <cit> . interestingly, every filarial nematode genome examined thus far has been shown to contain nuwts  <cit> , including nematodes that currently lack a wolbachia endosymbiont .

although very little is known in general about the function of nuwts, several nuwts or nuwt-related sequences have been found that give rise to genes that are expressed and possibly functional in their new environment. for example, salivary gland genes have been transferred between mosquitoes and wolbachia, possibly in both directions  <cit>  and experimental data for one of them showed specific localization of the expressed protein to the basal lamina of the salivary gland and indicated its importance for malaria sporozite invasion  <cit> . furthermore, expression of twenty genes of bacterial origin from the nuclear genome in mealybugs has been demonstrated  <cit> . although this does not directly infer functionality, the majority of these twenty genes has been lost in the obligate endosymbionts of the mealybug, and some of these nuclear encoded genes complement the genes retained in the endosymbionts leading to complete pathways. for example, riboflavin biosynthesis requires three insect genes that presumably arose via lgt from facultative endosymbionts belonging to the α-proteobacteria and bacteroidetes phyla, which include the genera wolbachia, cardinium, and arsenophonus <cit> . a similar result of identifying lgt from extant facultative endosymbionts was observed through an exhaustive analysis of lgt in the pea aphid, acyrthosiphon pisum. that analysis revealed twelve genes or gene fragments of bacterial origin  <cit> , five of which are most closely related to bacterial genes from the order rickettsiales  <cit> , of which wolbachia is a member. one of these genes, ldca, is transcribed in the aphid bacteriocyte and is involved in bacterial cell wall metabolism  <cit> . interestingly, buchnera aphidicola, an obligate mutualistic γ-proteobacterium associated with aphids, has all the components to synthesize the bacterial cell wall, except ldca, and it has been hypothesized that expression of this nuclear-encoded gene in the bacteriocyte may allow aphids to control growth of its endosymbiont by manipulating biosynthesis of the endosymbiont’s cell wall  <cit> . lastly, many filarial nematodes possess a ferrochelatase gene that was acquired by lgt from an α-proteobacteria in the rhizobiales  <cit> . this ferrochelatase, which encodes the terminal step of heme biosynthesis, is functionally active in an enzyme assay and complements an e. coli hemh mutant. in brugia malayi, the ferrochelatase is involved with filarial motility and viability, as assessed with a ferrochelatase inhibitor, and is essential, as assessed with rnai silencing with abnormalities arising in nuclei of germ cells and embryos  <cit> .

the nuwt in drosophila ananassae, examined here, was initially estimated to consist of an entire ~ <dig>  mbp wolbachia genome integrated on the left arm of chromosome  <dig> in a d. ananassae line from hawaii  <cit> . only low level transcription of  <dig> of the  <dig>  nuwt genes tested was observed in the d. ananassae hawaii line at the time  <cit> , and was later confirmed by the low abundance of nuwt sequences in the transcriptome of wolbachia-depleted adult flies  <cit> . although, the biological relevance of this low level transcription is not known, these results did not give strong indication for functionality of the nuwt. however, in fourteen lines from the drosophila stock center, pcr screening performed in the same study revealed the presence of similar nuwts in three more lines of d. ananassae from asia and the pacific, warranting further investigation into the evolution of this large nuwt in d. ananassae.

here, we describe the results of re-sequencing three of the four d. ananassae lines originally discovered to contain large nuwts and the results of further in situ hybridization to examine its chromosome position and structure. the analysis confirmed integration in all three lines and revealed that the integrated genomes are affected by extensive duplication and underreplication. we demonstrate that in the hawaii line the nuwt is most likely located on the heterochromatic fourth chromosome, which is abnormally large in d. ananassae compared to its close relatives. taken together, the results suggest that the nuwt in d. ananassae may not currently provide any function, but rather that it is tolerated in its new genome and contributes to the large size of a chromosome that is already riddled with non-coding dna and repeats.

RESULTS
d. ananassaelines used for genome sequencing
three of the four d. ananassae lines  that were previously found to have a nuwt  <cit>  were re-sequenced. all three lines are infected with wolbachia bacteria  and contain the nuwt   <cit> . because sequence data from contaminating wolbachia bacteria would complicate the analysis of the nuwt, the flies were treated with tetracycline  for three generations prior to dna extraction in order to create wb- nuwt+ lines. to further ensure the absence of wolbachia dna originating from the bacterial genome rather than the nuwt in the sequencing data, the ovaries of tet-treated flies were confirmed to be wb- by fluorescence in situ hybridization  microscopy with wolbachia-infected flies serving as a positive control. dna for sequencing was then isolated from the remaining carcass. separately, dna was isolated from 3rd instar larvae from a cross between a tet-treated india male and a florida female that is naturally wb- and nuwt-. female f <dig> offspring were subsequently backcrossed with males of the parental tet-treated india line, which resulted in a line without the wolbachia endosymbiont, with florida mitochondria, and a mix of florida and india nuclear genomes slightly enriched for india.

despite numerous attempts to cure the malaysia line, which is the fourth line where a nuwt was previously detected  <cit> , we were unable to generate the necessary numbers of wolbachia-free insects from this line for sequencing. on three separate instances, the line was acquired from the stock center, successfully cured using tetracycline for two generations, and the absence of wolbachia endosymbionts verified. however, following curing, the lines would not proliferate to the needed levels. it is not clear if this is due to the absence of wolbachia, the absence of other members of the microbiome, or other factors. however, as a result, this line was not sequenced.

genome sequencing and mapping
the dna extracted from each line was used to construct an ~3-kbp illumina mate pair library and an ~300-bp illumina paired end library. the resulting reads were mapped against the ~ <dig> mbp d. ananassae caf <dig> assembly  <cit>  and the ~ <dig>  mbp wri wolbachia genome  <cit>  using bwa  <cit> . the wri genome was chosen as the reference for further analyses because  previous analyses have shown that wri is more than 99% identical to the wolbachia sequences obtained from the d. ananassae genome sequencing project  <cit> ,  the mapped reads cover the whole wri genome, including genes that are not shared between wri and wmel  <cit> , and  the wolbachia sequences in the selected d. ananassae lines are estimated to differ by less than one snp in  <dig>  bp  <cit> . thus, the wri genome should be useful as a reference for the wolbachia reads in all of the sequenced d. ananassae genomes.

we considered the risk that mitochondrial sequences might erroneously map to the wri genome. across all three datasets, only nine reads of the more than  <dig>  reads were identified that mapped to both locations . given these very low numbers that would not influence the values presented nor the interpretation, we did not consider cross mapping an issue to address further. the only regions where we saw erroneous mapping of reads were in the rrna genes , which likely arose because fed adults with an active gut microbiome were used for preparing genomic dna.

analysis of sequence coverage for the hawaii line
approximately 5× coverage of the drosophila nuclear genome was expected for single copy genes based on the sequencing output of the mate pair library of the hawaii line. although mapping of the reads from this library to the d. ananassae genome shows the expected 5× coverage, or  <dig> copy , when mapping the same dataset against the wri genome, the coverage varies, suggesting 1– <dig> copies, with the majority of the genome having ≥10× coverage, or  <dig> copies . this suggests extensive duplications of the nuwt in this line with up to  <dig> copies per haploid genome in regions where the sequencing coverage is 60×.figure  <dig> 
coverage of hawaii sequencing data. the copy number for the  <dig> kbp mate pair library from the hawaii genomic dna was calculated over a  <dig> kbp window every 500 bp and plotted against the reference wri genome  and the first  <dig>  mbp of the largest scaffold  of the drosophila ananassae caf <dig> assembly. approximately 5× coverage was expected to represent single copy drosophila genes and single copy regions are apparent. however, most of the nuwt is present with at least two copies.



previously, similar copy number differences were observed using illumina sequence reads and were successfully validated for the nuwts in b. malayi <cit> . therefore, a qpcr assay was developed using  <dig> different primer pairs that amplify 4– <dig> regions predicted to be at approximately  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> copies in the nuwt of the hawaii line. in this assay, relative abundance is estimated by measuring the difference between the cycle threshold  values, i.e. the number of pcr cycles required for the fluorescent signal to exceed the background level, for the amplicons in the nuwt relative to the average ct value of  <dig> single copy d. ananassae genes to yield the Δct value -ct. the ratio of the abundance between the nuwt amplicon region and the average single copy gene is then 2Δct and should equal the number of copies of the nuwt amplicon in the genome as determined by genome sequencing. as expected, 2Δct has a positive linear correlation with the copy number over the length of the amplicon  for the hawaii line, where up to  <dig> gene copies per haploid genome could be validated. this suggests there may be as many as  <dig> copies per nucleus of large portions of this nuwt.figure  <dig> 
confirmation of coverage metrics using a qpcr based assay. the copy number was confirmed and found to be accurate up to  <dig> copies per haploid genome using a qpcr assay measuring the ratio of the lgt abundance to that of six single copy drosophila genes as shown for the  <dig> kbp mate pair library for the cured hawaii , india , and indonesia . a significant positive correlation  is found for the cured hawaii and the india line the results in panels a and c represent the accumulation of multiple qpcr experiments while those in panel b result from a single experiment.



analysis of sequence coverage for the india line
when performing the same analysis on the india line, a consistently lower coverage over the nuwt is observed when compared to single copy drosophila genes , suggesting < <dig> copy per haploid genome. even so, india has a highly similar pattern of coverage variation to the one observed in the hawaii line, indicating the presence of similar duplications . this result was consistent in three independent sequencing runs of  third instar larvae from the cross between india and florida  maintained by lk and sequenced at ncgr, santa fe, nm ;  third instar larvae from i × f maintained by lk and sequenced at igs from dna isolated on a separate occasion ; and  adult flies from a tet-treated india line obtained from the stock center at a separate time and maintained in the jcdh lab and sequenced at igs . this sequence coverage was validated with the qpcr assay described above, and a correlation similar to that for the hawaii line was observed .figure  <dig> 
coverage of india sequencing data. the copy number for the  <dig> kbp mate pair library from the india , and india x florida  genomic dna was calculated over a  <dig> kbp window every 500 bp and plotted against the reference wri genome  and the first  <dig>  mbp of the largest scaffold  of the drosophila ananassae caf <dig> assembly. the india genome shows the same relative pattern of duplication but is less abundant than single copy nuclear genes, as is the genome from offspring of a backcross of india with florida. the spikes in the coverage for the india × florida line reflect the mapping of transposase sequences.
comparison of the coverage patterns. the coverage of the indonesia genome is shown relative to that of the hawaii line by dividing the values for hawaii line by those of the indonesia line across the wri genome  and the drosophila ananassae genome . the coverage of the india line relative to the hawaii line is illustrated in the same manner . while the india line has the same pattern of duplication as hawaii, that pattern is different in the indonesia line.


summary of the sequencing and mapping statistics


drosophila
w
w
ri reads to
drosophila
the sequencing statistics for line and sequence sequence strategy are provided, including the combined read length, number of reads sequenced, number of non-duplicate reads mapping to the d. ananassae caf <dig> assembly, number of non-duplicate reads mapping to the wri genome, and the ratio of the reads mapping to the wri and d. ananassae genomes.

*this library had a significant number of duplicate mate pairs such that >84% of reads mapped, but >80% of mapped reads were duplicates.

analysis of sequence coverage for the indonesia line
in contrast to hawaii and india, the indonesia line has very even sequence coverage, indicating that there is no variation in copy number between different regions of the nuwt in this line . as expected, indonesia does not show a positive linear correlation using the qpcr assay since all of the genes have the same copy number. therefore, the plot only shows the random variation present in the data  supporting the assessment of coverage using the sequence read mapping. in all three cases examined, paired end reads yield approximately the same results as mate pair reads .figure  <dig> 
coverage of indonesia sequencing data. the copy number for the  <dig> kbp mate pair library from the indonesia genomic dna was calculated over a  <dig> kbp window every 500 bp and plotted against the reference wri genome  and the first  <dig>  mbp of the largest scaffold  of the drosophila ananassae caf <dig> assembly. the indonesia line has a nuwt with even coverage similar to the rest of the drosophila genome. the spikes in the coverage for the indonesia line reflect the mapping of conserved dna sequences  from bacterial contaminants like those in the guts of adult flies.



copy number in the presence of the wolbachiaendosymbiont
to ensure that the duplications seen in the nuwt are not an indirect effect of removing the wolbachia infection or due to the tetracycline treatment itself, the relative abundance of the nuwt in whole non-tetracycline treated adult hawaii flies was investigated . these flies show the same relative levels of duplication when comparing nuwt genes, although the qpcr results are shifted 4-fold due to the additional amplification of genes in the bacterial genome . this 4-fold shifting suggests that there are four bacterial genomes for every copy of the fly chromosomes. the conservation of the relative levels of duplication in the presence of wolbachia endosymbionts indicates that the extensive duplication of the nuwt has not occurred during the tetracycline treatment of the flies.figure  <dig> 
comparison of copy number of the nuwts in homozygous and heterozygous fly lines and cured v. uncured flies. cured  and uncured  hawaii flies show the same correlation of qpcr results and sequencing coverage, although the qpcr results are shifted by the amplification of genes in the bacterial genome as they are plotted against the sequencing coverage obtained from the cured insects. this indicates that the duplication of the nuwt does not occur during the tetracycline treatment of the flies to compensate for the loss of the infection. the results of the qpcr assay for coverage was compared for homozygous cured hawaii  and the offspring of a hawaii/mexico cross which is heterozygous for the nuwt  for the  <dig> kbp mate pair library library. should the hawaii line be heterozygous, the cross should have resulted in 50% of the offspring being homozygous for absence of single copy regions of the nuwt. instead, each of the  <dig> offspring  tested positive by pcr for single copy genes in the nuwt and the nuwt was at half of the abundance of the hawaii line relative to internal single copy drosophila nuclear gene controls in  <dig> of these as seen by a shifting of the y-intercept by ~ <dig> Δct.



nuwt copy number in heterozygotes
given that coverage can be noisy and very few regions in the nuwt were inferred to be present in a single copy, we wanted to ensure that regions with low coverage were not due to heterozygosity of the nuwt. tet-treated flies from the hawaii line  were crossed with flies from the mexico line that does not have a wolbachia infection nor any nuwt . if the nuwt is heterozygous, i.e. some genes are only present on one of the chromosomes in a pair, we expect that some of the f <dig> offspring from the cross with a nuwt- line will lack regions identified as single copy in our coverage analysis. however, the abundance of the nuwt, including single copy regions, in the f <dig> offspring was half that of the parental hawaii line using the qpcr-based coverage assay  indicating that the nuwt is homozygous. this is not unexpected given that the hawaii line was selected for genome sequencing because it was the most inbred line available  <cit> .

nuwt copy number through the life cycle
to determine whether the overrepresentation of the nuwt relative to nuclear genes could be due to something other than stable dna duplications, we examined if there is any variation in the duplication level throughout the life cycle in the hawaii line. thus, the copy number of the nuwt was examined by qpcr in single individuals as embryos, third instar larvae, pupae, and adults . in the hawaii line, the copy numbers were stable throughout the life cycle except in third instar larvae, where the nuwt had the same coverage pattern as the genome sequencing data, albeit with a 4-fold underrepresentation  relative to single copy drosophila genes. interestingly, two drosophila genes examined with the qpcr assay demonstrate the same behavior, dsx and an rna polymerase iii gene. in salivary glands of third instar larvae, dna is found in the form of polytene chromosomes, which contain multiple linked chromosomes that are formed through massive replication without cell division, i.e. endoreplication  <cit> . during endoreplication, not all parts of the chromosome are equally replicated; instead regions like the heterochromatin become underrepresented while euchromatin can become overrepresented. since the dsx gene is found in heterochromatin in drosophila melanogaster <cit> , an underrepresentation of these genes in the larval stage might suggest they are underreplicated and hence are present in heterochromatin. while the position of dsx with respect to heterochromatin/euchromatin is not known in d. ananassae, it is consistently 2- to 8-fold underrepresented in our qpcr studies. the similar levels of underrepresentation of dsx and the nuwt are consistent with both being located in heterochromatin in the hawaii line.figure  <dig> 
comparison of copy number of the nuwts through the life stages. the copy number from the genome sequencing of adult hawaii flies have a significant positive correlation to the qpcr results obtained for embryos , 3rd instar larvae , pupae , and adults . while the slopes for embryos, pupae, and adults are approximately one, the slope for 3rd instar larvae is almost four suggesting that the nuwts are 4-fold underreplicated in 3rd instar larvae.



microscopy of polytene chromosomes
while qpcr on 3rd instar larvae suggests that the inserts in the hawaii line are heterochromatic, this is inconsistent with the previous results demonstrating a single band in a euchromatic region when polytene chromosomes from the salivary glands of 3rd instar larvae were hybridized with a probe amplified from the nuwt for the gene homologous to wd_ <dig>  <cit> . wd_ <dig> is a hypothetical protein in the genome of wolbachia strain wmel from d. melanogaster with 1– <dig> copies per genome equivalent in the nuwt in the hawaii line using the coverage values described above, consistent with a single band if euchromatic. if the nuwt is euchromatic, regions with 8– <dig> copies per genome equivalent should reveal multiple bands. therefore, we probed polytene chromosomes from the salivary glands of 3rd instar larvae from the hawaii lines with wri_ <dig> amplified from genomic dna of the nuwt+/wb- hawaii line. wri_ <dig> encodes the dna repair protein radc and is estimated to be present in 8– <dig> copies. instead of seeing multiple bands in the polytene chromosomes, only a single band was revealed  that appeared to be in a different location than the band for wd_ <dig>  however, as both of these probes were prepared directly from genomic dna, low level contaminating amplification products could result in hybridization to the wrong locus. when repeating the experiment with a probe amplified from a sequence-verified clone containing wri_ <dig>  no bands were identified in the polytene chromosome fish  even though a single control band was seen when using a probe with a different fluorescent label amplified directly from a sequence-verified clone containing the d. ananassae actin gene in the same polytene chromosome preparation . however, when the wri_ <dig> probe generated from a clone was used on mitotic chromosomes isolated from larval brain ganglia, hybridization to the heterochromatic fourth chromosome  was observed. considering that the various copies of the nuwt genes co-segregate  <cit> , we believe that all, or most, of the lgt is on the heterochromatic fourth chromosome. this is consistent with the fish results reported here with regards to polytene chromosomes, since the fourth chromosome cannot be visualized in the polytene for d. ananassae <cit> . additionally, this result is more consistent with the genome sequence and mapping of scaffolds to the chromosomes in d. ananassae, relative to the previous results, because there is not a sufficiently large gap in the scaffold spanning the euchromatic portions of the second chromosome that could house the ~ <dig> mbp nuwt.figure  <dig> 
fluorescence in situ hybridization of polytene chromosomes. polytene chromosomes were hybridized with a wolbachia-specific wri_ <dig> probe amplified directly from genomic dna from the wb- hawaii line and visualized at 40x magnification. a single band is observed and not the 8– <dig> bands expected . polytene chromosomes were again hybridized with the wri_ <dig> probe amplified directly from genomic dna from the wb- hawaii line and visualized at 20x  and 40x . a single band is observed and not the 8– <dig> bands expected. polytene chromosomes were simultaneously hybridized with differentially-labelled probes for the wolbachia-specific wri_ <dig>  and a d. ananassae actin gene  that were generated from sequence-verified plasmids and visualized at 40x. while hybridization by the plasmid-derived wri_ <dig> probe is not detected, hybridization by the plasmid-derived actin probe is detected. this suggests that the previous detection with wolbachia probes amplified directly from genomic dna may be detecting hybridization of spurious amplification products and that the lateral gene transfer is heterochromatic.
fluorescence in situ hybridization of mitotic chromosomes. mitotic chromosomes were hybridized with a wolbachia-specific wri_ <dig> probe amplified from sequence-verified plasmids and visualized at 60x. while hybridization was not detected in polytene chromosomes with wri_ <dig>  it is detected in the mitotic chromosomes. the fluorescence appears to be localized to the centromere of the abnormally large fourth chromosomes of d. ananassae. the larger 2nd and 3rd chromosomes are visualized nearby as well as a likely x chromosome. hybridization to the fourth chromosome is consistent with the lgt being largely heterochromatic.



underrepresentation of the nuwt in the india line
the lower coverage of the nuwt in the india line relative to single copy nuclear genes indicates that it is underrepresented in the genomic dna when compared to the majority of the d. ananassae genome. unlike the putative underreplication in third instar larvae seen in the hawaii line, underrepresentation of nuwt dna in the india line is seen in adults. one possibility is that the population from the stock center was polymorphic for the nuwt and over time the population is losing the nuwt. another possibility is that endoreplication is occurring or there is an episomal location for the nuwt that is underrepresented in individual flies.

a male from the untreated india line  was crossed with a female from a line from mexico that contains neither the nuwt nor any wolbachia infection , and an offspring was examined using the qpcr coverage assay. such a cross should remove wolbachia in a single generation without the use of antibiotics across multiple generations. the nuwt was undetectable by the f <dig> generation, suggesting it was lost in both the tetracycline treated and untreated populations.

given that the india line was reared in the stock center for several years prior to us obtaining it, and that it was detected at levels like the hawaii line at the time we obtained it, we are uncertain of what triggers this underrepresentation to occur. we re-acquired the line from the stock center and the nuwt in this line is now undetectable as well. since the nuwt is no longer detected in the population, we could not examine this phenomenon further.

indonesia line, multiple copies and underrepresentation
the even coverage of the nuwt in the indonesia line , as seen from the mapping of reads to the wri genome, was confirmed by the qpcr assay . one concern with the even coverage observed in this line is that the sequences could stem from a residual wolbachia infection, rather than from a nuclear insert. this is unlikely as the fly line was previously treated with tetracycline, and fish on dissected ovaries using a probe for wolbachia did not reveal the presence of any wolbachia bacteria. however, to further confirm the presence of a nuwt in the indonesia line, previously prepared dna  <cit>  from a f <dig> offspring of a cross between an indonesia male and a florida female  was also examined. such a cross should remove the maternally inherited wolbachia endosymbionts. with a single insertion of the nuwt, these heterozygotes should contain half as much nuwt dna as single copy nuclear genes. instead, the Δct  was found to be between  <dig>  and  <dig>   indicating that there is  <dig> ×, or  <dig> ×, more wolbachia dna than single copy nuclear genes. given that these are f <dig> hybrids, this means the parental indonesia lines have  <dig> × more wolbachia dna than single copy nuclear genes, suggesting there were originally  <dig> or more copies of the nuwt covering the whole wolbachia genome in the indonesia line. this may suggest that when the genome sequencing of indonesia was undertaken it was 5-fold under-represented relative to when the f1s were generated.

while the indonesia line with a nuwt was present in the jcdh lab when sequenced, the line has since become underrepresented for the nuwt, similar to the india line. we and others have obtained further samples of the indonesia line from the ucsd drosophila stock center that all now seem to lack the nuwt, as shown by our qpcr assay and other pcr-based assays . therefore, further experiments to explore this were not possible.

discussion
endoreplication, underreplication, and drosophilaorigins of replication
there are multiple reasons for why not all parts of a chromosome are present in equal amounts in a cell. the most commonly known mechanism is that these different parts are not replicated an equal number of times, due to chromatin state and/or distance from origins of replication. the phenomenon of over- and underreplication is particularly common in cells that undergo endoreplication .

apart from the endoreplication of polytene chromosomes found in salivary glands of third instar larvae, endoreplication has also been suggested to be evolutionarily conserved in ovarian follicle cells of drosophilidae since all of the  <dig> species examined by bosco et al. complete dna replication with a ploidy consistent with  <dig> genome equivalents per cell  <cit> . however, in the same cells the authors also find that some dna is represented by only  <dig> genome equivalents, which is consistent with the presence of heterochromatic sequences that are not replicated to the general ploidy of the cell, but instead are underreplicated  <cit> . while endoreplication and polytene chromosomes are best studied in third instar larva salivary glands and ovarian follicle cells in drosophila species, nearly all differentiated cell types are polyploid with polytene chromosomes  <cit> .

given the bacterial ancestry of nuwts, it is likely that they lack drosophila origins of replication. in general, if nuwts only contain a few genes, the distance from an origin of replication is inconsequential, and therefore underreplication might not occur. however, given the large size of the nuwt described here, underreplication could potentially occur merely due to a lack of drosophila replication origins.

in drosophila, a six-protein origin recognition complex  recognizes origins of replication, and binding of this complex is needed for replication to begin. a summary of predictions in d. melanogaster suggests that there are  <dig>  non-overlapping orc recognition sites with a maximum distance between orc sites of  <dig> kbp in the genome that are potential origins of replication  <cit>  . assuming that d. ananassae has a similar number of replication origins and that they are evenly spaced across the entire genome, one would expect to identify an origin every ~ <dig> kbp assuming an ~ <dig> mbp genome, , or every  <dig> kbp assuming an ~ <dig> mbp genome, .

using either metric or even the maximum distance between d. melanogaster orc sites, the distance between origins of replication is smaller than the size of the nuwts found in d. ananassae. it was previously shown that six physically distant nuwt loci co-segregate perfectly in f <dig> maternal inheritance crosses  <cit> , indicating that the multiple copies of the nuwt are on the same chromosome and physically linked. here we show that there are  <dig>  wolbachia reads for every  <dig> drosophila reads in the hawaii line , meaning  <dig> % of the d. ananassae hawaii genome is from the nuwt. assuming the d. ananassae genome is ~ <dig> mbp, this means that ~ <dig> mbp of the d. ananassae genome might consist of tandemly arrayed nuwts. furthermore, we know of numerous integrations of retroelements  <cit>  that make the chromosome region that is devoid of replication origins even larger, assuming origins of replication do not integrate in the nuwt along with retroelements. therefore, the lack of drosophila origins of replication may at least partially explain the underrepresentation observed in third instar larvae of the hawaii line.

this would not explain the underrepresentation of the nuwt in the india and indonesia lines. although underreplication in somatic tissues, specifically the larval fat bodies and ovarian follicle cells, has been observed  <cit> , we are not aware of any case with such high levels of underreplication as in the nuwts of the india and indonesia lines. therefore, while the underrepresentation of the nuwts in these two lines could result from underreplication in adult somatic tissues, we believe that they either are polymorphic in the population or that there is another, currently unknown, mechanism that explain these results. one possibility would be that nuwts are episomal or on dispensable b chromosomes in the india and indonesia lines. however it is less clear why, before being lost, the nuwts were stable in these lines at the stock center for many years as well as in independently maintained collections.

origin and evolution of nuwts in the d. ananassae genome
given the combination of extensive duplication containing polymorphic sites  and the underrepresentation of the nuwt in the india and indonesia lines yielding relatively low coverage, a robust analysis of snps is not feasible. however, from the coverage analysis of the nuwt in the re-sequenced lines we see a highly similar pattern of duplicated regions in the hawaii and india lines suggesting that they share a recent common origin. although an alternative explanation for this observation would be that the insertion of wolbachia dna in the nuclear genome is non-random, this explanation seems less likely given that the same pattern is not seen in the indonesia line.

in the  <dig> lines that were originally screened in the study by dunning hotopp et al. <cit>  only four were found to contain the nuwt. of these four lines, two were from south east  asia, one from india and one from hawaii, whereas all lines from africa, the continental americas, and australia as well as one additional hawaii line lacked a nuwt. recently, an additional  <dig> d. ananassae lines were screened, of which eight tested positive for nuwts, including three from se asia, one from india, one from the south pacific island tonga, two from australia and one from ethiopia   <cit> . all additional nine samples from the pacific in this screen tested negative, including one sample from hawaii  <cit> . based on both screens, it is clear that the nuwt has wide geographic distribution, but that individual lines from the same geographic regions can differ in nuwt status. given that we have experienced loss of detection of the nuwt in the indonesia and india lines, it is possible that some lines may have nuwts that are undetectable or that some lines might have lost the nuwt during cultivation. it is however interesting to note that all five lines from se asia, which likely represents the ancestral species range of d. ananassae <cit> , contain a nuwt. colonization of other parts of the world, including india and hawaii, could be a consequence of human activity and hence these populations could represent independent migrations from the same ancestral population or human-enabled migrations between the two locations. hence, integration of wolbachia dna into the nuclear genome of d. ananassae might have occurred just once and then spread to different locations via human activity. one possible scenario is thus that the most recent common ancestor of all three lines  was a line that had extensive duplication of the whole wolbachia genome and that the indonesia lineage maintained the complete copies of these integrated genomes while the lineage leading to hawaii and india lost some parts of the nuwt.

the chromosomal location of the integration site of all three nuwts could inform our understanding of how nuwts form and perhaps also about their ancestry. however, due to the integration of numerous host retrotransposons inside the nuwt, we could not identify its exact location based on sequence data in any of the lines despite numerous attempts. although fish on mitotic chromosomes could be used to locate the nuwt in the hawaii line to chromosome four, the inability to detect the nuwt in the two other lines currently eliminates the possibility of exploring this further.

chromosome four
in most drosophila species, chromosome four  is referred to as the dot chromosome because of its small size. in d. melanogaster, chromosome four is the size of a typical bacterial genome at ~ <dig>  mbp, containing  <dig> genes and ~ <dig>  mbp of repeated sequences  <cit> . most drosophila species sequenced have a similarly sized fourth chromosome with only  <dig> - <dig>  mbp of contigs mapped to it  <cit> . interestingly, even though part of chromosome four can normally polytenize in most drosophila species, the whole chromosome shows properties similar to heterochromatin.

in contrast, the fourth chromosome in d. ananassae is equivalent in size to the  <dig> mbp x chromosome   <cit>  and has not been observed to polytenize. the increased size of the fourth chromosome of d. ananassae is thought to be the result of an expansion of repeats, with  <dig> % of the sequence arising from retro-elements  and other dna-based repeats   <cit> . however, the real repeat content is probably even higher, since gaps are likely to contain even more repeats. based on our results, we propose that the ~ <dig> mbp of nuwt sequence described here, as well as the retro-elements known to be integrated into the nuwt, are located on the fourth chromosome of d. ananassae. the nuwt would thus represent ~20% of the genetic material in chromosome four and partially explain its larger size in d. ananassae. however, as there is no described size variation of chromosome four in d. ananassae, although there is variation in the presence of the nuwt, it might just indicate that this species is prone to accumulate genetic material on this chromosome and perhaps also in general, since d. ananassae has the highest repeat content of the sequenced drosophila species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we find that multiple wolbachia genomes are transferred to the drosophila ananassae nuclear genome. the hawaii and india lines show uneven coverage suggesting that different parts of these nuwts are duplicated to different levels whereas the even coverage seen across the nuwt in the indonesia line suggests nearly perfect duplicates. furthermore, the large nuwt in the hawaii line becomes underreplicated in third instar larvae suggesting that it is located in heterochromatin. however, the underrepresentation of the nuwt in the india and indonesia lines is more severe than for heterchromatic regions and might reflect a gradual loss of the nuwt in the lab population or a yet unknown mechanism causing underrepresentation of dna. hybridization to mitotic chromosomes indicates that the nuwt is located on the fourth chromosome, which is enlarged in d. ananassae compared to other drosophila species. taken together with low levels of expression from genes in the nuwt  <cit> , it seems unlikely that the nuwt genes are functional. this might explain why the nuwt has not spread to more populations and other continents. however, it is still possible that the nuwts are functional under a yet unknown condition, which could explain their presence in multiple geographic locations. taken together, each line is unique in its combination of attributes and present interesting aspects for further research on lgt between symbionts and their hosts.

