BACKGROUND
a dual olfactory system is thought to be unique to tetrapods. the two distinct sensory epithelia of this system, the main and the vomeronasal olfactory epithelia, heterogeneously express families of chemoreceptor genes, with some overlap
 <cit> . these epithelia have anatomically distinct projections to different parts of the forebrain. these dichotomous molecular and anatomical profiles led to the hypothesis that the vno is specialized to detect pheromones
 <cit>  whereas other research has suggested overlapping functions for the main olfactory system and vno
 <cit> . amphibians were thought to be the earliest evolving animals with a complete vno
 <cit> , however recent work has shown that lungfish have a vomeronasal system
 <cit> . it should be noted that although they do not possess a canonically recognized vno system, molecular components of a vno system exist in elephant shark
 <cit>  and teleost fish
 <cit> . therefore, the vomeronasal system is presumed to have evolved after the main olfactory system in the vertebrate lineage
 <cit> .

although a distinct vomeronasal system has not been identified in fish
 <cit> , a recent study has found a vomeronasal system in a sister group to tetrapods, the lungfish
 <cit> . moreover, molecular components of a vomeronasal system have been identified in a basal vertebrate, the sea lamprey 
 <cit> . although fish have only one recognized olfactory epithelium, dulka 
 <cit>  suggested a functional division of the primary olfactory pathway in goldfish that may be analagous to the output neurons from the moe and voe in tetrapods. interestingly, the sea lamprey, like tetrapods, has two separate and distinct olfactory epithelia. the aoe was discovered by in  <dig> by scott
 <cit> , but its function had eluded description. in  <dig>  ren et al. showed that lamprey aoe is lined with a simple cuboidal ciliated epithelium and projects to the medial olfactory bulb
 <cit> . in addition, another structure with elusive function in the sea lamprey brain, the dorsomedial telencephalic neuropil 
 <cit> , is located in a similar position to the tetrapod aob. the sea lamprey dtn is dorsomedially situated, immediately caudal to the olfactory bulb, receives input from the olfactory bulb and projects to the hypothalamus
 <cit> .

we hypothesized that the aoe coupled with the dtn comprise a primitive form of the vomeronasal system in the vertebrate lineage. we reasoned that if the aoe was chemosensory, it should express at least some of the chemoreceptor  genes encoded in the lamprey genome
 <cit> . we further reasoned that the aoe projects to a separate telencephalic region, possibly the dtn. here we present evidence that aoe expresses all known families of lamprey cr genes and projects to the dtn. we conclude that the aoe-dtn-hypothalamic pathway in lamprey is a partial segregation of the olfactory pathway, which suggests that the components of a vomeronasal system may have been in place in this basal vertebrate.

RESULTS
aoe projects to the dtn and other telencephalic areas
figure 
 <dig> is an atlas to provide reference for the tract-tracing images. relevant structures to this study as well as reference landmarks are provided. injections of biocytin to the aoe vesicles revealed labeling in the olfactory system and the telencephalon. neurons with wide, thick cell bodies with a dendritic knob and cilia extending into the lumen of the accessory olfactory organ were evident . labeled cells in the moe showed a retrograde connection from the aoe, however this could be due to leakage of dye from the aoe to olfactory nerve fibers rather than a physical connection between the aoe and moe. tall, thin neurons were labeled in the basal lamellae of the moe . labeled cells lining the moe were pseudo-stratified ciliated columnar cells and those lining the aoe were ciliated cuboidal cells. the dorsal half of the olfactory nerve was more strongly labeled than the ventral part . anterogradely, labeled fibers and cells were observed in the medial olfactory bulb, at the ventral aspect of the dtn as well as the preoptic and striatum area . coarse, short fibers were visible in the dtn and cell bodies were seen at the ventral dtn . a bundle of thick fibers was seen between the medial pallium and the dtn, as well as cell bodies in the dorsal pallium and ventral dtn . the dorsal pallium  showed a grouping of coarse fibers and some cell bodies. in summary, the aoe has connections to the moe, the olfactory bulb, the dtn and pallia, and indirectly to the rostral hypothalamus.

dtn connects to the aoe and the hypothalamus
injections of biocytin to the dtn revealed a reciprocal labeling of cells in the aoe as well as direct projections to various regions of the telencephalon. retrograde labeling revealed round cells in the aoe  and tall elongate cells in the moe . short fibers and cell bodies were labeled in the medial olfactory bulb , similar to the results shown in derjean et al., 2010
 <cit> . the rostral dtn was densely labeled with fibers . within the dtn were some cell bodies oriented dorsoventrally with at least  <dig> process extending dorsally toward the dtn . at the caudal end of the dtn, the fiber population was smaller than at the rostral end. as well, the fibers were short, coarse and grouped at the dorsal part of the dtn . the thalamus had short, coarse fibers bilaterally located . the rostral hypothalamus had short coarse fibers and some cell bodies bilaterally at the level of the mammillary recess . in the habenula, a mixed population of thin and thick fibers was seen . in summary, sea lamprey dtn has connections to the aoe as well as multiple integrative centers in the telencephalon .

moe and aoe have virtually identical gene expression profiles
the first attempt to discover gene categories that differed between the moe and aoe by  <dig> fold  failed to show any differences in gene expression between the two epithelia. therefore, the threshold for differential gene expression was lowered  which corresponds to a  <dig>  fold change in expression.  <dig> of  <dig>  gene ontology  categories were shown to be differentially expressed between the two epithelia, which represent less than  <dig> % of the go categories compared. a heat map of the  <dig> go categories changed is shown in figure 
 <dig>  the majority of go category differences are due to cell maintenance or receptor trafficking .

expression of chemoreceptor genes is sexually dimorphic
sequences generated from high-throughput sequencing were aligned to the mouse refseq mrna database. using these sequences in combination with those identified by libants et al.
 <cit> , representative chemoreceptor and chemoreceptor-related genes were selected to confirm the solexa sequencing results and to further examine the chemoreceptor gene expression of the moe and aoe. real time quantitative pcr confirmed expression of six chemoreceptor and chemoreceptor-related genes  in both the moe and aoe. collectively, moe and aoe displayed a sexually dimorphic pattern in expression of cr and cr-related genes. or  <dig> , taar  <dig>  and adenylate cyclase  were expressed higher in adult females than in males  while or  <dig> , v1r  <dig>  and casr  were expressed higher in adult males than in females . the expression levels of these genes did not differ between moe and aoe.

discussion
this study discovered striking similarities between the tetrapod vomeronasal pathway and a lamprey accessory olfactory pathway containing the aoe and dtn, as shown in table 
 <dig>  go analysis coupled with real-time quantitative pcr demonstrated that lamprey moe and aoe gene expression profiles are similar. lamprey aoe expresses all known families of lamprey chemoreceptor genes. taken together, results suggest that the sea lamprey possesses a chemosensory accessory olfactory system.

 <cit> , v1r
 <cit> , taar
 <cit> , v1r, v2r
our neural tract-tracing results show direct projections from the aoe to the dtn. injections of biocytin to the aoe revealed connections to the medial olfactory bulb similar to the results of derjean et al., 2010
 <cit> , the pallial areas of the telencephalon and the dtn. labeling of cells in the moe after injection to the aoe was unexpected as the moe and aoe are anatomically separate, however, this may be due to piercing of olfactory nerve fascicles during injection, which are in close proximity to the aoe vesicles
 <cit> . alternatively, some aoe vesicles have been observed to be connected to the moe by ducts at the ventrolateral aspect of the nasal capsule, though this assertion could be an artifact of the plane of sectioning
 <cit> . moreover, dye could have been transported anterogradely to the moe from the aoe via the olfactory nerve axons that are in close proximity to the aoe. injections of biocytin to the dtn revealed reciprocal connections with the aoe and the moe. while the primary projections of the aoe to the dtn in lamprey are very similar to the primary projections of the vno to the aob in tetrapods, a difference is that in lamprey, the aoe has direct projections to the mob
 <cit> . in tetrapods, the moe and vno have segregated outputs to the mob and aob, respectively
 <cit> . therefore, the lamprey pathway is less segregated than those in adult tetrapods.

interestingly, the lamprey system shares similarities with the system in developing tetrapods. previous studies have already demonstrated anatomical evidence that moe and aoe both project to the medial olfactory bulb and functional evidence that the medial olfactory bulb activates locomotor brain regions
 <cit> . our work builds on these findings via anterograde and retrograde tracings from the aoe and the dtn of lamprey to show partial segregation at the peripheral level. the vomeronasal system recently discovered in lungfish is also a less segregated system
 <cit> , as molecular markers for a vno are expressed in the moe. the question of the ancestral vertebrate condition with respect to olfactory projections  requires further investigations.

another similarity seen between the lamprey and tetrapod pathways is in their projections to higher centers. the lamprey dtn has direct projections to a putative amygdala homolog as well as the hypothalamus and thalamus. dye injections to the dtn revealed labeling in the dorsal pallium, the hypothalamus and the thalamus. this confirms previous discoveries by northcutt and puzdrowski
 <cit>  who demonstrated dtn connectivity to the hypothalamus. polenova and vesselkin
 <cit>  also demonstrated connectivity of the dtn to the pallial areas of the telencephalon. our work provides further information on the telencephalic pathways with respect to the main and accessory olfactory epithelia. the bi-directional connectivity between the medial pallium and striatum has been demonstrated in silver lamprey by northcutt and wicht
 <cit> . furthermore, the pallial areas are likely homologs of the tetrapod amygdala because of gaba-ergic projections from the medial pallium to the striatum
 <cit> . consequently, the pattern of projection of aoe to dtn to pallial areas and hypothalamus likely parallels the tetrapod vomeronasal pathway.

the pathway seen in our study flows from the aoe to the dtn to the pallial areas and the hypothalamus. in tetrapods, the moe and vno have anatomically distinct primary projections. the moe projects primarily to the main olfactory bulb and the vno projects to the accessory olfactory bulb. in mice, there is a further segregation of output from the vno. specifically, sensory neurons in the anterior and posterior vno express v1r and v2r receptors, respectively, and project to the anterior and posterior aob, repeating the anatomical division seen at the periphery
 <cit> . output neurons from the aob in turn project to limbic areas of the brain including the amygdala and also to the hypothalamus and thalamus
 <cit> . from the aob, there are two distinct populations of output neurons that project to the rostral and caudal regions of the amygdala, which in turn project to rostral and caudal regions of the hypothalamus which mirrors the segregated inputs from the vomeronasal organ
 <cit> . in sea lamprey, there is a convergence of output from the moe and the aoe. both the moe and aoe have connections to the ob and the dtn, and so there is not a clear division of output from the moe and aoe to their respective olfactory integration centers.

the sea lamprey aoe has cellular and molecular characteristics of an olfactory sensory epithelium. since its discovery in petromyzon by scott in 1887
 <cit> , aoe has been suggested to function as jacobsen’s organ
 <cit> , nasal sac rudiments
 <cit> , part of the pituitary
 <cit>  and bowman’s glands
 <cit> . recently, ren et al.
 <cit>  demonstrated retrograde connectivity from the medial olfactory bulb to the aoe and concluded that the aoe and its projections are a distinct division within the olfactory pathway. our data complements this conclusion by demonstrating anterograde connectivity from the aoe to the medial ob. in addition, we have shown reciprocal connectivity between the aoe and the dtn. morphologically, the retrogradely labeled sensory neurons from both moe and aoe in lamprey are ciliated. molecular level analysis revealed further evidence that the lamprey aoe is a sensory epithelium. as expected, the overall gene categories expressed in moe and aoe are virtually identical, furthering the case of the aoe as a chemosensory structure. expression of chemoreceptor genes from all three of the families of chemoreceptor genes  identified in the lamprey genome was confirmed
 <cit> . in tetrapods, the vno expresses v1rs, v2rs and ors
 <cit>  while the moe expresses ors, taars and v1rs
 <cit> . while the moe and vno are anatomically separate in tetrapods, there is overlap with respect to chemoreceptor gene expression, secondary projection pathways and neural connectivity
 <cit> . the similarities in chemoreceptor gene families expressed in lamprey moe and aoe may be explained by the status of the lamprey as a basal vertebrate
 <cit> . moreover, during embryological development, the moe and aoe of vertebrates both arise from the olfactory placode
 <cit> . at the neural circuit level, as well as the molecular level, it appears that the lamprey dual system is not as segregated as the tetrapod dual olfactory system.

chemoreceptor genes were found to have a sexually dimorphic pattern of expression in lamprey moe and aoe. in vertebrates, sexually dimorphic gene expression is usually linked to sex determination. for example, in rainbow trout, sox9a <dig> is expressed in male gonads and cyp19a <dig> is expressed in female gonads
 <cit> . in the sea lamprey, the gene expression pattern observed in this study may be related to its sexually dimorphic behavior. while both males and females can detect the pheromone 3-keto petromyzonol sulfate , only females show a strong locomotor response
 <cit> . however, this speculation requires further examinations.

CONCLUSIONS
anatomical and molecular evidence shows that the sea lamprey has a primordial accessory olfactory system that may serve a chemosensory function.

