BACKGROUND
the structural units of the vertebral column are the vertebrae, composed of neural and haemal arches and the vertebral body itself, the centrum. vertebral bodies are joined by intervertebral tissue primarily derived from the notochord  <cit> .

the vertebral column results from a strictly controlled segmentation process that occurs in all vertebrate species and is associated to two main structures, the notochord and the somites  <cit> . the somites are epithelialized spheres of mesoderm that develop on either side of the neural tube, give rise to dermis, skeletal musculature  and vertebrae   <cit> . while the somite contribution to vertebra formation has been extensively studied, particularly in birds  <cit> , the role of the notochord has received less attention. in teleosts, the majority of extant vertebrates, the notochord is composed of a core of large, vacuolated chordocytes, and an epithelial layer of chordoblasts that secrete the notochord sheath  <cit> . the notochord sheath is a stratified structure, composed of a thin external membrane, with high elastin content, covering a thicker collagenous layer  <cit> .

in chondrichthyans and most osteichthyans, including tetrapods, but not in teleosts, vertebral bodies have a cartilaginous anlage that subsequently either mineralizes or is replaced by bone. in teleosts such as zebrafish, vertebral centra are formed in the absence of cartilage  <cit> . indeed, teleost vertebral centra form through the mineralization of the notochord sheath , which is then surrounded by somite-derived intramembranous bone   <cit> .

in teleosts, such as atlantic salmon  or zebrafish , the notochord plays an important role in early life stages, as its mechanical function is only replaced by the vertebral column in the postembryonic life  <cit> . in atlantic salmon, the initial mineralization of the chordacentrum has been described to be associated with cells of the notochord epithelium , while bone formation, by sclerotome-derived cells , is a second step  <cit> . in contrast, inohaya and co-workers suggest that in medaka , only sclerotome-derived cells are involved in chordacentrum and autocentrum mineralization, with no role of chordoblasts  <cit> . yet, a recent study  <cit>  shows that, also in medaka, with conditional ablation of osterix-positive osteoblasts, notochord sheath mineralization is maintained. therefore, the main cellular and molecular determinants involved in early notochord mineralization are still under debate. furthermore, the role of extracellular matrix proteins such as osteocalcin, generally expressed by mature and resting osteoblasts  <cit>  and by hypertrophic chondrocytes  <cit> , in that process, remains unclear. in several teleosts, including zebrafish, two osteocalcin genes  have been identified  <cit> .

in amniotes the vertebral column is divided into five main regions whereas the vertebral column of teleosts is often only subdivided into two main regions, abdominal and caudal . however, also in zebrafish, several regions can be recognized within the vertebral column. in particular, regions that contain the most anterior and the most posterior vertebrae are highly specialized  <cit> . regional differences are not only apparent at the morphological level but also regarding the tendency of vertebrae to fuse. while zebrafish vertebral bodies usually display no pathological fusion  <cit> , caudal fin vertebrae undergo several fusions as part of regular development  <cit> . yet, other teleosts, such as atlantic salmon and other farmed species, are known to suffer frequent pathological vertebral fusions  <cit> . whether regional differences in vertebrae morphology and mineralization relate to the susceptibility to fuse remains an open question.

this study aims to characterize mineralization patterns in different regions of the vertebral column  using various methods to reveal mineral deposition. subsequently, these patterns are compared with the histogenesis of the arches, revealed through collagen type ii immunostaining, and to the timing of centrum formation. we characterize the proliferation of notochord cells and we also localize proteins related to mineralization, such as alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin. we here provide the first evidence for the early presence of osteocalcin  <dig> in mineralizing chordacentra. finally, we discuss a possible association between timing of centra formation, the mineralization pattern and occurrence of vertebral fusion.

RESULTS
centrum mineralization follows arch formation in the caudal fin region
the fully developed zebrafish vertebral column displays a mode of  <dig> vertebral bodies  including  <dig> centra in the weberian apparatus,  <dig> abdominal vertebrae,  <dig> caudal vertebrae, and  <dig> to  <dig> caudal fin vertebrae   <cit> .


the first centra to mineralize  are  <dig> and  <dig>  in an anterior-to-posterior direction, followed by the mineralization of centrum  <dig>  and later centra  <dig> and  <dig>  in specimens of  <dig>  mm tl. the mineralization of the remaining abdominal and caudal centra follows an anterior-to-posterior direction . the mineralization of the caudal fin centra starts with the u <dig> from the compound centrum , in specimens of  <dig>  mm tl . pu <dig> is the last centrum to be formed, in specimens of  <dig>  mm tl, preceded by pu <dig> formation . by then, the complex cartilaginous structure that forms the weberian apparatus is already present in the anterior part of the vertebral column.


all weberian, abdominal and caudal centra mineralize before development of the arches . in the weberian region, the haemal and neural arches develop as cartilaginous anlagen. these are collagen type ii positive, except for the associated spines that have no cartilaginous precursor. in the abdominal and caudal regions, the arches develop as intramembranous bones, with no cartilaginous anlage.


in contrast, in the modified caudal fin vertebrae, centrum mineralization occurs after arch formation. the  arches associated to these centra have a cartilaginous anlage, also positive for collagen type ii. staining of these arches was particularly strong at the bases  and distal parts, where no perichondral mineralization is present throughout the individual’s life span. collagen type ii immunostaining also showed protein accumulation in the notochord sheath, although less evident than in the cartilage .

in addition to the different timing of centrum mineralization versus arch formation, the present results also show a clear pattern concerning mineral expansion within the centra .

with the exception of c <dig> and c <dig>  vertebral bodies in the weberian, abdominal and caudal regions start to mineralize in the form of a ring-shaped mineralized structure that expands in both anterior and posterior directions . these centra will be referred to as “ring centra”. in none of these vertebral bodies, have arches ever been observed prior to centrum mineralization. nevertheless, the origin of mineralization matches the position of the myosepta, i.e. the site where neural and haemal arches will develop at a later stage. from this point, centrum mineralization expands one quarter anteriorly and three quarters posteriorly, showing clear incremental mineralization fronts .

different from this pattern, in the caudal fin  region, mineralization starts as a broad ventral mineral deposition  , which expands dorsally. here, mineralization starts and expands from the attachment sites of the already developed modified cartilaginous haemal arches to the notochord. the developing centra show no apparent growth fronts as seen in the “ring centra” .

inner and outer cell distribution during chorda- and autocentrum formation
irrespective of the shape of the mineralized centrum,  , the origin of mineralization was shown both with von kossa staining  and tem , to occur always within the notochord sheath, thus establishing the chordacentrum. once the chordacentrum is fully formed, perichordal bone is deposited mostly at the anterior and posterior edges, in this way establishing the vertebral endplates of the centra, thus forming the autocentrum . autocentrum formation occurs irrespective of the initial mineralization pattern within the notochord sheath . yet, in the caudal fin centra, decreased bone formation is observed in the areas where cartilaginous arches attach to the notochord .


during chordacentrum formation, notochord inner cells or chordoblasts do not accumulate in the prospective intervertebral space , unlike what has been observed in other teleost species. however, once the centrum is mineralized, a higher number of chordoblasts can be seen in the non-mineralized intervertebral space . by then, the chordoblasts are oblong, larger in size and are oriented in a dorsal-ventral direction , as opposed to the squamous morphology displayed prior to and during chordacentrum development. in addition, chordoblasts proliferate in the intervertebral space, as shown by pcna staining. here, notochord sheath thickening occurs . this pattern of chordoblast distribution is observed throughout the notochord, regardless of the type of centrum and its mineralization pattern .

during chordacentrum formation, contrary to the inner notochord cells, the assumed sclerotome-derived notochord outer cells  <cit>  in the “ring” vertebrae are visible as few scattered nuclei located around the notochord . these cells are squamous and without apparent morphological features of active osteoblasts. in the caudal fin region, the cartilaginous haemal arches of the pus  directly attach to the notochord sheath with no space for other cells in-between the notochord sheath and the chondrocytes of the arches .

during autocentrum formation, osteoblasts can be clearly identified in association with bone deposited around the “ring” chordacentra . major areas of the caudal fin chordacentra are covered by the cartilaginous arches attached to the notochord sheath surface . yet some osteoblasts can be identified wherever the arches are absent, lining the edges of the prospective vertebral endplates.

osteocalcin in chordacentrum formation
in order to clarify possible factors in chordacentrum mineralization, both in “ring” and caudal fin centrum, we have localized alkaline phosphatase  and osteocalcin .


in “ring” centra, alp-positive signal is co-localized with the site of chordacentrum mineralization prior to any bone deposition outside the notochord sheath. the flattened shape of both outer and inner notochord cells makes it difficult to clearly distinguish the origin of the alp signal, due to its membrane-bound characteristic . in caudal fin centra, the arch chondrocytes, particularly those adjacent to the mineralizing notochord sheath, co-localize with a strong alp signal .

for osteocalcin immunostaining, we used an antibody raised against argyrosomus regius oc <dig>  which was previously validated  <cit> . it was considered to detect a single protein in zebrafish, since a western blot analysis gave a single band of approximately 5kda. nevertheless we cannot guarantee that it distinguishes zebrafish oc <dig> from oc <dig>  however, since oc <dig> appears only after day  <dig> post-fertilization in zebrafish as shown by qpcr analysis , immunostaining in younger fish, such as during formation of chordacentra c <dig> to c <dig>  could only represent sites of oc <dig> protein accumulation.

in “ring”  and caudal fin centra , oc <dig> protein accumulation is observed in the mineralizing matrix of the notochord sheath, even at very early stages of chordacentrum formation. oc <dig> accumulation co-localizes with chordacentrum mineralization, reflecting the exact same pattern as observed with alizarin red staining . moreover, in later stages of centrum formation, we can detect progression fronts in “ring” centra  while in caudal fin centra we observe homogenous protein accumulation . in the caudal fin region, oc <dig> is also detected in the vertebral arches and caudal fin rays , which are examples of perichondral and intramembranous mineralization, respectively.

analysis of semi-thin sections of the immunostained samples confirms accumulation of osteocalcin in the notochord sheath and not around the notochord, during early  and late  stages of chordacentrum formation. in caudal fin centra , the arch chondrocytes adjacent to the mineralizing notochord sheath also co-localize with oc <dig> protein , as observed for alp. no perichondral ossification occurred in the arch at sites positive for alp and oc <dig>  suggesting that these signals are not associated to arch ossification.

observation of the transgenic fish tg showed that no oc <dig> expression is present during early stages of centrum formation. in fact, oc <dig> is completely absent during chordacentrum formation, appearing first in intramembranous formation of abdominal and caudal arches, a process previously described as mediated by mature osteoblasts . analysis of relative oc <dig> and oc <dig> expression levels during zebrafish development shows that, while oc <dig> maternal transcripts are detected in early developmental stages, when no mature osteoblasts can yet be detected , oc <dig> is only expressed after 7dpf . chordacentrum formation of the first vertebrae starts at  <dig>  mm tl, as previously indicated, which, despite the natural variation in growth, corresponds to fish younger than  <dig> days.

discussion
zebrafish and medaka vertebral column development and morphology have been extensively described . nevertheless, many questions remain unanswered. in particular, how do distinct mineralization patterns relate to regional differences in arch histogenesis and to susceptibility for vertebral fusion? why do vertebrae in the caudal fin region fuse as part of the developmental process, in contrast to anterior regions where vertebrae remain individualized  <cit> ?

here, we describe two distinct mineralization patterns of vertebral centra associated with specific vertebral regions. we characterize these patterns based on  how mineral is being deposited throughout the centrum,  timing of development  and  arch histogenesis . while describing this process we localized accumulation of oc <dig> protein in mineralizing notochord sheath, suggesting it could play a function in early mineralization events during chordacentrum formation.

notochord segmentation, arch contribution to centra and association with fusion
the first mineralization of the vertebral bodies, independent of the vertebral type , occurs within the notochord sheath, establishing the chordacentrum. these are the first indications of segmented units in the zebrafish notochord. other authors have already described that early centrum mineralization in teleosts occurs within the notochord sheath  <cit> . in addition, the notochord may actively contribute to segmentation and centrum formation  <cit> .

thus, while the chordacentrum is always established through mineralization of the notochord sheath, the pattern of mineralization differs between caudal fin and remaining vertebral regions:  a caudal fin centrum mineralizes after arch formation, while a “ring” centrum is always formed prior to haemal or neural arches,  the modified arches from caudal fin vertebrae are composed of cartilage while “ring” centra outside the weberian apparatus are associated to arches formed by intramembranous ossification; and  caudal fin centra display a basiventral origin of mineralization, while all other vertebrae start with a “ring”-shaped mineralization.

arch histogenesis appears to be a clear mark that distinguishes caudal fin vertebrae from the remaining regions. a similar, regional distinct pattern of mineralization has been observed in medaka, with cartilaginous arches in the caudal fin region and intramembranous arches in the anterior part of the vertebral column  <cit> . although notochord mineralization of anterior centra in medaka starts dorsal, subsequently chordacentrum mineralization will proceed as “ring” centra  <cit> . yet, “ring” notochord-based centrum formation, is not an unique feature of zebrafish and medaka, occurring also in other taxa  <cit> . considering caudal fin centra of zebrafish and medaka, both display similar patterns of mineralization  <cit> , linked to the presence of modified cartilaginous arches. many basal ray-finned fishes have cartilaginous arches directly attached to an unconstricted notochord  <cit>  suggesting that cartilaginous arches are an ancestral feature. therefore, the caudal fin endoskeleton of zebrafish, and also medaka, appear to display the evolutionarily conserved condition, with cartilaginous arch formation.

mineralization in the caudal fin centra shows a clear association with attachment sites of the cartilaginous haemal arches to the notochord . the association between basiventral mineralization and presence of cartilaginous haemal arches has also been described in other teleost species, such as the goldeye   <cit> , atlantic salmon  <cit>  and white seabream   <cit> . in these species too, centrum mineralization originates exactly where the cartilaginous haemal arches are attached to the notochord. mineralization then progresses from a basiventral origin through bilateral wedge-shaped areas that meet dorsally.

moreover, we have identified mineralization related proteins in the chondrocytes of the cartilaginous arches, in the immediate vicinity of the area of the incipient mineralization of the notochord. this supports the possible role of the cartilaginous arches in early centrum establishment, a hypothesis that will be discussed in more detail in the next section.

the cartilaginous arches appear to be strictly associated not only with chordacentrum formation but also with the start of autocentrum formation, given that the arches are directly attached to the notochord, affecting bone deposition around the notochord.

the type of arches and associated pattern of centrum mineralization appears to be correlated not only to the formation of the vertebral bodies but also to their ability to fuse or stay as individual units . in the medaka bis  mutant, centra mineralize at sites where ectopic hypurals attach to the notochord, leading to the development of fused centra  <cit> . thus, it is tempting to suggest from the zebrafish and medaka data, that the cartilaginous arches have a role in centrum mineralization. perhaps the predisposition to develop vertebral fusions is related to a specific mineralization pattern with basiventral origin .


distribution of notochord inner and outer cells during centrum formation
in atlantic salmon, notochord sheath mineralization is preceded by an apparent segmentation of the chordoblast layer  <cit> . the same holds for medaka . in contrast, differential chordoblast distribution in zebrafish is only clearly observed after chordacentrum mineralization, with few scattered squamous cells in the mineralized area and large, dorso-ventrally oriented, highly proliferative cells in the intervertebral region.

regarding notochord outer cells, it appears that the segmental pattern of centra in the caudal fin region is associated with the anatomical pattern of arches. in contrast, no association can be found in “ring” centra between outer cell distribution and early chordacentrum formation. the latter is in agreement with the data from zebrafish fused somite mutants , where paraxial mesoderm lacks a proper segmentation  <cit> . this mutant shows fusion of vertebral arches, while vertebral centra are individualized, suggesting that centrum segmentation does not rely on sclerotome patterning only. the resegmentation process in zebrafish has been suggested to follow non-lineage restricted compartments, where one somite contributes to more than one vertebral body, independently of the antero-posterior somitic domains   <cit> .

although mineralization is not preceded by a clear pattern of inner or outer cell distribution , these cells may nevertheless contribute to centrum mineralization. in atlantic salmon, initial centrum mineralization has been related to chordoblasts, followed by sclerotome-derived bone formation  <cit> . different from atlantic salmon, in medaka sclerotome-derived osteoblasts, with no input of chordoblasts, have been described to form vertebral centra  <cit> . yet, recent data show that conditional ablation of osteoblasts in medaka maintains notochord mineralization and even leads to vertebral fusion  <cit> . this suggested that notochord cells have the ability to induce mineralization of the notochord sheath. this is consistent with studies in zebrafish  <cit>  that show that notochord cell ablation prevents early centrum mineralization.

osteocalcin and chordacentrum formation
osteocalcin is the most abundant noncollagenous protein in bone of vertebrates, including all teleosts analyzed so far  <cit> . although osteocalcin was already described in the vertebral bodies of teleosts including zebrafish  <cit> , no previous reports demonstrated oc in early notochordal mineralization events. thus, the presence of oc in stages of chordacentrum mineralization has to be considered in a perspective different from that of regular bone formation.

within teleosts, osteocalcin is represented by two distinct isoforms   <cit> , encoded by two different genes, which were proposed to originate from a duplication event  <cit> . analysis of relative gene expression levels by qpcr for oc <dig> and oc <dig> showed that oc <dig> expression is first detected after 7dpf, while oc <dig> is maternally transcribed, suggesting a different role of the two isoforms. in fact, oc <dig> is detected prior to any osteoblast differentiation or mineralization event. this leads to the hypothesis that oc <dig> must be involved in processes prior to bone formation. detection of oc <dig> by immunostaining shows that this protein accumulates exactly where mineralization of the chordacentrum occurs. in the “ring” centra, the origin of the secreted protein is difficult to assess, due to the squamous morphology of the cells of the notochord epithelium and the inconspicuous presence of cells outside the notochord. in the caudal fin region, alp positive chondrocytes, directly adjoining the mineralizing notochord sheath, are positive for oc immunostaining, as well as notochord inner cells. in the tg fish, oc <dig> expression was located at the bone of arches of the “ring” centra, that form via intramembranous bone formation. this time point corresponds to the phase of autocentrum mineralization, as previously described in medaka  <cit> . therefore, our results suggest that oc <dig>  but not oc <dig>  is connected to chordacentrum mineralization. likewise, in larval and juvenile atlantic cod  <cit> , oc <dig> and oc <dig> are expressed in different cells associated with mineralizing structures. in atlantic salmon, some mineralized areas with reduced expression of osteocalcin  were considered to be associated with expression of a second isoform that the authors did not identify  <cit> . laizé and co-workers  <cit>  described oc <dig> propeptide as serine-rich, potentially phosphorylated and containing acid residues. these characteristics allow this protein to bind numerous calcium ions. if osteocalcin has an active role in the process of mineralization or if it is a bone-related hormone that passively binds to calcium  <cit> , is a current debate and must be further explored.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we have analyzed distinct mineralization patterns in different regions of the zebrafish vertebral column and related them to the timing and nature of vertebral arch formation. we have examined the distribution of cells within and outside the notochord, and critically assessed their potential contribution to chordacentrum and autocentrum formation. if notochord mineralization occurs prior to arch formation, the mineralization of the notochord sheath is ring-shaped. if notochord mineralization occurs after cartilaginous arch formation, mineralization of the notochord sheath starts at the insertion point of the arches, with a basiventral origin. finally, we have detected oc <dig> in the notochord sheath during chordacentrum formation, whereas oc <dig> was only expressed later in association with bone formation. these results emphasize the need to better characterize the function of both osteocalcin genes in zebrafish and throughout the vertebrate clade.

