BACKGROUND
obligately intracellular bacteria with very small genomes  include important pathogens and required symbionts of parasites and disease vectors  <cit> . many are intractable to traditional methods of analysis because they are unculturable and cannot be manipulated genetically. despite this, informed hypotheses can be constructed from systems-level in silico analysis of those bacteria for which full genome sequences are available. in particular, insight into the metabolic capabilities of these bacteria can be obtained from the construction and analysis of metabolic models generated from the inventory of genes with function in metabolism. of the various methods available, constraints-based modelling using flux balance analysis  has particular application because it reconstructs flux through metabolism without requiring kinetic or other detailed information on the function of individual metabolic enzymes  <cit> . instead, each metabolite is assumed to be in steady-state , and flux is optimised to a desired output, also known as the objective function, usually biomass production. the purpose of this study was to reconstruct and analyse the metabolic network of an unculturable obligately symbiotic bacterium and, from this, deduce how the bacterium may be controlled by its host. we focused on the bacterium buchnera aphidicola aps from the pea aphid, which has a  <dig>  mb genome  <cit> . b. aphidicola provide aphids with essential amino acids , nutrients which the insect cannot synthesise de novo and which are in short supply in the diet of plant phloem sap  <cit> . remarkably, the gene content of b. aphidicola is a subset of the e. coli k- <dig> genome  <cit> , allowing nearly all buchnera gene products to be assigned confident functional assignments. in this way genomic and systems biology tools developed for e. coli can be used to explore the metabolic properties of this symbiotic bacterium  <cit> . constraints-based modelling using fba has been applied to a variety of organisms, from e. coli to humans  <cit>  and various symbiotic bacteria  <cit>  including b. aphidicola. in this study, we have created a high quality manually constructed metabolic model for b. aphidicola that is more biologically realistic than previous studies . in particular, we have imposed the requirements that, first, the cell synthesises the cofactors needed by other enzymes that operate in the network; and, second, eaas are exported at empirically determined rates. this biologically realistic model provides the basis to assess the genetic robustness of the metabolic network and explore how the sustained release of eaas is shaped by the structure of the metabolic network and nutrient supply from the insect host.

RESULTS
the metabolic network of buchnera aphidicola aps
the metabolic scope of the network  is small, comprising  <dig> gene products,  <dig> compounds and  <dig> reactions, only 39% of the compounds and 27% of the reactions in the e. coli ijr <dig> model. the limited number of metabolic pathways  includes central metabolism and biosynthetic routes for nucleotides, amino acids and cofactors. notably 35% of all reactions in the network are involved in eaa biosynthesis.

the metabolic network of aps is poorly connected in comparison to e. coli. in the reaction graph, the modal path length between every pair of compounds, the maximal path length and %-unreachable nodes are all higher for aps than for e. coli . also, the node distribution for both the compound graph and the reaction graph in both e. coli and aps had no significant match to the power law, as determined by the minimal likelihood method . this is consistent with recent work  <cit>  demonstrating that the scale-free distribution reported earlier for e. coli arose from inappropriate combining of frequencies for different nodal values.

 <dig> number of reactions between every pair of metabolites.

 <dig> in-degree is the number of substrates and out-degree is the number of products for the reaction graph. the value of gamma is shown with the kolmogorov-smirnov statistic in parentheses, with critical values  of  <dig>  for e. coli and  <dig>  for buchnera.

analysis of the metabolic model  using flux balance analysis
we applied fba to explore the distribution of metabolite flux across the network, optimised to maximise biomass production. two novel features were included in our model to promote biological realism. the first, which we term 'cofactor constraints', is the requirement for the cell to synthesise at low levels all the cofactors needed by other enzymes in the network, if it has the pathways available for making these compounds . this requirement has not been included in multiple previous studies of e. coli metabolic networks, including the published analysis of the ijr <dig> model  <cit> , resulting in many pathways essential for in vivo viability of e. coli having zero flux in silico. the second modification to the model was the requirement that eaas are exported. an estimate of eaa export was obtained empirically using the pea aphid-buchnera symbiosis reared on chemically-defined diets. it varied among the amino acids, from 22%  to 50%  of the amount synthesised . the fba model is, consequently, representative of a functional symbiotic bacterium; it is called the  <dig>  model . for fba analysis, all reactions in the network were permitted to be active simultaneously. this condition is realistic because b. aphidicola lacks almost completely transcriptional regulation  <cit>  and sequence analysis of enzymes subject to feedback inhibition in e. coli suggests these features have been lost from b. aphidicola  <cit> .

genetic robustness of the metabolic network for in silico growth
the genetic robustness of igt <dig> was explored by removing single genes from the in silico organism, thereby setting zero fluxes through any reactions for which that particular gene product is essential. the ijr <dig> model of e. coli k- <dig> provided a related robust network for comparison  <cit> . when deletion of a particular gene resulted in a > 99% decrease in the growth flux it was considered essential, and remarkably this was true for 84% of the genes in igt <dig>  while the equivalent value for ijr <dig> was 19%. this significant difference in essentiality is illustrated graphically in fig.  <dig>  which plots the relationships between the genes in the models and the % of the original biomass production remaining when they have been removed and demonstrates that the aps metabolic network is extremely fragile. the severely limited redundancy in the aps network included the ability to utilise each of two alternative exogenous carbon sources  and either the hpt or gpt gene product as isoenzymes for the guanine phosphoribosyltransferase reaction . the latter is the only example of true biochemical redundancy in the network. the in silico organism is able to grow at a very low rate in the absence of the nuo genes indicating that the lack of a functioning membrane-bound nadh dehydrogenase, and hence of a functional respiratory chain, can be tolerated by a network relying on substrate-level phosphorylation. in contrast, the terminal reductase of the respiratory chain, the cytochrome bo oxidase, cannot be eliminated because reduced quinone is required for the dihydoorotic acid dehydrogenase reaction in pyrimidine biosynthesis.

we also analysed single gene deletions by the linear minimisation of metabolic adjustment  method  <cit> . this analysis produced the same set of genes as in fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig> apart from a requirement for nuo genes ). hence,  <dig> of  <dig>  genes in the linearmoma model for igt <dig> are essential for growth, compared to  <dig> of  <dig>  for ijr904;  <dig>  of the required genes were shared between b. aphidicola  and e. coli k- <dig> .

these data demonstrate that aps does not conform to the generality that metabolic networks are complex and robust  <cit> , and suggest that the properties of b. aphidicola are close to those of the postulated minimal metabolic network  <cit> . the fragility of the metabolic network suggests that b. aphidicola is intolerant, first, of mutations that eliminate metabolic reactions unless that loss is compensated for by enhanced metabolic support from the host, and, second, of drastic changes in conditions, suggesting that the environmental conditions in the symbiosis may be relatively uniform. the condition of b. aphidicola in the symbiosis is consistent with this interpretation. the bacterial cells are restricted to a single insect cell type, the bacteriocyte, the sole function of which appears to be to house and maintain the bacteria; the cytoplasm of the bacteriocyte is packed with bacterial cells, each of which is enclosed by an insect membrane, known as the symbiosomal membrane  <cit> . the metabolic traits of the bacteriocyte and transport properties of the symbiosomal membrane are predicted to be adapted to support and control the fragile network of these symbiotic bacteria by regulating metabolic flux to the bacteria and the physicochemical conditions experienced by each bacterial cell.

metabolic adaptation of aps for the symbiotic function of eaa production
host demand for eaas derived from b. aphidicola is predicted to vary because the amino acid composition of the aphid diet of plant phloem sap is influenced strongly by environmental conditions and plant age and species  <cit> . several lines of evidence suggest that the amount of eaas released varies with host demand but it is not understood how the host communicates its nutritional demand to b. aphidicola. one hypothesis is that eaa production is controlled by the supply of carbon and nitrogen substrates from the host. in igt <dig>  the principal carbon sources are glucose and mannitol, and the nitrogen sources are the amino acids aspartate, glutamate and glutamine. to test this hypothesis, carbon-limited and nitrogen-limited models were generated by increasing supply of either nitrogen or carbon sources, respectively. consistent with prediction, these changes to the inputs to the aps network had substantial impacts on the output of eaas , demonstrating that host regulation of symbiotic function by nutrient supply is metabolically feasible. eaa production by aps is, thus, poised to vary with substrate availability from the host.

an extension of the hypothesis above is that the profile of eaas released from aps is responsive to the nutritional inputs from the host cell. these computed flux changes are unlikely to be dampened or prevented in vivo because the aps network has very little redundancy and is not subject to transcriptional or post-translational controls  <cit> . it is known that the eaa production by b. aphidicola varies with host demand, as dictated primarily by dietary supply of amino acids  <cit> . the in silico analysis reported here suggests that the supply of key precursors across the symbiosomal membrane may be sufficient to regulate eaa export from the bacteria. ongoing research is exploring how the individual carbon and nitrogen sources influence the pattern of flux through the different eaa biosynthetic pathways. intra- and inter-specific variation in aphid dietary requirements for eaas has been reported  <cit> . although some of this variation may be attributed to the gene complement of different strains of b. aphidicola, the results in fig. 3a raise the possibility that the differences in the metabolic and transport properties of the host bacteriocyte may also play a key role in determining the eaa profile released from b. aphidicola in different aphids.

truncation of the purine biosynthesis pathway in the aps network couples bacterial growth to eaa production
visual inspection of the aps metabolic network revealed a particularly interesting feature, namely the proximal truncation of the purine biosynthesis pathway . in e. coli and many other bacteria, the histidine and purine biosynthesis pathways are linked via an intermediate, aicar, which recycles the backbone of the atp molecule used in a proximal reaction of the histidine biosynthetic pathway . both pathways start with prpp and in e. coli flux through the purine pathway is 3– <dig> times greater than through the histidine pathway  <cit> . in aps, aicar  is the precursor for purine synthesis , and generation of aicar at sufficient rates to meet the purine requirements of b. aphidicola depends on high flux from prpp through the histidine biosynthesis pathway. the truncated aicar-dependent purine biosynthesis is also found in blochmannia, a related intracellular bacterium that may also overproduce eaas  <cit> , but a cross-genome analysis of purine biosynthesis genes performed using phydbac  <cit>  revealed no other bacteria with this truncation. this apparently unique coupling predicts that production of the eaa histidine is essential for purine biosynthesis. the absolute connection between the two pathways was confirmed by examining the flux correlations of both pathways .

to assess whether we could model the evolution of the reduced buchnera network with this key interdependence, we adopted an established procedure using e. coli ijr <dig> as an approximation to the ancestral non-symbiotic metabolic network  <cit>  and applied a sequential gene deletion method to evolve organisms with the same metabolic outputs as igt <dig>  a total of  <dig> genes were retained in all of the  <dig> simulations performed, comprising  <dig>  of the  <dig> genes in igt <dig> and a further  <dig> genes absent from igt <dig> . neither this study nor pal et al.  could replicate the proximal truncation of the purine biosynthetic pathway . whilst the greedy algorithm and sampling numbers used by pal et al.,  and herein potentially limit the full interpretation of this experiment, it is clear that, unlike the evolutionary loss of various other metabolic genes, the truncation of the purine pathway was an improbable evolutionary step. to our knowledge, this type of host-symbiont linkage has not been described previously for any symbiosis. there is, however, evidence for coupling of the metabolism of nitrogen-fixing rhizobia and the surrounding plant cells in legume root nodules, such that rhizobial access to host amino acids is dependent on the release of the nitrogen-fixation product, ammonia  <cit> . further research on the interface between the metabolic networks of b. aphidicola and its host may reveal similar couplings between nutrient supply to b. aphidicola and bacterial overproduction of eaas. such couplings would preclude the evolution of bacteria with reduced export of eaas, despite the evidence that eaa export is a costly trait for b. aphidicola . the metabolic coupling is in the selective interest of the b. aphidicola. because b. aphidicola is an obligately vertically transmitted microbe with a small effective population size, any short-term growth advantage of reduced eaa export to the host would rapidly translate into depressed fitness of both the host and its bacterial complement.

CONCLUSIONS
systems level in silico analysis has shed light on the evolution and function of a symbiotic bacterium with a small genome. from the properties of the reconstructed metabolic network of b. aphidicola, adaptations for the symbiotic lifestyle can be identified. the fragile metabolic network suggests that the symbiotic environment is benign and not subject to drastic fluctuations, and host controls over bacterial metabolism are indicated by the responsiveness of the essential amino acid profile released from the bacteria to the host supply of carbon and nitrogen substrates. the coupling of purine synthesis  to the overproduction of histidine transferred to the host is potentially one route by which this bacterium is bound to the cooperative lifestyle. systems level analysis of other taxa will establish the generality of these key traits of metabolic fragility, flexibility and coupling among symbiotic bacteria with reduced genomes.

