BACKGROUND
an important part of expression data analysis is the significance analysis of genes, in which relevant features are found among thousands of irrelevant ones. two widely used algorithms for significance analysis are sam  <cit>  and limma  <cit> . these methods are well suited for assessing differences of expression across classes or levels in an experimental design. dimension reduction methods such as principal component analysis  and partial least squares regression   <cit>  is another group of popular tools for expression data analysis. these methods attempt to describe the underlying variation of the data in a low-dimensional space, enabling the use of statistical methods that cannot deal with the high number of correlated gene-expressions in the original data. the real signal is separated from random noise, and the components of the dimension reduction can often be interpreted biologically.

a much used dimension reduction method is pca  <cit> . this is an unsupervised method that describes the main features of a data set using a small number of orthogonal components. the computational method of singular value decomposition  is in many aspects the same as pca, and often it constitutes the main part of the pca algorithm. when background knowledge is available about the objects, supervised methods may be used to identify genes that associate with this information. for instance, t-tests may be used to discriminate between classes in an experimental design. also, correlation tests such as spearman's correlation may be used to probe expression profiles for similarity with continuous responses. plsr  <cit>  is a very powerful dimension reduction method which can utilise any sort of background information directly in the decomposition. plsr components are designed to optimally describe the dependent variables in terms of the expression data. the main focus of plsr in the microarray literature has been on classification, where a regression model is trained to fit a binary array representing class labels. many methods are available to convert the prediction model to a classification rule, for instance by discriminant analysis of the plsr components  <cit> . we use the intuitively pleasing property that the predicted, validated responses may be discretised directly in order to predict class-assignments. when plsr is used for classification it is referred to as discriminant plsr  or pls discriminant analysis . nguyen and rocke were the first to demonstrate how dplsr may be applied to classify cancers based on expression data  <cit> . in that work, they used an additional discriminant analysis for the final classification. plsr has also successfully been used to model patient survival times  <cit>  or cell cycle data  <cit> , which are applications where a continuous response is used directly as input. overviews of dimension reduction methods for analysis of microarray data are given in  <cit> .

the dimension reduction methods offer a new way of doing significance analysis on expression data. the underlying variation of interest is described by a limited number of components, also known as latent variables . the lvs are axes in a coordinate system that span, depending on the dimension reduction method used, the most relevant structures in the data set. each object  is associated with a limited number of scores, which represent the projection of the measurements onto the latent axes. there is also a loading vector for each component, providing a mapping between the latent and the original variables . the score vectors thus span interesting directions in the original feature space, and the accompanying loading vectors hold the contribution of the features in those directions. jack-knife is a method which can be used to assess the significance of variables from the stability of cross-validated model parameters  <cit> . genes important for class separation may be found by jack-knife of the components that best span the different classes. we use a modified version of hotelling's t <dig> test statistic  <cit>  that is specially tailored for cross-validated data. the framework presented is a very general tool for significance testing, and it is applicable in principle to any dimension reduction method from which cross-validated loadings can be obtained. once a dimension reduction method is chosen based on the data available or the experimental setup, the same methodology for significance analysis may be used whether one, several or no responses are included in the modelling. the dependent variables may describe continuous phenotypic information, categorical information or a combination of both.

we apply our framework for significance analysis on three publicly available expression data sets, including one with known spiked-in transcripts. differences between pca and plsr-methods will be explored, and the results will be compared to sam and limma where possible. for ordinary plsr or dplsr, some of the weaker correlation patterns between the expression data and the responses may be overlooked in the modelling. we have therefore chosen to use a variant of plsr called bridge-plsr  <cit> . this method is able to extract all information relevant to the responses in the first components, and is therefore better suited for this kind of significance analysis. the false discovery rate  is estimated by resampling to provide a threshold for significance  <cit> . the set of parameters obtained from either of the dimension reduction methods in this work is referred to as a bilinear model. this reflects that the components representing the data are linear in both the rows and the columns. the same term is used also about the mathematical formulation of how the data are represented by scores and loadings, but the exact meaning in each case should be clear from the context. bold uppercase letters denote matrices, and bold lowercase letters describe column-vectors. an expression data set is arranged in an array x with experiments along the rows and with a column for each feature.

a toolbox written in matlab  with the code used in this work is provided under the gnu general public license .

RESULTS
smoker transcriptome
we first look at a data set that investigates the effects of smoking on human airway transcripts  <cit> . data are available from three groups of subjects according to their smoking history. the original article reports significant differences both between a group of smokers compared to subjects that have never been smoking, and between former smokers and the group of never smokers. a pca of the expression data x reveals that there is a large source of variation in the data that does not correspond to the available group information. in figure  <dig>  a pca score plot of the two first components is given, where the objects are coloured according to the classes "never", "former", and "current". unreported experimental factors, for instance a change in laboratory procedures, may be responsible for the separation of objects into two clusters along the first component. in the corresponding loading plot in figure  <dig>  the  <dig> most significant genes from the pca analysis are given in green. these genes span mainly the unreported x-variation and are not important for the smoking-induced differences of expression. the venn diagram in figure  <dig> confirms that the genes detected by pca are to a large degree irrelevant for classification of these data.

the pca-analysis indicates that the group information should be allowed to guide the decomposition if any genes related to smoking are to be found. we know that a minimum of k -  <dig> independent variables are needed for a linear separation of k classes. for instance, one gene measured for several subjects may in theory be used to differentiate between two classes, while a minimum of two genes are needed for assignments into three classes. due to co-regulation and inter-dependencies between genes, such single, descriptive features are usually both uninformative and hard to find. however, dimension reduction offers independent linear combinations of genes that may be used instead. if y is a binary matrix holding the class information for each object, a good linear separation based on the expression data may be obtained with components that span all the y-related variance in x. in bridge-plsr, this variance may be completely described in a minimum number of components. the score plot from a two-component bridge-plsr model is given in figure  <dig>  here, three groups corresponding to the predefined classes are revealed. this model explains 54% of y, whereas an ordinary plsr for comparison explains 45% in two components. jack-knife is performed based on a full leave-one-out cross-validation, and the significant features are given in the loading plot in figure  <dig>  the green spots correspond to features called significant by both sam and bridge-plsr, whereas the red spots indicate significant genes not found by sam. neighbouring genes in the loading plot have similar profiles, whereas genes in opposite quadrants are negatively correlated. also, the arrays in a specific area of the score plot have a high expression value for the genes in the corresponding area of the loading plot. as the significant genes span mainly the first component, they discriminate well between smokers and never-smokers, according to the score plot. along the second component, which separates former smokers from the rest, fewer significant genes are found. this indicates that this correlation is weaker and more susceptible to random variations in the data. it is seen, however, that bridge-plsr finds more genes than sam along this direction. any significant genes along the second component describes smoking-induced transcriptomic changes among the former smokers.

a venn diagram which compares the significant genes found with bridge-plsr, sam and limma is given in figure  <dig>  all methods agree on the significance calls for the majority of the genes, however, bridge-plsr finds an additional  <dig> genes which are undetected by the other methods. to verify that these genes are not primarily false positives, the genes are annotated and their biological significance with regard to smoking is evaluated. a comprehensive list of our findings is given as supplementary information . of the genes identified as differentially expressed by bridge-plsr, only  <dig> have unknown or poorly known biological function. an additional  <dig> have well understood biological function often related to the natural system, but with no readily apparent link to smoking or lung damage. of the remaining genes,  <dig> are known to be involved in regulation of cell growth, cell cycle, or apoptosis, processes known to be affected by smoking  <cit> . seven of these genes as well as another  <dig> genes on the list not related to cell growth, have been shown to be involved in various forms of lung cancer. as the majority of lung cancer sufferers are smokers or previous smokers, these genes can be linked to smoking directly. another interpretation is that these genes change early in the cancer development process. seven genes are identified that have been reported to take part in lung development, this is not surprising as smoking can cause dramatic changes in the airways. in addition to cancer, we identify  <dig> genes that are related to other diseases in the lungs and bronchia, such as asthma, inflammation, fibrosis, or response to metallic toxins. another large group of genes belongs to the protein life cycle, particularly the ribosome, or the ubiquitin cycle. this could point to an overall change in the rate of protein turnover caused by smoking. this is consistent with the results of tomfohr et al.  <cit> , who analysed the same data set with gene set enrichment analysis. five genes are also found that are known to be expressed in lungs, but for which we find no link to cancer development or lung damage in the literature. overall it seems that of the genes for which biological background information is available, the majority relate to biological processes that are influenced by smoking. the additional genes found by bridge-plsr are therefore unlikely to be false discoveries.

for prediction purposes, ordinary plsr seems to be superior to bridge-plsr. the best predictive plsr model is obtained for two components, with an explained y-variance of 32%. the best predictive bridge-plsr model is a one-component solution with a cross-validated explained variance in y of 20%. the residual mean squared error of prediction even increases slightly when two components are used. caution must therefore be used when interpreting the second component. they are both included here because the main goal of the analysis is significance testing. hotelling's t2-test using only one component corresponds to an ordinary one-sample t-test, and is, in this case, only able to separate between the groups "never" and "current". in order to find genes that might be relevant for former smokers, the second component must be investigated. the jack-knife is believed to reject most of the genes that cause the residual error to increase, as those genes have a high variance across cross-validation segments. for prediction purposes, the model with the lowest residual error might be used instead. it should be noted, however, that even if the bridge-plsr or plsr-model with one or two components, respectively, is optimal for prediction, neither will be able to predict former smokers.

a ridge parameter γ controls the influence of y in the decomposition. a small value of this parameter ensures that the first bridge-plsr components span the directions of maximum covariance between x and y. this is ideal from the point of view of significance analysis, as the major components will span all the y-relevant variance. however, if γ =  <dig>  the maximum number of components is limited by the rank of y, which for these particular data is two. for explorative reasons, γ is set to a default value of  <dig>  throughout this work in order to enable interpretation also of later components. for the first two components, this has no visible effect compared to a γ-value of zero. components three and four, however, are almost identical to the first two pca components in figure  <dig> . this is a further verification that the bridge-plsr is able to separate the y-relevant structures in x from technical and other irrelevant variation. it is possible to optimise both the ridge parameter and the number of components to minimise the residual error of the bilinear model. this would require an extra layer of validation, for instance by cross model validation  <cit> , to obtain unbiased error estimates. as the primary goal in this work is significance analysis, such an optimisation is out of scope. however, a supplementary response surface is provided for reference, along with the ordinary plsr results . it can be seen that the cross-validated error variance is robust with regard to γ for small values of the parameter.

analysis by ordinary plsr is performed for the sake of comparison. this model uses two components to separate never and current smokers, and additional two or three components are needed to describe the former smokers. the optimal number of components according to the cross-validation is two, but the majority of the significant genes found by this model span only the irrelevant x-information . because of the irrelevant, dominating structure in x, bridge-plsr is a much better choice for significance analysis in this case.

spiked-in data
a further analysis is performed with affymetrix spike-in data in a constant human background  <cit> . the spiked-in transcripts hybridise to  <dig> known probe sets, however, several authors report that also other probe sets show differential expression due to sequence or function similarity. sheffler et al.  <cit>  remove  <dig> such genes as outliers prior to analysis. two independent groups  <cit>  suggest that additional  <dig> or  <dig> probe sets, respectively, should be added to the original list of known spike-ins. these lists differ in a single probe set, which is known to have identical sequence to one of the spiked-in genes for  <dig> of  <dig> probe pairs. we include the  <dig> extra genes which are suggested by both groups in our analysis, yielding a total of  <dig> spike-in probe sets. bridge-plsr with jack-knife finds all these genes among the  <dig> most significant ones. an estimated fdr of  <dig>  results in  <dig> significant genes, corresponding to a true fdr of 7%. the five false positives are the probe sets "203173_s_at", "204890_s_at", "204891_s_at", "217019_at", and "200822_x_at". the maximum squared correlation coefficients between the expression values of these probe sets and the concentration profiles are, respectively, r <dig> ∈ { <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> }. for comparison, r <dig> for the list of true positives range from  <dig>  to  <dig> . in passing, it is noted that the three false positives with high correlation are included also in the outlier-list of sheffer et al.  <cit> .

rat liver study
a data set investigating liver damage in rats after exposure to toxic doses of paracetamol is also analysed  <cit> . in addition to design information of dose and time of exposure, several pathological variables based on blood and tissue chemistry are available for the rats examined. there is an abundance of possible comparisons in these data, and analysis by limma or sam is therefore difficult. we perform an analysis by sam in which two groups of "high" and "low" dosage are defined for each of the four time-points of the design. the drastic treatment some of these rats receive induces profound genetic responses, leading to a long list of differentially expressed features. testing for all  <dig> contrasts defined by the  <dig> groups, sam assigns significance to 50% of the genes at a significance level of  <dig> . this result verifies something that might be expected – that poisoning of an organism can affect several biological processes that in turn involve many genes. investigation of more complex relationships based on these methods is not straightforward.

plsr is well suited for handling both multiple comparisons and continuous responses. the score plot from a bridge-plsr model with all available response information in y is given in figure  <dig>  the spots are coloured according to the administered drug-doses. the low doses are clearly separated from the toxic doses along the first component, but the classes within those two groups are mixed together. the dashed lines envelope three groups that are related to the time from drug exposure to necropsy. the lower group consists of the 6-hour design points, the upper group corresponds to the 48-hour points, while in the middle group the 18- and 24-hour points are mingled together. the second component is thus related to time since exposure. a leave-one-out cross-validation is performed also for these data. the optimal model for prediction is obtained after four components, with a residual variance of 47%. however, we are interested mainly in the genes which are differentially expressed across dose and time. we therefore use a two-component model in the significance analysis, with a prediction error of 58%. for these data with much structure in y, the differences between the results from bridge-plsr and ordinary plsr are small. all predictive components describe the same phenomena, and the residual errors are similar, both in a calibrated and validated sense. for reference, the full response surface including several values γ of is given as supplementary information .

a helpful plot is the y-loading plot in figure  <dig>  here, each spot corresponds to a response-variable, and the predictabilities are given by the associated colour-bar. the colour of a spot reflects the cross-validated, explained variance for that variable, given in percent of the true response's variation. the variables with red spots are very well predicted while the blue spots represent variables that cannot reliably be modelled based on the expression data. two variables which have high predictive abilities and are correlated with the dose are alt  and ast . increased levels of these enzymes in the blood stream are diagnostic markers for liver damage. the large degree of explained variance for these variables indicates that the first component actually describes liver injury directly, rather than just the concentration of paracetamol in the rats. because the individual responses to the drug vary, these markers are better suited to model the genetic response to overdose than the design is. this information should be included also in the interpretation of the scores in figure  <dig>  it is seen that the response to overdose peaks between  <dig> and  <dig> hours after exposure, as these groups span the first component better than the 6- and 48-hour groups. after  <dig> hours, metabolism may have disposed of some of the paracetamol, the liver-cells may have started to repair, and the levels of alt and ast in the blood have started to decrease. other correlations seen in figure  <dig> may also be of interest. liver damage seems to be associated with increased concentrations of total bile acids and blood urea nitrogen, and there is also an indication that the level of cholesterol decreases. the reduced glutathione level in the liver tissue increases with time after poisoning, and the level of blood albumin seems to decrease accordingly.

an estimated fdr significance cutoff of  <dig> % yields 25% significant features for the bridge-plsr model. the x-loading plot is given in figure  <dig>  with the significant genes marked by green spots. the majority of these features span the component describing liver injury, but some are also found that vary with time. the significant genes found by sam are scattered more uniformly over the same loadings, making any systematic trends hard to detect .

discussion
dimension reduction methods are explorative in nature, and the decomposition attempts to find components that describe as much structure as possible using a small number of components. this is a very effective way to detect the sources of variation in large data tables, and visual inspection of score and loading plots enables discovery of unknown phenomena. the information carried by the components often corresponds to underlying biological processes, greatly simplifying interpretation of the results. comparison of score and loading plots forms a central interpretative tool for mapping measured genetic responses to different subjects or levels of an experimental design. the dimension reduction methods may be vulnerable to outliers and systematic noise, and it is important that the results are properly validated and understood. the inspection of scores and loadings can be used as an aid in the discovery of bad arrays or bad spots, respectively.

most genes are known to interact with other genes in potentially complex cellular networks. investigation of one gene at a time is therefore not optimal for a good understanding of a biological system. the dimension reduction methods attempt to find linear combinations of genes that describe the data well, and are therefore better equipped to model co-regulated genes. the representation of expression data by a small number of components also enables use of statistical methods that assume independence. the significance testing itself is also multivariate, as features are tested for significance in multiple dimensions simultaneously. genes that are not significant along any of the individual components may still be important for the full model.

the dimension reduction methods are applicable to a wide range of problems. pca is widely used for clustering and for exploration of the main structure of a data set. in this work, pca revealed a large systematic variance in the smoker data which was irrelevant for classification. a visual inspection of the scores clearly showed that a supervised decomposition was needed. plsr has been much used in the classification of expression data, and other uses have been shown where the y-information is non-categorical. it is hard to control all levels of variability in living organisms, and the responses to stimuli may differ between test subjects. similarly, biopsies used in cancer classification are heterogeneous material and may vary even among patients with the same diagnosis. the direct use of clinical and pathological parameters in the analysis may enable a more accurate modelling than if just the classes or levels of a design are used.

while significance analysis by jack-knife is much used in other fields  <cit> , at least two new concepts are introduced in this work. one is to use bridge-plsr to describe more of the response variation in fewer components. this may be needed when there is a large number of noisy or irrelevant variables in x, which is typical for expression data analysis. for the rat-liver data, no discernible difference was found between bridge-plsr and standard plsr. for the smoker data, plsr was more predictive for future objects, however, bridge-plsr was able to describe the classes better and is preferred for significance analysis. it is acknowledged also in  <cit>  that the best genes for prediction are not always the most interesting ones. the second novel concept is the modified hotelling's t2-test for use with jack-knifed models. this test is believed to be superior to the standard alternative of performing a t-test for each component individually.

there are several possible extensions to the presented framework that may be included to handle more complex problems. for instance, dimension reduction algorithms exist that inherently handle missing data  <cit> . often background information about the features are available, for instance in the form of gene ontology or metabolic networks  <cit> . there are various ways to include a priori information in the analysis, either in the form of a pre-processing step or in a specialised algorithm  <cit> . the dimension reduction methods are not even restricted to two-way data. it is possible that a three-way organisation of the rat-liver data into an array of time-by-dose for each gene would result in a more stable decomposition. several possible dimension reduction methods exist also for arrays of higher order  <cit> . finally, the presented methodology is not restricted to expression data. any bioinformatics application producing many measured variables per available object can be expected to benefit from these methods.

CONCLUSIONS
the dimension reduction methods are multivariate and well suited to deal with the intricate network of dependencies between genes. they offer a versatility that allows any continuous or discrete background information available to be incorporated in the analysis. the results are intuitively understood based on simple scatter plots, which also enable the discovery of unknown phenomena in the data. the identification of differentially expressed genes is an important part of expression data analysis. we have presented a general scheme for significance testing that can be applied to a wide range of dimension reduction methods. the validity of the procedure has been established by comparison with other, well known algorithms for significance analysis, by biological interpretation, and by analysis of spike-in data.

