BACKGROUND
rna interference  is the pathway by which short interfering rna  or short hairpin rna  are used to inactivate the expression of target genes . compared to sirna, shrna offers advantages in silencing longevity, delivery options and cost. expressed shrna is transcribed in cells from a dna template as a single-stranded rna molecule  . complementary regions spaced by a small 'loop' cause the transcript to fold back on itself forming a 'short hairpin' in a manner analogous to natural microrna. recognition and processing by the rnai machinery converts the shrna into the corresponding sirna. in a survey of more than  <dig> papers applying expressed shrna in mammalian systems we determined that shrna expression vectors are constructed by one of three different methods .

the most common method for making shrna constructs  requires the synthesis, annealing and ligation of two complementary oligonucleotides  into an expression vector . while this cloning method is quick, the oligo synthesis cost is nearly double that of other methods and the frequency of false positives determined by sequencing is high   <cit> . the unreliability of this method is in part due to the difficulty in the synthesis of long oligos   <cit> . as this method requires two long oligos the chance of mutation due to synthesis error is doubled.

the second strategy  is a pcr approach in which a promoter sequence serves as the template . the hairpin sequence is contained in the reverse primer and pcr results in a cloning cassette comprising both promoter and hairpin. correct amplicon production is critically dependent upon the sequence of the reverse primer. hence this technique requires costly purification  of the long reverse primer to exclude truncated oligos originating from the manufacturing process  <cit> . although it is advantageous that only a single long oligo is required, the strong secondary structure predicted to form within this primer can lead to the amplification of false products. to alleviate these problems, the long reverse primer can be exchanged for two shorter primers. the reaction is then modified to a two-round nested pcr with each primer introducing half the hairpin per round  <cit> . however, the repeated cycling inadvertently increases the chance of incorporating polymerase-induced mutations.

the third method  encompasses several techniques relating to primer extension. each is based on the principle of a polymerase extending the 3' end of overlapping oligos  <cit> . in one instance the shrna template is formed from two long partially complementary oligos of approximately equal length, overlapping at their 3' ends  <cit> . each oligo serves as both template  and primer . extension and repeated cycling generates a double-stranded product, akin to that generated in the annealed oligo method. in a variation of this method, one long oligo is used as the template and a second short oligo  is used as the primer for extension . the product can be further amplified by pcr with addition of another short primer binding the extended strand  <cit> . this technique is the cheapest of all the construction methods discussed as it both halves the cost of unique oligos  and does not need costly oligo purification . however, this saving may be off-set by a high rate of polymerase-induced mutation in either the initial extension step or by repeated cycling  <cit> .

a common drawback of constructing shrna vectors, irrespective of the method used, is the difficulty in confirming the sequence of the hairpin region using automated sequencing protocols. it has been widely reported that hairpin templates can lead to sequencing reactions that terminate prematurely, at sites adjacent to or just within the region that encodes the hairpin stem  <cit>  . although this phenomenon is commonly encountered, it does not affect all hairpins equally and is very likely dependent on the strength of secondary structures that are unique to each sequence.

the purpose of this study, therefore, was to determine the most cost effective and reliable method for producing multiple shrna expression constructs. two parameters were tested:  cloning strategies and  methodologies to ensure that all hairpin templates could be confirmed at high-throughput automated sequencing facilities.

RESULTS
upon consideration of the available methods for shrna construction, we selected primer extension using a long template oligo and a short universal primer as it was the least costly. our first step to reduce mutations was to remove the possibility of cycling-induced errors by conducting all reactions as single-step extensions. even so, our initial experiments using taq polymerase were not encouraging as,  the total number of colonies recovered was low ,  of these only a small fraction contained a correctly sized insert  and  upon sequencing it was found that up to  <dig> % of these 'positive' recombinant clones contained substitutions and deletions. the low recovery rate and high incidence of mutations were most likely due to the predicted secondary structure of the hairpin template  <cit>  inhibiting taq polymerase chain elongation. the extensive end-stage screening and sequencing of bacterial clones made this protocol, as it stood, impractical. to address these shortcomings, we tested a panel of molecular disruption agents to reduce secondary structure formation during chain elongation. agents tested included; q-solution , betaine , ammonium sulfate , dimethyl sulfoxide  and gc-melt . none of the additives tested yielded a detectable full-length extension product , although the addition of amso did improve on the number of recombinant clones . there was, therefore, little improvement over protocols employing taq alone.

to improve upon these results, we substituted taq polymerase with an enzyme better able to counter the secondary structure of the hairpin template. phi <dig> is an enzyme that facilitates rolling circle replication by the bacillus subtilis phage Φ <dig>  <cit> , and as such possesses strand displacing capabilities  <cit> . in addition, the supplier's comparison of fifteen available polymerases suggested that phi <dig> possessed the highest displacing activity . on testing phi <dig> we found it was able to copy a highly structured template oligo, yielding detectable full-length product . this resulted in higher cloning efficiencies  and a lower mutation rate  when compared to taq  . the mutation frequency was even lower than that reported for the annealed oligo cloning strategy   <cit> . furthermore, with a nucleotide polymerization rate ranging from  <dig> nt./min. @ 4°c to  <dig> nt./min. @ 30°c  <cit>  the reaction is fast, isothermal and independent of additives. we also confirm the previous finding that oligos for primer extension need only be ordered at the minimal synthesis and purification scales   <cit> .

the use of another enzyme with similar properties, vent, has also been reported  <cit> . however, additives  and repeated thermocycling were recommended for successful extension. whilst valid, this technique was hampered by the occurrence of cycling-induced errors. in summary, our isothermal procedure using phi <dig> retains the cost benefits of primer extension and reduces manifestations of both synthesis and polymerase-induced mutations.

during this study, we generated multiple shrna expression constructs; all of which required sequence confirmation. given the prevalence of mutations, this step becomes imperative as suppressive activity is dependent on homology between the sirna guide strand and target rna  <cit> . unfortunately, sequencing shrna constructs is not always straightforward  <cit> . we often found that the standard sequencing procedure failed, again most likely due to the inability of the polymerase to read-through the highly structured template . neither repositioning the sequencing primer, nor the addition of molecular disruption agents to the reaction were able to overcome sequencing limitations . although our work with phi <dig> suggests an obvious solution, it was not possible to exchange the sequencing polymerase when using automated sequencing facilities.

as an alternative, we found that inclusion of a unique restriction enzyme  site within the loop sequence allows the vector to be linearised and sequenced in two separate reactions; one for the sense and one for the anti-sense . our present design incorporates a centrally located xhoi site in an  <dig> base loop , but it is probable that other re sites could also be employed. we found that the digestion could be performed directly in the sample tube destined for sequencing, with no impact on sequencing quality . from our survey we also noted that although uncommon, the inclusion of an re site within the hairpin loop was not unique , but its only described use was to assist in screening and selection of recombinant clones  <cit> . in no case was there a reported link, as we propose, between re loop design and the benefits of dual-sequencing the digested vector.

our design incorporates an additional mismatched nucleotide pair placed adjacent to the end of the stem . structural predictions reveal this to be a necessary inclusion to ensure that the loop, based on a palindromic re site, remains in an open configuration . this is important as additional paired nucleotides at the base of the loop effectively increase stem length, shifting the intended stem-loop junction. it has been demonstrated, for analogous microrna structures, that altering the stem-loop junction has possible consequences for ensuing cleavage, processing, target recognition and hence suppressive activity  <cit>  – an observation that we have also noted for shrna molecules . surprisingly,  <dig> % of surveyed studies employed the loop sequence, uucaagaga, which is predicted to internally pair , potentially altering suppressive activity as described . the loop design we propose is amenable to any hairpin sequence without altering the internal stem, stem-loop junction or consequent sirna characteristics.

another reported strategy to alleviate sequencing difficulties is to include mismatched bases within the shrna stem  <cit> . additionally, it has been proposed that this also reduces the occurrence of bacterially-derived mutation events. the mismatches are positioned such that the anti-sense stem  is complementary to the target but mismatched to the sense stem . we attempted this using the annealed oligo strategy yet still observed an ~ <dig> % mutation rate – a figure comparable to fully complementary stem designs  <cit> . while we did see a reduction in sequencing difficulties when mismatches were present, we also observed a correlation between increasing mismatches and decreasing gene suppression activity . we can only speculate that these disparities with the original observations were due to sequence-specific effects  or different bacterial lab strains . with reference to the latter, commonly used e.coli strains such as dh5α encode sbcc and sbcd, which are proteins known to generate double-stranded breaks in dna hairpins  <cit> . we have found that engineered sbccd deletion strains such as gt <dig> , specifically developed to tolerate inverted repeat regions in dna, yield more faithful recombinant clones.

it is worthy of final note that we see no obvious correlation in our data between hairpin stem length  and the incidence of mutations arising during cloning or problems with sequencing. in our hands they appear largely sequence dependent as we encountered long and short hairpins that were problematic on both counts.

CONCLUSIONS
we have analyzed the literature and determined that shrna construction is frequently associated with difficulties and can be hindered by high mutation frequencies in accordance with our own observations. our investigations to find an improved alternative led to a variation of the primer extension method using phi <dig>  the procedure is swift, isothermal and independent of additives making it, in our hands, the most reliable and cost effective of all the construction techniques. in addition, we present a simple and robust solution for overcoming sequencing limitations commonly encountered with shrna vectors. this solution is based on an re loop design, which is amenable to any shrna without compromising its suppressive activity. these technical modifications will be of tangible benefit to researchers looking to improve their shrna construction process.

