BACKGROUND
the discovery of the regulatory role of rna has revolutionized our understanding of the molecular control and genome organization of living cells  <cit> . small non-coding rnas  have been shown, both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, to exert a tight control on gene expression. of relevance, a particular secondary structure can confer a regulatory ability of translation  <cit> , a catalytic activity  <cit> , or an interfering ability to silence gene expression  <cit> . importantly, a unique secondary structure is underlying all these mechanisms that, while preventing the degradation of the sncrna, allows the interaction with and subsequent modification of other sncrnas, mrnas, or proteins. in summary, structures are fundamental in determining the potential roles of sncrna and are, consequently, a fundamental component of the fitness of these molecules  <cit> . in an attempt to proof this point, many research groups have pursued identifying the footprints of natural selection on secondary structures of sncrnas, although this remains elusive. in this study we test the hypothesis that selection indeed operates at this level, driving the evolution of sequences to codify structures that present beneficial traits for the organism.

early studies tackled the structural robustness of rna molecules  <cit> , considering that robustness would be a beneficial trait. these approaches took advantage of a physicochemical model  <cit>  that allows predicting the resulting phenotype  from a given genotype . recent computational studies have been mainly focused on precursors of mirnas  <cit>  and on viruses  <cit> , and have suggested that natural rna sequences are robust to mutations. however, as we show in this study, the statistical significance of the results depends on the choice of the reference sample of sequences. moreover, whether robustness evolves driven directly by selection or is the by-product of the selection for another related magnitude remains highly controversial  <cit> . despite their biological relevance, however, very little is known about the structural robustness of bacterial sncrnas. here, we propose a new definition of environmental robustness that better allows studying its relationship with mutational effects. in addition, we explore and describe the robustness landscape of bacterial sncrnas and link it to functionality and evolvability.

robustness to environmental perturbations is the cornerstone of biological adaptation and diversification. in bacteria, adaptation to environment requires of fundamental changes at the molecular level . these changes may lead to the functional divergence of proteins or rnas that mediate the adaptation to the environment. indeed, bacteria have the ability to rapidly accumulate beneficial mutations when growing in new environments  <cit> . if most of such functional mutations are destabilizing, owing to the fact they compromise ancestral functions, robustness to these mutations may fuel biological evolvability  <cit> . however, a strong robustness may buffer the accumulation of beneficial mutations. hence, determining how robust are proteins or rnas to environmental and genetic perturbations may unearth the rules of evolvability  <cit> . our study reveals that plasticity evolved in natural sncrnas, conferring evolvability to bacteria  <cit> , and it also reveals that this magnitude modulates robustness.

RESULTS
robustness of small rnas
here, we define structural robustness as the sensitivity of an rna molecule to perturbations: the greater the robustness of an rna molecule, the more insensitive is to perturbations. to understand how rna molecules respond to perturbations, we measured two types of robustness. first, environmental robustness  accounts for the robustness to perturbations in the environment where the sncrna lives. these perturbations come mostly from extra-cellular factors. we assumed that environmental perturbations alter the physicochemical properties for rna folding. under this assumption, we computationally induced environmental perturbations by altering the energetic parameters implemented in the thermodynamic model for the base-pairs interactions  <cit> . alterations in the conformation of the sncrna structure resulting from such perturbations were used to calculate re. this assumption is justified because the thermodynamic model assumes a mathematical expression by decomposition, whose parameterization must be done against experimental data. different sets of energetic parameters have been proposed  <cit> , each of them being a relatively good approximation for making predictions. however, the model is certainly a simplification of the reality  and many more equations and parameters would be needed for a much more accurate calculation of free energies and rna structures. therefore, it is indebted to think that environmental conditions  modulate the energetic parameters of this effective model, and that environmental robustness would be achieved by being insensitive to perturbations in those parameters  <cit> . second, mutational robustness  accounts for the robustness of structures to single point mutations in the sncrna sequence. we provide formal mathematical definitions of these variables in section methods. to perform the computation over rna secondary structures we used vienna rna package  <cit> .

we focused our study on the sncrnas  of the bacterium escherichia coli, in particular the strain k <dig> mg <dig>   <cit> . among bacteria, e. coli is the one with more reported sncrnas. and among the different strains of this bacterium, the k <dig> mg <dig> is the one owning more sncrnas. in bacteria, most of the riboregulation is based on antisense rna-mediated repressions, although there are still few examples of activation. for instance, dsra gene codifies for one sncrna that represses the expression of hns gene  in e. coli by inducing a loop in the mrna, while it activates the expression of rpos gene  that is under the control of a leader sequence able to sequester the ribosome binding site by forming a hairpin  <cit> . we calculated the mutational and environmental robustness for those bacterial sncrnas. to do so, we first computed the thermodynamic ensembles of structures of all rna molecules. we then applied several mutational and environmental perturbations to each of the sequences, recomputed the ensemble of structures of perturbed sequences, and calculated the base-pair distance between ensembles  <cit> . we finally averaged the results to compute rm and re . in order to calculate re we fixed the sequence and perturbed  the energetic parameters, while in the case of rm we kept constant the energetic parameters and mutated  the sequence.

to assess the statistical significance of robustness values, we computed the z-scores associated to each sequence, with respect to the random population of structural analogs . we constructed three different random samples of artificial sequences having the same minimal free energy  structures as the real sequences . we found that the statistical significance of the robustness , to both mutational and environmental perturbations, depends on the choice of the sample . for instance, in sample i,  <dig> % of the sequences was significantly robust to mutations, and  <dig> % significantly robust to environmental perturbations. in addition, the entire set of sncrnas was on average significantly robust  . these results are in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , although caution should be taken in interpreting these values of robustness. in sample ii, the fraction of significantly robust sncrnas to mutations was reduced to  <dig> %, while robustness to environment was reduced to  <dig> % . despite these reductions, the results remain to be in stark agreement with a recent study  <cit> . in contrast to the two previous samples, sample iii, the more unbiased one, allowed us to better identify the subset of significantly robust sncrnas. in this sample, about 60% of genes were on average robust to both types of perturbations, mutational and environmental , while only  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  of genes were significantly robust to either mutational or environmental perturbations, respectively . in addition, we did not find a significant enrichment in both types of robustness on average, comparing the whole set of bacterial sncrnas against sample iii  . figure  <dig> illustrates the structural robustness landscape of bacterial sncrnas, using this last sample. our results indicate that bacterial sncrnas are not robust with respect to random sequences, and the comparative of the results for different null models indicate that previous analyses on the robustness of pre-mirnas  <cit>  should be revisited. to address this issue, we further applied our methodology to pre-mirnas of caenorhabditis elegans, and we found that they are not so robust as claimed before. more precisely, szöllósi and derényi reported for c. elegans 37% of significantly robust pre-mirnas, while we did not obtain any in the  <dig> sequences analyzed using an analog sample iii.

robustness versus plasticity
in addition to the environmental robustness, we also took into account the plasticity  of the molecules . sequences are more plastic when the thermodynamic ensemble of structures has higher variability  <cit> . in contrast to previous studies  <cit> , here we disentangled plasticity  from environmental robustness. this division made it feasible distinguishing clear patterns of linked genetic and environmental robustness. we calculated the degree of plasticity of the sncrnas and tested their significance as above . we found that natural molecules were significantly more plastic, in terms of population, than artificial ones  . specifically,  <dig> % of the bacterial sncrnas were significantly plastic , albeit the fraction of molecules significantly susceptible to the environment  was much lower . in addition, in terms of population, sncrnas are not significantly robust to environmental perturbations, neither to mutational effects. as before, we also analyzed the plasticity for the pre-mirnas of c. elegans, obtaining a significant enrichment of plasticity on average , similar to bacterial sncrnas. not surprisingly we found a slight inverse correlation between p and re , because 1-p can also be understood as a kind of robustness to temperature   <cit> . indeed, previous work pointed out that the higher the energy gap between the optimal and suboptimal structures of the thermodynamic ensemble , the higher is the robustness to mutations  <cit> . of note, with a definition of environmental robustness of 1-p, our results would indicate that bacterial sncrnas are on average more susceptible to environmental changes than artificial ones, while they are neither significantly susceptible nor robust to mutations.

the conclusion that bacterial sncrnas are significantly plastic could entail important evolutionary and functional implications . first, plasticity could serve as a mechanism to diversify the functions of molecules, since a single genotype could yield multiple phenotypes , even sncrnas can adopt multistable states  <cit> . second, plastic molecules have greater evolvability  <cit> , which could lead to functional innovation . third, the greater the plasticity, the larger structural changes can be after mutational or environmental perturbations . recently, it has been shown that robustness can correlate with evolvability but in a way strongly modulated by plasticity: intermediate robustness levels are optimal for fueling evolvability, where higher plasticity induces lower optimal robustness levels  <cit> .

we also investigated epistasis   <cit> , the interaction of mutations, and its relationship with plasticity. in terms of population, we found that double mutations in bacterial sncrnas tend to be antagonistic  .  <dig> % of the sequences display e >  <dig>  although with respect to sample iii the statistical significance is reduced . antagonistic epistasis indicates that the effects of the first mutation at a nucleotide site provoke a disruption of the structure that is more severe than the one provoked by the effects of a second mutation at another site  <cit> . accordingly, synergistic epistasis entails that single mutations will have a moderate impact on the structure. in fact, sncrnas with synergistic epistasis displayed higher levels of mutational robustness . in principle, epistasis would tend to  <dig> when the two mutations fall down in the sequence with sufficient separation so that their effects are uncorrelated. nucleotide sites that were detected to interact epistatically, both synergistically and antagonistically, were on average closer in the structure than expected by chance . in addition, we found a positive correlation between plasticity and epistasis . antagonistic epistasis thus comes from the fact that more plastic molecules are less robust. in this scenario, each individual is more sensitive to mutations  and the population tends to accumulate beneficial genetic variability . hence, our results are in tune with the suggestion that antagonistic epistasis would promote evolvability  <cit> , and that evolvability and mutational robustness are inversely correlated, at least in the short term  <cit> .

correlation between mutational and environmental robustness
based on our previous results, we sought to investigate whether mutational robustness correlates with our definition of environmental robustness, provided that the relationship between rm and 1-p has been already described  <cit> . we selected mica as a case study, although similar results could be derived with other sncrnas, and we performed a neutral evolution process . we found a significant correlation between the two types of robustness , although some punctual mutations can entail an opposite effect on these variables . by large, a sequence that evolves to increase its environmental robustness also increases its mutational robustness and vice versa. this reflects a clear dependency of these two magnitudes. energetic parameters handle the structural robustness in both cases, but while environmental robustness is a global outcome, mutational robustness is local.

we further dissected and quantified robustness in the different sncrna molecules. interestingly, not all sncrnas displayed the same level of robustness: a fraction of sncrnas has not evolved to greater robustness , while the majority of them have reached suboptimal levels of robustness  . the most robust gene was micf, to both mutations  and environmental changes , whereas the less robust gene was c <dig>  to both mutations  and environmental changes . micf is a stress response sncrna that targets the membrane protein ompf and other genes related to chemotaxis  <cit> . however, its structure is very simple, with most of the nucleotides remaining unpaired, hence perturbations have minimal effects on the stability of this gene. on the contrary, c <dig> is an enzyme with transferase activity that modifies rrna and has been identified as the most plastic of the bacterial sncrnas . environmental robustness strongly correlates with mutational robustness so that the promotion of one variable entails a proportional effect on the other . of relevance is the fact that the variability in sequence compositions that share a common structure was considerable and allowed unraveling a precise pattern by which the more robust molecules to environmental perturbations were also those more robust to mutational perturbations. this reinforces the fact that these two variables are not independent; hence the congruent evolution of the two robustness variables  <cit>  in the case of bacterial sncrnas becomes a plausible hypothesis.

free-living bacteria are subjected to fluctuations in their environment. these perturbations affect the available resources that bacteria use for their development and reproduction, but also affect variables such as temperature, pressure, oxygen, metals, and concentration of ions. changes in these variables may affect rna folding, among other effects. it is then expected that molecules of free-living bacteria  have evolved towards higher robustness to these environmental changes. it follows that environmental fluctuations may promote the evolution of mechanisms that confer robustness to such fluctuations. afterwards, environmental robustness would provide sncrnas with robustness to mutations, which is an inherent property of the molecule. in theory, direct selection for mutational robustness would only occur in organisms presenting high mutation rates such as viruses  <cit> . thus, in populations with lower variability, mutational robustness could certainly be a side effect of selection for mechanisms that mitigate the effects of environmental perturbations  <cit> . in addition, the energetic features of the molecule manage its structural robustness to both mutational and environmental perturbations  <cit> , and this explains the strong correlation between environmental and mutational robustness.

an illustrative test of this hypothesis would be the analysis of the robustness of sncrnas of different bacteria, each subjected to different environmental fluctuations. here we included in the analysis the endosymbiotic bacterium of aphid insects , which lives in highly stable environments , among other free-living bacteria. however, these endosymbionts  have an extremely reduced genome  <cit>  and hence very few or even none reported sncrnas. among all sncrnas studied here, the gene codifying for one rna component of the signal recognition particle, ffs  <cit> , is highly conserved in many bacteria including b. aphidicola. then we decided to focus our study on just this gene, observing that in b. aphidicola ffs is significantly less robust than their ffs homologs in other bacteria, which live in more fluctuating environments . although these initial results do not constitute an exhaustive analysis to point out that evolution of robustness negatively correlates with environmental stability, they show that robustness can be compared among species and not only against artificial sncrnas.

functionality of small rnas
to further dissect the robustness landscape, we calculated the degree of functionality  of the sncrnas . the degree of functionality gives the total number of accessible regions in the sequence that may promote an interaction with another rna molecule. indeed, this degree would account simultaneously for complexity and functionality in sncrna  <cit> , with longer molecules presenting greater stability, more complex structures, and higher number of regions for potential interactions . the length  of the sncrnas here studied goes from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides, but below  <dig> we find the majority of them . to show that the structural magnitude v is indeed a metric of functionality, we took the connectivity values  from a recent computational work that proposed an inferred network of hfq-dependent sncrnas  <cit> . we found a rough power-law relationship between v and k . the higher the degree of functionality of an sncrna, the more interactions can be established with mrnas. furthermore, the variance of the distribution of rm for several sequences sharing a common mfe structure depended on the functionality, while environmental robustness was insensitive to it . this points out that more complex sncrnas will display per se higher levels of mutational robustness . within a highly functional sequence, there are key nucleotides whose mutations provoke a significant disruption of the structure, whereas the majority of nucleotides have a more reduced impact on it. the sequence is hence on average robust to mutations. similarly, studies relying on the topological properties of gene interaction networks have provided insights on why complex biological systems are more robust than simpler ones  <cit> .

of special interest are those molecules that are both plastic and environmentally robust. in principle, as we have shown, these two variables are negatively correlated. however, we observed that  <dig> bacterial sncrnas presented this pattern. among them, we highlight gcvb, isrb, glmz, rsex, and ryhb. interestingly, these sncrnas present a high connectivity degree, especially gcvb. this could suggest that hub elements, in addition to increased degree of functionality, require high levels of plasticity to operate . however, dicf and isra, which also establish many connections, do not exhibit this feature. because the interaction network was inferred, these results should be interpreted with caution. further studies are needed to address the important issue of linking robustness with functionality.

to further investigate the relationship between rna function and robustness, we calculated p, rm and re for the bacterial trnas  . because those trnas have a length between  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides, we compared them against the sncrnas with l <  <dig>  although similar results were obtained for the whole set of sncrnas. we observed that sncrnas are significantly more robust, both to mutations and environmental perturbations, than trnas , and significantly less plastic . this could in principle indicate that the higher conservation of trnas is a consequence of low structural robustness, where one mutation would have a more severe effect than over a given sncrna. this comparison points out differences in robustness of two rna functional groups. however, the function of an rna molecule is usually associated to the expression of one or various proteins. in particular, hfq is an rna chaperone that binds to sncrnas for stabilization and assisting the interaction with the target mrna  <cit> . we also know that trnas present great stability because they are recognized by endogenous enzymes that prevent degradation by nucleases, which allow trnas to accumulate in high concentrations within the cell  <cit> . hence, it would be indebted to account for those endogenous enzymes to further link rna robustness and functionality, for example by looking at mutations in the rna sequence falling down in the protein recognition site.

limitations and further approaches
of course, the use of the secondary structure as a fitness magnitude is a simplification. future work could aim to determine the robustness to changes in gene expression by accounting for the interactions between sncrnas and mrnas  <cit> , and also to assess the optimality of the natural riboregulators exploiting computational design methods  <cit> . furthermore, the use of secondary structures to evaluate plasticity and robustness results in a limited framework. certainly, a more accurate model, although at a high computational cost, would be the three-dimensional structure of the molecule, as we know that different types of interactions  exist  <cit> . in that way, packages such as ifoldrna  <cit>  could be exploited to carry out such robustness analyses.

another important aspect corresponds to the uncertainty coming from transcription termination  tail). this process of transcription termination produces a population of sncrnas with different lengths. the extra nucleotides in the transcript due to an inefficient termination  may influence the folding of the global structure  <cit> . therefore, we could analyze the robustness of bacterial sncrnas to this consequence, gaining accuracy with predictors of transcription termination  <cit> .

in addition to compare natural rnas against structural analogs, we could generate random sequences by adapting the nucleotide composition of the pool  <cit> . we could also use structural variables to complement sequence alignments in the detection of functional rnas  <cit> . on the other hand, randomly generated sequences of sncrnas could be a non-appropriate null model, because the evolution of natural sequences usually comes from shorter sequence distances  <cit> . to overcome this issue, we can analyze sncrnas among different bacterial organisms. although an sncrna could not be significantly robust with respect to artificial sequences, it could be so with respect to analogs from other organisms . this comparison indeed accounts for the short evolutionary distance and phylogenetic dependence.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we used a computational approach to dissect the structural robustness landscape of the sncrnas encoded in the genome of the bacterium e. coli. we identified that natural sncrnas are not significantly robust to both mutational and environmental perturbations when compared against artificial, unbiased sequences. we also showed the dependence of the robustness analyses on different sets of artificial sequences. however, using the appropriate null model, we found a significant enrichment of plasticity in natural sequences. in contrast, previous studies claimed for significant robustness of natural pre-mirnas  <cit> , but this could reflect a caveat of the reference set of artificial sequences. by further applying our methodology to pre-mirnas of c. elegans, we found that they are not so robust as claimed before but are significantly plastic. this is in tune with the results here presented for bacterial sncrnas. indeed, both bacterial sncrnas and nematode pre-mirnas appear as significantly more plastic on average, a trait that could promote evolvability  <cit> . this enhances the idea that evolvability, or the ability of finding beneficial or innovative mutations, could be a selected trait in bacterial sncrnas.

in addition, our results can strengthen the understanding of the evolution of robustness and plasticity, concepts that have fueled enormous interest in the latest literature owing to their direct link with the promotion of adaptive evolution  <cit> . on the one hand, more functional  structures would permit a larger number of rna-rna interactions and we have shown these structures display higher robustness levels. on the other hand, plasticity would promote evolvability and we have shown it is negatively correlated with robustness. the observation that plasticity positively correlates with epistasis  supports the positive relationship between plasticity and evolvability, since antagonistic epistasis would promote evolvability  <cit> . this reflects a given modulator effect of plasticity on both robustness and evolvability. all in all, our study provides a quantitative, deep characterization of the complex map linking robustness, functionality and evolvability in bacterial sncrnas.

