BACKGROUND
recent evolutionary theories predict that genetic variation among group members can affect characteristics of social insect colonies in two ways. first, an increase in genetic variation among workers can enhance colony efficiency by facilitating division of labor  <cit>  and increased disease resistance  <cit> , <cit> . second, increased genetic variation among colony members can affect intracolonial conflicts, often by intensifying them  <cit> . although there is empirical evidence supporting the above views, to our knowledge, no study has tested the two effects simultaneously. thus, it remains unknown whether genetic variation has a direct impact on both characteristics. a study testing these two effects would provide us an opportunity to understand how intracolonial genetic variation affects evolution and maintenance of colony characteristics.

we focused on colony founding in the rhinotermitid termite reticulitermes speratus. in this species, as in other termites, newly emerged winged adults  generally form a male–female pair, which founds a colony together and reproduces sexually  <cit> . however, matsuura and nishida  <cit>  reported that occasionally when two female alates failed to find males, they could co-found a colony and reproduce parthenogenetically. this homosexual cooperation benefits both females, because their survival probability is markedly enhanced when compared to females singly founding a colony  <cit> , <cit> . given the limited dispersal  ability of alate termites in this species, relatedness of such co-foundress naturally varies, depending on the distribution of colonies in a population. this termite is therefore suitable for testing the two possible predicted effects of intracolonial genetic variation.

reproductive skew, the degree of uneven partitioning of reproductive output among group members, is a colony characteristic that can reflect intracolonial conflicts. transactional models of reproductive skew, in which group members yield reproductive shares to each other in return for cooperation, predict that reproductive skew becomes larger as relatedness increases  <cit> . empirical tests of this and other predictions of reproductive skew models are often problematic  <cit> , <cit> , however, because predictions are affected by assumptions and by several parameters other than relatedness . one such parameter that affects the outcome is group size. many reproductive skew models assume that a group consists of two individuals  or one individual . however, the group size of real animals is often more than two individuals and can vary, giving rise to a statistical problem in defining reproductive skew  <cit> . colony founding by r. speratus is advantageous in testing reproductive skew models, because the group size is either two  or one , thus meeting a fundamental assumption of basic reproductive skew models  <cit> .

the genetic factors associated with determining caste trajectory into nymphs vs. workers have been identified in this species; parthenogenetically produced eggs are genetically predisposed to develop into nymphs. however, a percentage of eggs can develop into workers in response to environmental stimuli, e.g., the presence of reproductive individuals  <cit> . nymphs can molt into secondary reproductives , and nymphoids parthenogenetically produced by the primary queen become the main reproductive force in natural colonies of this species  <cit> . thus, the production of nymphs can be an index of reproductive output in colonies. based on the above evolutionary theories, we tested our prediction that a reproductive skew in nymph production is affected by genetic relatedness of co-foundresses, and that genetic variation among sterile workers positively affects colony efficiency.

to test whether intracolonial genetic variation affects colony efficiency and reproductive skew in r. speratus, we studied two types of incipient female-female colonies under laboratory conditions: colonies founded by closely related individuals  and those founded by non-kin . colonies were censused and compared at 15 months after colony foundation, and the genotypes of individual colony members were determined using microsatellite dna.

RESULTS
rapid colony development in unrelated-pair colonies
at 15 months after colony foundation,  <dig>  and  <dig> % of founding females survived in  <dig> sister-pair colonies and  <dig> unrelated-pair colonies, respectively. the survival rates did not differ significantly between these two colony types , table 1). a glmm analysis of the effects of colony characters including colony type  on colony size  revealed that the colony size was significantly affected by colony type, but neither the founders’ survival rates nor the colony type × survival rate interaction . specifically, colony size in unrelated-pair colonies was significantly larger than those in the sister-pair colonies . nymph/worker ratio, however, was not affected by colony type , colony size, number of surviving queens, nor any interactions among these factors , indicating that intracolonial genetic variation between founders did not affect the nymph-worker caste ratio at the colony level. the number of neither nymphoids nor soldiers differed between colony types .

social characters include colony types , founders’ survival rate, colony size and their interactions. “*” indicates p <  <dig>  in generalized linear mixed model  analyses.

nymph production skewed toward one of the paired founding females in sister-pair colonies
genetic differences  between the paired founding females were observed  in  <dig> sister-pair and  <dig> unrelated-pair colonies. in these colonies, microsatellite dna analyses were performed to assign parentage to offspring, which included juveniles , workers, soldiers, nymphs and nymphoids ; the higher proportion  between two founding females was then defined as the skew of offspring production. the skew of nymph production was significantly affected by colony type, both directly and indirectly, while the skew of juvenile-, worker-, soldier-, and offspring-production were not . colony size and survival rate of founding females did not significantly affect skews . these results indicate that nymph production was more skewed in sister-pair colonies than in unrelated-pair colonies .

for the explanatory values, see table  <dig>  “*” and “**” indicates p <  <dig>  and  <dig>  in glmm analyses, respectively. skew of nymphoids could not be analyzed because of small numbers of colonies producing nymphoids .

discussion
in this study, we showed that genetic variation among colony members affected colony characteristics in r. speratus from two perspectives. first, in unrelated-pair colonies, colony growth was higher. second, in sister-pair colonies, nymph production was skewed toward one of paired females. these results demonstrate that intracolonial genetic variation had the two distinct effects on colony characteristics: a positive effect on colony efficiency, and a negative effect on reproductive monopoly, i.e., reproductive skew.

colony growth increased in unrelated-pair colonies with higher genetic variation among workers
in the honeybee apis mellifera, intracolonial genetic variation promotes both task specialization and resistance to diseases, resulting in increases in colony productivity  <cit> . similar relationships between genetic variation and colony productivity were observed in ants  <cit> - <cit>  and a wasp  <cit> , taxa whose socialities evolved independently of the honeybee’s  <cit> , <cit> . our results showed that, in r. speratus, colony size was larger in unrelated-pair colonies , than in sister-pair colonies . furthermore, in both sister-pair and unrelated-pair colonies, worker production was only slightly skewed toward one founding female , suggesting that there is an advantage to increasing genetic variation among workers. in a termite society, then, the increase in worker genetic variation promotes colony productivity, probably through effective division of labor and resistance to diseases, as in social hymenopterans.

according to the red queen hypothesis for the evolution of sexual reproduction, genetic variation generated by sexual recombination among host individuals prevents pathogens from adapting to particular host genotypes  <cit> - <cit> . in social insects intracolonial genetic variation among workers is thought to decrease intracolonial transmission of genotype-specific pathogens  <cit> , <cit> , and effective division of labor, particularly hygienic behavior such as corpse removal and colony cleaning, can prevent the spread of infectious diseases in insect colonies  <cit> . intracolonial genetic variation is known to promote task specialization among workers  <cit> , <cit> - <cit> , suggesting that genetic variation can improve disease resistance through division of labor. in social hymenopterans, worker genetic variation can be increased not only by sexual recombination but also by polyandry and/or polygyny  <cit> . in the basal termite zootermopsis angusticollis, outbred colonies were more resistant to fungal and microbial pathogens than inbred colonies, indicating that genetic variation arising from outbreeding increased disease resistance through social interactions such as trophallaxis and grooming  <cit> , <cit> . because r. speratus at the colony founding stage faces high risk of infection by bacteria, fungi and natural pathogens  <cit> , increased levels of genetic variation are expected to have an impact on survivorship during colony foundation. thus, worker genetic variation stemming from pleometrosis between unrelated females may promote disease resistance.

reproductive skew in nymph production
in r. speratus, the production of nymphs is a key step in colony reproduction, because nymphs can molt into alates or differentiate into nymphoid reproductives when primary reproductives senesce or die. our results indicate that a skew in nymph production was positively correlated with relatedness of the individuals in female pairs ; this supports one of the transactional models of reproductive skew  in which a dominant individual controls the subordinate’s fraction of total group reproduction  <cit> . according to the concession model, reproductive skew may be further increased under strong ecological constraints, when it would be preferable for the subordinate to stay in the colony rather than to leave the colony and reproduce alone  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that, in r. speratus, a female that founds a colony alone exhibits twice the mortality of a female in a founding pair, even under experimental conditions  <cit> . although to date there have been few studies supporting these predictions of concession models  <cit> , the current study strongly supports them. skew models incorporate many parameters , of which total experimental control in order to fit to the assumptions is often less feasible. our results supporting concession models might be due to our system, which more closely fits the models’ assumptions  than other systems. the current study additionally sheds light on a new aspect. there was a statistically significant colony growth × relatedness interaction effect on reproductive skew , suggesting that these are not independent and thus should be studied simultaneously. future theoretical studies should focus on the possibility that if an enhanced colony’s resource level is due to cooperation of unrelated females rather than related females, it can in turn increase the skew or vice versa . those are new facets of reproductive skew theory.

parthenogenetically produced offspring are genetically predisposed to develop into nymphs in r. speratus <cit> . however, in the presence of nymphoid reproductives, nymphal development is inhibited in one quarter of the offspring; they instead become workers  <cit> . in the present study, c.a.  <dig> percent of the offspring developed into workers in incipient female-female colonies . this suggests that interaction with reproductive individuals may inhibit nymphal development. the present study further demonstrated that nymph production was influenced by the relatedness between founding females, whereas the production of workers was not . these results suggest that skewed nymph production in these termites is controlled via nepotistic regulation of nymphal development by reproductives, in which some offspring parthenogenetically produced by a founding female are released from the induction of worker development. although the proximate mechanism of this regulation remains unclear, physical contact and pheromonal regulation are possibilities.

CONCLUSIONS
our study clearly revealed that, in incipient colonies founded by two females of r. speratus, increased intracolonial genetic variation had two distinct impacts on social characteristics. first, it improved colony growth while maintaining the nymph/worker caste ratio, probably through effective division of labor and resistance to diseases. second, it decreased reproductive skew via nepotistic regulation of nymphal development. to our knowledge, this is the first report testing and demonstrating these effects of intracolonial genetic variation simultaneously. simultaneous testing such as this can serve to link colony characteristics in insect societies with the evolutionary significance of intracolonial genetic variation.

