BACKGROUND
species distribution models   <cit>  are increasingly used in many fields of ecology and evolution. they have been used to address fundamental questions such as those exploring macroecological patterns  <cit>  and to address applied issues such as ecological impacts of climate change or biological invasions. these tools relate field observations to environmental predictor variables, based on statistically or theoretically derived response surfaces, for prediction and inference  <cit> . two groups of techniques are generally used. techniques that require data documenting the species presence only are called "profile techniques" while those that require both presence and absence data are called "group discrimination techniques"  <cit> . examples of profile techniques include bioclim  <cit> , domain  <cit> , species-pca  <cit> , and ecological niche factor analysis: enfa  <cit> . their development and use has been stimulated by the many presence-only data available in existing natural history collections  <cit> . group discrimination techniques are derived from established statistical approaches and are more numerous than profile techniques. they include classical regression-based approaches such as generalised linear and additive models  <cit>  but also more recent and robust techniques such as boosted regression trees . see  <cit>  and  <cit>  for a more exhaustive overview of existing approaches.

among group-discrimination techniques, logistic regression modelling , a particular branch of generalized linear models  for binary responses, remains the most widely used so far to predict the potential distributions of species  <cit> . based on a well established body of statistical theory, it is possible to do all of the following within the lrm framework: 1) construct a parsimonious model that strikes a balance between bias and variance using criteria supported by an established body of statistical theory, 2) identify the relative importance of the predictor variables, 3) explore and interpret the response of the species to each predictor, 4) estimate the uncertainty associated with parameter estimates, 5) predict the probability of observing the species  and 6) explore spatially explicit patterns of uncertainty in predictions.

fitting models with pseudo-absence data
despite its numerous advantages, lrm has been precluded from many studies of species distributions because it requires absence data, which are frequently unavailable and often not reliable. this is an acute problem for the study of poorly documented, cryptic, rare or highly mobile species  <cit> , many of which may be of special conservation interest. in order to facilitate the use of lrm when absence data were unavailable, a number of studies have used pseudo-absences in place of real absences  <cit> .

techniques for generating pseudo-absences
random pseudo-absences in group discrimination techniques
a basic technique for generating pseudo-absences selects them at random from the study area. a large international experiment with robust independent evaluation data  <cit>  showed that using group-discrimination techniques with random pseudo-absences out-performs predictions made by profile techniques . hence, given an adequate set of presence locations, models generated with random pseudo-absences can yield useful results. a potential drawback to using random pseudo-absences is that pseudo-absences might coincide with locations where the species actually occurs. this affects the calculation of probability of presence, and consequently, models built with random pseudo-absences are expected to have poorer fit, and lower predictive performance than models built with real absences.

pseudo-absences from two-step modelling
in an attempt to overcome these drawbacks, two-step modeling approaches have been implemented to restrict pseudo-absences to locations expected to have a low habitat suitability according to a preliminary model. for example engler et al.  <cit>  used a two step modelling approach to predict the distribution of a rare plant in switzerland. in the first step, they used the profile technique "enfa" to map potential habitat suitability for the species, and then selected pseudo-absences from the areas predicted to have low suitabilty. they subsequently included the pseudo-absences in a second logistic regression model which was used to predict the final species' potential distribution and prioritize further field work. the choice of profile method is a potentially critical step as this can result in very different predictions, and may have implications for results. among other reasons, predictions can vary depending on the way profile methods  handle predictor variables  <cit> . some weigh them equally, such as bioclim or domain, while others, such as enfa and s-pca weigh the variables according to their fit. thus two-step pseudo-absence selection may add noise to the modeling process by introducing additional uncertainty and bias. we expect that the choice and implementation of any profile model used to stratify the selection of pseudo-absences will influence parameter estimates, and weaken fit and predictions of the subsequent group-discrimination model.

testing with a virtual species
it is unclear which pseuduoabsence selection method should be the most appropriate for modeling species' distributions. it is also difficult to address this question with real data due to the complexity of the modeling process and the potential for introducing noise at each stage. consequently, a growing number of studies have used virtual species in real or artificial landscapes to study the behavior of different implementations of predictive distribution models  <cit> . in a virtual species approach, the species' distribution is defined a priori, by specifying its ecological niche as a simple mathematical relationship to the set of predictor environmental variables  and projects this relationship onto a map of the study area to define its "true" distribution. one can then attempt to recover the virtual species' known distribution by building models from samples drawn from the study area and then evaluate the efficacy of different implementations of models by comparing their parameter estimates and predictions to the true distribution of the species. such an approach has never been used to assess the best way to select pseudo-absences.

aims of the study
using a simulated, virtual species in which a true distribution is known in a real landscape, we used a robust model selection framework proposed by burnham and anderson  <cit>  to addresses two main questions:  how does the selection of pseudo-absences influence variable selection, model fit and predictions of a single simulated species?  which pseudo-absence strategy yields a prediction most similar to the predefined real distribution ? we expected the following: true absences will yield models with the best fit, predictive power, and the correct model  will be the best-supported by the data, as indicated by akaike's information criterion . pseudo-absences selected from a profile model within a two-step modeling approach  should yield the next-best models in terms of model fit and predictive power. however, due to the noise introduced by the preliminary profile model the correct model may not be the best-supported by the data. random pseudo-absences should yield the worst fitting models with the lowest predictive power, and models that include uninformative predictors may even be supported by these data.

RESULTS
lrm models with pseudo-absences and the  <dig> "correct" predictors
fit of selected models
adjusted deviance using the  <dig> correct predictors  was highest for the model that used correct  absences  . for both two-step pseudo-absence methods , the adjusted deviance declined from over 80% for the most inclusive pseudo-absence thresholds  to below 50% for the least inclusive thresholds  . the random background pseudo-absence selection strategy yielded the lowest proportion of adjusted deviance explained  .

model predictive power
aucs for predictions resulting from one-step profile methods , were lower than those obtained from lrms. the lrm that used correct  absences achieved the highest auc, and lay well above the 95% confidence intervals of the other methods. auc for the completely random pseudo-absence strategy was clearly better than using pseudo-absences from any two-step approach from bioclim and also better than most two-step approaches using enfa. among the two-step approaches, the least inclusive thresholds  exhibited the lowest auc values. the glms that included the incorrect predictors yielded auc values higher than those that included only the  <dig> correct predictors. 

relationship between explanatory and predictive power
auc values and adjusted deviance values were not positively correlated . typically, models that had high adjusted deviance had lower auc values based on independent data. one particular exception is the model that used correct  absences. both its adjusted deviance and auc were near one. 

lrms including  <dig> correct predictors and "noise" predictors: ranking models based on aic
the correct model  did not have the lowest  aic value, even when true absences were used . when true absences were used, the true model was ranked second after the best model, and also received considerable support by the data . nevertheless, the akaike weights were very small for all the candidate models, indicating high model selection uncertainty. the true model was ranked seventh in the experiment that used random pseudo-absences, and this model also received considerable support by the data . whenever a two-step modelling approach was used, the true model was only weakly supported by the data, as aic values were never  <dig>  or less.

for each pseudo-absence strategy we fit  <dig> candidate logistic regression models using  <dig> presence records and  <dig>  pseudo-absences.  values less than  <dig> indicate considerable support, >  <dig> but <  <dig> indicate substantially less, and >  <dig> indicate essentially no support by the data. akaike weights  can be interpreted as the percent of times we would expect a candidate model to be the one most strongly supported by the data if the experiment were repeated on a different sample.

discussion
on the use of simulated data
the primary goal of this paper was to determine how the choice of pseudo-absence strategy influences variable selection, model fit, and the discriminatory power of predictions on independent sites in a virtual species where the "true"  distribution is known. evaluating so many aspects of model's behaviour and performance is facilitated through use of a virtual species, because a real species' "true" relationship to environmental variables is never known. in the real world, sufficient amounts of reliable, completely independent, presence and absence data are rarely available to evaluate the predictive power of complex models in a controlled manner. our virtual species' distribution was defined exclusively by a limited number of climatic factors and was not complicated by spatial auto-correlation, biotic interactions or history. this ensured that variability in model performance resulted from pseudo-absence selection, and not by omission of important predictor variables into the model .

profile methods versus group discrimination techniques
although, profile models using bioclim and enfa still performed reasonably well in terms of auc, they were outperformed by the multiple logistic regression models using random pseudo-absences. this is in line with recent results showing that profile techniques  did not perform as well as group discrimination techniques  when evaluated on robust independent data  <cit> .

bioclim models that included  <dig> predictors performed better than those that included  <dig> predictors, possibly because the noisy variables constrained the bioclimatic envelope too much, resulting in an underprediction of the species' distribution. enfa models built with 3-predictor showed somewhat lower discriminatory power than 6-predictor enfa models, which is likely to result from adding noisy variables that are correlated with the correct  variables and explain some additional variance through spurious effects, a situation likely to occur also with real species.

a large body of statistical literature suggests that parsimonious models, including a small number of predictor variables, should have greater predictive power to independent samples than models including more predictors , and both showed somewhat lower predictive power in terms of auc than group discrimination models based on pseudo-absences. real species' response shapes to explanatory variables are likely to be better represented by unimodal or even skewed functions than by rectilinear envelopes  <cit> , and our virtual species was defined to have non-linear relationships to predictors. bioclim and enfa cannot incorporate quadratic relationships to predictors, so this may be another reason the glm methods performed better.

the response curves from glm, including simple polynomial expansions as we have included here, also offers a more flexible representation of species' ecological niches, and thus of their associated geographic distributions. provided that data are sufficient to adequately describe these relationships correctly, they should, in theory, yield more realistic models. indeed, with small datasets, models for which complexity is calibrated for sample size, such as maxent .

all of our predictions achieved high auc scores. this was expected due to the fact that the three variables used to generate the virtual species' distribution were present in all the models, and deliberately entered in the same order as the "true" model. thus, our results confirm the importance of careful selection of predictor variables  <cit> . another factor that may have contributed to the high predictive power is that our records were randomly scattered throughout the range of the species, which may have provided adequate sampling across the range of habitats where it occurs. random stratified samples may have improved this further, as they typically result in models that predict with higher accuracy  <cit>  however these are infrequently used in practice  <cit> .

influence of pseudo-absence selection
through the use of a simulated species we confirmed that although randomly selected pseudo-absences yield models with lower fi to the training data, they outperform models developed from two-step methods in terms of predictive power and variable selection. thus randomly selected pseudo-absences may be a reasonable alternative when real absences are unavailable.

consistent with our predictions, our findings confirm that true absences outperform any pseudo-absence selection strategy. the most parsimonious model based on true presences and absences had the best fit to the data and the highest auc scores. because of the simplicity of our virtual species example, we were able to show that a two-step pseudo-absence selection approach does not improve a models' discriminatory power over random pseudo-absence selection, and that both can provide rather high model evaluation results. this contrasts with the findings by  <cit> , who reported lower auc scores and maximum kappa for randomly selected pseudo-absences than for pseudo-absences selected using enfa. however, because their approach was applied to a rare species, using a very limited number of available occurrences and no knowledge of the true distribution, they needed to assess the discriminatory power on the same data set used to develop the model. as they pointed out, this is a less rigorous test of the model's predictive performance than using a completely independent dataset of real presences and absences, as done here. the better fit of their two-step model is therefore not surprising, as corroborated by our results. we also found that two-step pseudo-absences result in models that fit the data better than random pseudo-absences, however we also found that two step pseudo-absences result in models with weaker predictive power because they lead to overfitting. an overfit model will always have a higher value of adjusted deviance than a simpler model nested within it, but its predictive power to an independent sample will be lower because the model losses generality.

nevertheless, our results confirm a different finding of engler et al.  <cit> : pseudo-absence selection clearly influences model fit as measured by the percent of deviance explained. we expect this result to be continuously supported in future work, because randomly selected pseudo-absences cannot be prevented to fall in locations that are ecologically extremely similar to presence locations, which makes it more difficult for regression algorithms to estimate the model parameters.

variable selection based on an information theoretic approach
in our model selection experiment, the true model received considerable support by the data in a comparison of delta aic values, but was not selected as the aic best model when ranked against all other candidate models. we believe this is because although the "true" model in our list of candidate models consisted of the correct predictor variables, its parameters had to be estimated using maximum likelihood methods from  <dig> presence records and  <dig>  absences balanced using case weights, both of which probably affected the model coefficients by sampling only a limited amount of presences we introduced bias, which probably explains why the true model was not fully recovered. however, using real absences, the "true" model was ranked second and had a delta aic value of  <dig> , indicating considerable support by the data. the top ranked model only differed by missing the quadratic term for temperature, which had a very low value in the initial model . it is likely that the sampling of a limited number of species occurrences  contributed to decrease the fit of this predictor.

CONCLUSIONS
approaches that combine logistic regression in an information theoretic framework  <cit>  facilitate the exploration of relationships between the probability of species' occurrence and individual predictor variables in parsimonious models that account for uncertainty in parameter estimates and model selection. this offers clear advantages over methods that do not incorporate parsimony or allow for such rigorous quantification of uncertainty. logistic regression methods have not been widely used in many ecological contexts because they require absence data which are usually not available. our results confirm that robust models can be generated with logistic regression using randomly selected pseudo-absences, and that such models outperform profile techniques and two-step modelling approaches that use intermediate models to select pseudo-absences. moreover, using a virtual species in a real landscape, we confirm that simulated data represent a powerful approach to provide unambiguous answers to methodological questions. in cases where sufficient real absence data are not available in real ecological datasets, our results encourage further use of randomly generated pseudo-absences with logistic regression analysed within an information theoretic framework.

