BACKGROUND
protein phosphorylation is the most abundant post-translational modification in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. this process is regulated through the enzymatic activities of protein kinases and phosphatases. phosphorylation occurs predominantly on serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, and has been shown to be a key regulatory switch in a variety of cellular processes, ranging from cell cycle and differentiation to motility and learning  <cit> . in particular leishmania lacks transcription factors and phosphorylation has been proposed as an important regulatory mechanism  <cit> .

recent advances in mass spectrometry enabled the identification of a large number of phosphorylation sites in most eukaryotes . information on the phosphoproteome of parasitic protozoa is also starting to be available. in-depth analyses of the phosphoproteome of parasitic protozoa has only recently been initiated in african trypanosomes and leishmania  <cit> .

these studies reported phosphorylation sites whose sequence did not match known kinase recognition motifs, e.g. 25% of the sites identified by nett et al.  <cit>  were not recognized by either scansite  <cit>  or netphos  <cit> . moreover the data reveal the presence of phosphorylation events not conserved in orthologous proteins. for instance hem et al.  <cit>  showed that a number of chaperones and heat-shock proteins which are very conserved from leishmania to human possess parasite-specific phosphorylation sites.

these findings implicate that new and more family- or genera-specific prediction tools are required. here we use the results of phosphoproteomic experiments in leishmania to develop a novel method that improves p-site prediction in leishmania and other organisms of the trypanosomatidae group.

the complete spectrum of protein phosphorylation is difficult to assess due to the low stoichiometry of many phosphorylation events and the highly dynamic nature of this modification. thus the bioinformatic identification of putative phosphorylation sites and the subsequent analysis of these sites by biochemical assays may be an important alternative strategy to discover new phosphorylation events.

phosphorylation sites prediction tools are usually grouped into two categories: generic and kinase-specific. the first category of prediction tools indicates the phosphorylation state of the site, without making any assumption about the protein kinase responsible for the phosphorylation. methods in the latter category aim to infer which kinase family is responsible for the phosphorylation event. this information is extremely useful for the elucidation of signaling networks, however experimental data linking a protein kinase to its substrate is available only for a limited number of sites  <cit> .

netphos  <cit>  was the first predictor to use neural networks in  <dig>  outperforming phosphorylation site identification based on sequence motifs alone. besides the primary sequence, the structural context is also important in determining whether a site is phosphorylated or not  <cit> . indeed several predictors such as disphos  <cit>  and phosida  <cit>  include the predicted structural characteristics of the putative phosphorylation sites.

protein kinase-specific predictors include netphosk  <cit> , scansite  <cit> , kinasephos  <cit> , predphospho  <cit> , gps  <cit> , pkaps  <cit>  and predikin  <cit> . netphosk is the extension of the method netphos to kinase-specific predictions. scansite uses position specific scoring matrices  for  <dig> different kinase phosphorylation motifs. kinasephos and predphospho use hmmer profiles and support vector machines  respectively. in both cases the prediction models are trained on sets of peptides phosphorylated by protein kinases of the same family. gps performs profile searches with short motifs instead of using a machine learning approach. in order to achieve a higher coverage of known phosphorylation sites, the algorithm reduces the strength of the profiles, thus increasing the false positive predictions. pkaps has been developed to predict protein kinase a-specific phosphorylation sites, based on an extensive analysis of the pka motifs, thus achieving the best results for these particular predictions. predikin is based on the analysis of the contact positions between kinases and substrates in proteins of known structure. the authors were able to associate the identification of specific kinase residues with a corresponding preference in the sequence of the substrate.

moreover a number of organism-specific prediction systems have been developed in recent years  <cit> . these methods aim at increasing the prediction accuracy by training on peptides derived from single organisms. this approach makes it possible to capture organism-specific differences in known phosphorylation motifs and to reduce false positives arising from kinase families that are under-represented in the organism of interest. following this line of reasoning, the aim of this work is to use leishmania phosphoproteomics data to develop a tool that improves phosphorylation site prediction in trypanosomatids.

RESULTS
svm features
the dataset used in this work consists of  <dig> phosphorylation sites  mapping to  <dig> phosphoproteins. the sites were identified by mass spectrometry after enrichment on a titanium dioxide column. a portion of this data has already been published  <cit> .

phostryp uses an svm-based approach to predict phosphorylation sites; it was therefore necessary to choose a number of features that describe the sites and were used as inputs to the predictor. the features we included in the svm are:

∙ the sequence of the peptide

∙ a residue composition feature

∙ the secondary structure and disorder predictions for the site.

the sequence of the peptide is clearly the most important characteristic as shown in previous works  <cit> . we considered a window of +/-  <dig> positions around the phosphorylation site. an important point is how the sequence is encoded, i.e. transformed in variables that can be used as input to the svm. we tried two different encodings. the first one was the standard orthogonal binary encoding that essentially considers each position as a collection of  <dig>  mutually exclusive, binary variables, each one representing the presence of a specific amino acid in that position. we also used a different encoding based on the values in a substitution matrix . this encoding should better represent the fact that a substitution in a position of the peptide could have little influence on the probability of phosphorylation if the residues have similar physicochemical properties.

moreover we reasoned that in some cases residues close to the phosphorylation site might have an effect independent of their position. to this end we included a feature that depends on the enrichment of each residue in a +/- <dig> window around phosphorylation sites with respect to non-phosphorylated serine and threonine residues.

besides these sequence-dependent features we also included two descriptors of the structural context of the site. indeed phosphorylation sites are usually located in regions of the protein which are flexible and exposed to the solvent in order to facilitate the interaction with protein kinases  <cit> . the analysis of our dataset confirmed that phosphorylation sites have a preference for disordered regions and segments of the proteins that have a coiled structure. indeed  <dig>  of the positive sites lie in a region predicted as coil compared with  <dig>  of the negatives. the preference for disorderd regions is also apparent:  <dig>  of the positives are predicted to be disorderd compared with  <dig>  of the negatives. the significance of these values was confirmed by performing a chi-square test on the two contingency tables which yielded a p-value < 2e- <dig> for coil preference and a p-value < 8e- <dig> for disorder preference. therefore we added two binary variables describing whether the sites lie in a disordered region or in a coil.

training and testing the svm
as described in the methods we experimented with various combinations of features, building  <dig> different svms. we used 80% of data as training and 20% as test. both the positive and the negative peptides in the training set were clustered at the 50% sequence identity level to reduce the redundancy. moreover we removed the peptides in the test set that had more than 50% identity with one of the peptides used for training. the training data was used to optimize each svm by performing a 10-fold cross validation for each combination of the gamma, cost and epsilon parameters. the results for each svm are displayed in table  <dig> 

the svm using only the sequence in binary encoding and the one using the pam <dig> encoding and including all the features achieved the same performance on the training set . however the results on the test set indicate that the latter has a superior performance  and therefore was used throughout the work. however all the svms reached essentially comparable performance levels. the final score threshold used for the prediction is  <dig>  and was chosen as the one that maximizes the mcc.

comparison with netphos and netphosk
we compared phostryp with netphos, that provides generic predictions, and with netphosk that returns a score for each kinase family, according to the likelihood that kinases from that family are responsible for the phosphorylation. since netphosk predictions are kinase-specific, we considered as positive predictions the sites that are predicted to be phosphorylated by at least one kinase family.

we tested netphos and netphosk on the same non-redundant test set used for phostryp, obtaining an auc  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for both methods . the performance of these programs is therefore markedly inferior to the one obtained by phostryp . these values represent the average and standard error of  <dig> bootstrap replicates  and therefore give a reliable picture of the performance differences between the three methods.

phostryp captures phosphorylation features specific to leishmania
the improved performance of phostryp could be explained by differences in sequence specificity between the leishmania kinases and the kinases of other, better characterized, organisms. to investigate this possibility we used netphorest  <cit> , a collection of  <dig> sequence-based classifiers that predicts which kinase group is more likely to phosphorylate a given substrate. the output of netphorest is a score representing the probability that a given kinase group phosphorylates the peptide under analysis. in this analysis we only considered the highest scoring kinase group for each peptide. obviously the more the sequence of the peptide is similar to the consensus recognition sequence of the kinase the higher the score. the majority of the data in netphorest comes from experiments performed with human kinases and kinases from model organisms. therefore the score of a peptide is a direct indication of the overlap between the specificity of the kinase responsible for its phosphorylation and the specificity of kinases from well-characterized organisms.

we divided our phosphorylation sites in two groups: the sites that were predicted correctly by phostryp and netphos, and the sites that were false negatives according to netphos and true positive for our method. the latter group, which was missed by netphos but not by phostryp, could contain peptides with leishmania-specific recognition sequences. indeed the average netphorest score for this set of peptides is  <dig> , lower than the  <dig>  obtained with the peptides that were correctly predicted by our method and netphos . these results further confirm that phostryp, by training on leishmania sequences, is able to identify phosphorylation events that are specific to this organism.

search for new motifs in peptides predicted by phostryp
one possible explanation for the increased performance of phostryp compared to netphos and netphosk is that the dataset we used contains leishmania-specific phosphorylation motifs. therefore we extracted all the peptides which were correctly predicted by phostryp but not by netphos, to assess whether they contain novel phosphorylation motifs. we used the motif-x server with default parameters for motifs extraction  <cit>  using as background dataset the whole l. infantum proteome. to further assess the novelty of the motifs we visually compared the sequence logos with an extensive collection of known kinase recognition logos  <cit> .

this analysis resulted in the identification of two possible leishmania-specific motifs for phosphorylation on serine . the first motif, nxs, has a  <dig>  fold enrichment in the phosphopeptides dataset with respect to the whole leishmania proteome while the second one, sf, has a  <dig>  fold enrichment. all the motifs have a significance <=10e- <dig>  clearly the biological significance of these motifs should be experimentally tested. however the enrichment in the phosphopeptides dataset with respect to the proteome shows that these are not simply residues over-represented by chance at proximal positions.

testing the predictor on other trypanosomatids
we decided to investigate how the increase in performance with respect to netphos and netphosk translated to trypansomatids other than leishmania infantum. to this end we collected two other sets of phosphorylation sites from two recent phosphoproteomics experiments performed in trypanosoma cruzi  <cit>  and t. brucei  <cit> . for each set we collected, similarly to what we did for l. infantum, an equal number of negative sites by a random sampling of the proteome. the t. cruzi dataset comprised  <dig> peptides  while the t. brucei dataset consisted of  <dig> peptides.

we then used the svm that had the best performance on l. infantum to classify the peptides in the two new datasets. we obtained an auc of  <dig>  on the t. cruzi dataset and of  <dig>  on t. brucei . netphos had a lower performance of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. the results with netphosk were even worse, with an auc of  <dig>  on t. cruzi and  <dig>  on t. brucei . these results show that phostryp, which was trained on leishmania infantum, performs better than generic predictors when applied to this group of organisms.

in order to verify whether this improvement was simply due to the identification of phosphorylation sites in the orthologues of the proteins used for training, we used the orthomcl database  <cit>  to exclude from this test any sequence belonging to the same ortholog group as one of the training proteins. following this step there is a  <dig>  reduction in auc on both the datasets from t. cruzi and t. brucei. we can therefore conclude that phostryp, after being trained on l. infantum, succeeded in capturing phosphorylation features that are specific to trypanosomatids.

development of a predictor for organisms of the family trypanosomatidae
our results show that a predictor trained on leishmania-specific data performs better than generic predictors even when applied to the related organisms t. cruzi and t. brucei. this is an important point because it shows that it is possible to improve the prediction of phosphorylation sites in trypanosomatidae using data specific to a single organism of this group. clearly, since phosphorylation data is available for t. cruzi and t. brucei as well, the best strategy to develop a predictor specific for trypanosomatidae is to also use these peptides in the training. we therefore developed another predictor that was trained on a combined dataset including phosphopeptides from l infantum, t. cruzi and t. brucei. as previously described for the leishmania svm we split the data into 80% training and 20% test. moreover the peptides in the test set that had more than 50% identity with one of the peptides used during the training were removed.

on the test including the peptides from all the organisms the method has an auc of  <dig>  . the score threshold that maximizes the mcc is  <dig> . we also evaluated the performance on the test peptides specific to each organism. the sequences from l. infantum, t. brucei and t. cruzi were predicted with an auc of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  respectively. as expected the performance of the method increases when more data is used for training. this predictor is the one used in the webserver available at http://phostryp.bio.uniroma <dig> it.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described the development of phostryp, the first phosphorylation site predictor specific for trypanosomatids.

phostryp uses an svm approach and was initially trained on an extensive collection of  <dig> phosphorylation sites derived from large-scale phosphoproteomics experiments conducted in leishmania. the predictor was tested on a dataset that did not contain peptides similar to those used during the training and obtained an auc of  <dig> . this result represents a 17% improvement over the results obtained with netphos, a generic, non organism-specific, predictor.

we investigated in more detail the peptides that are correctly predicted by phostryp but not by netphos. this analysis showed that these peptides have, on average, significant differences in their kinase recognition sequences when compared with phosphorylation sites from more extensively studied model organisms. moreover we identified two possible novel serine phosphorylation motifs specific for leishmania. these results show that our method performs better than generic predictors because it captures leishmania-specific phosphorylation features.

we also verified that this perfomance improvement extends to other organisms in the trypanosomatids group. more specifically phostryp represents a 10% performance improvement over nepthos in the prediction of t. brucei phosphorylation sites and a 6% improvement when applied to data from t. cruzi.

these results show that it is possible to improve phosphorylation site prediction in trypanosomatids using data specific to a single organism of this group. in order to maximize the performance and usefulness of phostryp we retrained the predictor combining the data from l. infantum, t. cruzi and t. brucei. as expected this combined predictor shows an increase in performance.

in conclusion our work highlights the usefulness of developing predictors starting from species-specific data, so as to capture features which are characteristic of a given organism, or, such as in this case, group of organisms. we have made available phostryp as a web server at http://phostryp.bio.uniroma <dig> it.

