BACKGROUND
whole genome sequence data is currently unavailable for the overwhelming majority of plant species, including most crops. for such cases, the integration of linkage and physical maps provides a vital information platform to accelerate processes such as positional cloning, comparative genome analysis, and clone-by-clone sequencing  <cit> . one key limiting step in compiling a comprehensive link between physical and linkage maps is the ability to locate large insert clones  that contain the polymorphic markers used in linkage mapping. traditionally, this has been achieved by colony hybridisation using  radioactively-labelled cloned dna, pcr products, or oligonucleotides  <cit> . there are several disadvantages of using colony hybridisation as a means of identifying clones that contain target dna; these largely centre on the difficulty in setting appropriate hybridization conditions to minimise false positive and false negative results, but also include the need for appropriate facilities and procedures to handle radio-labelled probes  <cit> . these problems can be overcome if a pcr-based screening strategy is adopted using sequence tagged site  markers  <cit> .

several authors have argued that the efficiency of pcr-based screening can be greatly improved through the use of structured multidimentional bac pooling strategies  <cit> . compared with hybridization to high-density colony filters, the pcr screening of multidimentional bac pools is less prone to the confounding effects of repetitive elements and tends to be more cumbersome when radiolabels are used  <cit> . issues of error arise from both approaches, however, with the relative abundance of type  <dig> and type  <dig> errors varying according to post-hybridization wash stringency or pcr annealing temperatures respectively. importantly, the number of independent amplifications required to determine a clone's address can be reduced by smart pooling strategies. the use of conventional pcr for bac pool screening to anchor genetic markers to physical maps with a high throughput retains some shortcomings, most notably the common need to: i) isolate and normalise dna from a large number of clones  to ensure that sufficient template is available from each bac for reliable amplification of single copy targets by conventional pcr. ii) anchor and score each marker separately . iii) use agarose gel electrophoresis as crude verification  of the fidelity of target amplification. this last step is simple but comparatively slow and difficult to automate.

to overcome these limitations we describe a robust method for anchoring genetic markers in physical maps based on screening two-dimensional bac pools  using a combination of a modified multiplex-tandem pcr  and high resolution melt analysis . we demonstrate for a. thaliana that this strategy opens the possibility of direct screening of a bac library using pooled freezing stocks for pcr with high throughput, at low cost, and a minimum risk of false positive/negative results.

RESULTS
rationale of the method
bac library screening usually requires dna extraction from the bac pools  <cit>  to increase template accessibility sufficiently to allow reliable amplification by conventional pcr. we addressed the problem of low dna template in bac pools using a modification of multiplex-tandem pcr  . the mt-pcr protocol was originally developed to amplify rare transcripts from cdna pools  <cit>  but was subsequently adapted for use on genomic dna samples  <cit> . the technique first comprises a truncated pre-amplification step that typically consists of 15- <dig> cycles so that pcr amplification is arrested in the log-linear phase and template concentration ratios are broadly retained. importantly, this stage is highly amenable for multiplexing . after dilution, selective amplification is performed by conventional pcr  for each locus separately using either identical primers to those used for pre-amplification  or new primers targeting internal sites  <cit> . the value of mt-pcr lies in its ability to reliably amplify from low copy template within mixed samples. this property makes the technique highly attractive for bac library screening for low copy targets and opens the possibility of direct screening from freezing stocks rather than from isolated bac dna.

there remains, however, a need for a high-speed, low-cost system to verify identity of the amplicons generated by pcr  and also to distinguish pcr products from primer dimers in a gel-free environment . high resolution melt  analysis is a powerful tool for high throughput mutation detection  <cit>  and genotyping  <cit> . it therefore provides an attractive means of verifying the identity of pcr amplicons from bac pools . the advantage of hrm over other genotyping technologies for this purpose reside in its simplicity, high speed and low cost, the capacity to detect differences based on size and sequence, and the consistency of data output over a wide range of targets  <cit> . hrm analysis monitors alteration in fluorescence caused by the release of an intercalating dye from the double-stranded dna of pcr products as they dissociate with increasing temperatures. differences between pcr products are revealed by melting temperature shifts representing minor sequence or size variations  <cit> . recent advance in fluorescence-detecting instruments  allows hrm to be performed immediately following amplification and to be completed within  <dig> min. careful selection of amplicons that have non-overlapping melt profiles also opens up the possibility of multiplexing hrm analysis . multiplex pre-amplification and hrm analysis make bac library screening easy and minimize the risk of false positive or false negative results that can appear when pooled freezing stocks are directly used for pcr.

our mt-pcr-hrm-based protocol describes a rapid and robust way to identify low abundance positive clones within large insert libraries. a positive superpool is identified by n/ <dig> mt-pcr-hrm reactions where n is the number of 384-well plates of the bac library and a super pool contained  <dig> 384-well plates . a positive plate will be defined by two positive matrix pools after  <dig> mt-pcr-hrm reactions. the positive clone of a given plate is identified by the same 2d pooling strategy from four positive single pools  after  <dig> pcr-hrm reactions . in total n/ <dig> +  <dig> mt-pcr-hrm reactions are needed for each marker when tested separately . the number of mt-pcr-hrm reactions can be reduced when up to three suitable markers are combined into a single mt-pcr-hrm.

estimated number of pools and mt-pcr-hrm reactions required to find a single marker  within the denoted genomes, assuming a 3× coverage and  <dig> kb average insert size for the corresponding bac libraries. note: *1× coverage =  <dig> single pools ; 3× coverage =  <dig> single pools

the practical example
we use a. thaliana as an exemplar to demonstrate the usefulness of mt-pcr-hrm in combination with a multidimensional bac pooling strategy for the anchoring of markers into physical maps.

the experimental design comprises of three main steps: 1) pooling of bac freezing stocks; 2) multiplex pre-amplification of bac pools with up to  <dig> primer pairs; 3) localisation of positive bac clones by identifying the positive subset of pools via selective amplification followed by hrm analysis  to confirm locus identity.

1) pooling strategy for pcr screening of a genomic bac library
the size of large insert libraries is normally adjusted according to the haploid genome size, the mean insert size and the expected genome coverage of the library. a typical bac library has approximately  <dig> kb average insert size. it is recommended to use a bac library with at least  <dig> times coverage for pcr-based screening purposes  <cit> . such genomic bac libraries are typically stored in microtiter plates in a 384-well format.

several pooling strategies can be applied for pcr-based screening. the number of dimensions  deployed in a pooling strategy defines the number subsets of pools that may contain a specific bac clone. screening techniques based on conventional pcr normally require 3-d or 6-d pooling systems  <cit>  in order to ensure reliable amplification from a single bac clone. with the more sensitive and accurate mt-pcr-hrm technique, a two-dimension pooling strategy  is sufficient. for studies aiming to anchor genetic markers into physical maps of large genomes, the minimum number of screening reactions is decisive in setting labour and consumables costs. the pooling strategy proposed here allows screening of millions of clones with as few as the number of superpools plus  <dig> mt-pcr-hrm reactions . based on our experience, each super pool should not comprise more than twenty five 384-well plates. using  <dig> μl per bac clone, a super pool contains in total  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> μl . in our illustrative example, an a. thaliana library  <cit>  was used that contained twenty four 384-well plates. to evaluate whether the enhanced sensitivity of this method has utility for organisms with much larger genomes, we simulated 'rare single locus' hits in a substantially larger library by creating a superpool containing  <dig> μl of a single positive bac clone and  <dig>  negative bac clones of  <dig> μl each. we were able to exploit this approach to estimate the capability of the technique to detect single locus hits for genomes of much larger size .

according to the proposed pooling strategy, the required number of super pools for a typical 3× coverage bac library with a  <dig> kb average insert size is estimated for several important genomes . for genomes larger than  <dig> mb, the number of pcrs required to anchor one genetic marker is approximately equivalent. the number of plates per superpool can be varied in a certain frame  according to the genome size of the organism under study.

2) mt-pcr pre-amplification
applying a suitable pooling strategy, the number of pcr amplifications required to identify the positive bac clones can be reduced significantly. however, because of a low template concentration for sts sites and further dilution by e. coli dna, conventional pcr-based screening may over-dilute single locus targets to such an extent that amplifications often fail. dna extraction from the bacs is required for better template accessibility  <cit> . instead, we introduced a multiplex pre-amplification step on super bac pools  directly from freezing stocks, applying up to  <dig> primer pairs simultaneously. before pre-amplification, it has to be confirmed that each primer pair applied works individually on total genomic dna by pcr-hrm.

the pre-amplification increases the sensitivity and specificity of mt-pcr-hrm on pooled templates . without pre-amplification a higher cycle number is generally required for conventional pcr , yielding an excessively high background to product ratio .

3) identification of marker-containing bac clones by high resolution melting  analysis
hrm curve analysis after pcr-hrm provides a rapid, sensitive means for the bac screening. the rotor-gene™  <dig>  with a real-time rotary analyzer prevents unwanted temperature deviation inside the thermal cycler  <cit> . furthermore, intercalating dye improves hrm sensitivity, allows omission of the gel electrophoresis step and enhances true positive hit rates  <cit> . the positive bac pools yield clear melting curves instead of a background line as obtained in the case of negative bac pools . because melting curve analysis can differentiate between divergent sequences, the option of a multiplex pcr for up to  <dig> loci is applicable to reduce consumables and labour . the entire mt-pcr-hrm run for a single locus  can be completed within  <dig> minutes.

the same approach is applicable to organisms of much larger genome sizes . for example, using the tri-plex mt-pcr-hrm option in which three loci exhibiting non-overlapping melt profiles are combined into a single reaction, only  <dig> pcrs are required to screen approximately  <dig>  clones of the  <dig> gbp wheat genome for each of three markers represented in  individual bac . thus, this strategy potentially opens the possibility for high throughput-low cost screening across even very large genomes. besides the integration of genetic and physical maps, the potential of this protocol is to support ongoing genome sequencing projects e.g., for barley http://barleygenome.org/, wheat http://www.wheatgenome.org/, potato http://www.potatogenome.net/, swine http://piggenome.org/, cattle http://www.bovinegenome.org etc.

CONCLUSIONS
here, the new mt-pcr-hrm technology has been applied to bac matrix pools for simple, low-cost and high-throughput anchoring of genetic markers to physical maps. using a bac library of the model plant arabidopsis thaliana, we were able to show that mt-pcr-hrm can get reliable amplification of single copy targets from freezing stocks equivalent to twenty five 384-well plate super pools. a two-dimension pooling strategy can locate a target clone within a superpool by  <dig> reactions. the method also allows effective multiplexing to screen, in parallel,  <dig> genetic markers in one mt-pcr-hrm reaction and is particularly suited for genome characterisation initiatives.

