BACKGROUND
biomedical ontologies are emerging as critical tools in genomic and proteomic research, where complex data in disparate resources need to be integrated. the obo foundry is a collaborative effort to establish a set of principles for ontology development with the goal of creating a suite of orthogonal interoperable reference ontologies in the biomedical domain  <cit> . the foundry ontologies are organized along two dimensions:  granularity  and  relations to time . in this scheme, pro is a representation of entities on the level of granularity of molecules, and interoperates with other ontologies, such as the sequence ontology   <cit>  and the gene ontology   <cit>  which incorporate representations of protein qualities and processes. pro encompasses a sub-ontology of proteins based on evolutionary relatedness  and a sub-ontology of the multiple protein forms produced from a given gene   <cit> . of two other ontologies that have been designed for protein database integration or annotation, neither includes representations of the protein forms themselves. the protein ontology   <cit>  includes terms and relationships to describe attributes of individual protein forms , while the proteomics process ontology   <cit>  serves the detailed description of proteomics experimental processes.

here we summarize the current pro framework and the accompanying annotations, basing our account of the use of the pro in representating proteins from the tgf-beta signaling pathway. this pathway is well-studied, and thus provides a rich body of protein annotations relating to a wide spectrum of protein forms derived from cleavage and/or post-translational modifications , alternative splicing, and sequence variants that are related to disease.

the pro framework
a detailed description of the pro framework has been presented in our previous work  <cit> . briefly, the framework was designed to enable data retrieval and integration, and machine reasoning at the molecular level of proteins by means of a structure to support formal, computer-based inferences of shared attributes among homologous proteins ; and an explicit representation of the various forms of a given gene product   <cit> . figure  <dig> is an outline representation of the current version of pro and of a subset of its connections to other ontologies. the root in the ontology is the class protein, which is defined as "a biological macromolecule that is composed of amino acids linked in a linear sequence , and is genetically encoded". pro terms are connected by the relationship is_a or derives_from, both defined in the obo relations ontology  <cit> . the framework figure points to levels of distinction that are "unofficial" descriptors for sets of pro classes meant to provide some indication of how pro is organized.

proevo
proteins with full-length sequence similarity are said to be homeomorphic; they are presumed to share a common ancestor. within any given homeomorphic group, there may be monophyletic subgroups of proteins that have distinct functions  <cit> . proevo was designed to define protein classes on this basis and to capture the relationship between these classes. therefore, it includes proteins at both the family and the gene product levels. in proevo, terms are connected by the is_a relationship.

proform
this part of the ontology describes the translational products that are experimentally characterized, and includes definitions of sequence forms arising from allelic, splice and translational variation and from ptm and cleavage. it also includes representations of protein products of fused genes. therefore, the coverage domain of proform includes both sequence  and modification levels. we use the derives_from relationship to describe the relation between a modified form and the parent protein.

pro annotation
the generation of protein diversity from a single gene can make the systematic functional annotation of gene products difficult. many model organism databases  utilize the gene ontology  for functional annotation of gene products. annotations provided in gene association files for each organism are tied to a single object: gene, transcript or protein. however, most mod annotations currently default to the level of the gene. similarly, most protein annotations in goa are attached to the canonical sequence, and in a few cases to the specific isoform  <cit> . pro defines existing protein objects based on the current knowledge, allowing annotation at a more appropriate level . as depicted in figure  <dig>  the attributes of each pro term can be described by cross-referencing to various ontologies and/or databases that are pertinent to protein annotation such as go, so and modification ontology .

RESULTS
building the ontology
here we focus on the set of proteins in the tgf-beta signaling pathway as described in the kegg pathway database  <cit> , which consists of three sub-pathways: the tgf-beta signaling pathway, the bone morphogenetic protein signaling pathway, and the activin-mediated signaling pathway. it includes reference to  <dig> human/mouse orthologous proteins that map to  <dig> pirsf  <cit>  homeomorphic families and  <dig> pfam  <cit>  domains. we applied an automated process to generate the prospective pro nodes, followed by manual curation involving literature review and further sequence analysis. each curated node consists of a pro id, a term name, a definition and a cross-reference . the framework allows the creation of proform nodes for newly published, experimentally-characterized isoforms or sequence variants, including those not yet represented in sequence databases . moreover, it allows the representation of proteins that are products of a gene fusion due to chromosomal translocation, such as pro: <dig> creb-binding protein/zinc finger protein hrx that is encoded by part of the crebbp gene at the n-terminus and part of the myst <dig> gene at the c-terminus. this form is observed in some cases of acute myelogenous leukemia.

pro annotation
we have created a pro association file  to provide the experimentally-based annotation for the proteins that are sub-types of a given class. to facilitate the exchange of annotation between pro and go, the paf adopts the format of the go annotation file  <cit>  with some modifications. for example, each pro term may contain annotation derived from other ontologies in addition to go. additional columns were added to account for sequence coordinate specifications, such as the range of the sequence  or the modified residue  .

selected columns are shown. note that the last two columns are a tuple that define the sub-type of the class.

pro applications
the pro framework provides a basis for more accurate annotation. this is especially important given the current growth of experimental data specific to the isoforms and modified forms. figure  <dig> shows the pro terms related to the tgf-beta  <dig> protein together with definitions, relationships and annotations, demonstrating the complexity and variety of protein classes and sequence forms that can be derived from a given parent sequence. at the proevo level, the pro term tgf-beta-like cysteine-knot cytokine is defined as a protein with a signal peptide, a variable propeptide region and a cysteine-knot domain . the class represented by this term has seven children nodes , each defined as a separate group on the basis of sequence similarity and distinctive functional features. the granularity at this level varies depending on the sequence and functional diversity of the protein class. however, a proevo leaf node is always represented by a gene product class, which is defined as all protein products of orthologous genes. tgf-beta is a child node of the above-mentioned class and has three leaf nodes, tgf-beta  <dig>  tgf-beta  <dig> and tgf-beta  <dig>  in the current framework, pro represents the full-length homeomorphic proteins and not the individual domains. instead, domain information is included as a cross-reference to the pfam domain database  <cit>  in the ontology to indicate that a given protein class has_part some domain . at the proform level, the tgf-beta  <dig> precursor  is a dimer and undergoes cleavages by a signal peptidase and by furin in the golgi to generate two functionally important chains: the tgf-beta  <dig> mature peptide  and the latent peptide . these two chains remain associated as a latent complex  until proteases in the extracellular space degrade the latent peptide. in most databases, tgf-beta  <dig> canonical sequence  is annotated with go: <dig> transforming growth factor beta receptor binding. proform allows this go term to be appropriately associated with the active mature protein rather than the precursor. note that these various forms not only differ in function but also in their cellular localization.

pro and cross-species analysis
pro can facilitate cross-species comparison of protein forms based on annotations with experimental evidence and sequence conservation, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  here, pro: <dig>  is annotated with go terms based on the experimental evidence on the human entry  . based on the pro mapping to uniprotkb, there is a mouse counterpart for smad <dig> isoform  <dig>  since the protein features  are conserved, , one can investigate the existence of this modified form in mouse and its possible regulation by the coactivators. this analysis is not limited to human and mouse, since a sequence search using the human isoform  <dig> as query detects the bovine isoform  <dig> with high sequence similarity and a multiple alignment reveals the conservation of the sequence features covering the modified sites . such cross-specifies comparisons can provide the basis for the generation of new testable hypotheses, such as explaining the similarities or differences in protein function between different taxa due to the presence or absence of a given modification sites.

pro and pathway analysis
the pro curation of the tgf-beta signaling pathway illustrates the application of protein ontology in the context of pathway analysis. the states of a molecule are natural components of pathway ontologies or databases such as inoh event ontology  <cit>  or reactome  <cit> . as biomedical data expand, it will be increasingly important to explicitly represent these protein forms so that representations of attributes can be attached to the appropriate entities. figure  <dig> shows the mapping of pro terms to the associated reactome events in the tgf-signaling pathway. the mapping of the entities involved in the pathway gives a more accurate and complete framework for researchers to analyze their data.

pro and disease modelling
the pro-pathway mapping supports modeling of the specific objects involved in a given disease in the pathway context. for example, it is possible to model cardiac myocyte apoptosis, a process in which activated caspase- <dig> generates the cleaved form of rho-associated protein kinase  <dig> . this form is constitutively active and promotes apoptotic signals, as has been observed both in the mouse myopathy model and in human heart failure patients  <cit> . another example of disease modeling is the ability to link different protein variants that are associated to a common disease. juvenile polyposis is an autosomal dominant syndrome predisposing to colorectal and gastric cancer. this syndrome is caused by variants of smad <dig> or bmp receptor type-1a  <cit> . although smad <dig> is common to all tgf beta-related signaling pathways, bmp receptor type-1a is only active in the bmp-signaling sub-pathway; therefore, this information could potentially provide a clue for the specific pathway as well as the molecular mechanism that leads to the observed phenotype.

pro and go complex
the go cellular component includes protein complexes, which are defined in many cases on the basis of their component proteins. go terms are species-neutral, as are the protein classes in pro. pro provides a means for creating the corresponding logical definitions in the go complex ontology by using the precise pro term that describes the form  that occurs in the complex. therefore, a go complex can be defined as x complex has_part pro <dig>  has_part pro <dig> ...has_part pron.

pro and cell ontology
pro also provides protein terms to cell ontology. masci and collaborators have recently proposed to define some dentritic cell types  in terms of the proteins and protein complexes expressed on the cell surface by relating terms in dc-cl to terms for proteins in the pro and to terms for protein complexes in go  <cit> .

pro dissemination and statistics
the pro ontology file  and the paf annotation file  are disseminated through the pro website  <cit> , the obo foundry  <cit>  and the national center for biomedical ontology  bioportal  <cit> . pro can be also downloaded in formats other than obo such as owl from the obo foundry  <cit> . table  <dig> summarizes the release statistics with the total numbers of protein and pro terms, which cover the tgf-beta signaling-related proteins , additional voltage-gated channel proteins as part of an ongoing collaboration with the neuroscience information framework project  <cit>  , and additional immunology-related proteins as part of the collaboration with the dc-cl project . in the current paf file, there are about  <dig> annotations, covering  <dig> go terms, and  <dig> pmids. table  <dig> provides more detailed statistics pertaining to the annotation of go, psi-mod and so terms.

* number of pro terms under the umbrella of the corresponding ontology.

ongoing developments
one of the aims of the pro consortium is to engage the biological community in the curation of the ontology and annotation. thus, it is key to have a web-based editor that fulfils the requirement of a single interface for the curation of the ontology and annotation and that provides links to external resources and tools that will facilitate the curation task. a web-based ontology and annotation editor is under development and has been initially tested for community annotation during an annotation jamboree held in november,  <dig>  along with the pro annual meeting. based on the feedback, we are now enhancing the features and functionality of the editor. to maximize ontology usage, a web-based search interface will be developed that retrieves information from both the ontology and the annotation. this search interface will permit searching of the ontology and the annotation, plus other external links. special functions will include: finding the equivalent isoforms  in human and mouse, and the accompanying annotation; searching for the modified forms of a given protein that are non functional ; and searching for protein classes sharing a given domain.

CONCLUSIONS
we have illustrated key aspects of the pro framework through reference to proteins involved in the tgf-beta signaling pathway. the significance of the protein ontology is multi-fold:  proevo provides a structure to support formal, computer-based inferences based on shared attributes among homologous proteins;  proform helps to delineate the multiple protein forms of a gene;  pro provides critical interconnections between existing obo foundry ontologies;  pro can be integrated with or cross-referenced by other ontologies and/or databases, as for example, to better define objects in pathways or complexes or in disease modeling; and  the pro framework allows the community to annotate proteins of interest. in summary, pro offers a comprehensive picture of the protein realm by connecting protein evolution, function, modification, variants and disease. finally, pro can be adopted where data integration at the molecular level of proteins is needed, such as in systems biology or translational medicine.

