BACKGROUND
it has been estimated that, to meet world food demand crop production must double by  <dig>  <cit> . plant growth and yields are dependent on photosynthetic fixation of carbon, and optimal allocation of carbon to growing sink tissues. thus, in order to achieve this increase in yields on available arable land, we must develop a mechanistic understanding of photosynthetic c-fixation, c-transport and c-allocation to different tissues, and the regulatory system that controls photosynthesis and c-allocation  <cit> . it has been estimated that as much as  <dig> to 80 % of the c assimilated from co <dig> through photosynthesis in a mature “source” leaf is exported out of the leaf to satisfy the demand of the non-photosynthetic “sink” tissues of the plant  <cit> . experimental manipulations suggest that c-fixation and sink utilization are tightly co-regulated  <cit> . for example, a decrease in sink demand reduces sugar transport from the leaves which results in sugar accumulation in the source leaves, enhanced expression of genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism, and decreased expression of photosynthetic genes  <cit> . in contrast, increased sink demand enhances photosynthesis  <cit> . in soybean, root nodulation by n-fixing bradyrhyzobium japonicum which increases c-demand of the roots results in elevated leaf photosynthesis  <cit> . it has been shown that growing plants under elevated atmospheric co <dig> initially results in higher photosynthetic rates, but eventually is followed by a down-regulation of photosynthetic activity presumably due to the negative feedback resulting from inherently limited sink capacity . based on these observations it has been hypothesized that maintenance of high photosynthetic rate is dependent on the rate of carbon utilization and/or capacity for carbon storage of sink tissues. the cross-talk between the source and sink is facilitated in part by the regulation of phloem transport from source to sink, however we still do not fully understand the mechanisms underlying phloem transport. in part, this has been due to limited availability of technologies to measure phloem transport dynamics . improving our understanding of the mechanisms that drive phloem transport may lead to new approaches for manipulating photoassimilate allocation.

imaging tools that measure photoassimilate transport and allocation in plants non-destructively on appropriate spatial and temporal scales will facilitate investigations of the genetic, biochemical, and physiological mechanisms underlying c-transport and c-allocation  <cit> . positron emission tomography  is a functional imaging technique that can be used to determine whole-plant transport and nutrient allocation by quantifying the distribution of a positron emitting radioisotope in a plant non-invasively, over a time-course, and with a spatial resolution of a few millimeters. in addition to the radioisotopes carbon- <dig>  and nitrogen- <dig> , most of the plant nutrients have positron-emitting isotopes that could be detected using pet. by measuring allocation and transport of essential elements, such as carbon and nitrogen, in a whole plant in real time, pet provides a key tool needed to identify and characterize the mechanisms and regulation of transport and allocation. also, the high sensitivity of pet is ideally suited for studies of rapid changes in plant function in response to treatments . traditional carbon- <dig>  and carbon- <dig>  techniques are destructive, and the root compartment and thick tissues are essentially inaccessible for imaging. like x-ray-computed tomography  and magnetic resonance imaging , pet can image roots in soil and within thick stems, but pet can also provide spatially explicit and dynamic imaging of photoassimilate and nutrient transport in the root and stem. several pet scanners have been developed specifically for plants recently , including a combined pet/ct scanner  <cit> , and combined pet/mri  <cit> . although these pet imaging systems are designed for use with plants, most plant biologists do not have access to an instrumentation team to develop and operate them, and these experimental systems are usually scaled for small plants.

studies of large plants are uniquely important because much of our food is produced as seed late in development, during the reproductive stage. for example, in the top three staple crops in the world , the seed or grain is the only part of the plant edible to humans. previous studies suggest that the mechanisms controlling photoassimilate uptake into the edible portions of the plant may be fundamentally different than in vegetative meristems at the shoot or root tips  <cit> . therefore, studies of photoassimilate transport and allocation in large crop plants at the reproductive stage are important to devise new strategies for improving crop yields.

here, we describe the use of a commercially available clinical pet scanner for functional imaging of 11c-labeled photoassimilate in plants. this presents a feasible option to make the technology accessible to many more plant biologists, since many universities have commercial pet scanners for medical research programs. although the application of pet imaging to plants is relatively recent, pet has been used extensively for human and animal research and diagnostic imaging for over 30 years. the commercial clinical pet scanners have high spatial resolution  and high sensitivity, and have streamlined and user-friendly image processing packages, including automated spatially explicit measurement of radiation attenuation by the plant tissues and soil  <cit> . further, the clinical pet scanners have a large bore, a large field of view , and computer controlled bed that enable measurement of dynamics in large plants up to ~  <dig>  m in height. we demonstrate this pet imaging approach using sorghum bicolor . sorghum is a member of the family poaceae , which also includes the top three world staple crops, maize, rice and wheat. sorghum is one of the top ten food crops in the world, and one of the most important staple crops for people in impoverished regions of africa and asia.

RESULTS
in order to simultaneously administer 11co <dig> to the plants and study 11c transport and allocation with a commercial pet scanner we developed a portable handheld 11co <dig> pulsing system to deliver 11co <dig> from the cyclotron to the pet scanner  <cit> , and an externally illuminated plexiglass chamber that enclosed the whole plant to maintain environmental control, to keep the plant in position as it moved through the pet scanner, and to provide secondary containment of 11co <dig>  much like a fume hood . we acquired dynamic images of 11c distribution in sorghum stems immediately after the 11co <dig> pulse using a commercial pet scanner, and a static image of 11c-allocation 2 h later .fig.  <dig> experimental set up of sorghum for pet imaging using a commercial clinical pet scanner. a schematic of the 11co <dig> administration and imaging system developed for large grasses. b side view of a 70 day-old- plant used in one of the experiments, the black rectangular box in the picture is the led light panel used to ensure consistent illumination of the leaf cuvette. c a reconstructed pet image of 11c distribution in 70 day-old- sorghum-plant. d pet image shown in c with rois drawn to measure 11c-allocation to different tissues



quantitative considerations for imaging plants with a clinical pet scanner
commercial clinical pet scanners are calibrated using large uniform cylindrical 18f or 68ge/68ga phantoms of known radioactivity for imaging human subjects  <cit> . in addition to calibration, quantitative pet measurements require several corrections to the raw data that compensate for either misidentified scattered coincidences or “missing” data due to photon attenuation  <cit> . robust methods to correct for these well-understood phenomena have been validated and are included with all clinical pet cameras  <cit> . the extent of these data corrections is dependent on the size, shape and composition of the object being imaged. for this reason it is a standard practice to calibrate clinical pet cameras with phantoms whose geometry and composition is representative of the human body . in contrast, the geometry of plant tissue presents an extreme range of morphologies whose dimensions vary greatly from the human body. in large grasses like sorghum the aerial part of the plant consists of a cylindrical stem whose diameter is about 3 cm, leaving most of the imaging fov filled with air. roots on the other hand are relatively smaller in diameter and are buried in soil. because of this extreme difference in image object dimensions and composition from those normally used with a clinical pet camera, one goal of this study was to estimate the attenuation and scatter factors for different plant tissues for an accurate measure of radioactivity. the hr+ pet scanner used here has an automated procedure using built-in radioactive sources to determine attenuation and scatter . to test and optimize pet scans of plants, we attached 18f-phantom vials inside the stem of a sorghum plant , and inside the soil/root compartment at different depths . we determined attenuation and scatter of the phantom without radioactivity, and measured the 18f radioactivity of the phantom vials with the pet scanner to compare with measurements of the same phantoms in a calibrated γ-scintillation counter.

first we examined the effect of scatter on the accuracy of radioactivity measurements. the number of scattered coincidence events depends on the thickness and density of the object being imaged. because the sensitivity to scattered coincidences is expected to be greater in 3-d mode than in 2-d mode, we measured the effect of scatter only in 3-d mode. scatter correction had little effect  on the shoot and root phantom radioactivity measurements .fig.  <dig> optimization of pet parameters using 18f plant phantoms. a effect of scatter on the accuracy of stem and root phantom radioactivity measurements. bars show percent reduction in the error of phantom measurement after scatter correction under 3-d mode. b effect of attenuation on the accuracy of stem and root phantom radioactivity measurements. bars show percent reduction in the error of phantom measurement after attenuation correction under either 2-d  or 3-d  mode. c & d error in the stem c and root d phantom radioactivity measurements based on the emission scans under 2-d and 3-d mode with different transmission scan times . for  and , bars show the average error of pet measurements of 18f phantom radioactivity, after attenuation correction and scatter correction, as a percent of the radioactivity of the phantoms measured using a calibrated scintillation counter. for all graphs error bars represent standard error



to evaluate plant and soil attenuation of radioactivity, we performed transmission scans, in which each of the detectors in the pet scanner ring measured the radioactivity transmitted through the sample  from known radioactive source rods . from transmission scans, the ecat software generates a spatially resolved attenuation map that can then be used to correct for attenuation by the different tissues of the plant. we determined the phantom radioactivity with and without attenuation correction. there was a substantial reduction in the coincidence counts when we did not correct for attenuation . attenuation was the source for about 30 % error in stem and 55 % error in root radioactivity measurements . since it is clearly important to use attenuation correction to quantify radioactivity in plants accurately, we optimized the transmission scan time by performing transmission scans on the plant phantom for 10 s, 2 min, 4 min and 20 min after the 18f radioactivity decayed below detection limits. the accuracy in the measurement of root and stem phantoms was affected by the transmission scan time. the average error was highest for the 10 s transmission scan . increasing the transmission scan time to 2 min reduced the error to 10 % for the stem and 4 % for the root phantoms in 3-d mode . however, increasing transmission scan time beyond 2 min did not result in a further reduction in error . our analysis suggests that attenuation correction with the transmission scan of 2 min can significantly improve the accuracy of pet measurements. therefore, we used attenuation correction in all further studies with at least 2 min transmission scans for stem segments, and 4 min transmission scans for the root segments, since there was slightly higher attenuation by the dense soil surrounding the roots.

we compared the accuracy of measurements in both 2-d and 3-d modes. positron emitters, such as 11c, decay via emission of a positron which, upon collision with an electron, emits two 511 kev γ-rays in opposite directions  <cit> . taking advantage of these coincident gamma rays, pet scanners incorporate multiple rings of individual gamma ray detectors to provide positional information  when two coincident photons are detected within a narrow time window. most commercial scanners can be operated in either 2-d mode, which counts coincidences only within the most closely situated rings of detectors, or 3-d mode, which allows coincidence counts between any of the detector rings. for our phantom study, the emission scans were performed in both 2-d and 3-d mode. overall, 3-d mode was more accurate for estimating radioactivity of the plant phantoms and was slightly more sensitive compared to 2-d . because of higher accuracy and inherently higher sensitivity of 3-d emission scan, we used 3-d mode for acquiring emission data in our sorghum study.

measuring transport dynamics in sorghum
using a commercial pet scanner, we measured transport of photoassimilate in plants at two developmental stages: 40 days after planting  and  <dig> dap. the  <dig> dap plants had 5– <dig> fully developed leaves and were 70–90 cm tall; the  <dig> dap plants had 10– <dig> fully developed leaves and were 100–120 cm tall. each plant was positioned with lights on and left untouched for 1 h prior to 11co <dig> administration to the target leaf. we acquired dynamic emission data for 2 h  from the internode just below where the target leaf sheath connected to the stem . on the reconstructed, decay-corrected image, we outlined two rois of the same size  so that each roi encompassed the girth of the internode. the first roi  was near the top of the internode close to the point of attachment of the target leaf and the second roi  was outlined on the next adjoining internode. from the time-activity plot for each roi  the time of arrival  of the 11c-photoassimilate was estimated   <cit> , to calculate transport speed as distance between the two rois divided by the time of 11c transport between the two rois. the average transport speed of the newly fixed photoassimilate was  <dig>  m h− <dig> in stems of both  <dig> dap and  <dig> dap sorghum plants . although laying a plant horizontal will certainly affect plant function over the long-term, there was little or no effect of the horizontal positioning required for using the commercial pet scanner on transport speeds, 11c fixation , or photosynthetic co <dig> exchange rates  compared with vertical plants within the 3 h time frame of this experiment . to avoid potentially confounding gravitrophic effects, pet scanning of plants should be completed within 7–8 h of laying the plant horizontally, when carbohydrate utilization begins to change  <cit> . our transport speed measurements are similar to previously reported transport speeds in stems at the base of small sorghum plants, although plants in that study were grown hydroponically  <cit> . interestingly, we found that transport speeds were not constant throughout the plant. the 11c-photoassimilate transport speed was highest within the leaf blade , and decreased substantially in the stem and further still in the roots . this decrease in speed along the axis of transport may be a consequence of photoassimilate unloading along the phloem pathway in the stem and roots.fig.  <dig> use of pet to measure the dynamics in photoassimilate transport. a changes in decay corrected radioactivity over time of 11c at two rois  shown in the insert. each curve represents changes in radioactivity over time in that roi. the high radioactivity  spots in the insert are nodes. b transport speed of the 11c-photoassimilate between r <dig> and r <dig> measured at  <dig> and  <dig> dap in sorghum, bars are mean ± se of at least  <dig> replicate plants. c
11c-photoassimilate transport speeds measured in leaf blades, stems, and individual roots. d reconstructed image of the scanned sorghum stem in the fov of the pet scanner with the individual rois  outlined to estimate the changes in transport within an internode or across a node. white arrowhead shows the point of attachment of the target leaf; i <dig> and i <dig> are the two internodes in the fov. e transport speeds between different rois, calculated from toas using a combination of two of the rois, shown in 



previously, we observed accumulation of 11c-labeled photoassimilate in nodes of maize, a close relative of sorghum , suggesting that nodes may be a region of heavy phloem unloading. since substantial phloem unloading in the nodes could affect photoassimilate flow across the nodes, we compared transport speeds between different sets of rois both within an internode and across nodes. we outlined four rois at ~25 mm intervals, two in the target internode , and two in the internode below it  within the fov . rois could be placed closer together than ~25 mm, in theory as close 3 mm, but as the space between rois gets smaller, the time bins of data acquisition  need to be reduced to provide appropriate time resolution. within an internode, the average transport speed was about  <dig>  m h− <dig> between r <dig> and r <dig>  and between r <dig> and r <dig>  the transport speed across the node depended on the distance between the rois . the transport measured across r <dig> to r <dig> was  <dig>  m h− <dig>  which is slightly lower compared to transport speed measured within the internodes. interestingly, the transport speed between r <dig> and r <dig>  the two closest rois across the node, was significantly lower than the others . the nodes of monocots particularly may act as strong sinks due to the presence of intercalary meristem  <cit> . the nodes in large sorghum plants might act similarly to the reported “discrimination center” at the base of smaller sorghum plants  <cit> , since high radioactivity is apparent at the nodes in our sorghum images , and similarly at the nodes of maize . substantial phloem unloading at the nodes could possibly explain the slowing of the photoassimilate transport speed across the nodes, but would not explain why faster speeds are resumed basipetal to the node. alternatively, the complex anatomy at the nodes may contribute to the actual slowing, or appearance of slowing, in transport speeds. first, there may be substantial redirection of photoassimilate from basipetally-flowing to acropetally-flowing pipelines  <cit> , which, like unloading, could possibly slow the transport speed. second, flow velocity through a tube decreases proportionally with increasing tube cross-sectional area. total sieve-tube cross sectional area is larger within the nodes than internodes of monocots  <cit> . this larger cross sectional area would result in slower transport speed or velocity, since flow velocity through a pipe is inversely proportional to pipe cross-sectional area. this would also explain why the transport speed increases again basipetal to the node, where sieve tube cross-sectional area becomes smaller again. finally, the vascular bundles do not follow a straight path through the nodal plexus  <cit> . our measurement of distance was the straightest path, which should be somewhat less than the actual length of the meandering path followed by the vascular bundles through the node. this underestimated distance would yield a calculated transport speed that is slower than the actual transport speed through the vascular bundles in the node.fig.  <dig> use of pet to analyze c-allocation in sorghum at two developmental stages. two hours after the administration of a 1 min pulse of 11co <dig> to the youngest fully expanded leaf of a sorghum plant, excluding the flag leaf, the entire plant was scanned in 15 cm segments. representative pet images of sorghum plants at, a vegetative stage  and b early flowering stage , showing distribution of 11c. insets show roots with higher contrast for visualization, with contrast set the same level in a and b. c percent fixation determined based on the total 11c administered minus the 11c radioactivity not fixed, measured in a soda lime trap placed inside a capintec dose calibrator at 2 min after pulsing. d percent export from the target leaf, and e percent allocation of exported 11c to roots, lower stem, and apex. the data represent the mean ± se of  <dig> independent plants



measuring whole-plant carbon allocation
we also used pet to measure changes in c-allocation as the plants transitioned from a vegetative  to a reproductive  stage . this developmental shift in sorghum and in most grasses is characterized by higher c-allocation to the apex as the flower head begins to develop, and by initiation of internode elongation  <cit> . we targeted 11co <dig> administration to the upper most  fully expanded leaf excluding the flag leaf in both the  <dig> dap and  <dig> dap plants. to measure allocation, we scanned the entire plant in 15 cm segments, applied attenuation correction , and used the reconstructed whole-plant image to measure 11c- distribution to the target leaf, lower stem, apex and roots . the target leaf was split into three rois, leaf tip, load zone and the leaf blade . the load zone, the region of the target leaf where the leaf cuvette was attached to administer 11co <dig>  generally had the highest radioactivity . overall, the young sorghum plants  fixed more 11co <dig> than the older plants . this was consistent with lower overall photosynthetic co <dig> fixation by  <dig> dap as measured by irga in a greenhouse . a similar decrease in leaf photosynthesis with age has been previously reported by two separate studies in sorghum  <cit> . the export from the target leaf was estimated by subtracting the radioactivity in the target leaf from the total radioactivity in the entire plant. the percent of fixed 11c exported from the target leaf did not change significantly between  <dig> dap and  <dig> dap , although the total c exported decreased from  <dig> to  <dig> dap due to the decline in c-fixation. however, the allocation to specific tissues changed significantly as the plants matured. in particular, the younger plants allocated more 11c to the roots , while the older plants allocated a higher proportion of 11c to the apex  and almost no 11c to the roots. the allocation to the lower stem was higher in the younger plants  than in the older plants , consistent with a transition from stem growth at the vegetative stage to flower head development at the reproductive stage. source-sink dynamics within the plant determines how much, when, and where the carbohydrates are allocated which ultimately affects yield and productivity. here, sink demand in stems declined during flowering, which may be a trait that has been selected to the extreme in domesticated crops, such as grain sorghum, as an unintended consequence of breeding for high grain yields.

to test how long we can measure c-allocation with the routine administration of ~50 mci , three successive emission scans were performed on the same  <dig> dap sorghum plant,  <dig>   <dig> and 4 h after administering 11co <dig>  the measure of export from the target leaf was higher at 3 h than at 2 h, with a corresponding reduction in the estimate of 11c radioactivity in the target leaf . after 4 h, radioactivity in the target leaf decreased further, suggesting that more 11c was exported since 3 h. however, the amount of radioactivity detected in the rest of the plant after 4 h was lower than at 3 h, which was largely due to decreased radioactivity detected in the roots. overall, the root zone had the lowest concentrations  of radioactivity at both growth stages in sorghum. in order to visualize the roots, we had to increase the contrast above that needed for optimal visualization of the stem. the highest radioactivity was in the young adventitious roots near the top of the soil and the mesh of young fine roots near the bottom of the pot . most likely, after 4 h the concentrations of radioactivity in some regions of the root were near or just below the detection limits of the pet scanner. however, the commercial pet scanner provided good estimates of 11c-allocation up to 3 h after radioactivity was administered. this was more than enough time to assess whole-plant c-allocation patterns, which were apparent by 2 h and changed only slightly between  <dig> and 3 h.fig.  <dig> 
11c allocation at different times after 11co <dig> administration. quantification of 11c-allocation from three emission scans performed 2 h, 3 h, and 4 h after 11co <dig> administration to the leaf of a  <dig> dap sorghum plant. each data point represents decay-corrected 11c-radioactivity  measured in that roi, except for total export which represents total radioactivity exported from the leaf for each scan



CONCLUSIONS
large plant size is an important challenge to studying c-allocation in large grasses such as sorghum bicolor, particularly later in plant development when understanding of c-allocation is crucial for improving grain yields or composition of bioenergy feedstocks. our results show that, by optimizing certain parameters and accounting for geometry of plants, commercial pet scanners can be used reliably not only to measure c-allocation in plants but also to study dynamics in photoassimilate transport. one advantage of pet is that it provides both quantitative and spatial information on c transport and allocation in intact undisturbed roots in a 3-dimensional soil column, which is not possible by other means, showing regions of high carbon demand, which generally correlates with high metabolic activity. hence, pet provides functional imaging that can complement the spatially resolved imaging provided by other modalities, such as ct and mri. in addition to studying developmental changes, this technology could also be used to compare species, genotypes, or a variety of environmental treatments to understand the genetic mechanisms regulating c transport and allocation. furthermore, because the technology is non-destructive and the 11c and 13n radioactivity decays below the level of detection within 6–12 h, the same individual plant can be repeatedly pulsed and imaged over many days to measure the individual response to a treatment or developmental transition. this pet imaging method is suitable for imaging large grasses such as corn and sorghum; however, it also could be used for imaging smaller plants or other large plants . this method could also provide a platform for studying transport of phytohormones and nutrients that can be labeled with positron-emitting isotopes , which may also play important roles in reproductive development in large maturing plants.

