BACKGROUND
the evolutionary processes governing the divergence of animal genitalia are mostly unknown and constitute one of the most intriguing pieces of a mayor puzzle that is speciation  <cit> . in many arthropod groups male genitalia evolves at particularly high rates and this special feature constitutes the mechanistic basis of its use as a specific diagnostic trait  <cit> . notwithstanding the taxonomic importance of genitalic morphology, intraspecific studies addressing the causes and consequences of intraspecific morphological variation are scarce. such studies, using methods successfully applied in evolutionary biology, offer the opportunity to gain new insights into the evolutionary processes and forces involved in genitalic evolution  <cit> .

three main hypotheses have been proposed to explain the evolution of genital morphology: the lock and key, the pleiotropy and the sexual selection hypotheses. the lock and key hypothesis  <cit>  states that male genitalia evolve as a species-specific trait in order to properly fit in female genitalic organs. this theory predicts a canalized development of male genitalia and low levels of phenotypic and genotypic variation, since genitalic traits are expected to be under strong stabilizing selection  <cit> .

the pleiotropy hypothesis assumes that genital variation is largely neutral. since genital and non-genital morphological traits are implicitly genetically correlated, changes of allele frequencies at loci pleiotropically affecting general morphology and genitalia may lead to rapid and arbitrary evolution of genitalic traits  <cit> . the sexual selection hypothesis states that morphological differences in male genitalia are related to variation in fertilization success and that morphological divergence is driven by sexual selection  <cit> .

the study of the evolution of male genitalia may be even more complicated not only because it may be influenced by both natural and sexual selection, but also because it's phenotypic expression might be influenced by environmental factors  <cit>  as occurs for other morphological traits. thus, the joint study of intraspecific variation and interspecific divergence may provide a useful approach for the understanding of the underlying genetic architecture of genital traits and the evolutionary processes involved  <cit> . in this sense, it has been suggested that differences in genital morphology between closely related species would be largely polygenic  <cit> . such claim is based on the single study comparing the morphology of male posterior lobe in two closely related species of drosophila and their hybrids  <cit> . therefore, it is clear that more studies are necessary to further support this affirmation and to determine whether simple genetic differences can account for the evolution of fast evolving and complex structures such as male genitalia.

the aedeagus, which is the intromittent organ of male genitalia  <cit> , is considered the main diagnostic trait for species recognition in the drosophila repleta group  <cit> . to this group belong the south american d. buzzatii and d. koepferae  <cit> , which are morphologically undistinguishable except for conspicuous differences in male genitalia. these species are reproductively isolated by partial ecological isolation  <cit> , sexual isolation and post mating barriers  <cit> . both species can breed and feed on the necrotic tissues of several cacti species  <cit> , however they exhibit a certain degree of niche separation; d. buzzatii is mainly adapted to breed on decaying tunas , while d. koepferae prefers the necrotic stems of columnar cacti of the genera cereus and trichocereus  <cit> . though sexual isolation between these species is strong, behavioral barriers can be forced in the laboratory, since d. buzzatii males can inseminate d. koepferae females and female hybrid offspring can be successfully backcrossed to d. buzzatii males  <cit> . furthermore, recent population genetic studies have provided indirect evidence of past or recent gene flow between these species  <cit> .

the knowledge of the ecology of these cactophilic drosophila  <cit> , coupled with the possibility to produce interspecific hybrids in the laboratory and the potential for natural hybridization, makes this pair of species into an excellent model for speciation studies, particularly those addressing the genetic and ecological basis of morphological change associated to interspecific divergence.

in this work we investigate the sources of phenotypic variation, genetic and environmental, by examining genitalic size and shape in flies of several isofemale lines of both species and interspecific hybrids raised in two different species of host cacti.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> males were analyzed in this study .

the total number of principal components explaining a significant proportion of shape variation was  <dig> in d. koepferae and  <dig> in d buzzatii . the cumulative contribution of the first  <dig> principal components of the elliptic fourier descriptors  of the genital outlines accounted for over 74% and 77% of total shape variance in d. koepferae and d. buzzatii, respectively and nearly 84% of shape variation in the interspecific analysis . the proportion of morphological variation summarized by each pc is illustrated in figure  <dig> 

 percent of genital morphological variance explained by the first  <dig> principal components  in intraspecific and global  analyses.

parental species size and shape variation
we detected significant differences in aedeagus size between species but more notably between flies reared in different cacti . however, in a nested anova design as ours, the random factors line in species and line by cactus are the error terms of the fixed factors . large values of these terms may provide unreliable results in the testing of the fixed factors. consequently we performed "a posteriori" contrasts of the species by cacti interaction to confirm the general results. post hoc comparisons showed that d. buzzatii male flies reared in opuntia had larger male genitalia than those grown in t. candicans  while in d. koepferae differences between flies grown in different cactus media were not significant . as visually observed, d. buzzatii and d. koepferae significantly differed in their genitalic shape and presented morphological variation not only among lines within species but also interacting with the breeding substrate .

f values of the anovas and manovas for aedeagus size and shape respectively in interspecific  and intraspecific  analyses. * p <  <dig> 

the results of intraspecific anovas also revealed important differences . in d. buzzatii the cactus by line interaction was significant and accounted for a relatively high percentage  of phenotypic variance in aedeagus size. however, only the line factor was significant in d. koepferae, neither the cactus effect nor the cactus by line interaction were significant.

in summary, according to our experimental design, based on the isofemale line technique  <cit> , shows that aedeagus size is not only phenotypically plastic, but also that substantial heterogeneity exists among lines in their plastic response, suggesting that plasticity has a genetic basis in d. buzzatii. in d. koepferae, in contrast, our results show that variation in aedeagus size has a genetic component, devoid of any plastic response in relation to the breeding substrate. according to the results of the manovas, variability among lines in aedeagus shape was significant in both species . the proportion of total shape variation explained by the interaction cactus by line also differed between species. approximately 9% of total shape variance was explained by the cactus by line interaction in d. koepferae. this interaction was significant for pc <dig> which is related with variation in thickness in both dorsal and ventral median portions of the organ . conversely, in d. buzzatii, the cactus by line interaction was significant for pc <dig>  which describes changes in the process of the ventral margin  and accounts for an important proportion  of the explained morphological variance.

allometric patterns
correlation analysis between aedeagus size and shape also revealed important interspecific differences. on one hand, aedeagus shape was strongly correlated with size in d. buzzatii . conversely, none of the  <dig> principal shape variables in d. koepferae were significantly associated with genital size .

allometric shape variance was calculated as the sum of partial allometric variance of each pc significantly correlated with size. * p <  <dig> .

we also studied the relationship between variables describing size of male genitalia and wing length. these variables were not significantly correlated in d. koepferae , whereas in d. buzzatii, we detected a significant allometric relationship . furthermore, aedeagus size and wing length varied isometrically in d. buzzatii as suggested by a coefficient of allometry not significantly different from  <dig> .

aedeagus morphology in interspecific hybrids
four interspecific crosses, out of  <dig> attempted,  yielded enough hybrid progeny as to perform the present study. these results are in agreement with previous studies reporting strong premating isolation between d. buzzatii and d. koepferae  <cit> . in order to asses hybrid male fertility, and prior to dissection, hybrid males were aged for  <dig> week and placed for  <dig> days in vials with several mature virgin females of d. buzzatii or d. koepferae. in all cases hybrid males failed to produce offspring even though copulation attempts were observed in the vials. hybrid progeny obtained in crosses  <dig> and  <dig> could only be tested in vials prepared with the medium prepared with fermenting opuntia due to low numbers of hybrid larvae, while in the other crosses the yield of hybrid progeny was high enough to be reared in both cactus media.

regarding size, differences among genotypes  were significant in all crosses . in figure  <dig> we illustrate size differences among crosses and genotypes reared in opuntia, the rearing substrate where all crosses were able to be tested. f <dig> hybrid males from crosses  <dig> and  <dig> reared in opuntia vials presented intermediate values that differed significantly from both parental strains . in the other crosses, in which hybrids could be reared in both cacti, a significant genotype by cactus interaction  was only detected in cross  <dig>  hybrids male progeny in this cross presented larger aedeagi than males of the parental d. buzzatii line in opuntia, while differences between hybrids and the d. buzzatii parent were not significant in trichocereus. in all cases, d. koepferae presented the largest genitalia in both cacti. in one cross  mean genitalic size in hybrids was significantly lower than the male parental d. buzzatii line . based on the correlation matrix, only pc <dig> scores were correlated with organ size in hybrids accounting for  <dig> % of shape variation . unfortunately, the low number of hybrids and the high proportion of individuals with improperly unfolded wings precluded the analysis of allometric relationships between wing size and the variable describing aedeagus size.

f values of the anovas and wilk's lambda of manovas for aedeagus size and shape respectively. *p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> 

significant shape differences among genotypes were detected in all crosses . post hoc comparisons showed that all genotypes differed from each other in the shape of the genitalia at least in pc <dig> shape scores . however, neither the cactus factor nor the cactus by genotype interaction were significant in the crosses in which hybrids were raised in the two cactus media .

in figure  <dig> we present a plot of the first two principal components describing shape variation . the species differentiate themselves along the first shape axis  and the hybrid scores fall within the parental values. as can be observed the mean pc <dig> values of d. buzzatii lines involved in successful interspecific crosses tended to be negative and those of d. koepferae positive. however, hybrids failed to present intermediate values for both shape variables simultaneously. for instance, hybrids of cross  <dig> had shape scores for both pc <dig> and pc <dig> that placed them in the morphological space closer to the d. koepferae parent  than to d. buzzatii . on the contrary, in cross  <dig> a hybrid genital morphology was more similar to d. buzzatii for pc <dig>  but the mean for pc <dig> was more extreme than any of the parental lines. suggestively, as explained above, hybrids in  <dig> also presented smaller genitalia than both parental lines.

in order to evaluate the degree of resemblance of the morphology of hybrids to each parental line, we calculated the euclidean distance to the morphological centroid of each parental strain using the shape  scores of each individual hybrid. as a rough index of morphological dissimilarity, hybrids would show equal mean distances to the centroids of both parental clouds of points if they have intermediate aedeagus morphology. expression dominance of one genome over the other would produce phenotypes resembling more closely one parental strain or the other. morphological dominant expression was tested with an anova in which the variable was the euclidean distance of each hybrid male to the centroid of each parental species  with cross and parents as fixed factors. the anova revealed significant differences among crosses though it should be noted that hybrid resemblance to parental strains were not independent of the cross .

discussion
aedeagus morphology is a diagnostic trait that along with chromosomal inversions provides a guide for species identification in the genus drosophila and particularly in the d. repleta species group  <cit> . several studies have, recently, turned the attention to the d. buzzatii cluster, a guild of cactophilic flies, in active cladogenesis, that inhabit the arid regions of southern south america  <cit> . however, recent molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit>  cast doubts on the reliability of male genital  morphology to infer the evolutionary relationships in the d. buzzatii cluster  <cit> . for instance, mitochondrial dna sequence data place d. koepferae as the sister species of d. buzzatii, albeit the comparative analysis of aedeagus morphology indicates a close relationship with d. serido and allied species  <cit> . these results indicate that rates of evolution of male genitalia may be heterogeneous among branches of the clusters' phylogenetic tree. in this context, our study, motivated by such inconsistency between molecular and morphological data, provides valuable information that could help to distinguish the relevant factors involved in morphological variation of male genitalia in d. buzzatii and d. koepferae, a pair of species in the heart of an evolutionary conflict.

the first issue raised by our study is that aedeagus size and shape vary substantially in both species, and, that a significant portion of variation is genetically determined. moreover, the inclusion, in our experimental design, of semi-natural rearing media prepared with different cactus hosts permitted the characterization of morphological variation in terms of phenotypic plasticity in both species. in this sense, phenotypic plasticity in genital morphology was evident in d. buzzatii: flies emerged in alternative cactus hosts showed significant differences in aedeagus size and shape. moreover, the analysis of the sources of variation also revealed a significant line by cactus interaction in d. buzzatii, i.e. isofemale lines did not respond in the same way to the two environments tested, suggesting that the plastic response of genital morphology has a genetic basis  <cit> . such a plastic expression of genital morphology constitutes the first evidence of a rearing substrate affecting genital morphology in drosophila, and is in line with a recent study showing a plastic response of aedeagus morphology in relation to rearing temperature in d. mediopunctata  <cit> . in contrast, comparisons between males of d. koepferae emerged in different cactus media did not reveal any sign of phenotypic plasticity, suggesting a more canalized  development of male genitalia.

another relevant point is that patterns of allometry within  and between organs  also differed between d. buzzatii and d. koepferae. in the latter, shape and size of male genitalia, as well as aedeagus size and wing length, appeared to be largely uncoupled as suggested by the low level of within and between organ allometries. these results suggest that differences among flies in wing length are not expected to be accompanied by changes in the size of the genitalia, indicating that the factors involved in development of wings and male genitalia are largely independent in d. koepferae. in contrast, aedeagus shape and size were significantly correlated in d. buzzatii, suggesting that factors affecting size  may also indirectly affect the shape of the organ.

in d. buzzatii, body size related traits , known to be under natural selection  <cit> , are affected by the nature of the breeding substrate  <cit> . furthermore, a positive correlation between body size and male reproductive success is well known in this species  <cit> . if the phenotypic correlation observed between aedeagus size and wing length has a genetic basis, any directional selective pressure affecting body size  would indirectly affect the evolution of male genitalia.

several features of the mating system, such as female remating frequency, premating time, copulation duration, interval between successive matings, and progeny numbers, have been shown to be genetically variable in d. buzzatii  <cit> . however, the connection between these traits and male genital morphology has not been explored. indeed, the implications of our present results in genital evolution and speciation would obviously depend on the kind of relationship between genital morphology and mating success, as it was reported to occur in other insect taxa such as heteroptera  <cit>  and coleoptera  <cit> .

to this point we have presented basic features of the patterns of variation of aedeagus morphology in d. buzzatii and d. koepferae, now, we would like to examine whether our data allow a critical evaluation of the plausibility of the three main hypotheses proposed to explain genital evolution. though our results are not entirely conclusive in this respect, the extensive phenotypic and genetic variation in aedeagus morphology are strong evidence against the "lock and key" hypothesis, that predicts low levels of variation  in genital structures. however, the correlation between aedeagus morphology and wing length, along with the condition dependence  are in agreement, at least in d. buzzatii, with predictions of the hypothesis of pleiotropy. concerning the third hypothesis, sexual selection, we must await for the results of experiments testing the relationship, if any, between genital morphology and reproductive performance.

the final issue we would like to address is whether our study allows us to envisage the genetic architecture underlying differences in male genitalia between d. buzzatii and d. koepferae. in this sense, our results seem in conflict with the single available work comparing genital morphology in hybrids and parental species  <cit> . genital size and shape of hybrid males were not intermediate and the morphological resemblance of hybrids to either d. buzzatii or d. koepferae varied among crosses. in fact, hybrid's morphological distance to d. buzzatii and d. koepferae depended on the parental strains employed in the crosses. in none of the  <dig> crosses hybrid morphology was phenotypically intermediate . hybrids from crosses  <dig> and  <dig> tended to be more similar to the d. koepferae parental strain, while in crosses  <dig> and  <dig> the morphology of the hybrid genitalia resembled closer that of d. buzzatii male parent. these results seem to be incompatible with the idea that interspecific differences in the morphology of male genitalia are caused by polygenes with small additive effects as claimed by coyne and orr for d. simulans and d. mauritiana  <cit>  . actually, our results suggest a complex genetic architecture probably involving a certain degree of dominance and the involvement of genetic factors with large effect.

however, there are certain differences between our study and liu et al's  <cit>  that are worth mentioning. the first relates to the part of the genitalia examined in each case, the intromittent organ in d. buzzatii and d. koepferae and the posterior lobe  in d. simulans and d. mauritiana. these organs perform different functions during copulation  <cit>  and therefore their evolution might be governed by different processes. the second is methodological and can be avoided by applying our methodology to liu et al's dataset. to this end, we captured the outlines available in the digital version of  <cit> , and tested for shape differences between f <dig> hybrids and parental species. this reanalysis confirmed that f <dig> hybrids have an intermediate morphology between d. simulans and d. mauritiana . another non trivial point, that may complicate our interpretation is the difference in the time of divergence between the members of the two pairs of species, since development in interspecific hybrids is a result of a balance between the effects of the degree of heterozygosity and the degree of genomic coadaptation  and the outcome of the past selection pressures on the species studied . d. simulans and d. mauritiana are two recently derived species that shared their last common ancestor  <dig>  –  <dig>  million years ago  <cit> , while d. koepferae and d. buzzatii are older species that diverged  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . finally, d. simulans and d. mauritiana are homosequential species, i.e. their basic polytene chromosome banding patterns are identical  <cit> , whereas two inversions became fixed since divergence in d. buzzatii and d. koepferae. in addition, rich second chromosome inversion polymorphisms have evolved independently in the latter pair of species  <cit> . our knowledge of inversion polymorphisms is mostly restricted to d. buzzatii, in which polymorphic inversions are known to affect morphological and fitness related traits . although there is no direct evidence linking inversions and genital morphology, inversions may affect aedeagus morphology via its effect on general body size . in this context, the idea that morphology  of an organ potentially involved in species recognition , might be associated to polymorphic inversions is consistent with recent theories linking chromosomal rearrangements and reproductive isolation  <cit> , and deserves further investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
our comparative study of patterns of intraspecific variation in male genital size and shape and intra and inter-organ allometries in d. koepferae and d. buzzatii suggest different scenarios of genital evolution and probably the evolution of different developmental networks. moreover, our study suggests that extrapolations across species are unwarranted, different evolutionary mechanisms might be involved in the evolution of genital morphology even in closely related species.

