BACKGROUND
aberrant signal transduction pathways induce and maintain many cancers  <cit> . therefore, targeted therapeutics blocking this aberrant cellular signaling activity can impede malignant progression. however, the clinical success of targeted agents relies on accurate identification of the relative contribution of the targeted pathway to the malignancy prior to treatment. for example, egfr overexpression is associated with poor prognosis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma  leading to adoption of egfr-targeted agents including cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody against egfr, for clinical management  <cit> . although many hnscc patients benefit from cetuximab treatment, a majority of patients do not respond or eventually develop acquired resistance after the initial clinical response. previous studies have implicated activation of epistatic signaling intermediaries downstream of egfr activation in cetuximab resistance  <cit> . thus, inference of aberrant pathway activity controlled by egfr activation may shed light on molecular underpinnings of acquired cetuximab resistance in patients with hnscc.

gene expression profiles constitute an important tool to investigate and predict biochemical network activity in complex cellular systems such as human tumors. standard class discovery techniques, such as hierarchical clustering  <cit>  and singular value decomposition , can implicate gene expression activity common to subsets of samples. however, clustering algorithms are unable to account for the reuse of genes in diverse biological processes as is common in eukaryotic systems  <cit> . moreover, algorithms such as svd infer complex combinations of responses across all measured genes, without regard for the biochemical structure of cellular signaling networks. as a result, these inference techniques often obscure the relationship of the resulting genetic signatures to the specific cell signaling processes that are active in the measured system  <cit> .

on the other hand, coordinated expression changes in a priori sets of downstream targets of pathway-activated transcription factors can implicate activity in specific signaling pathways  <cit> . these pathway-inference techniques predominately use statistical techniques that quantify the magnitude of class comparison statistics, notably t-statistics, in a priori gene sets relating to cell signaling relative to a background, null distribution . similar to clustering algorithms, co-regulation of individual genes by multiple pathways and transcription factors will bias these gene set-based analysis techniques  <cit> . previous studies have shown that markov chain monte carlo  matrix factorization techniques, such as bayesian decomposition  and coordinated gene activity in pattern sets , robustly infer gene expression patterns relating to transcription factor activity in cancers  <cit> .

to generate pathway signatures for hnscc that are well characterized at the molecular level, we use hacat keratinocytes and isogenic variants thereof. hacat cells are well characterized in reference to their biological and malignant properties  <cit> . therefore, these hacat models provide a potential to identify oncogenic signatures related to signaling responses that are unencumbered by ‘background noise’ inherent to tumor tissues. the hacat cell lines have the further advantage as a model system because their genetic aberrations closely parallel early oncogenic events seen in hnscc. specifically, like hnscc  <cit> , the hacat lines represent a spontaneously immortalized aneuploid human keratinocyte cell line of monoclonal origin with increased telomerase activity  <cit> , two mutant p <dig> alleles  <cit> , and absence of p16ink4a expression due to promoter hypermethylation  <cit> .

here we show that the mcmc matrix factorization algorithm cogaps infers gene expression patterns in hacat keratinocytes associated with modulation of the egfr activity by forced expression, ligand stimulation, and pharmacological inhibition  <cit> . we relate these patterns directly to activity at the pathway level, in contrast to previous studies that have focused on transcription factor-level activity  <cit> . in addition, the cogaps inferred patterns predict molecular response to cetuximab treatment in an isogenic pair of hnscc cell lines with varying cetuximab sensitivities.

RESULTS
compilation of protein-protein interaction data in the signaling pathways downstream of egfr in hnscc for pathway-level gene set inference
a number of molecular interactions triggered by egfr activation have been characterized in hnscc. figure  <dig> summarizes the corresponding pathway diagram of canonical protein-protein interactions in egfr signaling in hnscc compiled from reviews by  <cit> . this diagram displays that many of the egfr-dependent signaling events culminate in activation of distinct subsets of transcription factors . although not directly downstream of egfr, addional file 6: table s  <dig> also shows transcription factors activated by the notch and tgf-β pathways. these pathways are included in our analyses because they intersect with egfr-dependent signaling events and have previously been implicated in hnscc biology  <cit> . the pathway-activated transcription factors and associated targets listed in additional file 6: table s  <dig> were used to infer specific pathway activity from affymetrix microarray measurements of hnscc using the gene set statistics from the cogaps algorithm  and from linear models  <cit>  as described in the methods section.

cogaps reveals transcriptional responses to egfr pathway modulation in the isogenic hacat model system reflected in their gene expression changes
isogenic hacat variants overexpressing either wild-type egfr or the transcription factor nf-kappa-b p <dig> subunit , or mutant hras have previously been described by  <cit> . in order to delineate specific targets resulting from activating these pathways, we measured gene expression patterns associated with increased expression of wild-type egfr  and p <dig>  with and without serum and ligand stimulation  and from constitutive activation of hras imparted by an activating mutation  concurrently with the pathway modulation demonstrated in  <cit> . table  <dig> further summarizes the experimental design for these gene expression data.

summary of the experimental conditions in the hacat cell line expression experiments, provided in further detail in supplemental file  <dig> 

cogaps infers the relative presence of patterns in gene expression  across samples measured  from a matrix of microarray data d with n genes  and m samples . specifically, it uses the mcmc algorithm described in the methods section to find the optimal, sparse non-negative matrices a and p according to the equation

  d~nap,Σ 

where n represents the normal distribution on each element of the matrix multiplication ap and the ith row and jth column of the matrix Σ is the standard deviation of gene expression for the ith gene and jth sample. the resulting signals that are common to subsets of the samples are summarized in the rows of the pattern matrix p, with related gene expression patterns in the corresponding columns of a. in contrast to standard techniques class-comparison algorithms that strictly infer differential expression between sets of samples, the cogaps analysis infers predominant signals from the gene expression data in an unsupervised analysis. as a result, cogaps can capture degrees of gene expression activity that are common to various sample classes. a further advantage of cogaps over standard class-comparison or clustering algorithms is its ability to infer activity in subsets of genes concurrently affected by the diverse biological processes in each sample type  <cit> .

when decomposing the data from the hacat model system according to eq.  <dig>  cogaps infers six patterns. these patterns are robust in that they are conserved across three separate simulations of the cogaps algorithm . therefore, all subsequent analyses are performed for the average patterns inferred from these simulations. although the cogaps analysis is unsupervised, the six inferred patterns plotted in figure  <dig> separate samples based on the experimental conditions summarized in table  <dig>  specifically, cogaps infers patterns that relate to the molecular changes introduced in the isogenic hacat model system; egfrwt, p65wt, hrasval12d and empty vector control. likewise, cogaps infers an additional pattern that reflects pathway activity resulting from the exposure of cell lines to fetal calf serum. when serum starved, both hacat-egfrwt and hacat-p65wt show weak upregulation in the pattern associated with the control hacat-vector . moreover, incorporating the egf ligand in the media for hacat-egfrwt  and the tnf-α ligand for hacat-p65wt  moderately increases the association of both cell lines to their respective patterns over their serum starved counterparts .

in accordance with eq.  <dig>  the inferred patterns from the rows of p can be linked to signatures of gene expression in the columns of the amplitude matrix a to implicate relative gene expression in subsets of samples. we apply the z-score gene-set statistic of  <cit>   to infer pattern-specific pathway activation  from over-  representation of large magnitude elements in the a matrix for genes that are targets of transcription factors. whereas  <cit>  limited application of this statistic to targets of transcription factors, figure  <dig> displays estimates of activation and repression of pathways and additional file 2: figure s  <dig> the statistics for component transcription factors  estimated with eq.  <dig> for the hacat data. therefore, in this application a pathway is inferred to be either up or down regulated if its targets have a correspondingly larger or smaller z-score in elements of the a matrix relative to a random selection of genes. by basing this statistic on the relative standard-deviation adjusted magnitude in elements of a, cogaps directly infers pathway activity that is active in each pattern inferred . therefore, cogaps provides a direct implication of relative pathway activity in samples in contrast to the inference limited to differential pathway activity in gene set statistics in standard class-comparison algorithms. similar to the inferred patterns, these pathway and transcription factor level statistics are robust across cogaps simulations .

in analyzing the cogaps estimated pathway activity , we observe the expected global upregulation of stat, ras, and akt pathways in hacat-egfrwt, upregulation of ras in hacat-hrasval12d, and upregulation of akt resulting in hacat-p65wt. we also observe unexpected weak activation of tgf-β in hacat-egfrwt and of ras and tgf-β in hacat-p65wt. these unexpected signals are likely due to pathway cross talk and the observed weak upregulation of ras and tgf-β pathways in hacat-vector control. the presence of serum also enhances this upregulation of ras and tgf-β. the final pattern is consistent across samples and reveals a global upregulation of notch and stat pathways in the hacat cell lines.

comparison of gene expression signatures inferred in cogaps and linear models
we note that the six cogaps patterns are inferred without any prior information about the experimental conditions in table  <dig>  whereas standard linear models of pathway response require information about the pertinent experimental conditions. as a result, linear models formed based upon the experimental conditions in the hacat forced expression experiments may overfit expression changes due to treatment and stimulation conditions. moreover, they would be unable to account for relative changes in the magnitude of expression across comparable samples encoded in the relative magnitude of rows of p .

for comparison, we formulate a linear model that accounts for the forced overexpression conditions and presence or absence of serum based upon the inferred cogaps patterns. in figure 4a, we observe that the expression patterns inferred for the linear model across all hacat samples , all serum treated samples in hacat, and all hacat-hrasval12d samples are most similar to the corresponding cogaps patterns. however, the patterns associated with known molecular variables in hacat cells cluster separately from the cogaps estimated patterns. these patterns also show a larger difference in their clustering than the patterns of molecular variables inferred from cogaps.

gene expression signatures from cogaps distinguish pathway-level response in isogenic cetuximab sensitive and resistant hnscc cell lines
we project the three hacat signaling patterns averaged across three cogaps simulations and associated with the hacat forced over-expression  onto the gene expression data for hnscc cell lines umscc <dig> and 1cc <dig>  as previously described, this pair of cell lines are isogenic sensitive and resistant hnscc lines, respectively  <cit> . thus, we can infer whether the signaling-related gene expression signatures elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying cetuximab resistance in this pair of cell lines to potentially model cetuximab resistance in hnscc. figure  <dig> summarizes the relative cogaps inferred signature activity in umscc <dig> with and without cetuximab treatment, and 1cc <dig> with and without cetuximab treatment. the signatures associated with modulation of egfrwt, p65wt and hrasval12d are all significantly larger in 1cc <dig> than umscc <dig> . treatment with cetuximab in the sensitive cell line umscc <dig> further reduces the activity in hacat-hrasval12d  and hacat-p65wt , but upregulated the signature associated with hacat-egfrwt . a similar trend is observed for 1cc <dig> . however, whereas treatment with cetuximab reduces the hacat-hrasval12d signature in the sensitive cell line umscc <dig>  it has no effect on treatment in the resistant cell line 1cc <dig> .

discussion
cogaps demonstrated improved ability to correctly infer patterns with even subtle transcriptional differences because this algorithm can accurately account for gene re-use  <cit> . in contrast to linear models, cogaps seeks gene expression signatures with minimal structure. as a result, the signatures inferred with cogaps are more similar than those inferred with linear models. therefore, these cogaps expression signatures reveal degrees of activation of the pathways downstream of egfr due to pathway cross-talk, unlike the standard gene set test or permutation gene set analysis for linear models. for example, only the cogaps analysis can detect the modest ras and stat signals associated with forced expression of egfr and hras in hacat cells. moreover, the sparsity in the cogaps prior ensures that gene expression amplitude is assigned only to pertinent patterns. as a result, while the linear model assigns notch activity to each of the forced expression signatures, cogaps correctly assigns this global signature to the background term.

this type of statistical modeling can delineate the key pathway activity of relevance to the development of targeted agents in genetically heterogeneous hnscc. in our previous molecular characterization of hnscc based on gene expression profiling, we have shown that there are at least four subtypes of hnscc and these subtypes have prognostic implications reflecting the biological heterogeneity  <cit> . in addition, recent completion of whole exome sequencing of hnscc has shown that tobacco-related hnscc contain average of  <dig>  mutations per tumor and many of the mutated genes are tumor suppressors that cannot be easily targeted  <cit> . furthermore, many of these mutated genes are regulated in contextual manner meaning that one mutation of a gene in a tumor may result in a different phenotype depending on the genetic context determined by other co-existing mutations or deregulations. the analyses of global gene expression signature will potentially yield the dominant pathways that result from lack of tumor suppressor or contextual regulated genes, and allow exploitation as therapeutic targets or biomarkers of clinical outcome. it is also a potentially valuable tool of determining the on- and off-target effects of targeted agents and hypothesis generating approach to unravel the mechanism of resistance by unbiased examination of global changes in the inter-connected pathways induced by inhibition of the targeted pathway. due to the small sample size, we could not infer accurate expression signatures from the pharmacological inhibition of egfr, mek or pi3k in our model system. however, additional studies to optimize the experimental design and to further validate the model for utilization in experimental therapeutics are in progress.

in this study, the inferred cogaps gene expression signatures implicate signaling processes in the hnscc system that they model. for example, the gene expression signature related to constitutive activation of the ras pathway in the hacat-hrasval12d distinguishes the transcriptional profile of umscc <dig> and 1cc <dig> and their relative transcriptional response to cetuximab treatment. this observation suggests that over-activation of the ras pathway cannot be repressed by cetuximab in resistant hnscc cell lines. while hras mutations are found in hnscc  <cit> , the umscc <dig> and 1cc <dig> cell lines are hras wild type. therefore, this aberrant activity in the ras pathway that our algorithm inferred for 1cc <dig> is consistent with activation of the wild type ras pathway in cetuximab resistance. one possible mechanism for this activation would be the compensatory pathway activity proposed in  <cit> . further studies to validate the mechanisms underlying these are currently ongoing.

CONCLUSIONS
this work demonstrates the versatility of the cogaps matrix factorization algorithm to infer biological signaling nodes and intermediaries as they relate to specific gene expression in immortalized hacat and transformed variants thereof. for example, upon stimulation/deregulation of egfr activity, the algorithm successfully identified gene expression signatures consistent with known elements of the egfr signaling network . in contrast to linear models, the cogaps algorithm performs pathway inference without a priori knowledge of the experimental conditions listed in table  <dig>  pathway inference by cogaps was predictive across a heterogeneous set of experimental pathway manipulations, i.e., transcriptional responses triggered either by overexpression of egfr, nf-kb/p <dig> or mutant hras, or those induced by addition of serum to culture media.

similarly to the umscc1/1cc <dig> model, we hypothesize that the pathway-level gene expression signatures inferred from the hacat model with cogaps will implicate relevant molecular mechanisms in gene expression data from hnscc patients in future studies. for example, the gene expression signature relating to constitutive ras activation estimated from the hacat-hrasval12d provides a potential biomarker to infer patient-specific cetuximab sensitivity and resistance prior to clinical treatment. moreover, previous studies have also linked cetuximab resistance to increased akt pathway activity in hnscc cell lines with cetuximab resistance  <cit> . we hypothesize that application of the cogaps algorithm to future samples of hacat with forced expression of raf and pi3k with activating mutations will distinguish whether the activation of the ras pathway induces akt pathway activity preferentially over mapk pathway  in cetuximab resistance. when applied to tumor data, these additional cogaps inferred gene expression signatures would also provide candidate molecular targets for patients with predicted cetuximab resistance.

