BACKGROUND
recent developments in livestock transgenesis, including somatic cell nuclear transfer   <cit> , and stem cell biology  <cit>  have energized plans to engineer the pig genome for both agricultural and emerging biomedical markets. although pronuclear injection  and scnt are proven methods for gene supplementation and gene targeting, respectively, more sophisticated methods for manipulating the pig genome have been lacking. tandem gene targeting and scnt provides a method for the precise introduction of transgenes or alternate alleles, but the inherent inefficiency of homologous recombination and donor-cell senescence limits its efficiency. transgenesis by random integration of naked dna has proven much more efficient for gene supplementation, whether using pni or scnt. however, random integration of naked dna is often accompanied by transgene instability  <cit> , transgene concatemerization  <cit> , loss of transgene expression due to methylation  <cit> , and short deletions, inversions and duplications at the site of transgene integration  <cit> . in addition, the lack of precision associated with random integration of naked dna limits transgene manipulation and control post-integration.

dna "cut and paste" transposons have been widely used for precise and efficient delivery of dna expression cassettes into invertebrate and plant genomes. over the past ten years, several dna cut and paste transposon systems have been shown to function in vertebrate cells, including sleeping beauty   <cit> , passport   <cit> , tol <dig>  <cit> , and piggybac   <cit> . in addition, transposons have been used for germline transgenesis of fish  <cit> , frogs  <cit> , and mice  <cit>  and for transgenesis of mouse somatic and embryonic stem cells  <cit> . it is noteworthy that although transposons function in a wide array of cell types, their efficiency can differ from species to species or even within various cell types of one species. the function and efficacy of vertebrate transposons in pig cells had not previously been examined. demonstration that one or more transposon systems functions efficiently in porcine cells would provide a rationale for investigating their use in pni and scnt. in addition, the precision of transpositional transgenesis  provides a segue to the development of conditional expression systems for application in pigs and porcine cells.

many genes have roles in multiple tissues and/or at multiple times during growth and development. due to a requirement for strict regulation, global ectopic transgene-expression or gene-knockout will be an implausible approach for many targets. to overcome these limitations, binary systems based on transcriptional transactivation or dna recombination have been developed and applied in model organisms for conditional gene-expression or silencing  <cit> . although the tetracycline transcriptional activator system  <cit>  has been demonstrated to function in transgenic pigs  <cit> , recombinases have not. cre and flp recombinases catalyze a conservative dna recombination event between two short recombinase recognition sites , loxp and frt, respectively  <cit> . this results in the deletion or inversion of the dna between two rrs- depending on their orientation. deletion or inversion of sequences in transgenes can be used as genetic switches to activate or silence gene expression in specific cells, at particular times, or under prescribed conditions. applications beyond conditional gene expression include the removal/recycling of selectable markers or transgenes  <cit>  or chromosome engineering  <cit> . the successful application of recombinase technologies to porcine genetics requires the demonstration of cre and/or flp activity in porcine cells and the efficient delivery of rrs sites and recombinase-based expression vectors to the porcine genome.

in order to assess the utility of dna transposons and recombinases for enzymatic engineering of the porcine genome, we tested four transposon systems and two recombinases. the sb, pp, tol <dig>  and pb transposon systems were able to function in cells derived from pig tissues and significantly improved the rate of transgenesis in vitro. cre and flp recombinases were capable of removing antibiotic selection cassettes in porcine cells and conditionally activating transgenes in porcine cells, demonstrating the potential for their applications to "leave no trace" and/or conditional porcine genetic engineering.

RESULTS
sleeping beauty activity in porcine cells
to test the ability of the sb transposon systems to mediate transposition into the porcine genome, a transposon vector  and a transposase expression vector  were constructed . the transposon vector encodes a puromycin-thymidine kinase  fusion protein  <cit>  between the inverted repeats of the sb transposon system. the ptk cassette was flanked by both frt and loxp sites so that it could be used as a substrate for testing both cre and flp recombinases . pig fetal fibroblasts  or porcine endometrial gland epithelium  cells were transfected with the ptk transposon along with the sb expression vector, a vector encoding non-functional sb , or a β-galactosidase expression vector . after the transfection period, cells with integrations were rendered resistant to puromycin selection, and formed clonal cell colonies after 9– <dig> days. clones were stained with methylene blue and quantified . the transposase catalyzed  <dig> ×  -10×  more colony formation versus transfection with a non-functional transposase  or β-galactosidase. this difference in the rate of clone formation corresponds to tnt versus the background rate of non-transpositional transgenesis.

multiple transposon systems function in porcine cells
the success of the sb transposon system prompted investigation of three additional transposon systems. in addition to retesting the sb transposon system in pege cells, we also tested pp , tol <dig> , and pb, the founding member of the piggybac transposon family  <cit> ). pege cells are one of a few immortalized pig cell lines available, transfect consistently , and form tight non-migrating clonal colonies- essential characteristics for the colony forming assays performed. the ptk expression cassette was placed between inverted repeats corresponding to each transposon; pkt2p-ptk, pptnp-ptk, pgtol2p-ptk, and ppbt-ptk, respectively . pege cells were co-transfected with each of these transposons along with their corresponding transposase expression construct; pkub-sb <dig>  pkc-pts <dig>  pcmv-tol <dig>  or pkc-pb, respectively. each transposon vector was also co-transfected with pcmv-β to determine the background rate of non-transpositional integration. transfected pege cells were placed under puromycin selection for 9– <dig> days, colonies fixed, stained, and enumerated. again, transfection of pege cells with both components of the sb system  resulted in over  <dig> colonies per  <dig>  plated cells, or about  <dig> % of transfected cells based on an average 10% transfection efficiency. this represented a  <dig> -fold increase over transfection without transposase. similar enhancements to transgenesis were seen for all the transposon systems. pp produced an average of over  <dig> colonies per  <dig>  cells; a 5-fold increase over transfection without transposase . the inclusion of tol <dig> transposase resulted in the generation of puromycin resistant colonies at a rate 21-fold over transfections without transposase , producing on average over  <dig> colonies per  <dig>  cells. the pb transposon system  yielded an average of over  <dig> colonies per  <dig>  cells , representing a 28-fold increase over transfection without transposase.

molecular characterization of transposition
integration of dna transposons produces target-site duplications upon integration into the genome. analogous to sb and other tc <dig> type transposons, the target site preference for pp is a ta dinucleotide. target-site preference for the pb transposon is a ttaa tetranucleotide  <cit> . integration of tol <dig> results in a target-site duplication of eight bases but does not rely on specific primary sequence, instead targeting a characteristic local deformation of dna  <cit> . blocked linker-mediated pcr was used to clone junction fragments after transfection of pege cells with each transposon system. characteristic integration footprints were observed for each transposon system . junction sequences were compared to sequences in genbank using blast  <cit> . despite the small amount of contemporaneous porcine genome sequence available, some flanking dnas of each transposon system were found to have high identity to the pig genome, in most cases in abundant repetitive elements. this demonstrates bona fide transposition into the porcine genome for each transposon class.

one characteristic advantage of transposase-mediated integration is the precise incorporation of one or more independently transposed gene expression cassettes, without adjacent plasmid vector. in order to observe representative integration events, dna was isolated from  <dig> or  <dig> selected clones from each transposon and analyzed by southern hybridization . non-transposase mediated integrations, often head to tail concatemer repeats, have a predictable hybridizing fragment size following restriction enzyme digestion. however, transposon mediated events have unique dna outside of the itrs and therefore have unpredictable and varying fragment lengths. the enhancement of transgenesis by transposition  was substantiated by the presence of inserts of varying size in cellular clones, in most cases without concatemers. the level of tnt can also be measured by counting the number of independent integrations per cellular clone. the more active transposons tol <dig> and pb, display multiple  independent integration events. the wild-type pp transposon system mediated a single integration event per cellular clone, reflecting its lower activity in pege cells, whereas the engineered sb system displayed an intermediate number of insertions.

cre/flp activity in porcine cells
to test the ability of cre and/or flp recombinase to function in porcine cells pt2-floxp-ptk  was transfected into pege cells along with sb. these clones were obtained from preliminary transfections that were selected under very stringent drug conditions that favored high-copy integrations, particularly non-transposition events. dna from puromycin resistant clones was isolated and analyzed by southern hybridization. isolated clones contained multiple copies of the ptk transgene due to non-transpositional integration, as indicated by concatemers and concatemer junction bands . ptk transgenic clones were subsequently transfected with ppgk-nlscre, pkt2p-nlsflp, or pkt2c-egfp. excision of the ptk cassette was detectable in transiently transfected cells by pcr, and the sequence of the excision product confirmed by sequencing . transfected cells were placed under selection with gancyclovir for 10– <dig> days and colonies counted . only cells that had excised the ptk gene could withstand gancyclovir selection. as expected for concatemers, we observed a low level of transgene instability as evidenced by the appearance of gancyclovir resistant clones upon transfection with pkt2c-egfp. a much more pronounced recombinase stimulated elimination of the ptk cassette was demonstrated by elevated resistant colony formation for  <dig> out of  <dig> of the clones transfected with either ppgk-nlscre or pkt2p-nlsflp. while cre and flp are both active in pege cells, in all cases cre mediated recombination/excision matched or exceeded that observed for flp. a single clone  never showed evidence of ptk elimination. the southern analysis , revealed a fragment of pt2-floxp-ptk likely resulting from the integration of a shortened ptk expression cassette lacking at least one flanking rrs. this clipped ptk transgene is therefore unable to be removed by recombinase-mediated excision.

cre-activated gene expression
to further demonstrate the functionality of the transposon based cre recombinase system for use in porcine genome engineering, a sb transposon containing a cre-activated gene expression cassette was constructed- ptc-loxptk-g . the ptk gene would be transcribed by the mini-cags promoter and efficiently terminated by three complete poly signals  in the intact ptc-loxptk-g  <cit> . cre recombination results in deletion of the ptk/triple-stop cassette, thereby juxtaposing the mini-cags promoter and the downstream gene expression cassette and enabling transcription of the gfp gene. conditional activation of gfp expression was assessed by microscopy and flow cytometry after transient transfection of pege cells with ptc-loxptk-g in the presence or absence of ppgk-nlscre . there was no gfp observed in cells transfected with ptc-loxptk-g alone, whereas about 10–12% of the cells were gfp+ when transfected with ppgk-nlscre. this corresponds well with the average transfection efficiency of pege cells, indicating that the cre excision reaction is very efficient in transiently transfected cells.

to further examine the efficiency of cre recombinase in transiently transfected cells, conditional removal of the ptk/triple stop expression cassette was assessed by selection in puromycin following co-transfection of pege cells with ptc-loxptk-g and either cre, β-galactosidase, sb, or cre + sb. transfected cells were plated under puromycin selection for 9– <dig> days, stained with methylene blue, and enumerated to quantify the efficiency of ptk/triple stop elimination prior to or after integration into the genome . addition of ppgk-nlscre to the transfection, alone or in combination with pkub-sb <dig> reduced puromycin-resistant colony counts to levels significantly lower than that observed for pkub-sb <dig> or pcmv-β, which alone result in tnt and non-transpositional transgenesis with an intact ptk gene expression cassette, respectively. therefore, cre recombinase excision activity in transiently transfected pege cells approaches 100%, especially with regard to plasmids available for transposition by sb transposase.

although this particular co-transfection with ptc-loxptk-g and sb suffered from a low transfection efficiency  that reduced tnt , puromycin resistant clones were expanded for characterization by southern hybridization . analysis indicated tnt with  <dig> to  <dig> transposon integrations per clone. although, clones  <dig>   <dig> and perhaps  <dig> contained hybridizing species near what would be expected for non-transpositional integration, their molar representation was equal to that of single copy inserts, not multicopy concatemers. clones  <dig> and  <dig> also harbored hybridizing species smaller than was expected for transposition. these fragments likely represent non-transposase mediated dna recombination events. the proportion of non-transpositional integrations detected by southern analysis  corresponds well with the observed unfacilitated rate of transgenesis as determined by colony count for this transfection.

ptc-loxptk-g clones were generated to analyze the efficiency of recombinase-directed selection-cassette recycling and the conditional activation of gene expression from a variety of porcine genomic loci. puromycin resistant clones were transfected with ppgk-nlscre and scored for gancylovir resistance . all gancylovir resistant clones expressed gfp, although variation in the intensity of gfp was observed  depending on the parental clone source. this expression variance is expected due to the influence of porcine sequence adjacent to the sites of transposon integration, a phenomenon commonly referred to as "position effect". a significant increase in the efficiency of selection cassette recycling was demonstrated in the presence of single copy inserts when compared to multicopy concatemers . in addition, activation of gfp expression upon recombinase-based excision from integrated transposons demonstrates the efficacy of cre-dependent conditional gene expression in transgenic porcine cells.

discussion
multiple transposons and recombinases are active in porcine cells
this work demonstrates for the first time the capability of four dna transposon systems, sb, tol <dig>  pb, and pp, to enzymatically facilitate precise and efficient transpositional transgenesis in porcine cells. we have also established for the first time that cre and flp dna recombinases are active in porcine cells. the combination of these dna directed enzyme systems provides for the delivery and removal of gene expression cassettes to the porcine genome for the purpose of cellular transgenesis, selection cassette recycling and conditional gene expression based on transposons and recombinases. in these studies, the tol <dig> and pb transposon systems were more efficient than sb, which was more efficient than pp at mediating tnt in pege cells, although these relative efficiencies should not be over-interpreted. although we used favorable conditions for each transposon system by our selection of promoters and transposase/transposon ratios, our focus here was on testing their function, not on determining their relative activities in pege cells, an immortalized cell line unsuitable for generating pigs by scnt. indeed, it is well established that the rate of tnt in any cell type is likely to depend not only on intrinsic transposase activity, but also on the presence or absence of cellular co-factors and dna repair enzymes, the method of dna introduction, and the amount of transposase produced/provided in the specific cell type. transposon activity varies not only between cells from different species, but also between different cell types from the same species  <cit> . future studies will focus on the efficiency of different transposon systems and recombinases in pig fibroblasts , pig stem cells , and porcine embryos .

in addition to potential differences in efficiency, the integration behavior of each transposon may be an important factor in determining the appropriate transposon system for a specific task. for instance, pb appears to preferentially integrate into transcription units  <cit> . consistent with this observation, in our limited examination of integration sites in the pig genome, flanking sequence from two of seven pb insertions matched porcine cdnas. in addition, pb primarily leaves no footprint when remobilized  <cit> . therefore, pb may be most suitable for functional genomics studies in pigs or pig cells, where mutations due to the interruption of genes, and the potential for precise transposition-based rescue is desirable  <cit> . sb does not integrate into transcription units at a rate much higher than what would be expected by random integration  <cit> , so it may represent a better choice for animal transgenesis, transposon-based dna vaccination, or other somatic therapies. alternatively transposon systems engineered to target specific genomic locations may be developed and could provide the safest choice for these applications  <cit> . the integration profiles of tol <dig> and pp are not well characterized in any organism or cell type, and the integration predilections of any transposon system remains to be addressed in specific swine cells being considered for engineering.

advantages of transposition for pig transgenesis and genetics
there are several advantages of transpositional versus unguided transgenesis. first, the enzymatic activity of the transposase increases the efficiency of transgene integration . secondly, transposase-mediated transgenesis precisely integrates a single copy of the transposon into one or more locations in the genome. consequently, transposition avoids the integration of g/c-rich prokaryotic elements of the vector and avoids transgene concatemerization, both of which can lead to shutdown of gene expression  <cit> . in addition, concatemerization is problematic for selection cassette recycling  and the implementation of more complex genetic rearrangements with recombinases. we propose the use of transposon systems for transgenesis of porcine cells prior to their use for the creation of pigs by scnt to enable increased efficiency, better precision, reliable expression, and selection cassette recycling. in addition, sb and pb dramatically improved the transgenesis rate in mice by pni  <cit> , providing a clear rationale for improving the efficiency of transgenic pig production via this method.

recombinases in swine genetics- selection-cassette recycling and conditional alleles
there are several immediate applications for recombinases in swine genetics. first, as shown in fig  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  recombinases can be combined with a positive/negative selectable marker like ptk for selection cassette recycling  <cit> . currently, most, if not all transgenic animals produced by scnt contain a selectable marker  in addition to an experimental transgene. this selectable marker is useful for the proper identification of nuclear donor cells, but generally is undesirable in the transgenic animal. this could be particularly important for removal of xenogenic elements after gene knockout or manipulation preceding the introgression of engineered germplasm into agricultural production herds. the flanking of selectable markers with rrs provides the opportunity to eliminate them in culture or by breeding to cre expressing pigs, leaving behind only a single 34-basepair rrs footprint.

recombinases also permit the creation of conditional alleles for activation or inhibition of gene function in response to cre or flp recombinase activity, as illustrated in figures  <dig>   <dig> <cit> . in addition, the effectiveness of homologous recombination constructs can be improved to allow selection cassette recycling, thereby avoiding 'selection cassette interference', whereby the exogenous regulatory elements in the selection cassette can interfere with the expression of genes in the vicinity of the targeted mutation  <cit> . as has been elegantly demonstrated in mice, recombinases can also be used to create conditional knock-outs in pigs when tissue specific ablation is desired, or when traditional knockout results in embryonic lethality. the availability of an assortment of transposon and recombinase systems should also permit serial cellular transgenesis and recombination to achieve complex genomic rearrangements in the pig. serial transgenesis provides a direct method for the production of pigs that express several gene products. given the dramatic long-range conservation of synteny between pig and human genomes, far more extensive than for mouse and human, engineered chromosomal rearrangements between serially provided rrs in the pig could provide superior large animal models of human congenital and cancer related chromosomal abnormalities  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
pork represents the single most economically important meat product in the world and pigs are playing an increasingly critical role in biomedicine. an armamentarium of effective genetic tools will be required to capture the value and potential of this species for human nutrition and health. here we have tested four transposon and two recombinase systems for activity in pig cells. sb, pp, tol <dig>  and pb and transposons are capable of precise transpositional transgenesis of porcine cells, increasing efficiency by 4– <dig> fold. we have also demonstrated that cre and flp recombinases function efficiently in the nucleus of pig cells for selection-cassette recycling and conditional regulation of transgene expression. the combination of these tools will significantly improve the efficiency and sophistication of porcine genetic manipulation for enhancing pig production and human nutrition, as well as modeling and treating human disease.

