BACKGROUND
the dystroglycan-dystrophin  complex has been shown to provide cells with structural integrity by forming a conduit between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeletal network and there are lines of evidence that implicate an additional signaling role for the complex  <cit>  dystroglycan binds to extracellular matrix components, including laminin at its n-terminus and the actin cytoskeleton via dystrophin at its c-terminus  <cit>  defects in these interactions can result in muscular dystrophies  and various epithelial cancers  <cit> 

the characterization of the dystrophin glycoprotein complex  in drosophila has revealed that it possesses similar roles in muscle integrity and neuronal migration in flies as it does in humans  <cit>  these abnormalities include age dependent muscle degeneration, reduced mobility, defects in eye development as manifested by altered photoreceptor axon path finding and photoreceptor morphology. additionally, mutations in dys and dg affect cell polarity in drosophila  <cit>  interestingly, some of these phenotypes are affected by the nutrition or energy metabolism in the animals  <cit>  recently, a reduced lifespan, as well as heart and muscle abnormalities, have been reported in drosophila mutants of another component of the dgc, δ-sarcoglycan  <cit>  and heart and further eye phenotypes have been observed in drosophila dys and dg mutants  <cit> 

analogous defects observed when the dg-dys complex is disturbed in both flies and humans make drosophila an attractive model for further studies on clarifying the cellular function of the dgc. recent biochemical and in vivo structure-function analyses have revealed that a specific set of c-terminal domains are critical for the function of dystroglycan. we have found that a putative sh <dig> domain binding motif but, surprisingly, not the most c-terminal dystrophin ww domain binding motif is required for dg function in cellular polarity in drosophila  <cit> . however, since two potential ww binding sites exist near the dg c-terminus it is possible that the second ww binding site can also bind dystrophin in vivo, as has been shown in vitro  <cit> . in this study we dissect the roles of the two ww binding sites in the drosophila dystroglycan c-terminus in vivo and, interestingly, find that the sites are essential and their functions are partially overlapping.

RESULTS
in order to understand the regulation of dg and its role in signaling, we have analyzed the binding motifs that are required for the function of the dg-dys complex in cellular polarity in drosophila. the proline-rich c-terminus of dg has several potential protein binding motifs, which suggests that it may be involved in regulating the complex and potentially may have signaling role. proline-rich sequences have been shown to be the targets of several protein interaction domains involved in signal transduction. the most c-terminal ppxy motif has been established as a binding site for the ww domain of dystrophin in humans  <cit>  and in drosophila by in vitro binding studies  <cit> . however, this ww domain binding site at the very c-terminus of dystroglycan, is not essential for the function of the dg-dys complex in cellular polarity in drosophila. an internal region of the dystroglycan c-terminus containing a second ww domain binding site and a putative sh <dig> domain binding site appear to be sufficient for function in this context. we have also shown that dystrophin can bind both the c-terminal and the internal ww domain binding sites in vitro  <cit> . we now test whether the internal ww domain binding site is essential, whether the two ww domain binding sites are redundant or whether neither is required for dg function in drosophila. to distinguish between these possibilities we used both overexpression and loss-of-function rescue analyses.

generation of transgenic lines expressing biochemically verified wwbs mutations
previous results show that two mutations designed from computer predictions resulted in dramatic alterations in the affinity between dg and dys in vitro  <cit>  these two mutations, predicted to abolish the ww but not the sh <dig> binding domain, resulted in very low binding affinities between the dystroglycan c-terminal peptide and the dystrophin ww domain with ef-hand region , as compared to wild type peptides . these values are comparable to the dissociation constant observed with a negative control for the assay , suggesting that specific binding is abolished. we therefore generated transgenic lines expressing the following representative mutations: ppsg, which has a mismatch in wwbsii  and 2ww, which has mutations in both ww binding sites  . at least two independent transgenic drosophila lines for each construct were obtained and analyzed. similar results with two independent transgenic lines confirmed that the phenotype was due to the dg mutation and not due to positional effects of the transgene inserts.

we first tested the ability of the transgenic constructs to produce functional forms of the dg protein using the gal4/uas system. in order to overexpress the transgenic constructs in follicle cells we used the hsflp; actinfrt<cd2>frtgal4/uas system in which clonal cells that overexpress the gene of interest were marked with gfp. dg, in the wild type follicular epithelium, is located at the basal membrane . overexpression of the transgenes resulted in dg localizing to both the apical and basal sides of the follicle cells . we also tested the expression of the constructs in germline cells using the mattubgal <dig> and nanosgal <dig> drivers. during oogenesis, dg is expressed at low levels in the germline . at stage 2– <dig> of oogenesis overexpression with mattubgal <dig> shows dg levels are substantially increased in germline cells . increased protein levels were also observed using the nanosgal <dig> driver which showed a distinct pattern starting with high levels in the germarium, lower levels during stages 3– <dig> and with higher levels during later stages . similar patterns and levels of the dg constructs were observed with all the transgenic lines analyzed in these experiments .

ww binding site function as assayed by oocyte polarity
to analyze whether the dg mutant forms are functional in oocyte polarity, we expressed mutant and wild type dg constructs in germline cells using a germline specific driver , and examined oocyte polarity using orb protein as a marker. orb is a member of the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element binding  family of rna-binding proteins that are implicated in local protein synthesis  <cit> . in drosophila oogenesis orb co-localizes with the microtubule organizing center , which is localized to the anterior of the oocyte during stage  <dig>  and then moves to the posterior by stage  <dig>  between stages  <dig> and  <dig>  orb is clearly localized to the posterior of the oocyte, making it an excellent marker to analyze the polarity of the oocyte . absent or mislocalized orb during these stages indicates a failure to establish early oocyte polarity.

we have previously shown that overexpression of the wild type form of drosophila dystroglycan  is sufficient to generate oocyte polarity defects  <cit>  . when fl is overexpressed in the germline, orb becomes mislocalized, surrounds the entire oocyte nucleus, or accumulates in a clump to one side of the oocyte instead of localizing to the posterior. therefore, dystroglycan, when expressed at elevated levels in germline cells, is sufficient to disrupt oocyte polarity. overexpression of the full length form of dg with the tubgal <dig> driver causes semi-lethality . similarly, in vertebrates overexpression of dg has been shown to cause defects in neuromuscular junctions  <cit> . we used the overexpression oocyte polarity assays to test whether either of the ww domain binding sites is essential for dystroglycan function.

to test the function of wwbsi in vivo we overexpressed the ppsg mutant protein in germline cells using the mattubgal <dig> driver and determined the localization of the early oocyte polarity marker orb. as discussed, in wild type cells orb marks the localization of the microtubule organizing center and is localized to the posterior side of the oocyte during stages 3– <dig> . overproduction of the ppsg protein results in the mislocalization of the usually posterior orb marker. in mutants orb surrounds the oocyte nucleus or localizes to the sides of the oocyte nucleus in  <dig> ± 2% of 3– <dig> stage oocytes . the level of this defect is similar to the one observed with the fl construct  <cit> , which contains both ww binding sites . these data suggest that disturbing the second ww binding site at the dg c-terminus does not dramatically affect the functionality of the protein; similar to fl construct, when overexpressed it still is sufficient to disturb the oocyte polarity.

in contrast to the fl and ppsg constructs, overexpression of a 2ww mutant construct did not result in a high percentage of orb mislocalization . with 2ww overexpression, orb, in most cases, was localized to the posterior of the oocyte . the frequency of mislocalization with the 2ww construct, in which both ww binding sites were mutated was similar to that of the c <dig> construct which lacked all the c-terminal binding sites .

these data, in combination with our previous data  <cit>  show that a single mutation in wwbsii or the lack of wwbsi does not result in dramatic defects in dg activity in this sufficiency assay measuring the oocyte polarity. however, simultaneous mutations in both ww binding sites dramatically reduce the function of dystroglycan in this assay.

one ww binding site is required for dystroglycan function
we also tested the function of the ww binding site mutants in rescue experiments by expressing the transgenes in a dg loss-of-function background. dg <dig> germline mutant clones are arrested prior to stage 3– <dig> and have mislocalized or missing orb protein . we have previously shown that these defects are partially rescued by wild type  dg expression  <cit>  . full rescue is not expected since the dg <dig> deletion also affects a newly described neighboring gene mrpl <dig>  and recent data implies that the level of nutrients and energy metabolism in the animal may affect cellular polarity  <cit> . to test if our mutant constructs were capable of rescuing the developmental arrest and the defects in oocyte polarity on the same level as the dg full-length construct, we expressed them using the germline driver nanosgal <dig> and calculated the percentage of loss-of-function clones with rescued growth and polarity. using this assay we tested whether the dg wwbs mutations were capable of a similar level of rescue as full-length dg. if the dg mutant with both ww binding sites mutated  could rescue the dg <dig> phenotype in oocyte polarity at the same level as wild type dg, we conclude that neither of the ww binding sites in drosophila is required for dg activity. on the other hand, if dg with two wwbs mutations cannot rescue, we conclude that both or just the internal ww binding site is essential for dg activity . as discussed above, to distinguish between these possibilities, we have generated a single mutation in wwbsii  and will test whether this mutant still has the full length dg activity in the loss-of-function rescue assays.

similar to the full length dg , the ppsg mutant constructs were capable of partially rescuing the dg mutant phenotype . loss-of-function clones with expression of fl  and ppsg  had similar levels of posterior localization of the polarity marker, orb . these mutants were also capable of restoring the developmental arrest phenotype by showing a higher percentage of loss-of-function clones that were older than stage 4– <dig> . in contrast, 2ww was unable to rescue . dg loss-of-function clones with expression of 2ww and c <dig> showed lower percentages of normal polarity  and growth rescue  than fl or ppsg constructs . this result indicates that at least one ww binding site is required for normal function of dg but a mutation in only one of the sites does not alter the functionality of dg protein dramatically.

since a single wwbsii mutation or a wwbsi deletion does not cause a severe loss of dg activity but the double mutant does, we conclude that the two binding sites act, at least partially in a redundant manner in oocyte polarity and growth assays.

ww binding sites are highly conserved
since both ww binding sites proved to be important in our in vivo experiments we wanted to know if the importance of these sites has been preserved among the interspecies population. to analyze the conservation of ww binding sites, we tested for variability in the sequence of those sites among all drosophila species. for this purpose, using the clustalw program, we aligned the dystroglycan sequences of the  <dig> species of drosophila obtained from the gbrowse database. the alignment analysis indicates that the two ww binding sites are fully conserved among all  <dig> drosophila species . some variation in the nucleotide sequences of the ww binding sites were observed between the species, however these changes did not lead to amino acid sequence changes . furthermore, both dg ww binding sites were also conserved between drosophila and humans .

in order to better understand patterns of polymorphisms in human dystroglycan , and, in particular, the ww domains, we sequenced a  <dig> bp fragment spanning the region of interest in  <dig> samples from six geographically diverse human populations. in total, only one segregating site was identified among the  <dig> chromosomes sequenced  and none were identified in either of the ww domains. the estimated nucleotide diversity  in the combined sample is  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  in contrast, the average nucleotide diversity of  <dig> genetic regions that were sequenced in a panel of  <dig> european-americans and  <dig> african-americans is  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  suggesting that the sequenced region of dag is under significant functional constraint. these data suggest that during evolution both ww binding sites have been important and therefore are preserved among species.

a number of chromosomes

b number of segregating sites

c watterston's theta per bp

d nucleotide diversity per bp

discussion
the functional redundancy of the ww binding sites poses interesting questions: have both binding sites survived through evolution to protect organisms from the mutations in an essential complex or does each binding site have a specific function in different tissues and/or developmental stages. mutations in the dgc cause muscular dystrophies; however only mutations in dystrophin, but not dystroglycan per se, are associated with known types of muscular dystrophies in vertebrates. in mice, mutations in dystroglycan are embryonic lethal, which suggests that dg is an essential gene and, perhaps the redundant dystrophin binding sites in dystroglycan provide an additional means for dgc regulation.

the comparative sequence analysis of drosophila and human ww binding motifs revealed very high conservation. however, each wwbs resides in a specific protein micro-environment, which may suggest that each site has specific binding partners. the previously performed genetic screens for modifiers  <cit>  of dg and dys showed that the dg-dys complex interacts with components of different signaling pathways and components involved in cell/neuronal migration, cytoskeletal rearrangement and muscle development. this suggests that the dg-dys complex might be a major hub that regulates transfer of extracellular information to the cytoskeleton. therefore it will be important in the future to test if ww binding sites have specific and independent biological functions in different tissues. this kind of analysis is likely to provide insights into the specific functions of the dg-dys complex and serve as a basis for the development of novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of muscular dystrophy.

CONCLUSIONS
we have investigated the role of the ww binding sites at the c-terminus of dystroglycan protein and found that both sites may bind to the ww+ef hand domain of dystrophin. our previous studies  <cit> , indicate that wwbsi and wwbsii both can bind dystrophin protein in vitro. to test whether both ww binding sites can function and are required in vivo we generated two transgenic mutants: 2ww, which has mutations in both ww binding sites , and ppsg, which has a mismatch in wwbsii . we used the establishment of early oocyte polarity as an assay to verify the functionality of wwbsi and wwbsii. importantly, the data show that while each ww binding site mutation yields to close to normal dg function, the double wwbs mutation has lost dg c-terminal activity. these data suggest that at least one wwbs is required for full dg function in vivo and that the two sites may be partially redundant.

