BACKGROUND
gram-negative bacteria utilize a variety of secretion systems to colonize and invade eukaryotic hosts. the most ubiquitous of these is the recently described type vi secretion system , which appears to exist as a cluster of 15- <dig> genes that are present in more than 25% of all bacterial genomes  <cit> . the t6ss is a sophisticated protein export machine of gram-negative bacteria capable of targeting effector proteins into host cells in a cell to cell contact-dependent manner, but also with the unique propensity to confer lytic effects on other bacteria  <cit> . some of the t6ss components are evolutionarily related to components of bacteriophage tails and it was recently demonstrated that active protein secretion by vibrio cholerae requires the action of dynamic intracellular tubular structures that structurally and functionally resemble contractile phage tail sheaths  <cit> . it was concluded that such structures form the secretion machinery and, in addition, that contraction of the t6ss sheath provides the energy needed to translocate proteins  <cit> .

based on the conserved proteins of t6ss, such as the secreted vgrg and hcp proteins, homologues of the t <dig> phage needle complex and a phage tail tube protein respectively, and vipa and vipb, which form tubuli with resemblance to the t <dig> contracted tail sheath, the secretion system can be divided into four or five major phylogenetic groups  <cit> . a lone member of one of these groups, and a phylogenetic outlier, is the t6ss of f. tularensis, a highly virulent gram-negative intracellular pathogen, which causes the zoonotic disease tularemia in humans and many mammals  <cit> . the t6ss is encoded by a 33-kb gene cluster, the francisella pathogenicity island , which comprises 17- <dig> genes that form a secretion system that secretes up to  <dig> fpi-encoded substrates during intramacrophage infection  <cit> . studies on fpi mutants have revealed that bacteria replicate only after phagosomal escape and, thus, mutants that are incapable of escape show a null phenotype with lack of intracellular growth, no cytopathogenic effects, and avirulence in experimental models  <cit> . in addition, uptake of f. tularensis bacteria leads to rapid induction of a proinflammatory response, which is repressed upon bacterial internalization via modulation of host cell signaling and, again, execution of these mechanisms appears to require a cytosolic localization of bacteria  <cit> . a majority of fpi mutants have shown dichotomous phenotypes also in this respect and the mutants that are unable to escape from the phagosome do not repress of host cell signaling, whereas other mutants show the same phenotypes as the parental strains  <cit> . two notable exceptions are the Δigli and Δiglg mutants of lvs, since these are avirulent but show intact growth in certain monocytic cells, although with only marginal cytopathogenic effects  <cit> .

an fpi protein of special interest is pdpc, since a truncated form of the protein has been identified in fsc <dig>  an attenuated, spontaneous mutant of the prototypic f. tularensis subspecies tularensis strain schu s <dig>  <cit> . we have previously characterized the fsc <dig> strain and observed that it displays impaired replication in murine monocytic cells  <cit> . therefore, we hypothesized that the spontaneous mutation could be related to the impaired intracellular replication of the mutant. in the present study, we generated and characterized a Δpdpc mutant of f. tularensis lvs. we observed a phenotype that was distinct from all previously described fpi mutants, since it showed very impaired phagosomal escape and lack of intramacrophage replication, but still pronounced cytopathogenic effects, although distinct from those of the parental strain.

RESULTS
in silico analyses and localization of pdpc
to characterize pdpc, in silico analyses together with cell fractionation were carried out. pdpc was predicted to be a cytoplasmic 156-kda protein with putative transmembrane regions. standard algorithms did not identify any conserved domain, signal peptide, lipoprotein signal, or secretion signal, and no homologies to non-francisella proteins were found. homologues exist in all species and subspecies of francisella, however, they are not identical to pdpc of lvs. for example, pdpc in both lvs and schu s <dig> contains  <dig>  amino acids, whereas the f. novicida u <dig> homologue contains  <dig>  amino acids. the former two show only  <dig> amino acid differences, whereas  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids , respectively, are distinct compared to the f. novicida variant. figure  <dig> shows a representation of the different genes found in the fpi, and the localization of pdpc at the end of one of the two putative operons.

to investigate the subcellular localization of pdpc, lvs bacteria were separated into soluble, inner membrane, and outer membrane fractions and the amounts of the protein in each fraction determined by immunoblot analysis. pdpc was found to be predominantly an inner membrane protein, but a small portion was also found in the soluble fraction . it is likely that the transmembrane regions identified in the in silico analysis may contribute to its membrane location.

construction and phenotypic characterization of a Δpdpc null mutant
to determine the role of pdpc in f. tularensis lvs, an in-frame deletion mutant was constructed by deletion of both copies of the gene. to verify the absence of pdpc in the mutant, immunoblot analysis with an anti-pdpc antibody was performed on bacterial pellets and real-time pcr was used to quantify the transcription levels of pdpc. no immunoreactive protein or gene transcript was detected in the mutant, whereas expression of the downstream pdpe gene was not affected , indicating that the deletion conferred no polar effect. for complementation in cis, the pdpc gene was introduced in the original site of one of the pathogenicity islands of the mutant.

a the results show the average fold change in gene expression from  <dig> experiments. the results for the other fpi genes indicated no significant changes in the mrna expression between Δpdpc and lvs.

a student’s t-test was used to determine if the difference in fold change was significant between lvs and the Δpdpc mutant.

since pdpc was found to localize to the bacterial inner membrane, it would be possible that its absence affected the integrity of the bacterial membrane and, therefore, we investigated whether Δpdpc may be defective for membrane integrity and/or sensitive to stress stimuli. we found this particularly pertinent in view of the recent finding that so called hypercytotoxic f. tularensis mutants, often deficient for membrane-associated proteins or lps, are prone to intracellular lysis, which leads to increased levels of pyroptosis  <cit> . the lps profile of Δpdpc, as judged by use of an lps antibody, was indistinguishable from that of lvs  and, moreover, it did not show increased susceptibility to a detergent, sds, a cell-permeable dye, etbr, or an antibiotic that penetrates deficient gram-negative membrane, vancomycin, nor to stress-related stimuli such as low ph, temperature, or h2o <dig> . additionally, since it was shown that growth of hypercytotoxic mutants was delayed in chamberlain’s medium, but not in tsb  <cit> , in vitro growth of the Δpdpc mutant was investigated. however, the mutant grew as well as lvs in both chamberlain’s medium and tsb as well as on solid media. therefore, we conclude that the Δpdpc mutant showed intact membrane integrity and thereby none of the features typical of hypercytotoxic mutants.

by performing pcr using primers specific for pdpc and other fpi genes, we found that pdpc was part of a large transcript including the  <dig> fpi genes from pdpa to pdpe . to investigate the possibility of polar effects in the mutant, we measured the expression of fpi genes using rt-qpcr. the transcription of genes directly upstream of pdpc was not affected, nor was there any effect on the pdpe gene immediately downstream, indicating a lack of polar effects of the gene deletion, while, surprisingly, the genes in the iglad operon were downregulated, although only two of them to a significant extent . the downregulation also included the corresponding proteins, igla, b, c, and d, but also the levels of vgrg and iglh were lower in the mutant . thus, there appear to be both transcriptional and translational effects resulting from the absence of pdpc. the absence of pdpc did not affect expression of any of mgla, sspa, pmra genes , all of which encode proteins that positively regulate fpi expression  <cit> . we also used a bacterial two-hybrid  assay to determine the possibility that pdpc may form a regulatory complex together with the fpi regulatory proteins sspa, mgla, fevr, and pmra  <cit> , but none of these were found to interact with pdpc, although a novel pmra-pmra interaction was determined, nor did pdpc interact with any of the other members of the fpi . thus, pdpc does not appear to be part of a positive transcriptional regulatory complex, but affects iglabcd expression by an unknown mechanism.

the Δpdpc mutant shows a distinct form of phagosomal escape
previous studies have demonstrated that many of the fpi genes are directly or indirectly necessary for the phagosomal escape . often the subcellular localization is determined by antibodies against lamp- <dig>  a marker of late endosomes or lysosomes acquired within 30 min after uptake of f. tularensis . therefore, confocal microscopy was used to determine the percentage of lamp- <dig> that colocalized with green fluorescent protein -expressing Δpdpc in j <dig> macrophages up to 6 h. at this time point, we have previously observed that essentially all lvs bacteria had escaped from the phagosome  <cit>  and this was confirmed in the present study since only  <dig>  ±  <dig> % colocalized with lamp- <dig>  while the corresponding numbers for Δigla, the negative control, were  <dig>  ±  <dig> %  . for the Δpdpc mutant, the numbers were  <dig>  ±  <dig> % , suggesting that the mutant, similar to Δigla, does not escape from the phagosome . even at  <dig> and 24 h, the percentages of lamp-1-colocalized bacteria were around 70% for Δpdpc . to further investigate the intracellular localization of the mutant, transmission electron microscopy  was performed. j <dig> cells were infected with lvs, Δpdpc or Δiglc, and the percentage of cytosolically located bacteria determined. at 6 h, as many as  <dig> % of the lvs bacteria were found free in the cytoplasm while a small population,  <dig> %, was surrounded by highly damaged  vacuolar membranes . at the same time point, 50% of the Δiglc mutant bacteria were surrounded by intact vacuolar membranes, 42% by slightly damaged vacuolar membranes , whereas only ~ 15% of the vacuolar membranes were intact around the Δpdpc bacteria and ~40% of membranes were slightly damaged and 40% highly damaged . this suggests that Δpdpc, in contrast to the Δiglc mutant, clearly affected the preservation of the phagosomal membranes. at 18 h the majority, 96%, of the lvs bacteria were found free in the cytoplasm, whereas a majority of the Δpdpc bacteria still co-localized to highly damaged, 45%, or slightly damaged vacuolar membranes, 28%. around 25% of the Δpdpc bacteria were surrounded by membranes that were less than 10% intact, however, even these bacteria were distinct from the lvs bacteria, since they were not completely free in the cytosol.

these findings appeared to be contradictory, since the lamp- <dig> colocalization data suggested that the degree of phagosomal escape of Δpdpc was similar to the Δigla and Δiglc mutants, prototypes for the phagosomally located mutants, whereas the tem data indicated distinct differences between the Δiglc and Δpdpc mutants. we believe that the findings can be reconciled, however, since the tem data indicated that essentially no Δpdpc bacteria were free in the cytoplasm, whereas ~ 80% were surrounded by slightly or highly damaged membranes. this unusual phenotype demonstrated that a majority of the Δpdpc bacteria was closely adjacent to membrane parts, in agreement with the confocal microscopy data indicating that 60-75% of the bacteria colocalized with lamp- <dig>  therefore, the mutant will show a high percentage of colocalization although not being confined to an intact phagosome. thus, we conclude that pdpc directly or indirectly plays a very important role for the normal phagosomal escape.

the Δpdpc mutant shows defective intracellular replication
to determine whether the partial degradation of phagosomal membranes observed for Δpdpc was sufficient to allow intracellular growth, murine macrophage-like j <dig> cells were infected with lvs, the Δpdpc mutant, or the complemented strain. the number of bacteria at time  <dig> was identical for the lvs strain and the Δpdpc derivatives in all experiments performed, so the distinct phenotypes of the mutant could not be explained by differences in its uptake by phagocytes. while lvs and the complemented strain replicated approximately three log <dig> cfu within the first 24 h, the Δpdpc mutant showed no growth . in additional experiments, there were no significant increases in bacterial numbers during the first 6 h, or at  <dig> or 72 h . the results unambiguously demonstrated that the Δpdpc mutant had a markedly impaired ability to replicate intracellularly. replication was also assessed in bmdm and pec and the results were similar to those obtained with j <dig> cells; the mutant showed no replication whereas the complemented strain replicated as well as lvs . to further verify the inability of the mutant to grow intracellularly, bacterial rna was isolated from infected cells and the expression of the f. tularensis 16s rrna gene was measured. we observed a  <dig>  log <dig> decrease of 16s rrna in Δpdpc-infected cells during the first 24 h, while lvs infected cells showed an increase of  <dig>  log <dig>  the data demonstrate that, regardless of method and macrophage type utilized, the Δpdpc mutant showed no significant intracellular replication and the deficient phenotype could be restored by complementation of the mutation in cis.

the Δpdpc mutant shows attenuation in vivo
the lack of intracellular replication observed for the Δpdpc mutant suggested that it is likely attenuated in vivo. to test this, mice were infected by the intradermal route with lvs, the Δpdpc mutant, or the complemented mutant. the model has been widely used  <cit>  and identifies even marginal levels of attenuation since the ld <dig> for lvs is estimated to be approximately 2 × 107 cfu  <cit> . with an infection dose of 4 × 107 cfu, lvs caused 80% mortality  and all mice infected with the complemented strain died within 4 days . in contrast, only two mice died after infection with a 20-fold higher dose, 8 × 108 cfu, of Δpdpc . in a second experiment, all mice died within 4 days when infected with a dose of 5 × 107 cfu with lvs or the complemented strain, whereas no mice died after infection with a dose of 1 × 109 cfu of the Δpdpc mutant . thus, pdpc directly or indirectly plays a very critical role for the virulence of f. tularensis. to determine the bacterial burden in organs, spleens were isolated 5 days after infection with a dose of 3 × 102 cfu of lvs or the Δpdpc mutant and 16 days after infection with 1 × 107 cfu of either strain. in the latter experiment, three out of five lvs infected mice died. no bacteria were found in any of the spleens on day  <dig>  whereas both lvs and Δpdpc bacteria were isolated on day  <dig>  the former were 70-fold more numerous,  <dig>  log <dig> vs.  <dig>  log <dig>  thus, although much attenuated, the Δpdpc mutant was capable of limited systemic spread.

Δpdpc induces an moi-dependent cytopathogenic response
previous studies on fpi mutants have revealed a strong correlation between phagosomal escape and cytosolic replication on one hand and cytopathogenicity on the other . the cytopathogenic response resulting from an f. tularensis infection is characterized by morphological changes such as membrane blebbing, cell detachment, ldh release, and dna fragmentation  <cit> . to determine whether Δpdpc induced cytopathogenicity, j <dig> cells were infected and the release of ldh into the cell culture supernatants measured and morphological effects on the cells were investigated using phase contrast microscopy. in view of the previously published findings that the cytopathogenic effects in most cases correlated to the intracellular replication of the fpi mutants, we reasoned that the moi could affect the cytopathogenic effect resulting from the Δpdpc infection, although the mutant did not replicate intracellularly. indeed, with an moi of  <dig>  the lvs infection resulted in significant release of ldh, but the Δpdpc infection only in low release, at levels comparable to that of Δiglc-infected cells . at an moi of  <dig> or  <dig> , the ldh levels from lvs- or the complemented Δpdpc mutant-infected cell cultures were similar and much higher than Δiglc-infected cultures , whereas the Δpdpc mutant showed an intermediate value at an moi of  <dig>  and as high as lvs at the highest moi . regardless of the moi, there was no intracellular growth of Δpdpc recorded . thus, infection with the Δpdpc mutant leads to significant and moi-dependent cytopathogenic effects despite its lack of intracellular replication. this phenotype is distinct from that of lvs, but also from bacteria located inside intact phagosomes, such as Δiglc.

modulation of macrophage inflammatory responses by the Δpdpc mutant
previous studies have identified an active suppression by f. tularensis on the ability of host cells to secrete tnf-α in response to e. coli lps, an inflammasome-independent process  <cit> . mutants confined to the phagosome lack this suppressive property  <cit> . to characterize the effects of the Δpdpc mutant, j <dig> cells were infected and cell culture supernatants were analyzed for the presence of tnf-α after 120 min of lps-stimulation. efficient and comparable inhibition of tnf-α release was observed after infection with lvs and Δpdpc, but not after infection with the control strain Δigla . thus, the phenotype of the Δpdpc mutant is clearly distinct from that of bacteria enclosed in intact phagosomes.

af. tularensis-infected, or uninfected , j <dig> cells were incubated for 2 h with lps. the average tnf-α secretion in pg/ml with standard errors of triplicate samples is shown, results are from one representative experiment out of three. a student’s t-test revealed that there was no significant difference in tnf-α secretion between lvs and Δpdpc mutant infected cells, but that cells infected with either strain had a significantly lower tnf-α secretion than uninfected cells .

the rapid phagosomal escape of f. tularensis into the macrophage cytosol is critical for the efficient inflammasome-dependent induction of il-1β secretion  <cit> . as a result, mutants with no or delayed phagosomal escape, e.g., Δigla, Δiglc, Δiglg, Δigli, Δdotu, or Δvgrg, exhibit no or very diminished il-1β release  <cit> . the cytokine was measured in supernatants of bmdm infected with lvs, Δpdpc, the complemented Δpdpc mutant, or the control strain Δiglc at  <dig> or 24 h. in supernatants from lvs-, complemented Δpdpc-, and Δpdpc-infected cell cultures, levels were low or below the detection level of the assay at 5 h, but much higher at 24 h, especially for the lvs- and the complemented Δpdpc-infected cultures, whereas levels were below the detection level of the assay for Δiglc-infected cultures or uninfected cells regardless of time point . thus, Δpdpc demonstrated an intermediate phenotype with regard to the il-1β release, consistent with the incomplete cytosolic escape of Δpdpc, whereas the complemented mutant showed a phenotype indistinguishable from lvs. these data support the notion that inflammasome activation does not occur when the bacteria are confined to intact phagosomes, whereas even the partial disruption of the phagosomal membranes, as executed by Δpdpc, leads to highly significant, but intermediate levels inflammasome-activating cytosolic signaling. this is a slightly modified hypothesis compared to the previously proposed, suggesting that there was a direct correlation between cytosolic location and inflammasome activation  <cit> .

af. tularensis-infected, or uninfected  bmdm cells were incubated for  <dig> or 24 h. the average il-1β secretion in pg/ml with standard errors of triplicate biological samples from one representative experiment, out of three, is shown. a student’s t-test was used to determine if the il-1β secretion was significantly different between lvs infected and mutant infected cells . bdl means that the concentration was below the detection limit of the assay .

b only one of the triplicates was above bdl.

discussion
f. tularensis is capable of rapid escape from the phagosome, which is followed by efficient growth within the cytosol of monocytic cells. the molecular mechanisms behind the intracellular life style of the bacterium are not well understood, but have been shown to be dependent on many fpi-encoded genes, of which the most well-studied are the members of the iglabcd operon  <cit> . evidence indicates that many of the fpi proteins collectively constitute a t6ss, however, while such systems have been identified in nearly  <dig> different bacterial species to date, their homologies to the fpi system are weak, indicating that the latter constitutes an evolutionarily distinct group  <cit> . while the fpi proteins igla, iglb, pdpb, vgrg, and dotu show modest similarities to common components of t6sss, the remaining fpi proteins appear to be unique and this makes it laborious and tedious to understand their roles and functions. the accumulating evidence indicates that many of them are essential core components and as such critically required and, thereby, their absence leads to a null mutant phenotype characterized by lack of phagosomal escape, no intracellular replication, and avirulence  <cit> . a majority of the investigated fpi mutants appears to belong to this group but, in contrast, the Δpdpe mutant exhibits full virulence  <cit> . not all of the investigated mutants so far fit into this polarized pattern, however, since the Δigli and Δiglg mutants of lvs show delayed cytopathogenicity and a lack of virulence, although intact intracellular replication in some macrophage types  <cit> .

in a recent study, we characterized the markedly attenuated fsc <dig> strain, a spontaneous mutant of the highly virulent strain schu s <dig>  belonging to subspecies tularensis. whole-genome sequencing revealed that only one deletion event and three point mutations discriminated the strains, two of which were identical single nucleotide deletions in each of the two copies of pdpc <cit> . although one of the other mutated genes was fupa, which confers the most important contribution to the attenuation of lvs, we observed other features of the fsc <dig> strain that were distinct from those observed for a Δfupa mutant and this led to our interest in understanding the role of pdpc  <cit> . the present investigation reveals that the Δpdpc mutant of lvs is another example of an fpi mutant with a very distinct and paradoxical phenotype, since it in some aspects mimics that of the lvs strain, whereas it in other aspects is very different since it does not fully escape into the cytosol, lacks intramacrophage replication, and is highly attenuated in the mouse model.

f. novicida strain u <dig> has been widely used to study the functions of the fpi, presumably since it harbors only one copy of the fpi and, thus, is more amenable to genetic manipulation and, moreover, does not require bsl <dig> containment. however, the results are not always in agreement when fpi mutants of f. tularensis and f. novicida are studied, as exemplified by our recent finding that igli mutants of f. novicida and lvs show distinct phenotypes  <cit> . moreover, a recent study of f. novicida fpi mutants revealed that a Δpdpc mutant showed normal intracellular replication in murine cells and also in insect cells and drosophila melanogaster <cit> . our only explanation for the disparate results on the Δpdpc mutants is that the functions of pdpc are distinct between the u <dig> strain of f. novicida and the lvs strain. in support of this hypothesis, there are  <dig> amino acids that discriminate the two proteins.

in view of the paradoxical phenotypes of Δpdpc; lack of intracellular replication, but much more distinct cytopathogenic effects than the Δiglc mutant, to some extent resembling those of the so called hypercytotoxic mutants that were recently identified by peng et al.  <cit> , we found an in-depth analysis of the physical properties of the mutant warranted. an additional rationale was that our bacterial fractionation assay revealed that pdpc predominantly is an inner membrane protein and the hypercytotoxic phenotype has been suggested to be caused by physical instability of mutants that, not surprisingly, are defective for important membrane proteins, or components of the lps or o-antigens  <cit> . this instability leads to bacterial lysis in the cytosol, which normally does not occur for the lvs or u <dig> strains. however, regardless of methodology used, we did not observe any similarity between the Δpdpc mutant and the hypercytotoxic mutants and we therefore believe that the phenotype of the former depends directly or indirectly on the functions of pdpc and not on any physical instability of the mutant. the distinct expression of fpi proteins in the mutant was of interest in this regard, since the igla, iglb, iglc, igld, iglh, and vgrg proteins showed markedly lower expression and this was also reflected in lower transcription of the iglabcd operon. as most of these proteins play key roles for the virulence of the bacterium, their reduced expression may be important for the distinct phenotype of the mutant and, thereby, the contribution of pdpc to this phenotype may be indirect. one possible mechanism whereby such effects on protein levels could be mediated is via direct protein-protein interactions, however, our two-hybrid analysis revealed no such interaction for pdpc to any other fpi protein nor to any of the fpi regulatory proteins mgla, sspa, fevr, and pmra. this indicates that one of the roles of pdpc is likely regulatory, but distinct from the mgla/sspa/fevr regulatory complex since this complex affects expression of all fpi proteins.

the findings on the Δpdpc mutant illustrate certain caveats concerning methods to discern the intracellular localization of bacteria. a very widely used assay is based on the late endosomal and phagosomal marker lamp- <dig>  however, in the case of the Δpdpc mutant, we conclude that the 75% co-localization we observed is not indicative of normal phagosomal entrapment, since the tem analysis clearly indicated that almost all bacteria were surrounded by slightly or highly damaged membranes, thereby explaining the high degree of lamp- <dig> colocalization. this phenotype was very distinct compared to the Δiglc mutant, which was associated almost exclusively with intact membranes at similar time points.

the lack of intramacrophage replication was, not surprisingly, also reflected in a much attenuated phenotype in the mouse model, though the mutant was capable of limited systemic spread. however, the most paradoxical phenotype was that, despite its lack of intracellular replication, the mutant modulated the inflammatory response of the host cells in a way that was different from that of the Δiglc mutant. an assay that clearly illustrates this distinction is secretion of il-1β. we and others have shown that phagosomally contained mutants, e.g., Δiglc, do not induce release of this cytokine  <cit> , however, the Δpdpc mutant showed much higher levels than Δiglc. this indicates that the damage of the phagosomal membrane is a major trigger for the inflammasome activation. in view of the hypothesis by peng et al., that the phenotype of the hypercytotoxic mutants is dependent on bacterial lysis in the cytosol  <cit> , which does not occur for wild-type strains, our present data suggest that the lysis of the physically intact bacteria occurs in the phagosome and that the dna that activates the aim <dig> inflammasome is released when the phagosomal membrane is damaged, as is the case for the Δpdpc mutant, but not for the Δiglc mutant. this would explain the intermediate levels of il-1β secretion induced by the Δpdpc mutant. another example of the potent immunomodulating effect of the Δpdpc mutant was suppression of the e. coli lps-induced tnf-α secretion, an inflammasome-independent event. we have previously concluded that there is a close relationship between the mitigation of the lps-induced inflammatory response and the subcellular localization of f. tularensis <cit> . the Δpdpc mutant adds to the understanding of this mechanism, since it, as the lvs strain, completely abrogated the tnf-α secretion. thus, this phenotype is not related to intracellular replication, but only to the ability to disrupt the phagosomal membrane.

the findings reported herein demonstrate that the relationship between bacterial intracellular location and infection-mediated effects on host cell is not always straightforward and indicate that a key event in mediating the latter is the disruption of the phagosomal membrane and presumably the concomitant release of bacterial dna and effector proteins of the t6ss and possibly other secretion systems. this situation is to some degree analogous to recently published data on mycobacteria. although mycobacterium tuberculosis and other mycobacteria are primarily considered to be vacuolar pathogens, it has become evident that the esx- <dig> secretion system effectuates limited perforation of the phagosomal membrane, although the bacterium still remains within the phagosome. recent publications demonstrate that this perforation results in mixing of phagosomal and cytoplasmic contents and induces a cytosolic host response triggered by bacterial dna  <cit> . thus, although the ultrastructural findings on the Δpdpc mutant are distinct from those on mycobacteria, the bacteria-induced effects on the host cells are in both cases critically dependent on the permeabilization of the phagosomal membranes and leakage of dna and, possibly, bacterial effectors into the cytosol.

collectively, our data show that the Δpdpc mutant distinctly modulates the interaction between f. tularensis and the phagocytic cell, since it shows incomplete phagosomal escape, lack of intramacrophage growth, intermediate cytopathogenic effects, and marked attenuation in vivo, but almost intact modulation of the macrophage inflammatory response. the unique phenotype of the mutant provides novel information, since it demonstrates that some of the cytopathogenic effects and modulation of host cell signaling is not dependent on bacterial replication, but only requires disruption of the phagosomal membrane. therefore, further elucidation of the exact functions of pdpc will be important in order to understand the enigmatic mechanisms behind the intracellular life style of f. tularensis.

CONCLUSIONS
the pathogenicity of f. tularensis is intimately linked to expression of the type vi secretion system encoded by the fpi. our characterization of the fpi mutant Δpdpc demonstrates that is exhibits a unique phenotype compared to other fpi mutants since it exhibited lack of intracellular replication, incomplete phagosomal escape, and marked attenuation in the mouse model, but still efficiently triggered secretion of il-1β and markedly induced ldh release. the findings implicate that a thorough understanding of the function of pdpc will provide important understanding behind the unique intracellular life cycle of f. tularensis.

