BACKGROUND
the endolithic environment affords microorganisms protection from desiccation, rapid temperature variation, and uv radiation flux  <cit> . this microhabitat may, however, be extremely challenging, in particular for photosynthetic organisms because of limiting light  and nutrient conditions  <cit> . the cyanidiales are unicellular red algae that thrive in endolithic habitats   <cit> .

as eukaryotic extremophiles, cyanidiales grow at high temperature  and in extremely acidic  habitats around hot springs and/or acidic sulfur fumes  <cit> . because of their simple morphology, only three genera  and six species of cyanidiales have historically been recognized  <cit> . however, we recently discovered a high biodiversity of cyanidiales at sites in pisciarelli in the phlegrean fields near napoli, italy that included three putative new genus/order-level lineages. the results of this study suggested the one of the new lineages, provisionally named galdieria-b, was adapted to and dominated the endolithic habitat  <cit> .

among previously described cyanidiales, members of the genus galdieria are distributed among inter- and endolithic habitats in addition to diverse microhabitats including non-thermophilic sites  <cit> . this genus is heterotrophic and mixotrophic, can grow on more than  <dig> carbon sources, and tolerates a broad range of ph  and salinity   <cit> . the metabolic flexibility of galdieria may explain why this genus can thrive in diverse environments in contrast to cyanidioschyzon merolae which appears to be limited to humid habitats  <cit> . a recent comparative genomic analysis of these two species supports this view showing the presence of a large number of membrane transporters involved in the uptake of reduced carbon compounds in the galdieria sulphuraria genome that are absent from c. merolae  <cit> . however there is no direct evidence from physiological studies in c. merolae to support these predictions based on genome analyses.

here a culture-independent, environmental pcr survey approach was used to examine cyanidiales species composition in nature. this method is a very efficient approach to facilitate the discovery of uncultivated cryptic species, particularly for unicellular microbes that may lack distinguishing morphological characters  <cit> . we conducted an environmental pcr survey from five inter- or endolithic populations in two geothermal areas at larderello, a geologically active area in southern tuscany, italy . using the ribulose 6-phosphate carboxylase oxygenase  coding region as a marker, we determined species composition at these sites and compared these data to a typical endolithic population that was previously described from pisciarelli   <cit> . in addition, we determined a partial sequence of the calmodulin  gene that includes  <dig> or  <dig> spliceosomal introns from multiple individuals to address cyanidiales population structure. phylogenetic analyses of rbcl sequences from the environmental samples revealed a clear pattern of genetic differentiation among the studied cyanidiales with the cam data revealing different species composition patterns in the endolithic microhabitats.

RESULTS
rbcl phylogeny and species distribution of cyanidiales
the ml trees of rbcl sequences were inferred from three data sets of  <dig> nt ,  <dig> nt  and  <dig> aa  from  <dig> new environmental samples of cyanidiales that included  <dig> representatives. the trees inferred from the latter two analyses share a very similar topology with the ml-all tree , except for the monophyletic clade composed of cyanidioschyzon merolae and galdieria maxima that is positioned with the galdieria-a + -b lineage in the ml-protein tree. however this clade was poorly supported in the bootstrap analyses . the rbcl phylogeny is similar to a 3-gene tree found in our previous study  <cit> . the ml-all tree shows strong support for the monophyly of the cyanidiales, with these taxa forming a sister group to the rest of the red algae . the internal topology of the cyanidiales indicates a division into four lineages  <cit> ; 1) galdieria spp. , 2) cyanidium caldarium, 3) mesophilic cyanidium sp., and 4) cyanidioschyzon merolae and galdieria maxima. each of these lineages was strongly supported in the bootstrap analysis, however their interrelationships are poorly resolved . as apparent in the tree g. maxima is clearly separated from the other galdieria species  and shows a close relationship to c. merolae. this result is congruent with our previous study  <cit>  and suggests that a taxonomic revision is required for the genus galdieria.

we sequenced a total of  <dig> rbcl-encoding clones from five sites. all of these clones were positioned in the galdieria-a and cyanidium lineages. members of the galdieria-a lineage were found at monte rotondo- <dig>  , monte rotondo- <dig>  , monte rotondo- <dig>  , sasso pissano- <dig>  , and sasso pissano- <dig>  . all clones from the sp <dig> site were however restricted to the galdieria-a type. we did not find any representatives of the galdieria-b lineage from the larderello populations. this is in contrast to pisciarelli which included an endolithic habitat   <cit> . it is noteworthy that members of cyanidium were found in many larderello populations  but were absent from the pben site  <cit> .

population structure inferred from calmodulin intron sequences
the  <dig> rbcl sequences of galdieria-a from the sp3en site were virtually identical except for 1– <dig> non-informative substitutions per insert among the ca.  <dig> bp that were sampled. similar to the sp3en site, the pisciarelli-b  clones also consisted of virtually identical rbcl sequences of galdieria-b  <cit> . to address the population structure at these sites, we chose to sample a more rapidly evolving nuclear sequence. therefore, we determined a partial sequence of the cam gene from dna clones isolated from the sp3en and pben sites. twenty sequences from sp3en and  <dig> sequences from pisciarelli-b were determined. because sp3en showed a relatively high divergence rate within the cam spliceosomal introns, we determined more sequences from mr4in , mr5en , and mr6en  to address this finding at the larderello sites. in addition, a homologous region of the cam gene from galdieria sulphuraria dbv- <dig> and utex  <dig> strains was also determined as reference. cyanidioschyzon merolae, which lacks introns in the cam gene , was used to determine the sites of intron insertion.

the partial cam coding region  showed size variation  in the sp- <dig> population . two introns were found following the 95th and 178th nucleotide positions in the alignment and were of size  <dig> –  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, respectively . there were guanine and thymine  repeats in the first intron  that gave rise to the size variation. in contrast, the mr populations  showed a  <dig> – 9x gt repeat and the g. sulphuraria utex  <dig> gene contained 3x- repeats in the first intron. there was no size variation  in the cam gene from the pben site . the second intron  was found in addition to the first  and the third following site 178th  in the pben population. although two single-species populations share intron sites , the intron sequences are too divergent between the two populations to be aligned. therefore, we analyzed the pben data separately using the cam gene plus the intron sequences. although these data showed much less variation most of the polymorphic sites are likely to be real changes rather than due to taq polymerase mis-incorporation or sequencing errors due to the distribution of many as shared or silent changes. analysis of the distribution of polymorphic sites showed that of  <dig> columns with changes in the alignment,  <dig>  or 49% were comprised of changes that were shared among different clones , 19% were in third codon positions, and of the other  <dig> unique changes,  <dig> were in the relatively divergent intron regions.

the me tree using the cam sequences shows a highly diverse branching pattern for the sp3en population which is comprised of a single species . most nodes are weakly supported. when we included the three larderello populations , the representatives of these sites were intermixed with the sp3en taxa, however without strong bootstrap support . in the me analysis of the pben population  that is shown in figure 3c there is a clear separation of the sequences into two  lineages. six clones of the cam gene form a well-supported monophyletic group  with g. sulphuraria dbv- <dig> . two representatives  of pb-cam group b are relatively distantly related from the rest of this clade . the remainder of the clones form another distinct clade named pb-cam group b.

population differentiation
congruent with the phylogenetic studies, there is no fixed nucleotide difference between sequences from the sp3en and mrs  populations. out of the  <dig> observed mutations in the sp3en/mrs populations,  <dig> are shared between populations  and  <dig> are present in only one population. to investigate whether the sp3en and mrs sites constitute genetically differentiated populations, we applied population differentiation tests that take into account the frequency of mutations within and between populations . the results reveal detectable differentiation between the sp3en and mrs populations and hence, and despite the similarity, we can rule out a single panmictic population constituted by the sp3en and mrs sites.

column headings: the taxon and site names and genbank accession numbers for the rbcl and calmodulin genes that were isolated in this study are shown. the ratios in the rbcl column are the actual number of clones of the taxon over the total number of pcr clones that were sequenced from each environmental library.

this weak, albeit detectable, differentiation may indicate extensive gene flow between sp3en and mrs or a very recent establishment of two isolated populations, where shared mutations would represent ancestral polymorphism. both scenarios predict that shared mutations should be at similar frequencies in both populations. indeed, this pattern is observed between sp3en and mrs populations , with an average difference in the frequency of only  <dig> . the amount of gene flow required to completely eliminate fixed differences between two long-term isolated populations and cause mutations to segregate at similar frequencies is very high . on the other hand, extensive gene flow is unlikely to be associated with ~71%  of mutations being present in only one population, tentatively suggesting that a recent establishment of two isolated populations is the most likely scenario.

discussions and 
CONCLUSIONS
the cyanidiales provide an untapped resource for understanding adaptations at the genomic level to life in extreme environments with one complete genome sequence already available   <cit>  and another that is nearly finished   <cit> . the cyanidiales are unique in their ability as eukaryotes to thrive under extreme conditions at hot springs   <cit> . these single-celled, photosynthetic red algae also have the ability to grow under low light conditions in endolithic habitats   <cit> . it is rare for eukaryotes to live beneath the rock surface, although endolithic prokaryotic communities have often been found in extreme conditions   <cit> . endolithic cyanidiales were first reported from pisciarelli and la solfatara near naples, italy  <cit> . these authors assumed, based on gross morphology  that the endolithic cyandiales were species of cyanidium and galdieria. however, traditional taxonomic characters are not very useful in identifying morphologically simple, coccoid cyanidiales cells  <cit> . we recently surveyed environmental samples from pisciarelli and found a new lineage termed galderia-b that dominates the endolithic habitat  <cit> . it was postulated that galdieria-b had adapted to this relatively dry environment. here we tested whether galdieria-b also dominates the endolithic habitat at another site  and contrasted the population structure in pisciarelli and larderello.

galdieria-a and cyanidum exist in endolithic habitats
the rbcl tree  clearly resolves the species composition at five interlithic  and endolithic  sites. four sites  were composed of two species, galdieria-a and cyanidium caldarium. the sp3en site consisted of a single species . individuals of galdieria-a were more abundant in the endolithic populations , however this species was also abundant at an interlithic site . c. caldarium was distributed in interlithic  and endolithic  habitats. it is surprising, despite our low sample size, that we did not identify other cyanidiales species  at the larderello sites. galdieria-b was of particular interest because it was rich in endolithic  and interlithic  sites at pisciarelli  <cit> . these data suggest that several genetically divergent cyanidiales taxa have likely adapted to flourish in the endolithic environment.

in contrast to sites around fumaroles or in hot acid springs, the endolithic environment appears to offer a relatively stable habitat. there is an absence of rapid temperature variation resulting from hot sulphur fumes, uv radiation flux, and desiccation   <cit>  that are critical for heterotrophic growth. it is also possible that c. caldarium thrives without heterotrophy just below the rock surface where adequate light is available for photosynthesis  <cit> . these hypotheses need to be tested using controlled environmental conditions to assess their relevance.

recently, another endolithic population was reported from norris geyser basin of yellowstone national park, usa  <cit> . these authors found four ribosomal  rna sequences that were "closely related cyanidium species" without providing species identifications. we included these sequences in phylogenetic trees  and identified them as originating from g. suphularia , g. maxima , and c. merolae . the most intriguing observation is of c. merolae from an endolithic site, which contrasts to the finding of our study at pisciarelli and tuscany. it is generally thought c. merolae would not survive in the endolithic environment because it lacks a cell wall and a vacuole which are crucial for maintaining and regulating turgor pressure and the osmotic potential  <cit> . in addition, the genome of this alga does not contain many membrane transporter genes which appear to be critical for heterotrophic growth; i.e., it encodes only one monosaccharide transporter  <cit> . however, the genome of c. merolae does encode all the metabolic enzymes required for heterotrophic growth . these genomic features are generally consistent with  the idea that the ecophysiological characters of c. merolae make it an obligatory photoautotroph that is limited to humid microhabitats such as in pisciarelli, naples, italy  <cit> . consistent with the predicted dominance of c. merolae in humid environments, ferris et al  <cit> , in a 18s rdna-based environmental survey in nymph creek were able to recover only this taxon out of  <dig> clones that were isolated from this acidic stream. nymph creek is near norris geyser basin in yellowstone national park. despite these promising data, it is clear that understanding the true limits to the distribution of c. merolae in nature will require future sampling of many other sites.

establishment of endolithic cyanidiales populations
how cyanidiales colonize an endolithic habitat remains unknown. gross et al.  <cit>  suggested two possible mechanisms: 1) inoculation through cracks in the upper silica layer, and 2) the formation of the upper rock layer after cyanidiales had colonized the rock surface, although it is unknown under which time scale the latter process may occur. if the endolithic sites were colonized by a single or a few cells via inoculation, these regions would potentially show low sequence diversity reflecting the chance entry of the founder cells. if the populations originated via covering of the rock surface, the sequence diversity would potentially be higher such as at non-endolithic  sites. selection for desiccation tolerance could however cause a selective sweep that would result in a strong reduction of genetic diversity after the origin of a covering rock layer. upcoming multi-locus studies will allow us to discriminate between these two scenarios based on the fact that strongly advantageous mutations will influence polymorphism at particular genomic regions or chromosomes whereas recent colonization is expected to have genome-wide effects on polymorphism.

because the cam intron regions from galdieria at the larderello  and pisciarelli  endolithic sites could not be reliably aligned these data sets were analyzed separately. the tree of the larderello sequences shown in figure 3b shows a paraphyletic radiation of galdieria-a into the four sites. however, most nodes in this tree are weakly supported and there appears to be poor resolution of sequence interrelationships. this may indicate recurrent gene flow between the sp3en, mr4in, mr5en, and mr6en sites or extensive ancestral polymorphisms reflecting recent population establishment. interestingly, cam sequence diversity of the endolithic cells at the sp3en, mr5en and mr6en sites was similar to that of the interlithic mr4in site. in contrast, the cam sequences from the endolithic pisciarelli pben site formed  <dig> distinct clades suggesting that two  independent inoculations of galdieria-b occurred here. the significant differences between the topologies shown in figures 3b and 3c are noteworthy and may provide important insights into how these endolithic populations were established.

a potential explanation for the difference in cam gene diversity in larderello versus pisciarelli is that cells at the former site originated through the addition of a rock layer over an existing genetically diverse population. gross et al.  <cit>  provided preliminary support for this colonization method based on their finding that after the application of an artificial silica layer on galdieria cells, these algae maintain a dark-green color for  <dig> weeks, even when the silica layer becomes  <dig> mm thick  <cit> . in contrast, the pben population was likely colonized by inoculation of  <dig> –  <dig> founder cells. one of the founder cells at the pben site is closely related to the dbv <dig> strain at the university of naples culture collection that was isolated from a single colony.

recombination at intragenic level
the study of cam sequences from the sp3en and mrs sites reveals an unexpected nucleotide pattern, with a minimum of  <dig> recombination events across the cam region based on the conservative approach of investigating the presence of four gametic types  <cit>  . this observation is not compatible with a genetic system with the complete absence of genetic recombination . the study of the sp3en and mrs sites separately generates equivalent results, with a minimum of  <dig> and  <dig> recombination events, respectively . these results are intriguing because they hint at the existence  of sexual reproduction in the cyanidiales, a process that has never been observed in these algae either in culture or in the wild. future population analyses across the genome will allow us better understand the evolutionary causes of this pattern.

