BACKGROUND
understanding the regulation of gene expression is essential to understand the form and function of living systems. microarray technology has been widely used in many organisms to understand genome-wide changes in gene expression in response to treatments  <cit> , in different organs  <cit> , cell-types  <cit>  and along developmental time series  <cit> . therefore, a large amount of microarray data representing many different biological conditions has accumulated over recent years. this data has been used successfully to hypothesize on gene function on a global scale in different organisms, such as yeast and c. elegans  <cit> , and to suggest shared regulatory mechanisms. promoters of genes with strongly correlated expression patterns in multiple experiments are likely to be bound by a common transcription factor  <cit> , and conserved regulatory motifs have been identified based solely on expression data  <cit> . from a systems view, however, we believe that this data has been underutilized as a resource to understand the basic rules of gene expression.

to learn the general rules that govern gene expression in plants, we took advantage of a large microarray database available for arabidopsis in the nascarrays database  <cit> . using this data, we defined the internal and external cues that regulate the expression of all of the arabidopsis genes that are represented in the affymetrix ath <dig> gene chips. we quantified the effect of the different experimental conditions on gene expression, which revealed tissue type to be the most influential variable. we also analyzed different structural features and correlated it with the capacity of the genes to respond to the different stimuli. we found evidence for a mechanistic relationship between dna methylation in the body of the gene  and the regulation of gene expression, thus assigning a novel and important role for the methylation of the body of the gene in eukaryotic genomes.

RESULTS
the arabidopsis transcriptome is robust to most perturbations but strongly influenced by organ type
in an effort to discover new principles that govern gene expression in arabidopsis thaliana, we integrated and analyzed publicly available whole-genome microarray data for this model plant. from this data, we defined  <dig> biologically relevant comparisons  as described in materials and methods . these comparisons spanned a wide variety of experimental conditions and plant organs . we wished to evaluate the effect of the different experimental factors that defined each comparison on genome-wide gene expression patterns. to do so, we defined differential gene expression using the rankproducts method  <cit> . this method outperformed other methods to determine regulation of gene expression in previous studies  <cit>  and in our own evaluation , particularly in datasets with a small number of replicates.

we first examined the number of differentially regulated genes per comparison. we found their distribution to be far from normal. as shown in figure 2a, some comparisons exhibit more than  <dig>  differentially expressed genes. these outliers were exclusively comparisons between different organs. in fact, organ type was the strongest experimental factor contributing to the number of differentially expressed genes. other experimental factors, regardless of their nature, showed an approximately 10-fold smaller impact on gene expression with an average of  <dig> genes regulated per comparison . moreover, approximately 10% of the arabidopsis genes did not respond to any of the stimuli in the dataset and were only differentially expressed between organ samples. thus, organ is by far the most important factor in determining genome-wide expression levels. furthermore, the upper 5th percentile  of the  <dig> mutant vs wt comparisons involved only genes whose mutations have well documented developmental phenotypes. these genes were ap2- <dig> <cit> , arr <dig> <cit> , glabrous <dig> <cit>  and lfy- <dig> mutations  <cit> . they regulated  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively – a much more than the category average . these results indicate that global gene expression patterns are established during plant development. the results also suggest that the arabidopsis transcriptome is robust to most perturbations, with only an estimated  <dig> % of the genome on average responding in a single experiment to experimental factors such as chemical or hormone treatments, pathogen challenges or environmental stress. a detail of the categories in which each of the arabidopsis genes responds is presented in additional file  <dig>  additional files  <dig> to  <dig> contain the genes that respond in exclusively one category, including organ type.

given its impact on global gene expression levels, we next wished to evaluate the importance of organ type in the context of typical experimental factors that are tested in the laboratory. we compared the number of genes responding in shoots or roots for each of the nine treatments in the atgenexpress abiotic stress series. on average, only 13% of the total genes that responded to a treatment responded in both organs. by contrast, a much higher proportion of genes  were regulated by the treatment in an organ-specific manner . this data indicate that plant responses to external stimuli are strongly organ-dependent and underscore the need for a more thorough survey of organ-specific and, by extension, cell-specific responses in arabidopsis and other plants  <cit> .

housekeeping and hypervariable genes possess marked structural differences
to identify properties that explain the capacity of a gene to respond to stimuli, we ranked genes based on the number of comparisons in which they are differentially expressed. as shown in figure 2c, the arabidopsis genome contains genes that are regulated in a wide range of comparisons, with an average of  <dig> comparisons, or 3% of the total comparisons in our dataset. the underlying data is provided in additional file  <dig>  we expect structural differences to be maximized at the extremes of this distribution. we defined housekeeping genes based on three criteria:  genes that were not differentially expressed in any of the  <dig> comparisons,  genes with signal intensities higher than the median intensity across the entire dataset and  genes with the lowest signal variability  across the entire dataset. in contrast, we defined hypervariable genes based on the following three criteria:  genes that were within the top 1% of the gene responsiveness distribution,  genes with the largest signal variability, and  genes that show differential expression by stimuli from six of the eight categories described in figure 1a. these criteria defined  <dig> housekeeping genes and  <dig> hypervariable genes .

a previous study positively correlated expression levels with gene size in plants  <cit> . to understand how gene responses to stimuli relate to gene size and other structural features, we analyzed the structure of housekeeping and hypervariable genes. housekeeping genes were significantly larger and had more introns than do hypervariable genes and were above genome averages for both criteria . by contrast, hypervariable genes were significantly shorter and contained fewer introns than average . interestingly, a functional annotation of the hypervariable gene set indicates that it is enriched for genes involved in responses to internal and external stimuli . most hypervariable genes were plant specific as defined in a previous study  <cit> , and the set was enriched for genes that code for unstable transcripts  <cit>  . these results suggest that plants favored the evolution of small, hypervariable genes to respond quickly and economically to multiple environmental signals.

the first column lists various features analyzed for housekeeping genes , hypervariable genes  and the whole genome . rows report average and standard error or percentage values. p values for significant  enrichment or depletion as compared to the genome occurrence are shown in parenthesis. a, differences between all groups are significant  as determined by anova.b, average number of cis-acting regulatory elements as defined in the agris database  <cit> . p-value was determined by a t-test. c, presence of tata-box as determined by the motifsearch algorithm  <cit> . similar results were obtained with an alternative tata-box definition  <cit> . d, unstable transcripts as defined in  <cit> . e, phylogenetic profiles as defined previously  <cit> . only significantly enriched profiles are listed. f, methylation patterns as determined in  <cit> . g, methylation patterns as determined in  <cit> . n.a., not applicable.

eukaryotic genes are transcriptionally regulated by the coordinated interaction of multiple protein factors that interact with discrete binding sites and with each other  <cit> . these binding sites are usually located upstream of the transcribed region they regulate  <cit> . the promoters of hypervariable genes often have a tata-box sequence and contain a larger number of predicted transcription factor binding sites as compared to the housekeeping genes or the genome average . these data suggest that the presence of a tata box and the number of transcription factor binding sites in the promoter region of some of the most responsive genes in arabidopsis may explain their capacity to respond to stimuli, as was previously found in an analysis of a smaller expression dataset  <cit> . however, it is clear that this simple rule does not always apply and that other factors are necessary to explain gene expression responses.

in addition to gene structure, epigenetic mechanisms such as dna methylation are known to have an impact on gene expression in eukaryotes, particularly in heterochromatic regions  <cit> . to evaluate the potential role of dna methylation in the gene expression responses observed for housekeeping and hypervariable genes, we analyzed the methylation patterns of these two groups of genes. we used two recently published genome-wide methylation data sets  <cit>  to analyze methylation in the promoter and transcribed regions of each gene. using the methylome data produced by zhang et al.  <cit> , we found that a large proportion of housekeeping genes were methylated in their transcribed regions . by contrast, only 8% of the hypervariable genes were methylated in their transcribed regions . similar results were obtained with an independently generated methylome data set  <cit> . these results suggest that the capacity of arabidopsis housekeeping and hypervariable genes to respond to stimuli not only depends on structural features in their promoter or transcribed regions, such as transcription factor binding sites, but may also have an important epigenetic component.

transcript region methylation is the most important factor to explain genome-wide responses to internal/external stimuli
to evaluate the importance of these features for gene expression responses on a genomic scale, we performed a regression analysis of the gene responsiveness for all arabidopsis genes as a function of each of the structural features described above. we used a linear model of the form: y ~ αx + β, where y was the observed gene responsiveness of all genes and x was the structural feature under evaluation . thus, the effects detected were free from any bias arising from gene selection, as could be the case when analyzing this relatively small group of housekeeping and hypervariable genes.

notably, using the two independently generated methylome datasets  <cit> , gene responsiveness showed a remarkably high negative correlation with the presence of methylation in the transcribed region of the gene. both datasets generated models with a coefficient of determination  of  <dig>  . a similar result was obtained using average fold-change ≥ |2|  as a criterion to determine gene responsiveness . this correlation was independent of the type of experimental factor, as similar trends were observed when analyzing each experimental category individually for both methylome datasets . next, to transcript region methylation, the presence of a tata-box was the second best factor to explain gene responsiveness, and it had a positive effect. r <dig> for two definitions of tata-box  <cit>  were  <dig>  or  <dig> . two factor models that included transcript region methylation and the presence of a tata-box slightly improved the r <dig> over those obtained with methylation alone . two factor anova models  confirmed the stronger effect of gene body methylation on responsiveness, as determined by the tukey comparison procedure  <cit> . however, goodness of fit estimation by the bayesian information criteria  <cit>  suggests that additive models, including tata-box and methylation, are better than one-factor anova models. . interestingly, this also suggests that the effect of tata-box and methylation are independent, as interaction terms are not significant in these models . none of the other structural features  yielded models with such high r <dig> on a genomic scale. thus, gene body methylation and, to a lesser extent, tata-box presence explained gene responsiveness on a global scale. it is not possible, however, to infer from this data the mechanistic relationships between tata-related factors, gene body methylation status and regulation of gene expression.

column  <dig> reports the explanatory variables used to model gene responsiveness. column  <dig> indicates the source of the data . columns  <dig> and  <dig> report the different statistics obtained with the linear regression. n.r., not reported; n.d., not determined. a, statistics for methylation variable. b, statistics for tata-box variable. column  <dig> shows the coefficients from the linear regression analysis.

the effect of dna methylation on gene responsiveness could be explained by a simple transcriptional gene silencing effect  <cit> . silencing a gene would render it unable to be regulated. if so, transcript region methylation should correlate with expression levels. comparing the frequency of methylation to the median expression level of the whole dataset revealed no such trend . the most and the least highly expressed genes are likely to lack methylation within their body, as previously reported  <cit> . similarly, no correlation was found between the presence of a tata-box and gene expression levels. . moreover, no relationship was evident between expression level and gene responsiveness in our data set .

we also evaluated the relationship between the presence of modified histones and gene responsiveness. we used a recently published genomic survey of trimethylation in lysine  <dig> of histone h <dig>  f <cit> . we found a weak correlation between the frequency of h3k27me <dig> gene targets and gene responsiveness, with an r <dig> of  <dig>  . this finding is consistent with the hypothesis that h3k27me <dig> mostly acts in a dna methylation-independent manner, as previously suggested  <cit> . other histone modifications, such as h3k <dig> or h3k <dig> methylation  <cit>  or combinations thereof  <cit> , may be related to gene body methylation in arabidopsis, thus "marking" the corresponding chromatin region for or against the regulation of gene expression  <cit> .

gene body methylation and regulation of expression by nitrate in tca cycle genes
as a case-study and to provide a concrete example of the influence of methylation patterns on the regulation of gene expression, we focused on a discrete biological process and experimental factor: nitrate. nitrate has been shown to be a signal to regulate gene expression in plants  <cit> . we chose four microarray experiments in which wild-type seedlings were treated with different nitrate concentrations. these nitrate experiments were not included in the microarray database used in the previous sections. we found that nitrate regulates many genes in central metabolic pathways such as the tca cycle  <cit> . we analyzed responsiveness and nitrate regulation for all genes coding for tca cycle enzymes. most of the genes  did not respond to the nitrate treatments, as expected due to the robustness of expression patterns in arabidopsis . among the genes regulated by nitrate, we found a malate dehydrogenase gene , two genes coding for nad+ dependent isocitrate dehydrogenases  and a putative nadp+ dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase  . remarkably, these four genes were classified as unmethylated in studies by both zhang et al.  <cit>  and zilberman et al.  <cit> . moreover, body methylated genes were enriched among the analyzed genes that were not regulated by nitrate . for instance, among eight genes coding for malate dehydrogenase that are not regulated by nitrate, five are methylated according to the two methylome datasets. this is a much higher frequency than is expected by chance , as only 20–34% of the genes were methylated according to the two methylome datasets. the same was true for the isocitrate dehydrogenases, with enrichment of methylated genes for those that did not respond to the nitrate treatment . these results agree with the proposed relationship between gene body methylation and the regulation of gene expression in response to regulatory signals . moreover, it suggests gene body methylation plays a role in the regulation of gene expression in physiological processes such as the reprogramming of carbon metabolism in response to nitrogen nutrient availability  <cit> .

this table provides the agi number, the gene annotation, regulation by nitrate as determined from four independent experiments  and the methylation status according to the two methylome datasets used in this work. this table includes all the different malate dehydrogenase and isocitrate dehydrogenase isozyme-coding genes present in the arabidopsis genome, according to virtualplant . amethylation code: u, unmethylated in both datasets; m, methylated in both datasets; a, ambiguous according to zilberman et al.  <cit>  but unmethylated according to zhang et al.  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of the large and heterogeneous whole-genome microarray dataset available in the public domain proved useful to evaluate principles that govern regulation of gene expression in plants. our global and systematic analysis of the quantitative effect of different experimental factors  on the plant transcriptome revealed the key role of developmental processes for establishing mrna levels throughout the plant. this process in turn determines how cells, organs and tissues respond to exogenous cues. our data indicate that plant responses to external stimuli are strongly organ-dependent and underscore the need for a more thorough survey of organ-specific and, by extension, cell-specific responses in arabidopsis and other plants  <cit> .

the second part of our analysis provided a weighted insight into the role of different molecular mechanisms in the global regulation of gene expression in arabidopsis. the data indicate that dna methylation within the body of arabidopsis genes is a key factor that may determine or negatively influence the capacity of genes to respond to internal or external cues. the presence of a tata-box may favor gene responsiveness but to a lesser extent than the negative effect of dna methylation. surprisingly, our data indicate that other gene structural features  are less important than dna methylation and the presence of a tata-box. these results highlight the importance of epigenetic mechanisms for the global control of gene expression. as a concrete example, we found consistency between regulation by an external stimulus  and gene body methylation for a discrete biological process, the tca cycle, beyond what would be expected by chance. the results presented here suggest a model whereby gene body dna methylation restrains the ability of a gene to be regulated, regardless of regulatory signals . this effect would not be directly dependent on basal gene expression levels. moreover, our results provide a plausible functional role for the dna methylation that is found in the body of a large number of arabidopsis genes. this new role differs from the proposed role for dna methylation in suppressing spurious transcriptional initiation  <cit>  and reinforces the link between the regulation of gene expression and dna methylation in eukaryotes.

