BACKGROUND
while the general features of the olfactory system are remarkably conserved among vertebrates, the chemosensory receptor gene families expressed there have experienced dramatic diversification  <cit> . odor detection and discrimination is accomplished by the interaction of odorous ligands with receptors located on the cilia or microvilli found on the dendritic ends of olfactory receptor neurons , and will necessarily depend upon the number of individual receptors and their specificities  <cit> . in this paper we use the term chemosensory receptor  to refer to all known g protein-coupled receptors that interact with odorant molecules in olfactory epithelia. cr genes have been a subject of much interest since their discovery, because of their persistence in diverse animal taxa, their roles in social and environmental interactions, and their expansion and divergence between vertebrate lineages  <cit> . cr genes exhibit the seven transmembrane domain structure characteristic of the g protein-coupled receptors  superfamily and are predominantly expressed in orns. genes encoding large families of candidate crs have been identified in all vertebrate groups, from lamprey to teleosts, and from amphibians to humans  <cit> .

all studies conducted to date indicate that representatives of or, taar, v1r and v2r gene families were present in the most recent common ancestor of jawed vertebrates  <cit> . these four families of cr genes display strikingly different evolutionary dynamics and lineage-specific phylogenetic clustering driven by environmental and life history challenges, as well as genome-scale events over the past  <dig> million years  <cit> . the or family, for instance, has expanded explosively in the vertebrate lineage and has become the largest gene family described in mammalian genomes  <cit> . further, the v1r family has expanded largely in tetrapods and the v2r family has expanded in teleost fishes and amphibians  <cit> . on the other hand, only a very limited number of potential orthologs of vertebrate or genes have been identified in the representative genomes of all major phylogenetic groups of invertebrate chordates  <cit> . this striking contrast implicates the significance of cr expansion in the vertebrate radiation, and raises an interesting question on the timing of the origins and initial expansion of all cr gene families . clearly, genomes representing the jawless stage of vertebrate evolution, the last chordate group whose genomes have yet to be examined systematically for cr families, hold the key information to address this question.

recently, the sea lamprey genome has been sequenced and made available for examination. lamprey and hagfishes form a monophyletic group representing the earliest extant primitive vertebrates  <cit> . extensive electro-olfactogram  studies indicate that the number of compounds detected by sea lampreys is more restricted than in teleosts  <cit> . the sea lamprey olfactory system is highly sensitive to pheromonal bile acids. however, in direct contrast to teleost olfactory systems, which are highly sensitive to most amino acids, the sea lamprey olfactory system is highly sensitive only to arginine and lysine. molecular cloning studies in european river lamprey  revealed two unrelated families of odorant receptor  genes, one of which resembles typical ors identified in other vertebrates  <cit> . the second family shows little sequence identity with any previously described ors, and is more similar to class a gpcrs for biogenic amines  <cit> . it is expected that many of these receptors in sea lampreys are expressed in the single, medially positioned main olfactory organ. posterior to this main organ is an accessory olfactory organ whose epithelial lining may contain cells resembling the orns found in the main olfactory epithelium  <cit> . the olfactory capsule in larvae consists of a small pouch with a region of sensory epithelium containing mature olfactory receptor neurons at the caudal end, and responds to many of the same odorants as in adults  <cit> . during metamorphosis sea lamprey larvae transform into parasites, possessing eyes, an oral disk and a greatly elaborated olfactory system, feeding by attaching to other fish and consuming blood and body fluids. parasitic-stage adults cease feeding before migrating into rivers where they become sexually mature, spawn and die. here we use the term "parasite" to refer to an actively feeding adult removed from free living fish in northern lakes huron and michigan, and the term "adult" to indicate sexually mature lamprey collected from spawning streams. each of these stages relies upon a functional olfactory system and many of their behaviors are regulated to some extent by odorants  <cit> . this complex life history offers an opportunity to examine and decipher changes in vertebrate odorant reception at distinct developmental stages.

our objective is to determine which cr families were present at the jawless stage of vertebrate evolution and infer the significance of cr genes in the radiation of vertebrates. we present predicted cr genes from the sea lamprey draft genome and describe their expression as determined using roche  <dig> gs  <dig> life sciences sequencing technology  and rt-pcr , in addition to ests from the national center for biotechnology information.

expression data is shown for a subset of lamprey cr genes, including all or, taar and v1r genes detected by olfactory organ cdna  <dig> sequencing. rt-pcr results, primer sequences, annealing temperatures and ncbi est data are also included. gonad includes both adult testis and undifferentiated gonad from parasites. the partial gene  <dig> or <dig> corresponds to three ests  from adult olfactory organ*. two sequences from the ncbi est database  obtained from sea lamprey embryo map to the gene  <dig> or328**. expression of a calcium-sensing receptor  and a metabotropic glutamate receptor  were detected in the olfactory organs of adult sea lamprey. a  <dig> bp est represents a cellular nucleic acid binding protein† expressed in both adult olfactory organ and embryo that was not included in the phylogenetic analysis.

RESULTS
chemosensory receptor gene repertoire
an extensive search indicated that the sea lamprey genome contains all three known single-exon cr gene families. tblastn searches of the wgs p. marinus draft genome assembly  <dig>  identified  <dig> contiguous sequences  containing potential chemosensory receptor genes . one hundred and eight of these contigs with open reading frames larger than  <dig> bp were identified by batch blastp queries of the ncbi non-redundant protein database as potential cr genes. potential crs were considered pseudogenes if they possessed incomplete predicted 7-transmembrane helices, lacked start codons or stop codons, or were highly fragmented. fifty-two cr pseudogenes were identified, including thirty-five or pseudogenes and  <dig> taar pseudogenes. of the one hundred and eight potential cr sequences > <dig> bp, twelve were identified as histamine-, glycine- and 5-hydoxytryptamine- receptors. fifty-nine of the one hundred and eight potential cr genes were intact single-exon chemosensory receptors and were included for phylogenetic analysis .

assembly of long scaffolds from the sea lamprey genome has been hindered by the presence of long, repeat-rich regions. multiple intact crs occurred on eight contigs, separated by distances ranging from  <dig>  kb to  <dig> kb, with an average distance between intact cr genes of  <dig>  kb. three contigs possessed three crs , and seven contigs possessed two crs . the remaining  <dig> intact crs occurred singly, and no supercontigs possessed more than three crs. the calcium-sensing receptors and v1r-like genes described here occurred individually on separate contigs. intact or and taar genes occurring on the same contig cluster together with high bootstrap support in nj analysis , and no contigs were found to contain members from more than one cr gene family. nj analysis of the lamprey calcium-sensing receptor genes and v1r-like genes are presented in additional figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

neighbor-joining , maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood analyses of the intact cr gene nucleotide sequence data set clustered the genes into four well-supported groups, including a group of four v1r-like genes , a group of twenty-eight taar that correspond to the  <dig> intact taars reported by hashiguchi and nishida  <cit> , and two well-supported groups  of ors . a partial or cdna assembled from the  <dig> data  mapped to the assembly but was missing its 5' end in both the genome draft and expressed transcripts. this olfactory receptor gene was excluded from the neighbor-joining analysis of intact crs presented here , but is included in the supplemental material .

two of the predicted intact cr genes from the draft genome  were not resolved in the phylogenetic analysis of lamprey or and taar genes and were identified by blast homology searches as a putative neuropeptide ff receptor and prolactin releasing hormone receptor, respectively. a single-exon gene  in the petromyzon genome demonstrates a high degree of homology with the 2-exon prolactin releasing hormone receptor gene from danio rerio . while the amino acid sequence of this gene is highly conserved, the exons in the danio ortholog are separated by a  <dig>  kb intron containing a predicted pol polyprotein . these putative neuropeptide receptors were also excluded from the phylogenetic analysis in figure  <dig> 

neighbor-joining analysis identifies all lamprey single-exon or genes as clustering most closely to the θ, η, and κ or families described by niimura and nei   <cit> . four intact v1r-like genes  cluster in nj analysis with recently described v1r cdnas in danio  <cit>  on the basis of conserved amino acid residues . the presence of these v1r-like genes in lamprey indicates that the v1r gene family arose in chordates before the divergence of jawed and jawless fish .

an extensive search of the lamprey draft genome failed to identify likely potential candidates belonging to the multi-exon v2r gene family. psi-blast searches of the petromyzon genome using danio v2r pheromone receptors as queries returned calcium-sensing receptors and metabotropic glutamate receptors, but no candidate v2r genes or v2r pseudogenes. the glutamate and calcium-sensing receptors from lamprey clustered most closely in nj analysis with v2rs identified in danio . using tblastn and blastp to search the genomes of the echinoderm strongylocentrotus purpuratus, the urochodate ciona and the cephalochordate branchiostoma with a wide variety of v1r and v2r query sequences  also failed to identify potential v1r or v2r orthologs in these representative genomes.

chemosensory receptor gene expression in adults and parasites
representatives from all maximum likelihood clusters of single-exon cr genes were expressed in the olfactory epithelia of adult and parasitic lamprey . seventeen of the  <dig> predicted single-exon cr genes were present in ests assembled from  <dig> reads. seven of these  <dig> receptors detected by  <dig> sequencing were expressed only in the olfactory organs of sexually-mature adults, and four were detected only in the olfactory organ of parasitic-stage adults . five receptors were expressed in both parasites and adults. three expressed crs correspond to the v1r family . no v2r-like genes were detected in the  <dig> or est data. expression of one calcium-sensing receptor and one metabotropic glutamate receptor were detected in the  <dig> and est data . publicly available or-like est accessions from ncbi correspond to ests detected using  <dig> sequencing of olfactory organ cdna with the exception of two, eg <dig> and eg <dig>  these accessions represent a single or gene  that is expressed in sea lamprey embryos, but was not detected in olfactory tissues of adults and parasites.

 <dig> data from olfactory organ cdna revealed two potential cr genes that were not predicted from the assembly. a unique cr gene  that is expressed in both adult and parasite olfactory organ corresponds to three highly similar sequences from the ncbi est database . a putative cellular nucleic acid binding protein  is also expressed in embryo and adult olfactory organ. these partial cdnas were not included in the phylogenetic analysis. expression of well-characterized signal transduction cascade components, transient receptor potential cation channel, guanine nucleotide binding protein , adenylate cyclase, and phospholipase c were also verified in the olfactory organ  <dig> cdna data.

rt-pcr confirmed tissue-specific expression of  <dig> or330a and  <dig> taar <dig>  representatives of two distinct cr families, the ors and taars, respectively . expression of  <dig> or330a was restricted to the olfactory epithelia, testis and undifferentiated parasite gonads.  <dig> taar <dig> was expressed only in the olfactory epithelium. expression of  <dig> or330a and  <dig> taar <dig> were not detectable in brain, liver, gill, or kidney by rt-pcr. in situ hybridization  of adult and larval olfactory epithelia found  <dig> or330a to be expressed in the orn . the olfactory epithelium is visible as a band lining the lamellae radiating from the wall of the olfactory chamber. the columnar cell body of orn expressing the cr genes in adults are located in the middle layer of the olfactory epithelia . within this layer, the positive orns were randomly distributed within the olfactory epithelium. individual cr probes annealed with  <dig> %–2% of the orns in lamprey during larval, parasitic and adult life stages. olfactory neuron-specific golf α antisense rna probes also hybridized to this same region. note that instead of the convolutions of the adult olfactory lamellae, there is a single layer of olfactory epithelium covering the olfactory wall in the larval lamprey that also expresses golf α and  <dig> or330a . further, ish indicated that only  <dig> or330a and not  <dig> taar <dig> was expressed in the interstitial cells of adult sea lamprey testis .

interestingly, three intact single-exon genes that were poorly resolved between the or and the v1r-like receptors in our phylogenetic analyses  were shown to be expressed in the brains of both adult and parasitic lamprey by rt-pcr. transcripts from the predicted prolactin releasing peptide receptor , neuropeptide ff receptor-like gene  and a novel or  were detected by rt-pcr in brain but not olfactory organ, testis or liver from adults and parasites. rt-pcr results and conditions are summarized in table  <dig> 

discussion
the purpose of this study was to identify the repertoire of chemosensory receptors for olfaction in the sea lamprey draft genome and infer the evolution of those gene families in the chordate lineage. all known chemosensory receptors are 7-transmembrane g-protein coupled receptors, but vary considerably in overall sequence and exon structure, consistent with an ability to recognize diverse ligands  <cit> . this study identifies  <dig> intact single-exon chemosensory receptor genes in the sea lamprey genome that belong to three cr families: v1r-like, or and taar families. these genes share many characteristics of gnathostome single-exon cr genes. sea lamprey cr genes identified in this study are similar in structure and size to those described in higher vertebrates  <cit> . we found several contigs that each contain highly homologous members of the same cr families, which is consistent with findings in gnathostome genomes where cr genes often cluster in specific chromosomal regions  <cit> . furthermore, of the  <dig> intact cr genes from our petromyzon marinus genome draft assembly, we have identified a set of seventeen in the cdna from olfactory epithelia of mature and parasitic-stage adult sea lamprey using  <dig> sequencing. rt-pcr and in situ hybridization confirmed that expression of representative or and taar are largely limited to odorant receptor neurons and testis, which is consistent with expression of single-exon cr genes in higher vertebrates  <cit> . the observed life history-specific expression of cr genes may be adaptive for different olfactory-mediated behaviours demonstrated in the sea lamprey, as parasites display search behaviours for detection of prey odor and adults respond specifically to migratory and mating pheromones  <cit> . it is likely that the majority of the  <dig> predicted intact genes described in this study are functional cr genes for olfaction in the sea lamprey.

our data indicate that all three families of single exon cr genes were present in the most recent common ancestor of jawless and jawed vertebrates . both the or and taar genes are numerous and diverse in the genomes of sea lamprey and higher vertebrates  <cit> , supporting an expansion prior to the most recent common ancestor of jawed and jawless vertebrates. our search for predicted genes from the draft genomes of stronglyocentrotus , ciona and branchiostoma  using lamprey gene queries and subsequent phylogenetic analyses suggest that or, taar and v1r gene families had not expanded before the rise of vertebrates, and that or and v1r receptor families are vertebrate-specific, with taar specific to chordates. this is consistent with findings from the genomes of the cephalochordate branchiostoma  <cit>  and the ascidian ciona  <cit> , both possessing trace amine receptors , but neither of which have been shown to possess v1r pheromone or olfactory receptors. a recent report has inferred a much more ancient origin for ors, placing them in the common ancestor of vertebrates and cephalochordates, while placing the origin of taars in the common ancestor of vertebrates  <cit> . these results are not in agreement with the blast results presented here, nor with the available genome-scale analyses of cephalochordates and urochordates  <cit> . a large-scale phylogenetic analysis of available ors, taars and biogenic amine receptors would address this discrepancy. however, given the expanse of time involved in the evolution of these ancestral molecules and the striking variation observed within or and taar gene families, resolution of these discrepancies may require more data than blast searches, alignments and phylogenetic inference can provide. specific ligand-receptor interactions and structural analysis of ligand-binding domains in these receptors should provide critical data regarding homology and convergence in the chemosensory receptor repertoires of deuterostomes.

analysis of the genome of strongylocentrotus purpuratus has offered strong evidence of an elaborate chemosensory system in echinoderms  <cit> . sea urchin rhodopsin-type gpcr repertoires indicate that these large chemosensory receptor subfamilies expanded in echinoderms in a lineage-specific manner and were derived from biogenic amine receptors  <cit> . using lamprey taar and or to query the glean predicted peptides in the strongylocentrotus genome produced a non-redundant list of  <dig> serotonin-, octopamine-, histamine and adreno-receptors. thirteen of these "best hit" receptors that were identified as potential taars were included in our phylogenetic analysis. these formed a well-supported clade distinct from single-exon vertebrate chemosensory genes . these results support the hypothesis that chemosensory trace-amine receptors evolved independently at least twice in the deuterostome lineage.

the  <dig> intact lamprey taar genes identified in our study cluster into a well resolved group, in agreement with the  <dig> taar genes identified from a previous sea lamprey draft assembly that form a monophyletic clade  <cit> . other than in a few teleost groups, the number of taar genes did not expand dramatically in tetrapods  <cit> . in contrast, or gene repertoires in both teleosts and tetrapods experienced dynamic expansion before and after these two vertebrate groups diverged. the sea lamprey ors cluster most closely to the intact η, κ, and θ or subfamilies described by niimura and nei  <cit> . these or subfamilies are represented but not expanded in either teleosts or tetrapods  <cit> .

it is interesting that v1r-like genes, a remarkably diverse cr family in tetrapods  <cit> , did not expand extensively in either the sea lamprey or teleost genomes. sea lamprey v1r-like genes cluster in nj analysis with expressed v1r genes described in danio  <cit>  . the presence of v1r-like genes in lamprey and our phylogenetic analysis indicate that this family arose early in the vertebrate lineage, before the agnathan-gnathostome divergence , but did not expand dramatically until vertebrates began exploiting terrestrial habitats  <cit> . further, the v1r family likely arose after the separation of cephalochordate and urochordate lineages which do not possess identifiable v1r-like sequences in their current draft genomes. the early divergence of v1r in the vertebrate lineage is further demonstrated by the phylogenetic signal observed between the lamprey, teleost and mammalian v1rs  and the need to use an appropriate protein substitution matrix to detect similar homologies across greater than  <dig> million years of evolutionary time  <cit> . during the successful diversification in the teleost lineage, the v1r family did not undergo the dramatic expansions that are observed in the genomes of terrestrial vertebrates  <cit> , nor did v1r expand during additional rounds of genome duplication in teleosts  <cit> . our results indirectly support a previous study that the v1r family expanded when vertebrates adapted to the terrestrial environment  <cit> .

the most surprising, and arguably the most interesting, results from this study are the lack of v2r-like sequences identifiable from the currently available genomic resources for the sea lamprey. the v2r family is believed to encode receptors for detection of water borne compounds  <cit> . this family is characterized by rapid gene turnover and lineage specific phylogenetic clustering  <cit> , and is most expanded in fish and frogs  <cit> . we anticipated that this family would be represented and expanded in the lamprey genome. our search for potential v2r orthologs in the current sea lamprey draft genome, and those of other groups  <cit> , did not produce an identifiable full or partial v2r candidate, nor were any v2r-like transcripts found in olfactory organ est library , filtered  <dig> sequences  from adult and parasite olfactory organ, or in the ncbi trace database for lamprey . it is also not likely that our search parameters were too stringent, as our queries using v2r sequences returned metabotropic glutamate receptors  and calcium sensing receptors  that are most similar to known v2r receptors. additionally, searches of urochordate and cephalochordate genomes for potential v2r genes have identified no putative v2r sequences  <cit> . these results from urochordate, cephalochordate, and the current sea lamprey draft genomes, as well as olfactory organ transcriptome data suggest that the v2r gene family arose and diversified in the lineage leading to teleosts after the separation of jawed and jawless vertebrates. this provides evidence regarding the timing of the v2r expansion and its' potential role in the successful radiation of the modern vertebrate lineage.

the limited repertoire of cr genes in the lamprey genome, in both the number of gene families and the restricted degree of expansion in each cr family, accounts for the limited number of odorants that are detected by lamprey. the  <dig> intact cr genes described in this study likely represent a large portion of the complete cr repertoire of sea lamprey, for two reasons. extensive and stringent alignment and mapping analysis using lamprey ests indicate that the assembled contiguous sequences represent a minimum of  <dig> percent of the sea lamprey genome. the majority of lamprey ests that do not map to the assembly appear to be non-coding rnas from those same repetitive regions that have confounded efforts to assemble larger scaffolds. moreover, the cr transcripts detected in olfactory organ cdna by  <dig> sequencing analysis all mapped to the draft genome, suggesting that 76% coverage provides a cautious estimate for coverage of cr families. therefore, the complete sea lamprey cr repertoire is likely much smaller than those of teleost fish and tetrapods. electrophysiological studies indicate that the sea lamprey can detect all of the classes of odorants that are detected by teleosts  <cit> ; the actual number of individual odorant compounds within each odorant class that are detectable by the sea lamprey, however, is much reduced  <cit> .

the lack of identifiable v2r homologs in the sea lamprey genome provides a perspective on development of cr early in the vertebrate lineage that leads to the dynamic and vagile life histories that characterize modern vertebrates. similar to cephalochordates and urochordates, all extant agnathan species spend the largest portion of their life cycles, or their entire life, amongst the benthos. the diversification of cr genes in jawed vertebrates, including the advent of the v2r gene family, likely corresponded to an increased ability in ancient vertebrates to locate food and mates while exploiting novel habitats and avoiding potential threats. in retrospect, this was one of several critical early developments in our lineage that lead ultimately to the diversity of modern vertebrates.

CONCLUSIONS
analysis of available sea lamprey genome data has identified a minimum of  <dig> intact single-exon chemosensory receptor genes. these gpcrs are homologous to the olfactory receptors, trace amine-associated receptors and v1r pheromone receptors described in higher vertebrates. expression of seventeen of these receptors has been detected in the olfactory organs of mating- and parasitic-phase lamprey by  <dig> sequencing and confirmed by rt-pcr. rt-pcr further indicates that more of these crs are expressed at relatively low levels in the olfactory epithelia. in situ hybridization for representative taar and or genes in olfactory epithelium demonstrates this expression occurs specifically in the olfactory receptor neurons of adult lamprey. these results provide strong support for the majority of these genes functioning in the sensory epithelium of the olfactory system. the presence of these gene families in the sea lamprey genome also suggests that the advent of or, taar and v1r gene families had occurred before the divergence of jawed and jawless vertebrates.

