BACKGROUND
the identification of mold in the clinical laboratory is classically based on macroscopic and microscopic examination of the colonies grown on mycological culture media. it is a slow and complex process requiring highly skilled mycologists, and misidentifications may occur, even in experienced reference laboratories  <cit> . additionally, some distinct species, which are identified via dna sequence analysis, are morphologically indistinguishable  <cit> . therefore, multilocus dna sequence analysis represents the recommended approach to accurately identify these microorganisms. nevertheless, the dna sequence-based identification of filamentous fungi is primarily limited by the following: i) low dna extraction yields because mold cells are difficult to lyse, ii) the presence of pcr inhibitors, iii) the presence of misidentified sequences in non-curated public dna sequence databases, and iv) the cost and time required for sequencing. currently, only some clinical laboratories routinely use a molecular approach for microorganism identification, which is primarily due to the cost and application constraints  <cit> .

recently, matrix-assisted desorption/ionization time-of-flight  mass spectrometry  has been applied to rapidly identify bacteria and yeasts in the clinical microbiology laboratory setting  <cit> . this technique is used to analyze microorganism content , thereby generating a spectrum that is considered the fingerprint of the microorganism  <cit> . using this technique, the identification of an unknown organism is performed by comparing the corresponding spectrum to a reference library of spectra. when establishing a reference library for microbial identification purposes, many authors have used reference mass spectra, sometimes referred to as “metaspectra” or “superspectra”, which are generated by combining the results of a various number of individual spectra corresponding to technical replicates of a given sample. previous studies have indicated that ms could be used to identify various filamentous fungi taxa of clinical interest, including fusarium spp  <cit> , dermatophytes  <cit> , aspergillus spp  <cit> , and pseudallescheria/scedosporium spp  <cit> ; those of industrial interest, including penicillium spp  <cit> , verticillium spp  <cit> , and trichoderma spp  <cit> ; and various filamentous fungal contaminants frequently isolated in the clinical laboratory  <cit> .

the heterogeneous morphological phenotypes of filamentous fungi affect the identification process. as shown in figure  <dig>  the same heterogeneity exists for maldi-tof mass spectra, between different strains of the same species as well as between subcultures of the same strain, which negatively impacts the reproducibility of the spectra. to troubleshoot this issue, we accounted for this heterogeneity during the establishment of the rms library . we hypothesized that ms identification effectiveness could be enhanced by increasing both the number of reference meta spectra  of a given strain included in the reference library and the number of deposits used to generate each rms. the primary objective of this study was to test the effectiveness of distinct reference spectra library architectures for the maldi-tof ms-based identification of filamentous fungi. more precisely, we assessed the influence on identification effectiveness of the following: i) the number of technical replicates, i.e., the number of analyzed deposits  from one culture used to generate an rms; ii) the number of biological replicates, i.e., the number of rms derived from distinct subcultures for each strain; and iii) the number of distinct strains of one species used to construct the library.

RESULTS
phenotypic and genotypic identification of clinical isolates
the results of the classical and dna sequence-based identification of  <dig> clinical isolates  were applied to classify the isolates into two groups: isolates included and isolates excluded from the msl. the ms results of both groups are summarized in table  <dig>  the isolates belonged to  <dig> different genera and  <dig> different species. moreover,  <dig> isolates corresponded to  <dig> species, which were represented among those used to construct the eight libraries, whereas the  <dig> remaining isolates belonged to  <dig> species that were not represented in the libraries.

rms: reference mass spectrum in the mass spectra library  constructed from several raw spectra.

concordant ls1: ls value for the first concordant identification with the library; non-concordant ls1: ls value for the first non-concordant identification with the library; nb.: number.

reference ms library validation
all  <dig> spectra derived from the  <dig> clinical isolates for which the species was not included in the seven ms libraries  yielded low log scores  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>   regardless of the library utilized, which is markedly below the manufacturer recommended threshold of  <dig>  for a valid identification. the number of correct identifications among the  <dig> remaining spectra  and the corresponding ls values were statistically different depending on the mass spectra library used for identification . notably, the number of identifications concordant with the molecular biology or microscopic identification and ls values significantly increased when the library included an increased number of both rms per strain and strains per species. in contrast, constructing rms from  <dig> raw spectra  instead of  <dig> raw spectra or reducing the number of raw spectra used to build rms of the b <dig> library from  <dig> to  <dig>  failed to significantly alter the performance of the identification process . overall, the best results were obtained using library b <dig>  which involved the combination of the highest number of rms per strain and the highest number of strains per species. using this library, we obtained  <dig>  concordant identifications, with ls values higher than  <dig>  in  <dig> %  of the cases and ls values higher than  <dig>  in  <dig> %  of the cases. conversely, all  <dig>  non-concordant identifications exhibited ls values less than  <dig> , a value under which the results of ls identification should not be taken in account. these results were dramatically improved compared with those obtained using library b <dig>  which included only one isolate per species and one subculture per isolate. indeed, using the b <dig> library, we only obtained  <dig>  concordant identifications,  <dig> % of which displayed ls values higher than  <dig>   and only  <dig> % were higher than  <dig>  . modulation of the msp creation parameters, while considering the b <dig> library, tended to show that the performance of the database could be improved by an increased peak frequency minimum, regarding the number of concordant identifications and the log score of the first identification  mean value. however, when these parameters were applied to the b <dig> library, we observed the opposite result .

a: percentage of concordant identification, b: ls mean of the concordant identifications.

considering aspergillus fumigatus isolates separately, the results ranged from 79%  to 97%  concordant identifications, whereas for other species, the percentage of concordant identification ranged from 56%  to 79%  . finally, the identification of a clinical isolate, regardless of the species, was not improved by creating metaspectra  of the  <dig> spectra for the comparison of the various libraries .

the multivariate analysis findings  indicate that concordant identification rates increased significantly with the number of both rms per strain and raw spectra per rms. similarly, the ls values significantly increased  with the independent effect of the numbers of rms per strain and raw spectra per rms . the independent effect of the number of raw spectra per rms was weaker than the effect of the number of rms per strain. the percentage of concordant identifications significantly increased exclusively when the number or raw spectra per rms exceeded  <dig> .

rms: reference mass spectrum in the library constructed from several raw spectra. nb.: number.

discussion
in contrast with recurrent efforts to improve the reproducibility of the ms-based identification of filamentous fungi by standardizing the pre-treatment procedures, we report the first study aiming to improve identification by comparing the effectiveness of distinct rms library architectures. however, in a recently published study aiming to identify filamentous fungi using ms, de carolis et al.  <cit>  have shown that some of the mass spectra data obtained during routine diagnosis matched preferentially with the rms obtained from either young or mature cultures of the same species. regarding scedosporium identification, coulibaly et al.  <cit>  have shown that both the culture media and the duration of culture had a significant impact on maldi-tof assay results. however, the standard recommendation to address problems associated with the heterogeneity of microorganism species is merely to increase the number of strains per species in the library. our findings confirm this hypothesis; however, it is particularly challenging to increase the number of well-characterized strains included in the rms library for each fungal species. numerous species have been described to play a role in human infections and, in many cases, only a single strain or a few strains of the same species are preserved in international collections. in the current study, we demonstrated that increasing the number of mass spectra generated from distinct subcultures of a given strain yields a significant improvement in the process of filamentous fungi identification and can partially offset the relatively low number of specific strains available to construct rms libraries. modulating msp creation parameters yielded discrepant results depending on the database that was taken into account. as the b <dig> database appears ideal for filamentous fungi identification, bruker’s default parameters for the msp creation method seem to be more suitable for library construction.

conversely, the number of spectra derived from a strain  that were used to construct rms did not result in a marked improvement of the identification performance. this straightforward optimization of rms library architecture significantly enhanced the identification effectiveness.

in this study, we used quadruplicates of the clinical samples to test the various rms libraries. by taking only the spectrum with the highest ls value into account, we observed an increased percentage of concordant identifications . in parallel, using the four clinical replicates to construct an msp and then compare it to the various libraries did not alter the results but instead tended to complicate the procedure, as this cannot be performed with rtc software during routine analyses.

the use of standardized conditions   <cit>  reduces filamentous fungi pleomorphism but does not preclude the heterogeneity of the mass spectra derived from a given isolate. for example, chen et al.  <cit>  have improved the accuracy of penicillium identification by assessing the presence or absence of different species-specific peaks in the mass spectrum data obtained when analyzing penicillium spores; however, separating spores from hyphae significantly complicates the pre-processing step. conversely, some authors have shown that mass spectra heterogeneity is reduced using non-sporulating hyphae obtained in broth culture conditions  <cit> . unfortunately, the more stringent the method, the less suited it is for high-throughput routine diagnoses. furthermore, certain impediments are difficult to avoid in routine culture conditions, such as inter-technician variations, variation in protocol, and minor variations , when aiming to standardize such protocols.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, this study provides useful insight into architecture design of reference ms libraries utilized for the maldi-tof ms–based identification of filamentous fungi in routine clinical laboratories. our results show that both incorporating an increased number of subcultures from each strain and increasing the number of strains representing each species are key to improve the architecture of rms libraries. these findings should be taken into account to construct a more effective library in clinical laboratories.

