BACKGROUND
initial analyses of the human genome sequence have showed that ~5% of the human genome is composed by interspersed segmental duplications   <cit> . sds can be defined as blocks of dna ranging from 1– <dig> kb in length, with copies found in multiple sites and that typically share high sequence similarity . the distribution of these duplications is non-uniform within and among chromosomes, with a tendency to cluster in pericentromeric and subtelomeric regions  <cit>  and in the breakpoints of chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> 

duplications have both functional and structural effects  <cit> . their functional consequences are very diverse. first, by predisposing chromosomal architectures to be rearranged by non-allelic homologous recombination  <cit> , sds constitute genetic risk factors for many diseases . second, sds are related to genic evolution because they produce duplications of coding sequences that can lead to genes with new functions  <cit> . finally, rates of evolution of duplicated genes are accelerated just after the duplication event  <cit> . these accelerations could be due to an increase of mutation rates after duplication, the relaxation of purifying selection due to the duplication of functional genes, the action of positive diversifying selection on one or both copies, or a combination of these factors  <cit> .

regarding structural effects, sds predispose chromosomes to rearrangements, which suggests that sds may be the main force driving the evolution of genomic structure along the lineages of mammalian species  <cit> . other studies, however, point to both sds and chromosomal rearrangements as different manifestations of the intrinsic instability of some particular dna sequences  <cit> .

recently, interest in the role of chromosomal rearrangements in speciation processes has been renewed. models of chromosomal speciation based on the reduction of recombination induced by rearrangements pose that regions involved in those rearrangements could become isolated earlier when compared to the rest of the genome  <cit> . these models predict an association between rearranged regions involved in any speciation process and higher divergence rates of linked dna sequences. current evidence for or against such models is extremely contradictory. in human-chimpanzee comparisons, higher evolutionary rates were originally linked to chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> , whereas other studies found no effect  <cit>  and even more recent ones have detected lower evolutionary rates within inversions  <cit> . in other lineages, new studies remain consistent with the original finding of higher evolutionary rates associated with chromosomal rearrangements  <cit> .

other explanations have been proposed to account for the relationship between chromosomal rearrangements and faster or slower evolutionary rates. for example, chromosomal rearrangements can influence dna divergence rates simply by inducing changes in genomic contexts. for instance, if some dna fragments are moved by a chromosomal inversion from a region with different recombination rates or different equilibrium nucleotide composition, this could induce changes in mutation  <cit> . also, rearrangements may tend to occur or to be fixed in regions of relaxed purifying selection and, thus, of faster genic evolution  <cit> . finally, chromosomal rearrangements  have been found to be located in regions of ancestrally high gc content in mammals   <cit> . thus, ancestral gc content could be contributing to the observed relationship between chromosomal rearrangements and higher mutation rates by means of methylation and deamination of cpg dinucleotides, leading to higher divergence measures in regions close  the rearrangements.

regardless of how the relationship between sequence evolution and chromosomal location change is ultimately resolved, it is important to consider the possibility of an association between sds and chromosomal rearrangements in relation to speciation. if rearranged chromosomes, whose breakpoints are enriched with sds, take part in speciation processes in which individuals bearing different chromosomal structures become genetically isolated, it is possible that evolutionary novelties contained in these duplications play some role in such isolation processes.

to tackle this issue we must start by understanding the rates and patterns of sd divergence in the primate lineages. here, we analyze the genomic distribution of intraspecific divergence between paralogous copies of human sds and of interspecific divergence between regions duplicated either in humans or chimpanzees and their homologous sequences in the other species. we take into account all major chromosomal rearrangements , and, in addition, several other genomic variables that affect evolutionary rates of single copy dna, such as, linkage to the x chromosome, hsax  <cit> , or to telomeric and centromeric regions  <cit> .

RESULTS
we addressed three main sets of questions. first, how are sds distributed in the genome relative to rearrangements? second, what is the genomic distribution of divergence between paralogous copies of human sds, especially in relation to rearrangements? and, third, what are the divergence distribution patterns of copies of sds between humans and chimpanzees? to address each of these questions we used three different datasets . the first one  contains pairs of coordinates of fragments of the human genome that have been defined as segmental duplications  <cit>  together with measures of divergence between these paralogous fragments. this dataset is used to detect accumulations of sds in different parts of the genome. the second dataset  was created to remove redundant information from the previous dataset. it contains only a sample of sds representative of each duplicated region. finally, a third dataset  was designed to represent the inter-specific divergence between human and chimpanzee for non-overlapping duplicated regions of the human genome. the aim of the two non-overlapping datasets is to study the distribution of sd divergence rates in different regions of the genome while avoiding the redundant information that the first dataset contains. to do so, the simplifying assumption is made that the selected representative of each duplicated region actually reflects the complex history of the region.

overrepresentation of relatively young sds in rearranged regions
we started using the raw dataset  to study the distribution of paralogous copies of human sds relative to the nine major rearrangements  between humans and chimpanzees . we defined as "young" sds those with a greater than 98% sequence identity among copies, while sds with less than 92% identity were labeled as "old". these labels, of course, do not imply strict age estimates, since gene conversion or positive selection are known to influence divergence rates of sds.

after all the filtering processes  in the filtered dataset, we observed a higher proportion of young sds within rearranged regions than outside them: ~40% of sds located within rearranged regions are young, while this figure is only ~12% for sds outside the inverted regions of the same chromosomes. also, these regions contained younger sds than colinear chromosomes, where only ~11% of sds are classified as young . it is crucial to note that these young duplications cannot be caused by the inversions. most of the  <dig> major rearrangements separating humans and chimpanzees took place in the chimpanzee lineage  <cit> , and here we are analyzing human sds. thus, this association is not caused by an accumulation of sds within the inversion itself, but within the orthologous region in the homologous chromosome of the sister species, which retained the ancestral structure.

the percentages were calculated as the proportion of pairwise alignments at each percent identity.

to check whether these results were due to a genome-wide phenomenon or were driven by some individual chromosomes, we performed a chromosome by chromosome analysis. this allowed us to pinpoint hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> as primarily responsible for the reported association. these chromosomes show the largest difference in percent identity and correspond to the greatest proportion of alignments . no other chromosome showed a differential accumulation of young sds within their rearrangements . therefore, the association above is mainly due to these two chromosomes which, being inverted in one lineage , have accumulated an expansion of recent sds in its sister lineage .

given that sds tend to cluster within pericentromeric and subtelomeric zones  <cit> , part of the above effect could be attributed to the fact that all the major rearrangements between humans and chimpanzees are pericentric, and thus include the centromere. we accounted for this possibility by excluding sds that mapped within  <dig> mb of the centromeres. to make sure that the filtering process had eliminated any centromere-associated effect, we simulated pericentric inversions in colinear chromosomes and searched for young sds within them. pseudo-inverted pericentric regions in colinear chromosomes were defined as regions equivalent in length and location to real rearrangements. given that the average inversion spans  <dig> % of its chromosome, we created a virtual inversion of that size in each colinear chromosome, keeping the centromere as the center of the inversion. on average, chromosomes with virtual inversions did present a higher proportion of young sds, but the effect is not as large. first, the increase was only 50% of that in real inversions ; and second, only hsa <dig> and hsa <dig> seemed to accumulate some local clustering of recent sds . however, clustering is not exclusive of the inverted region, as is the case for the inverted chromosomes hsa <dig> and hsa <dig>  but extends all over the chromosome. the rest of the colinear chromosomes did not show any particular age distribution of sds inside vs. outside virtual rearrangements, suggesting that the association of young sds and rearranged chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> might be not only due to the accumulation of sds near centromeres, even if that accumulation is likely to make a major contribution to the magnitude of our observation.

the percentages were calculated as the proportion of pairwise alignments at each percent identity.

the distribution of divergence between human paralogous sds
to study how the rates of intraspecific evolution of sd may be affected by rearrangements and other factors such as the location in sex chromosomes or telomeres, we used a second dataset: the non-overlapping dataset or dataset  <dig> . given the results above, we extracted two subsets from the original dataset: "young sds"  and "old sds" . we kept, as representatives of every covered zone, sds that had both copies in the same class of region .

we sequentially analyzed and removed every known variable affecting divergence rates , starting with sex chromosomes. young human sds located in hsax presented less divergence among copies than equivalent sds in autosomes. this is not the case for old sds. no length differences were detected in sds located in hsax. when located in hsay, young sds presented lower intra-specific divergence and increased length. old sds in hsay are also longer, but, in contrast, they present higher divergence between paralogous copies.

divergence  is calculated as the number of substitution per site between the two duplication alignments. length  corresponds to the aligned basepairs. p-values are calculated by means of permutation test .

regarding the position of sds along chromosomes, we first considered telomeres. only young sds located in telomeres showed higher divergence between paralogous copies. they also showed shorter alignment sizes. on the contrary, old sds did not present divergence differences between telomeres and the rest of the genome. when focusing on centromeres, we found that sds near them are longer in both subsets . as to divergence, only old sds showed a slight decrease of paralogous divergence in pericentromeric regions compared to sds located elsewhere in the genome.

hsa <dig> has been shown to have atypical divergence and nucleotide composition patterns. it presents higher divergence between human and mice, higher gc content, and an accumulation of dna binding genes  <cit> . also, hsa <dig> appears to have a deficit of interspersed sds   <cit> . surprisingly, our analysis shows that sds located in this chromosome did not differ from sds in other autosomes, neither in their length nor their divergence rates.

when we finally compared paralogous copies of human sds located in rearranged chromosomes versus sds located in colinear chromosomes, the only detectable patterns were that young sds are significantly longer and less divergent when located in rearranged chromosomes. however, this observation can not be exclusively attributed to inversions; because when comparing divergence among copies of human sds within the inverted regions  versus sds outside the inversion in rearranged chromosomes, there were no divergence differences, although sds were longer within rearranged regions. since evolutionary breakpoints are enriched with sds in many species  <cit> , we assessed the sequence features of sds located at the breakpoints of inversions separating humans and chimpanzees. neither the length nor the divergences of those sds are statistically different from sds located elsewhere in the genome.

finally, we considered a set of small inversions recently detected in silico  <cit> . sds located within these inversions showed a slight increase in divergence . only young sds showed a remarkable increase of length within those rearrangements.

the distribution of divergence between human and chimpanzee sds
we used dataset  <dig>  to study divergence between human and chimpanzee sds. this dataset is formed by two subsets of sds: first, a subset non-overlapping human sds for which we have measures of divergence from chimpanzee; and second, a subset of non-overlapping chimpanzee sds for which we have measures of divergence from human . again, we studied the effect of all the factors considered above in the divergence of sds among species by sequentially analyzing and removing every individual factor .

divergence is calculated as the number of substitution per site between the two duplication alignments.

our first observation was that sds located in hsax showed lower divergence than sds in autosomes. this effect was consistent for both datasets of inter-specific sd divergence. second, regions near telomeres presented higher divergence than the rest of the chromosome, just as previously seen for single-copy dna in other studies  <cit> . this pattern was again consistent for both human and chimpanzee subsets of sds. in contrast, and contrary to other studies  <cit> , inter-specific divergence in sds is higher near pericentromeric regions. finally, sds in hsa <dig> present higher divergence than sds in other autosomes .

regarding the effect of rearrangements over interspecific sd divergence, we found that sds within rearranged chromosomes diverged less than sds in colinear chromosomes, which is in agreement with the most recent results for single copy genes  <cit> . in contrast to previous results, there were no significant divergence differences between sds within versus sds outside rearranged regions. finally, and again differing from results in single copy genes  <cit> , sds located within small inversions  <cit>  revealed lower divergence rates compared to sds located elsewhere in the genome. to unveil any specific individual contributions of chromosomes, we analyzed interspecific divergence for every inversion . there was no clear pattern to be detected. only hsa <dig> presented higher divergence within its inversion and only when considering the subset of chimpanzee sds.

discussion
several conclusions arise from our whole-genome sds analysis. first, there is an accumulation of relatively recent human sds within some chromosomes that carry an evolutionary rearrangement between human and chimpanzees. seven of the nine major inversions between humans and chimpanzees occurred in the chimpanzee lineage , thus inversions cannot be the cause of that accumulation. the classical explanation of the accumulation would be that some of these young sds predate the split of humans and chimpanzees and, thus, that they originated the inversions via non-allelic homologous recombination, but this seems unlikely in the light of their location. our observations are consistent with an alternative scenario in which both chromosomal rearrangements and sds are consequences of a third factor, perhaps regions of high instability  <cit> . this has been suggested in opposition to the idea that rearrangements and sds are related only because highly similar regions promote rearrangements by non-allelic recombination  <cit> . a final possibility is that we are observing an excess of similar duplications in pericentromeric regions, specially in hsa <dig> and hsa <dig>  in which there are an excess of young human sds  within regions that were inverted in chimpanzees. even if we endeavored to remove the effect of centromeres, the possibility remains that particularly strong local effects were not accounted for. only further research on primate sds will allow to ascertain the involved phenomena and the order in which they occurred.

several authors have found that the association among rearrangement breakpoints and segmental duplications is maintained between different lineages, but not within the same lineage  <cit> . for instance, primate segmental duplications occur at specific locations that are enriched for mouse-human synteny and mouse-rat synteny breaks. as the majority of synteny rearrangements have occurred in the rodent lineage, there cannot be a causal relationship between the two. rather, it must be the case that primate segmental duplications tend to appear at the same locations in which rodent chromosomes have rearranged. thus, instability would seem a long standing property of these genomes at these locations. in addition, she et al.  <cit>  described a non-uniform distribution of intrachromosomal human sds and highlighted nine autosomal human chromosomes with an excess of young human sds, seven of which presented rearrangements between humans and chimpanzees . these observations provide evidence for a link between expansions of recent sds in one lineage and chromosomal rearrangements in the other. only deeper analysis of the two chimpanzee chromosomes that carry human-specific rearrangements  will help to clarify any direct relationship among chromosomal rearrangements and expansion of sds. this analysis, however, is beyond the scope of the present work and would require a higher quality sequence assembly of the chimpanzee genome.

several explanations can be put forward as to why chromosomal rearrangements and young sds should accumulate in sister lineages. the first one relates to the aforementioned instability regions. a recent change in the understanding of the evolution and behavior of sds  <cit>  poses that there are "core elements" that may act as sources for the dispersal of new sds, by creating a large number of copies of themselves. these copies tend to cluster by means of local duplications. thus, one explanation for our results would be that some core elements were present in the chromosomes ancestral to those that currently harbor inversions and sds in humans and chimpanzees. as inversions decrease recombination between homologous chromosomes  <cit> , core elements becoming active and expanding by local copies in a given class of chromosome, would be less likely to be eliminated by recombination from their source regions while rearrangements are still segregating in the ancestral population. thus, these core elements would accumulate copies of themselves only in the lineage in which they appeared. moreover, the reduction of recombination caused by inversions  <cit>  may also prevent the dispersal of the other associated sds . sds trapped within rearrangements would be more similar to the "original" state because they would be prevented from invading other regions or chromosomes that could affect mutation rates and thus produce highly divergent sds copies.

a second possibility is that lower recombination rates themselves could help explain our results. as suggested in previous work  <cit> , there is a positive correlation among low recombination rates, low diversity within species, and low divergence that can be explained by a mutagenic effect of recombination. while inversions are segregating, regions within rearrangements have lower recombination rates and, thus, they should present lower divergence . of course, this would only be the case if rearrangements had been segregating in the population for a long time, so that the reduction of recombination could have a detectable impact on mutation rates.

finally, some of the pairwise alignments classified as young sds may in fact not be young, but their high identity may have been maintained by gene conversion  <cit> . gene conversion is a homogenizing force that might erase differences among copies leading to underestimations of the age of sds. it is possible that during the segregation of new rearrangements, the resolving structure of the few recombination events taking place within inversions would be biased towards increased gene conversion instead of the reciprocal exchange of chromatids. this would help explain the excess of highly similar tracks of sds in one lineage together with inversions in the other lineage. however, this possibility implies that most gene conversion events ought to have happened before the separation of the two lineages and while the inversions were segregating in the population, which is unlikely. moreover, she et al.  <cit>  concluded that gene conversion events can not explain most of the high sequence identity of sd copies.

secondly, we conclude that old and young sds evolve at different rates when compared to single-copy dna, hinting at different evolutionary trajectories for different sd classes. it is possible that young sds are reflecting the history of recent primate evolution – which led to our species – while old sds may reflect periods of duplication early during primate evolution. our results, for example, support a recent expansion of young sds or a more complex interaction among recombination and sds. the latter appears to be the case for sds in telomeres, where young sds are marginally more divergent, but are significantly shorter than elsewhere in the genome, maybe as a result of telomeres having higher rates of recombination  <cit> . in contrast, older sds do not show this trend, which could be expected since telomeres are likely to have moved during primate evolution  <cit> .

regarding centromeres, and probably as a result of their decreased recombination rates  <cit> , we obtained larger sizes of pairwise alignments of sds. however, as centromeres have been reported to be prone to repositioning during evolution  <cit> , this result could be reflecting some other cause rather than a direct recombination effect. sds in hsay are also longer, which could be related to the lack of recombination in that chromosome or with recent, hsay-specific, sd expansions.

our main conclusion regarding major rearrangements between humans and chimpanzees is that young sds located in rearranged chromosomes are longer and exhibit greater sequence identity than sds located in colinear chromosomes. this could be expected, since rearrangements are known to be either human or chimpanzee specific and, thus, old sds should not be affected by such recent rearrangements. still, both young and old paralogous copies of sds tend to be larger within rearranged chromosomal regions. this is also the case for smaller rearrangements that have been detected in silico  <cit> . these are puzzling patterns, hinting at some period of decreased recombination within rearranged regions. finally, we observed higher levels of intraspecific divergence between sds within smaller inversions  <cit> . altogether, these data suggest that chromosomal rearrangements might have affected sd divergence rates during primate evolution.

our third and last finding is that interspecific sd divergence displays rates and patterns that are roughly equivalent to those of single-copy dna. sds located in telomeres and in hsa <dig> show higher levels of interspecific sd divergence. also, sds located in rearranged chromosomes show lower divergence between species. still, there are some discrepancies between single-copy and duplicated dna, such as the higher divergence between sds located in centromeres or the lower divergence of sds within small inversions. finally, hsay does not show the higher degree of divergence reported for single-copy dna  <cit> , perhaps as the result of the recent expansion of young sds in that chromosome  <cit>  or of extensive gene conversion  <cit> .

as to individual inversions, hsa <dig> stands out as the only chromosome showing significantly higher human-chimpanzee divergence within its rearrangement. this suggests a burst of interspecific divergence within the inversion, that could perhaps predate speciation. therefore, hsa <dig> is currently the best candidate to further study any potential relationship among sds, rearrangements, divergence, and speciation. if chromosomes have played any role in any of the speciation events that led to humans and chimpanzees, it is clear that not all of them would have made the same contributions and, thus, would not bear the same molecular signatures. we should keep this in mind when trying to explain why hsa <dig>  which presents high divergence of single copy dna located within its inversion  <cit> , does not present any particular pattern when considering its duplications. also, certain chromosomes  have been pinpointed as the most dissimilar between humans and chimpanzees in terms of the expression intensities of their genes  <cit> , findings which are only partially consistent with the results presented here.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we conclude that some rearrangements in the human and chimpanzee genome may be associated with dynamic regions in the genome that may result in rearrangements in one lineage and duplications in the other, although the effect is not seen in all chromosomes. on the other hand, intraspecific and interspecific divergences between sds are affected by the same factors which were known to affect divergence rates of single copy dna sequences. although chromosomal rearrangements do affect the evolution and fate of sds, chromosomal speciation  does not seem to have been a common process along the human and chimpanzee lineages. still, hsa <dig> is the best possible candidate to have been involved in some complex interaction among rearrangements, sds, and evolutionary novelties. studies which include more species and focus on the powerful novelty-generating force of segmental duplications are needed to increase our knowledge of this exciting topic.

