BACKGROUND
tetrahymena thermophila is a ciliated eukaryotic unicellular organism belonging to the regnum of protozoa and bearing two nuclei, a transcriptionally silent, diploid germline micronucleus  and a transcriptionally active, polyploid somatic macronucleus  <cit> . in  <dig>  when nobel laureate andre lwoff succeeded in growing tetrahymena in pure culture, the basis for exploiting this alveolate as a model organism was laid. milestone discoveries made in t. thermophila are the discovery of dynein motors <cit> , telomeres <cit> , rna-mediated catalysis <cit> , telomerase <cit>  and the function of histone acetyltransferases in transcription regulation <cit> . within the last decades molecular biological techniques have been developed to alter t. thermophila's genome and proteome: dna transfection methods range from microinjection <cit>  and electroporation <cit>  into the mac to biolistic bombardment of mic and mac <cit> . episomal plasmids based on an rdna-replicon are available <cit> , as well as knock out/-in techniques based on homologous recombination <cit> .

on protein level heterologous expression of related species has been performed <cit>  and also endogenous proteins were silenced by a novel antisense-ribosome-technique <cit> . the biotechnological potential of t. thermophila has been proven in numerous publications, demonstrating fast growth, high biomass, fermentation in ordinary bacterial/yeast equipment, up-scalability, existence of cheap and chemical defined media  <cit> .

although known and analysed for decades, only a few markers have been described for t. thermophila. so far there are ribosomal point mutation mediated resistances, a plasmid based neomycin resistance <cit>  and a beta-tubulin selection marker making use of an inducible promoter in combination with mutated tubulins being resistant or sensitive to the mitotic drug taxol <cit> . yet no true auxotrophic marker is available that permits selection without the use of antibiotics or drugs.

critical enzymes in pyrimidine biosynthesis are dihydrofolate reductase  and thymidylate synthase . dhfr catalyses the production of tetrahydrofolate from dihydrofolate; ts is in charge of transferring a methyl-group from n <dig>  n10-methylene-tetrahydrofolate to dump thereby generating dtmp and tetrahydrofolate. these enzymes being crucial for pyrimidine synthesis have been used as auxotrophic markers in various systems by targeted gene disruption but also a number of inhibitors  have been developed as anti-cancer drugs <cit> . in animals, fungi and eubacteria the dhfr and ts gene are separately translated, whereas plants, alveolata and euglenozoa have a bifunctional fusion gene with both enzyme activities combined in one protein .

the occurrence of the bifunctional enzyme in t. pyriformis has been postulated in  <dig> and  <dig> but no functional or even molecular biological analysis had been performed. a partial amino acid sequence of dhfr-ts of a non determined "t. pyriformis-like strain" has been published in  <dig> <cit> , but this work is lacking any proof of linkage to the described partial cdna to enzyme function. here we present a first characterization of the t. thermophila dhfr-ts gene including gene structure and functional data on the enzyme and data on in vivo function. for the first time we show that the t. thermophila dhfr-ts locus provides an auxotrophic marker system that enables monitoring of allelic assortment processes. as pcr based approaches always have to cope with wildtype alleles present in the mic, the dhfr-ts auxotrophy system is able to deliver direct proof of the allelic assortment to be completed: only in the case of all wildtype alleles in the mac having been substituted by the knock out construct the auxotrophy will occur. combining this methodology with a knock in, a new, stable and useful strain to express recombinant enzymes or proteins has been generated.

RESULTS
tetrahymenathermophila is a free-living ciliated protozoan that has become increasingly interesting as an excellent expression system. it is one of the best characterised unicellular eukaryotes and its genome has been sequenced in its entirety . these features form the basis for using t. thermophila in future biotechnology applications. however, appropriate marker systems that are essential tools for genetic manipulations are limited. the enzymes dihydrofolate reductase  and thymidylate reductase  play a crucial for pyrimidine synthesis, therefore both enzymes have been used as auxotrophic marker-systems in various species by targeted gene disruption. the aim was to establish such a dhfr marker system for t. thermophila. interestingly, the bifunctional dhfr-ts has been as taxonomic tool to set up phylogenetic trees for years. these approaches led to a very rudimental dhfr-ts amino acid fragment sequence of a non determined "t. pyriformis-like strain". by using this incomplete information and data from the entire t. thermophila genome it was possible to determine the whole sequence of the bifunctional dhfr-ts mac gene in t. thermophila. the t. thermophila dhfr-ts gene and its flanking regions were amplified by using the primer pairs dhfr 5'1f noti, dhfr 5'2r bamhi for the 5'region non coding region, the primer pair dhfr 3'1f xhoi:  <dig>  dhfr 3'1r acc65i for the 3'region and the primers dhfr cds-f, dhfr cds-f for amplification of the coding region.

the t. thermophila dhfr-ts gene structure
the comparison of the amino acid sequences of related species to the translated coding region of the dhfr-ts structure gene revealed the corresponding cdna . alignment with the cdna with the gene revealed the intron exon boundaries. figure  <dig> summarises the results and shows the mac gene structure with two introns, the corresponding dna sequence and the amino acid sequence of the t. thermophila dhfr-ts.

sequence alignment of the t. thermophila dhfr-ts enzyme to other alveolates
the alignment of the dhfr-ts between the alveolates tetrahymena thermophila, plasmodium falciparum, plasmodium vivax, cryptosporidium hominis and toxoplasma gondii  illustrates a 50–60% degree of identity between the proteins. this is also the case if the ciliate dhfr-ts is compared to the analogous enzyme of leishmania major and trypanosoma cruzi . this is almost due to the highly conserved thymidylate synthase part of the bifunctional enzymes. a highly conserved histidine is found at position  <dig>  suggesting that the amino acids 198– <dig> represent the thymidylate synthase part of the bifunctional enzyme. much more heterogeneity is found in the n-terminal part of the bifunctional enzyme that consists of the dhfr part and a linker site. the alignment reveals that almost all enzymes bear one or more individual, non-homologue amino acid stretches .

proper integration of the knock out construct into the dhfr-ts locus and auxotrophy for thymidine
in order to verify that only one dhfr-ts activity is present in t. thermophila and that the sequence given in figure  <dig> corresponds to this activity a construct for knocking out the dhfr-ts gene was made. by inserting the flanking regions of the dhfr-ts gene into a pbs ii sk backbone we created a plasmid for stable integration into the ciliate genome. the neo <dig> cassette of ph4t <dig> <cit>  was used to monitor the successful uptake of this plasmid by selection against paromomycin. figure  <dig> shows that the neo <dig> cassette is flanked by the ~ <dig>  kb fragments of the 5' and 3' parts of the non-coding regions of the dhfr-ts gene, respectively. because the pbs backbone lacks an appropriate origin of replication, paromomycin resistant t. thermophila clones argue for proper homologous recombination in the dhfr-ts gene locus.

the most convincing evidence for the correct integration into the dhfr-ts locus is a loss of the dhfr-ts activity in the transformed strain. however, in the case of t. thermophila this requires the complete replacement of all chromosomal dhfr-ts wildtype alleles  by the arps that includes the knock out cassette. we achieved this by allelic assortment, a phenomenon summarised in figure  <dig>  this allelic or phenotypic assortment is based on randomised distribution of the mac chromosomes units  during mitosis. in order to force the assortment process into the desired direction – namely into the recombinant resistance gene – the transformed cells were cultivated for at least 3– <dig> weeks using increasing concentrations of the drug paromomycin. single clones were isolated and tested for dhfr-ts deficiency by using a minimal chemical defined medium  with  and without thymidine . it could be shown that dhfr-ts knock out clones are real auxotrophic strains. the mutants are able to grow in cdm with thymidine like wildtype strains or strains with an incomplete allelic assortment. in cdm lacking thymidine they are unable to grow .

functional addition of an expression cassette to the knock out construct
the knockout of the endogenous dhfr-ts gene of t. thermophila also provides the possibility to knockin a further foreign gene that can be expressed heterologously in the dhfr-ts knock out strains. therefore we named our constructs pkoi . to illustrate this knock out/-in concept we constructed the pkoi dvl plasmid. it consists of a pkoi backbone with an additional expression cassette that encodes the first  <dig> amino acids  of the precursor sequence of the pla <dig> gene and the mature human dnase i . the pla <dig> pre/pro-peptide  has significant similarity to members of the cathepsin l family and mediates secretion into the medium <cit> . the five additional amino acids  should ensure an optimal cleavage of the pro pla1-dnasei fusion protein by endogenous pro-peptidases. in contrast to the neo <dig> cassette the expression of the pppla115-dnase i fusion protein is regulated by the inducible mtt <dig> promoter <cit> . the inducible system was selected because it allows a clear discrimination between the dnase activity of heterologously expressed recombinant human dnase i and the basal activity due to at least two endogenous dnases. the transformation, selection of positive clones and the directed allelic assortment were done as described in the material and methods section.

furthermore, we tested the correct and complete integration of both expression cassettes  in the dhfr-ts locus by a pcr approach . in order to demonstrate the pkoi concept, cells of these dhfr-ts knock out strains carrying the pppla115-dnase expression cassette were treated with and without cadmium. only induced strains showed an elevated dnase activity in the supernatant . to confirm this enzymatic data a specific antiserum against human dnase i was used to analyse the cell extracts and the supernatant of these human dnase expressing dhfr-ts knock out strains by western blot. the results illustrate that the dhfr-ts knock out strains are capable of expressing and secreting the functional recombinant human protein .

discussion
the ciliated protozoan t. thermophila features two nuclei, a somatic macronucleus  and a genetic micronucleus  offering different possibilities of manipulating the organism's properties .

it is well known that altering the cell's phenotype ultimately needs direct or indirect  genetic engineering of the vegetative mac. the first approaches for heterologous expression were done by using plasmids that use the vast amplification of the rdna gene during anlagen/mac development. however, the episomal presence of these plasmids depends on the drug concentration and the plasmid may recombine homologously and non-directionally into endogenous rdna units.

stable integration of expression cassettes into diploid mic can be achieved by biolistic bombardment. after conjugation of two different mating types the old macs disappear and new ones form that carry the new information derived from the recombinant mic. the whole process follows the statistics of the mendelian genetics. the advantage of this approach is that one obtains stable clones that maintain the genetic properties and that can be crossed via classical genetics to combine various properties of different t. thermophila strains. this approach is elaborative and time consuming. furthermore, it has been shown recently that scan rnas  derived from the old mac play an important role in dna elimination during the development of the somatic mac from the germline mic . the primary sequence of these small rnas explains how the parental mac epigenetically controls the genome rearrangement in the new mac. in the case of stable mic transformants this rnai-like mechanism may cause partial deletion of foreign expression cassettes in the developing new mac  <cit> .

therefore instead of episomal transformation by rdna based plasmids or the stable transformation of the mic we used a shortcut by combining mac transformation with allelic assortment. this combination has several advantages. firstly, the mac transformation is much more efficient because there are at least about  <dig> potential integration sites per gene locus. this increases the probability of integration to at least one order of magnitude. secondly, not only conjugating but also non-conjugating and therefore defined strains can be transformed. this is very important, because it allows the stepwise improvement of strains by maintaining defined genetic properties. thirdly after completed allelic assortment the use of any antibiotic is obsolete as wildtype alleles have vanished in a one-way-manner. this allows cheap cultivation at large scales for e.g. biotechnical production processes.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary use of the dhfr-ts gene locus as a target for homologous genomic integration does not only provide a robust and simple marker system to assure complete allelic assortment of altered arps in the mac but also the pkoi concept combining the dhfr-ts knock out with an additional knock in and subsequent expression of foreign genes.

