BACKGROUND
adaptation to diverse ecological habitats is a major force driving population differentiation, leading to the evolution of reproductive isolation, and ultimately speciation . theoretical studies suggest that populations in differential ecological habitats can develop reproductive isolation through divergent natural selection in a few thousand generations  or even in dozens to hundreds of generations . recently, progress in molecular and population genetic techniques has allowed us to estimate the evolutionary and demographic histories of recently diverged populations or species reliably. for example, model-based simulation analysis, such as the isolation-with-migration  model , can simultaneously estimate the divergence time, bidirectional gene flow since the initial split, and fluctuations in effective population sizes among recently diverged lineages based on the nucleotide variation at multiple loci. estimates of these demographic parameters in ecologically divergent lineages provide important insights into evolutionary histories, population dynamics, and the maintenance of adaptive divergence.

the flood-resistant riparian plants referred to as rheophytes  are remarkable examples of plant ecological adaptation. they are riparian specialists that inhabit riverbank habitats, where individuals are subjected to frequent submergence during intermittent floods after heavy rains. there are several advantages to using flood-resistant riparian plants to investigate the mechanisms of adaptive ecological divergence. first, the major selective force  and the resultant adaptive trait evolution  are explicit. to resist a strong flow of water, these plants typically evolve a narrow, thick leaf , increasing mechanical toughness of the leaves . second, flood-resistant riparian plants and their close non-riparian relatives with distinct phenotypes  are often found in parapatry across riverbank–forest floor transitions . the non-riparian relatives inhabit adjacent forest floor environments where flooding never reaches, providing opportunities to investigate divergence via divergent natural selection resulting from differential ecological habitats. non-riparian relatives usually have much wider ranges than the riparian species, implying that most riparian lineages are derived from inland progenitors after pioneering in flood habitats in each locality . third, most of these riparian taxa are considered to have evolved convergently in each region via local adaptation because they occupy separate taxonomic groups in angiosperms, as well as pteridophytes, which are found worldwide. approximately  <dig>  riparian vascular plant species have been reported , and most  are considered to be locally endemic with quite narrow ranges . therefore, comparative analysis of adaptive divergence among independently evolved riparian lineages is possible.

this study investigated the evolutionary and demographic history of the adaptively diverged plants in ainsliaea ; two independent lineages of flood-resistant perennial species, ainsliaea linearis makino and a. oblonga koidz., and their closely related species distributed in the japanese archipelago . ainsliaea linearis is endemic to yakushima island, in the southern part of the japanese archipelago . it is a riparian species that is strictly confined to rocky surfaces or crevices along riverbanks, where individuals are often subjected to flash floods after rains. a. linearis has developed narrow, streamlined leaves . ainsliaea apiculata sch. bip., the sister species of a. linearis , is distributed across the japanese archipelago, and yakushima island is the southernmost part of its range . a. apiculata has ovate or rounded leaves with shallow lobes and inhabits the floor or margins of deciduous or conifer forests . its range largely overlaps that of a. linearis on yakushima island, where the two species frequently grow in parapatry across riverbank–forestry transitions . a recent study using microsatellite dna markers indicated that parapatric populations of a. linearis  and a. apiculata are isolated reproductively, mainly by divergent natural selection arising from their contrasting riparian and inland habitats, despite ongoing hybridization . despite their distinct morphology and ecology, little genetic differentiation in some nuclear and chloroplast dna regions has been detected within this monophyletic group . this implies that the adaptive divergence occurred over a relatively short evolutionary timescale.
3: table s <dig> 

another riparian species, ainsliaea oblonga, is endemic to okinawa island, part of the ryukyu–taiwan island chain, which is located between southeast china and mainland japan . a. oblonga, like a. linearis, grows in flooded habitats. the leaves of a. oblonga are long and elliptical, and the base is cuneate, showing adaptive characteristics in flooded habitats . the closely related sister species a. macroclinidioides hayata is widely distributed across the ryukyu–taiwan island chain . it has ovate or rounded leaves with shallow lobes and inhabits the floor or margins of laurel forests . the two species occur together in northern okinawa island. a. oblonga grows along riverbanks in gorges that are flooded regularly, while a. macroclinidioides grows on upper slopes and ridges. although the two species are often distributed in contact , they show clear segregation in flooded and forest floor habitats. in common garden experiments, the leaf shapes of the two species were stable, suggesting that the morphological characteristics are fixed genetically. in addition, viable, fertile hybrids with an intermediate leaf shape can be produced with artificial crossing . in natural populations, however, intermediate phenotypes have not been seen, suggesting that the divergence of a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides is likely maintained by ecological factors, such as habitat segregation that could lead to pre- or post-mating isolation.

we investigated the divergence time, significance and directions of gene flow, and effective population size differences among riparian  and non-riparian  species in ainsliaea  using the im model based on the multilocus datasets of nuclear gene sequences. the specific hypotheses addressed are the following. first, the initial events splitting the riparian and non-riparian species might be recent, despite their distinct morphological and ecological differences. second, with adaptive divergence between the riparian and non-riparian populations, they could have exchanged genes since the initial split. the patterns of gene flow  might have implications for population dynamics, the relative strength of reproductive isolation, and selective pressures between the ecologically divergent riparian/non-riparian lineages. third, the riparian specialists could have less genetic variation and smaller effective population sizes than the non-riparian populations owing to genetic drift. comparative analyses of the two riparian species with different origins might show common or different patterns of divergence, providing implications for the process and maintenance of adaptive divergence to highly disturbed flooded habitats in this group of taxa.

RESULTS
patterns of polymorphism and genetic divergence in riparian and non-riparian species
we sequenced  <dig> nuclear loci with a total length of  <dig> bp from  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> populations of a. linearis,  <dig> of a. apiculata,  <dig> of a. oblonga, and  <dig> populations of a. macroclinidioides. the length of the aligned sequences for each locus ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> bp . we found five insertion–deletion  polymorphisms across all loci, but we did not include indels in the subsequent analyses. all sequences with different haplotypes  were deposited in the dna data bank of japan , with accession numbers ab601211–ab <dig> 

s, number of segregating  sites.

π, average number of pairwise nucleotide differences per site.

θ, watterson's estimator of θ per base pair.

rm, estimate of the minimum number of recombination events.

sf, number of segregating sites that are fixed between the two speices.

dxy, average proportion of nucleotide differences between species.

the sequence polymorphisms and divergence between each monophyletic pair of riparian and non-riparian species  are compared in table
 <dig>  for a. macroclinidioides, the southern populations were excluded from the analyses because they clustered as distinct lineages in the phylogenetic analyses . the genetic divergence between riparian and inland species was fairly small, and most of the polymorphisms were shared between them. the fixed nucleotide differences between a. linearis and a. apiculata averaged  <dig>  per locus, while no fixed difference was observed between a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides. we found that the riparian species tended to have fewer polymorphic sites and recombination events, and lower nucleotide diversities than the inland sister species.

none of the loci showed a consistently significant deviation from neutral expectations for tajima’s d or fu and li’s d* and f* statistics, except the a <dig> locus for a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides . for this locus, a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides showed significant deviation from neutral expectations in all three tests. since tajima’s d-statistic is sensitive to population structure and demography , we performed a multi-locus hudson, kreitman & aguad  test, which is robust to population structure and demography. when using one sequence of a. fragrans, which occurs in southeast china, as an outgroup, we did not detect a significant departure from the equilibrium model for any of the comparisons between each species and the outgroup . none of the  <dig> loci showed evidence of being under selection using all of the statistics for the species examined, and we used all loci for the subsequent analyses. note that inclusion or exclusion of the a <dig> locus in the analyses did not significantly change the results.

phylogenetic relationships and population structure
the phylogenetic network reconstructed using neighbornet analysis showed that the populations of the riparian species a. linearis formed a cluster . conversely, the populations of the other riparian species, a. oblonga, were not separated genetically from the non-riparian relative, a. macroclinidioides. the genetic admixture in a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides was also indicated in the structure analysis . the most likely number of clusters was four when the Δk statistic of evanno et al. <cit>  was applied . when k =  <dig>  a. linearis and a. apiculata comprised different clusters, while a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides were not separated from each other. the genetic admixture in the structure analysis could reflect recent introgression between the two species .

by contrast, the phylogenetic and structure analyses showed that the a. macroclinidioides populations exhibited distinct genetic structuring with regard to the northern  and southern  regions of the ryukyu–taiwan island chain, suggesting that a. macroclinidioides is a non-monophyletic group. the southern populations showed close relationships with chinese outgroup species. there was no evidence of within-species geographical structuring for the four species, with the exception of a. macroclinidioides. therefore, the southern populations of a. macroclinidioides were excluded from the riparian/non-riparian comparisons.

estimating demographic parameters
the maximum-likelihood estimates  and 90% highest posterior density  of the population genetic parameters estimated by im are shown in table
 <dig>  the parameter estimates were scaled using the geometric mean of the per locus mutation rate to make the parameters more easily interpretable. the analyses were conducted separately for each monophyletic pair of riparian and non-riparian species.

n <dig>  n <dig>  na: effective population sizes of population  <dig>   <dig> and ancestral. θ=4nu.

m1: the rate of gene flow from population  <dig> to population  <dig> per gene per generation. m1=m1/u.

m2: the rate of gene flow from population  <dig> to population  <dig> per gene per generation. m2=m2/u.

2n1m1: the effective rate of gene flow from population  <dig> to population  <dig> per generation.

2n2m2: the effective rate of gene flow from population  <dig> to population  <dig> per generation.

each value is the average of three independent runs of the simulations. demographic quantities, n <dig>  n <dig>  na, m <dig>  m <dig>  and t, were converted based on a mutation rate  of  <dig>  × 10– <dig> substitutions/site/year.

in the divergence parameter estimation the three independent runs consistently showed a sharp peak in each dataset, however, the marginal posterior probability distribution of the parameter did not drop to zero when sufficiently high values were reached. the mles of the divergence parameters were ca.  <dig>  years ago  for a. linearis and a. apiculata and ca.  <dig> years ago  for a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides . the estimated wide confidence intervals were likely due to small data set that may not be enough to achieve convergence.

the strict isolation model in which no gene flow occurred during the divergence of the two sets of riparian and inland species was rejected by likelihood ratio tests for both pairs . the gene flow between riparian a. linearis and non-riparian a. apiculata was estimated to be unidirectional; the gene flow from a. apiculata to a. linearis was significantly greater than zero , while there was no evidence of gene flow in the opposite direction . the population migration rates was  <dig>   from a. apiculata to a. linearis and  <dig>   in the opposite direction.

 <dig> nested models  were compared to the full model .

“log” is the posterior probability of the model given data, “2llr” =  <dig> × nested model-logfull model), “df” is the difference in number of parameters between nested and full model, and the p-value is the probability of achieving the test statistic  by chance under the null model. the models with p <  <dig>  represent rejection of the models and they are indicated in boldface. θ <dig>  θ <dig>  θa are effective population sizes of population , population , and ancestral population, respectively. m <dig> and m <dig> are the gene flow from  to  and  to , respectively.

more gene flow was detected between riparian a. oblonga and non-riparian a. macroclinidioides, although the probability distributions did not show sharp peaks . both directions of gene flow were significantly greater than zero . the gene flow from non-riparian a. macroclinidioides to riparian a. oblonga was also higher  than in the opposite direction . however, the population migration rates showed the opposite results; from a. macroclinidioides to a. oblonga  =  <dig>  and that in the opposite direction  was  <dig> , suggesting that the amount and direction of gene flow between the two sets of riparian/non-riparian lineages differed in each group.

we found that the effective populations of riparian species were significantly smaller than those of non-riparian species . the estimated effective population size of a. linearis was  <dig>  , nearly one-third that of a. apiculata . the population size difference between a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides was more remarkable. the riparian a. oblonga had the smallest effective population , nearly one-tenth that of the northern lineage of a. macroclinidioides . the effective sizes of the ancestral populations tended to be larger than the descendent populations, although the posterior probabilities had wide, flat distributions. this significant reduction in the population size of riparian species is consistent with the relatively low genetic diversity compared with the non-riparian species.

discussion
origins of the two flood-resistant species of ainsliaea
according to our estimation of demographic parameters using the im model, the initial splits of the flood-resistant riparian plants in ainsliaea might have occurred over short evolutionary timescales. given the wide confidence intervals, however, there is uncertainty in the divergence time estimates. such wide intervals were likely due to relatively small data set. the previous studies showed that the divergence time parameter tended not to reach to convergence for the recently diverged populations or taxa . the riparian and non-riparian relatives showed fairly low genetic differentiation that is consistent with the previous study using some nuclear and chloroplast dna sequences . based on the fact that the riparian/non-riparian species can hybridize and produce fertile progenies, our results support recent origins and rapid phenotypic evolution via adaptation to flooded habitats in this group of taxa. these findings are consistent with postulates that ecological differences can drive the evolution of phenotypes and partial reproductive barriers within short evolutionary timescales . in animals, there is increasing evidence of recent species diversification via ecological adaptation , but there is little evidence of this in plant species. our study presents a potential case of rapid speciation in plants arising through adaptation to different abiotic environments.

the two riparian species showed different levels of genetic divergence from their non-riparian sister species. a. linearis and a. apiculata, which coexist on yakushima island, comprised distinct genetic clusters in the phylogenetic analysis, suggesting that they have accumulated genetic differentiation since their split. by contrast, the riparian species a. oblonga and its sister species a. macroclinidioides, which coexist on okinawa, had no fixed nucleotide differences, and they were not clustered separately. a previous study demonstrated the origin of the flood-resistant riparian species solenogyne mikadoi, an endemic species in the ryukyu islands . it showed that the divergence between solenogyne mikadoi and the other solenogyne species with disjunct distributions in southeastern australia dated back several million years. this indicates that the riparian solenogyne mikadoi is a relict species that had diverged from its non-riparian relatives in ancient times, following geographical isolation through range shifts and local extinction. on okinawa island the two riparian species, a. oblonga and s. mikadoi, occur in flooded riversides. our results indicate that the existing taxa of flood-resistant plants have various evolutionary histories.

evidence of historical gene flow between riparian/non-riparian species
our im simulations rejected the strict isolation model of population divergence and provided evidence of historical gene flow between riparian and non-riparian species. recent coalescent-based analyses—such as the im model—have been used to distinguish between the effects of shared ancestral polymorphism and gene flow on the level of genetic differentiation . the likelihood ratio test indicated unidirectional gene flow from non-riparian a. apiculata to riparian a. linearis. one possible explanation of the unidirectional gene flow from riparian to non-riparian species is that the genes of riparian species are more difficult to move to non-riparian species inhabiting forest floor habitats. the nucleotide diversity of the riparian species was low, suggesting that their genomic components have undergone selection for specific types that have greater fitness in riparian habitats, but lower fitness in forest floor habitats. although the statistical test suggested the existence of gene flow, the population migration rates  between a. linearis and a. apiculata were below  <dig>  for both directions, suggesting that the riparian/non-riparian species have been isolated genetically and are well-differentiated .

by contrast, another set of riparian/non-riparian species, a. oblonga and a. macroclinidioides, was estimated to have exchanged genes at a relatively high rate since their divergence. the population migration rate from riparian a. oblonga to non-riparian a. macroclinidioides was  <dig>  and that in the opposite direction was  <dig> , suggesting that there was sufficient gene flow to prevent genetic differentiation between the two species. in the structure analysis, the genetic admixture and absence of population clustering in the two species also indicate relatively recent gene flow . the greater amount of unidirectional gene flow from riparian a. oblonga to non-riparian a. macroclinidioides might be due to the difference in the strength of selective pressures compared to the other riparian/non-riparian pair: a. linearis and a. apiculata. yakushima island, where a. linearis and a. apiculata occur, is characterized by very high rainfall, up to  <dig>  mm/year , leading to the development of fast-flowing rivers that often cause flooding after rains. it thus seems likely that divergent selection arising from riparian/non-riparian habitats is relatively stronger on yakushima island than okinawa island. the riparian/non-riparian species in each system can hybridize each other and they are reproductively isolated mainly by ecological divergence . the contrasting patterns of gene flow between the two riparian/non-riparian species pairs may be attributed to the different evolutionary history of divergence, reflecting different level of adaptive divergence in each system.

the gene flow between the northern and southern lineages of ainsliaea was estimated to be nearly zero , indicating that these regionally subdivided populations have long been strictly isolated. the estimated date of their divergence, ca.  <dig>  mya, is congruent with the geological history that the ryukyu–taiwan island arc had separated from the nearby continent . notably, morphological differentiation cannot be recognized between these allopatric populations of a. macroclinidioides . overall, the contrasting patterns of divergence  highlight the relative importance of adaptation to new ecological habitats for phenotypic evolution and speciation in this group of taxa.

levels of genetic diversity and population sizes
we found lower genetic diversity and significantly smaller effective population sizes in riparian populations compared to the non-riparian populations. flood-resistant riparian plants of various angiosperm and pteridophyte taxa have diversified globally . the ranges of most riparian species are confined to fairly small areas, while the closely related non-riparian species have broad ranges. therefore, in many cases, locally endemic riparian species are expected to have arisen from inland ancestral populations by adapting to flooding habitats. according to this assumption, our finding of lower genetic diversity and significantly smaller populations in riparian species might be a consequence of genetic drift during the process of adaptation to flooded habitats. during the process of local adaptation, natural selection might cause population declines and increase the potential for local extinction . consequently, founder populations are susceptible to genetic drift at the time of founding. indeed, the effective population size of a. oblonga, which is thought to have speciated quite recently, was the lowest of the four species studied. presently, the riparian species a. linearis occurs only on yakushima island and forms abundant metapopulations in the river systems . a. oblonga is also thought to maintain sufficiently large populations to prevent bottleneck effects that reduce genetic diversity . given that the plants in riparian flooded habitats suffer severe selective pressures, the invasion of flooded habitats is likely achieved by small numbers of founders, leading to reduced genetic diversity and effective population sizes through genetic drift. the im model assumes the absence of a population structure in the ancestral population and the sudden split, thus the model can be viewed as a simple case of divergence. in general, the effective population sizes of the descendant populations are well estimated, but the estimates of na are reported to be sensitive to model misspecification . thus, further investigations using other models of divergence with larger dna data sets are needed to address the detailed demography.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrated the recent origin of flood-resistant riparian plants, which are remarkable examples of plant ecological adaptation to abiotic environments. the population demographic analyses showed evidence of historical gene exchange between riparian/non-riparian species with parapatric distribution. the two independently evolved riparian species showed reduced genetic diversity and effective population sizes, implying that strong natural selection by flooding frequently reduced diversity of riparian populations. the small sizes of effective populations of riparian species could have promoted the fixation of adaptive trait divergence in highly disturbed flooded habitats. our results presented a potential case of rapid population differentiation and speciation by ecological adaptation in plants, and adaptive divergence between riparian and non-riparian species has been achieved in the face of gene flow.

