BACKGROUND
army ants are functionally defined by a suite of interrelated behavioural and morphological traits  <cit> : they are obligate group predators, they frequently emigrate to new nest sites, and their queens are permanently wingless and highly specialized egg-layers. some species conduct spectacular swarm raids, in which hundreds of thousands of ants form a dense carpet that sweeps through areas of  <dig> m <dig> or more on a single day in search of prey. however, this remarkable foraging behaviour is found in rather few species, as most army ants have an inconspicuous, completely underground lifestyle.

army ants in the dorylomorph clade  form a monophyletic group that originated in gondwana in the mid-cretaceous, slightly over  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . with the subsequent break-up of this supercontinent, the clade split into the new world army ants  and the old world army ants. the latter comprises three monophyletic subfamilies, the dorylinae , the aenictinae , and the enigmatic subfamily aenictogitoninae, which is only known from nocturnal males that have been sporadically collected at lights in sub-saharan africa, and which has been inferred to be the sister taxon to the dorylinae  <cit> . whether the aenictogitoninae have all the defining army ant traits will thus not be known until colonies with workers and queens have been discovered.

the subfamily dorylinae consists of the single genus dorylus, which has been subdivided into six subgenera  <cit> . this subdivision has, however, not become generally accepted  <cit> . five of these subgenera are entirely subterranean, but the sixth subgenus anomma encompasses both species that hunt in the leaf-litter and species that forage on the forest floor and in the vegetation. the latter are the infamous "driver ants"  <cit> , renown for their massive swarm raids that overwhelm most invertebrates that do not get out of their way and occasionally also small vertebrates  <cit> .

a major reason for the confused taxonomy and classification of dorylus s.l. is that most of the recognized species have only been described from a single caste or sex  <cit> . the large and distinctive males, which were originally described by linné  <cit>  as vespa wasps and are known in africa as "sausage flies", are easily collected at light sources during the night, but have rarely been taken from nests together with workers or queens. the extreme worker polymorphism within colonies and the difficulty of finding the largest workers among the foragers of subterranean species poses an additional challenge to resolving the phylogenetic relationships between species and species-groups with morphological data, because valid comparisons of homologous character states can only be made between workers of the same size. finally, similar worker morphologies in different species might reflect convergent adaptations to specific foraging niches and prey spectra rather than common ancestry.

in the present study we use dna sequence data to overcome the problems mentioned in the previous paragraph and to obtain an accurate and unbiased phylogeny for the genus dorylus. we use this phylogeny to reconstruct the evolution of the driver ants from their subterranean ancestors, and to infer the morphological changes that have occurred as putative adaptations to changes in foraging niche. the dna sequences also allow us to establish new associations between males and workers for several species across the different subgenera, thus helping to clarify dorylus taxonomy.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses
the maximum likelihood  topology  is given in fig.  <dig> together with bayesian posterior probabilities and ml and maximum parsimony  bootstrap values for all nodes. all three methods recovered very similar topologies: disagreements were restricted to a few terminal taxa, mainly within the driver ant clade, and none of these affected the conclusions to be drawn.

the total evidence indicates that:  <dig>  the southeast asian monotypic subgenus dichthadia is sister to the remaining dorylus s.l. species , confirming an earlier inference by brady  <cit> .  <dig>  each of the subgenera alaopone, typhlopone, and rhogmus is monophyletic according to the taxon sample obtained for the present study.  <dig>  the species of the subgenus anomma that forage in the leaf-litter are more closely related to subterranean species of the subgenus dorylus s.s., than to the surface swarm foraging anomma driver ants, which form a well supported clade. the close phylogenetic relationship between the leaf-litter anomma species and the subgenus dorylus s.s.  also emerges from the position of the male of d. gribodoi, which clearly belongs to a clade of leaf-litter anomma species, although it was originally described as belonging to the subgenus dorylus s.s..  <dig>  while most species of the subgenus dorylus s.s. form a clade nested within the leaf-litter anomma species, d.  spininodis is more distantly related and may be the sister taxon to the remaining species of dorylus s.s. plus anomma . this implies that the subgenus anomma is paraphyletic and the subgenus dorylus s.s. is polyphyletic.

male-worker associations
pair-wise genetic distances of mitochondrial sequences between closely related male-worker pairs were clearly bimodally distributed with five values ≤  <dig>  and the remaining five values ≥  <dig>  . using a  <dig>  reference value for two distantly related specimens of dorylus  molestus from the same population, we concluded that the first five pairs represent workers and males of the same species. some of the latter pairs may eventually turn out to belong to the same species as well once additional data become available, because most of these worker and male specimens came from distant populations  so that our threshold value for sympatric conspecifics is probably very conservative.

genetic distances were calculated from the mitochondrial dna sequences. the distance between two worker specimens of dorylus  molestus from the same population at mt. kenya is included as a reference . pair-wise distances below  <dig>  were inferred to characterize pairs that belong to the same species and are marked with an asterisk.

specimens have been deposited at the zoological museum in copenhagen, numbered consecutively with a reference to this publication . abbreviations of subgenera are anomma , dorylus s.s. , rhogmus , dichthadia , typhlopone , and alaopone . foraging niches were not applicable  for males and outgroup taxa.

reconstructing evolutionary transitions in foraging niche
mp and bayesian analyses unambiguously reconstructed three transitions in foraging niche . the first transition from subterranean to leaf-litter foraging took place between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million years ago   along the branch leading to the clade of anomma plus dorylus s.s. . the second transition, a reversal from leaf-litter foraging to subterranean foraging occurred between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya  along the branch leading to the dorylus s.s. clade . finally, a transition from leaf-litter foraging to surface swarm raiding occurred between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya  along the branch leading to the driver ant clade.

morphological analyses
the variation in maximum head width, antennal scape length, mandible length, and hind leg length was strongly correlated with foraging niche . when comparing these traits between the species that reversed to subterranean foraging from leaf-litter foraging and the extant leaf-litter species, we found that all measurements were significantly smaller in the former category . in fact, maximum head width, antennal scape length and hind leg length were all intermediate between the extant leaf-litter foragers and the originally subterranean species, while mandible length was even smaller in the reversed than in the originally subterranean species. with the reversal to subterranean foraging, species of the subgenus dorylus s.s. thus secondarily evolved a similar morphology in four key traits related to foraging performance and these convergent adaptations shifted trait values fully back to or even beyond the values that characterize the species that inherited subterranean foraging directly from the common ancestor of all dorylus s.l. species.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates that the currently recognized subgenera anomma and dorylus s.s. are not monophyletic. the driver ants of the subgenus anomma clearly form a separate clade from the anomma species that forage in the leaf-litter, which are more closely related to the subterranean species of the subgenus dorylus s.s. . the confusion about the subgenera anomma and dorylus s.s. can be traced back to the original descriptions of the leaf-litter anomma species d. kohli, d. gerstaeckeri, and d. emeryi and of the subterranean d.  spininodis. already wasmann  <cit>  pointed out that the workers of d. kohli seemed transitional between driver ants and dorylus s.s. in both morphology and foraging habits. because he assumed that the largest workers, which were not available to him for examination, would resemble those of driver ants, he assigned the species to anomma  <cit> . similarly, emery  <cit>  noted that workers of d. gerstaeckeri did not fit well with his diagnosis of anomma and our present findings indicate that the male that he described as d.  gribodoi might in fact be the male of d.  gerstaeckeri . furthermore, mayr  <cit>  described dorylus emeryi without reference to any subgenus, but the species was later assigned to anomma without explicit justification  <cit> . finally, males of d. kohli have been collected together with workers by j. van boven and are now shown to be identical to males that have originally been described as a dorylus s.s. species . it has thus always been acknowledged that males of leaf-litter anomma species are morphologically more similar to males of the subgenus dorylus s.s. than to the males of anomma driver ants, but their correct associations were not established until the present study.

at the same time spurious assumptions and imprecise subgenus definitions have led to the incorrect assignment of the workers of leaf-litter species to the subgenus anomma. while the workers of dorylus spininodis  were recognized as clearly distinct from the dorylus s.s. species of the "d. affinis species group" because they lack caudally projecting spines at the frontal carinae , the species was nevertheless assigned to the subgenus dorylus s.s.  <cit> . we thus conclude that the subgenera anomma and dorylus s.s. are not monophyletic, that suspicions of this have existed for a long time but only make sense in light of our present data, and that the current subgenus classification cannot be upheld. we will formally propose the necessary taxonomic and nomenclature changes elsewhere.

our results further show that the differences in life-style between dorylus s.l. species are not merely the result of a simple unidirectional development from subterranean foraging to surface swarm raiding, as has been assumed so far  <cit> , but that there has also been a reversal from leaf-litter foraging to subterranean foraging . previous analyses of dorylus s.l. worker morphology already showed that shifts in foraging niche are correlated with changes in several morphological adaptations  <cit> . longer hind legs increase running speed on the soil surface and allow the ants to carry larger prey items  <cit> , whereas shorter legs are probably adaptive in subterranean species which hunt in narrow tunnels  <cit> . similarly, larger heads can accommodate larger mandibular muscles so that workers can bite more fiercely  <cit> . large heads and mandibles are thus likely to be adaptative in driver ants, which have to defend their nests and foraging or migration columns against vertebrate predators   <cit>  and that benefit from being able to cut up larger prey. longer antennae, on the other hand, may allow workers to follow pheromone trails at higher speed while avoiding collisions  <cit> , which seems adaptive on open trails with a high volume of traffic. while an earlier analysis  <cit>  treated all species with subterranean foraging as a single monophyletic group, our present phylogenetic study shows that the subterranean dorylus s.l. species consist of two clades and that one of them has secondarily re-evolved subterranean foraging and many of the morphological adaptations to an entirely subterranean lifestyle . our present findings thus give strong independent support for the inference of schöning et al.  <cit>  that many worker allometries of army ants represent adaptations to specific foraging niches, as we now know that the subterranean syndrome evolved twice convergently.

our present study establishes that subterranean foraging is ancestral in dorylus s.l. and that leaf-litter foraging and surface swarm raiding originated later. the imprecise age estimates resulting from the lack of dorylus s.l. fossils make inferences regarding environmental conditions at the time of ecological niche shifts speculative. it is nevertheless interesting to note that the transition to surface swarm raiding and the reversal to subterranean foraging may have occurred at approximately the same time . this raises the interesting question why one group of army ants reverted to the subterranean foraging niche, which was already occupied by distant relatives, roughly at the same time that a second group began to exploit the entirely new niche of surface swarm raiding. how foraging niches evolved in the other army ant lineages and whether the common ancestor of all army ants also hunted in the soil is as yet unknown. this information, combined with data on prey spectra and distributional ranges, will be crucial to infer under which conditions the army ant life-style evolved, which general factors promoted the subsequent niche shifts in different lineages, and where these transitions took place. finally, detailed comparative analyses of worker morphology in the other army ant clades are needed to establish whether they also show correlated shifts in foraging niche and morphological traits of workers.

