BACKGROUND
heavy metal pollution has become a major issue in the agriculture fields due to recent advancements in industrial and urban activities. metals like cadmium  and copper  are added in the agriculture soil through contaminated irrigated water. higher concentrations of these metal cause toxicity to living cells, even at very low concentrations. cadmium can inhibit the growth and yield of plants as a result of chlorosis, instability of lipid membrane, oxidative damage  <cit>  and reaction with functional biochemicals  <cit> . copper  is naturally distributed in soil whilst plays essential role in plant growth. it is also important in its function to synthesize enzymes and proteins which are used in various metabolic processes by plants  <cit> . however, higher concentration is toxic for crops as it interferes with numerous physiological processes  <cit> .

lack of immobility and solubility of these toxic metals further synergized the negative effects on plant growth. phytoremediation is argued as a promising method to rehabilitate the polluted soil. however, most of the metal-accumulating plants are not suitable due to their small biomass and slow growth rates. therefore, it is deemed important to further develop remediation strategies for heavy metal contaminated soils  <cit> . in this regard, interactions among metals, microbes and plants have attracted much attention because of the biotechnological potential of microorganisms to remove metals directly from polluted media and the possible role of microorganisms in promoting plant growth in metal contaminated soils  <cit> . among microbes, endophytic fungi have been recently known to produce plant growth regulators  and extend plant tolerance under abiotic and biotic stresses  <cit> . in addition, it has been shown that endophytic fungi such as chaetomium globosum <cit> , neotyphodium coenophialum <cit>  and neotyphodium endophytes  <cit>  have the potential to remove soil contaminants by enhancing phytoremediation potential of the host-plants  <cit> .

soybean growth is often hindered by the calamities of extreme environmental conditions, thus reducing crop yield and growth. soybean is known to play essential role in human health and food intake specially the east-asian countries  <cit> . previously, we isolated and identified endophytic fungi from the roots-tissues of soybean plants . these endophytic fungal species produced gibberellins, increased plant growth and enhanced tolerance against salinity and drought stresses. endophytes penicillium funiculosum, metarhizium anisopliae, and exophiala sp. extended greater benefits to host-plants by ameliorating host-physiology during stress conditions. the endophytes were bioactive in promoting waito-c  and dongjin-beyo  rice cultivars. p. funiculosum and exophiala sp were detected to produce physiologically active gibberellins through advanced gc/ms selected ion monitor  techniques  <cit> . promicromonospora sp. was observed to produce ascotoxin  <cit>  and inhibited the seed germination of lettuce and weed seed. metarhizium anisopliae was inactive to produce gibberellins but played active role to help the host-plants to resist salinity stress  <cit> . since these endophytes were active to counteract abiotic stresses and produced phytohormones/secondary metabolites, therefore, we hypothesized that due to this potential they might help the host-plants to avoid heavy metal toxicity. to elucidate plant-microbe-metal interactions, we initially screened four endophytic fungal strains to know their potential to bioaccumulate cu/cd in contaminated mediums. the bioactive strain was then associated with host soybean plants to assess the metal removal capacity and influence on the essential biochemicals and plant growth.

ga ; its ; lsu ; nd ; nst .

RESULTS
screening for metal resistant endophyte
four different endophytic fungi  isolated from soybean plants were screened for their potential to bio-accumulate metal. the results showed that promicromonospora sp. and exophiala sp. did not grow well during ten-days of incubation in cu and cd polluted mediums. conversely, the growth of p. funiculosum and m. anisopliae was significantly higher during cu as compared to cd . the growth area of promicromonospora sp., exophiala sp., m. anisopliae and p. funiculosum was  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig> ,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cm <dig> during cu stress respectively. in case of cd stress, the growth of all endophytes was not significantly different from each other. though the growth area of m. anisopliae and p. funiculosum was a little higher but it was not significant.

upon high growth of m. anisopliae and p. funiculosum in cu/cd stress, we carefully removed the mycelial pads and subjected it to icp-ms analysis to determine the level of metal accumulation. p. funiculosum contained significantly higher concentration of cu as compared to m. anisopliae while cd accumulation was not significantly different between each other . the phosphate and sulphate contents were significantly higher in p. funiculosum as compared to m. anisopliae. thus, on the basis of growth dynamics and higher accumulation rate of copper, p. funiculosum was selected for further experiments of plant-metal-microbe interactions.

p. funiculosum-association influenced soybean growth and photosynthesis pigments during cu stress
the bioactive p. funiculosum was associated with host soybean plants to assess the effect of symbiosis on the plant growth during cu stress. endophyte association  with host soybean plants significantly increased the shoot length and biomass as compared to non-inoculated control  plants . during cu stress, the shoot length, shoot and root fresh biomass were considerably reduced in the endophyte-free  plants as compared to p. funiculosum infection. the reduced growth of shoot and root was quite visible and significant in e- plants than e + with or without cu stress . reduced leaf area and increased leaf curling was significantly higher in e- than e + plants under cu stress. this enhanced growth was also confirmed from the quantities of essential elements i.e. carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen. the elemental analyses showed that carbon content was significantly higher in the shoot parts of e + plants as compared to e- with or without the excursion of cu stress . this suggests higher plant biomass assimilation during the symbiosis of endophyte. the hydrogen content was similar in e + and e- plants under normal growth conditions however under cu stress, it was significantly higher in e + plants than e-. it suggests that the relative proportion of water was significantly higher in the shoot of endophyte-inoculated plants than non-inoculated control plants . nitrogen assimilation in shoot part of the plants plays a pivotal role in maintaining improved growth and metabolism. during plant-endophyte-metal interaction, the endophyte-inoculated e + plants had assimilated significantly higher level of nitrogen in shoot as compared to control e- plants during cu stress .

values in the table refer to mean of  <dig> plants/treatment while ± shows s.e. means followed by different letter  are significantly different  between e- and e + as determined by duncan’s multiple-range test.

to further assess the role of endophyte in improving plant physiology and relieving the adverse effects of cu stress, photosynthetic pigments like chlorophyll and total carotenoid were determined. the results in figure  <dig> showed that during normal growth condition, chlorophyll a and total carotenoid content had no significant difference between e- and e + plants however, chlorophyll b was significantly higher in e + than e-. upon cu stress to soybean plants, the e + plants had significantly higher chlorophyll a, b and total carotenoid as compared to e- plants. the increased synthesis of photosynthetic pigments was also confirmed by the level of protein metabolism. total protein content was significantly higher in e + plants as compared to e- plants under normal growth and cu stress conditions .

copper uptake and root essential nutrients composition
to elaborate the metal uptake by the soybean roots, the cu content was assessed through icp-ms. according to analysis, cu was not detected in e + plants grown under normal conditions however the e- plants contained a significantly lower amount of cu in roots. under cu stress, a significantly higher cu uptake was observed in the non-inoculated control plants  as compared to p. funiculosum-inoculated plants . a similar trend was also revealed in the cu accumulation in soybean shoots. the e- plants had significantly higher cu content in their shoots as compared to e + during cu-stress . furthermore, there was a significant difference between e + and e- to remove cu. from the cu quantification, it was also observed that the root parts had higher concentration of cu as compared to shoot which suggest endophytic intervention of cu transport into shoots via roots . this was also confirmed from the cu removal capacity of endophyte-inoculated plants. the result showed that the cu tolerance rate was significantly higher in e +  as compared to e- . the transport index was also significantly different between e + and e-. the p. funiculosum inoculated plants had lower cu transport rate  as compared to e- . it indicates that endophytic fungal-association has mitigated the cu induced abiotic stress.

essential nutrients i.e. sulfur and phosphorus uptake from the soil by roots was significantly higher in e + plants as compared to e- plants. phosphorus  is a major nutrient for plant growth and reproduction. phosphorus content was significantly higher in the roots of e + plants under normal and cu stress conditions as compared to e- plants . current findings suggest that p. funiculosum helped the soybean plants in the availability of p even during stress conditions. sulfur, being taken from soil into plant tissues, plays essential role in building parts of plant proteins and important amino acids. significantly higher contents of sulfur was found in the roots tissues of p. funiculosum-associated plants as compared to non-inoculated control plants under normal and cu stress conditions . calcium  in plant’s roots plays a pivotal role in plant growth and response to abiotic stress and microbial association  <cit> . our results showed that endophyte p. funiculosum association significantly activated ca signaling in the roots of soybean plant as compared to control . the same trend was also observed under cu stress. potassium  content was also significantly higher in e + plants than e- plants under normal and cu stress conditions.

effects on electrolytes, lipid peroxidation and reduced glutathione
the electrolytes release from plant tissues was not significantly different between e + and e- plant under normal conditions. however, when soybean plants were exposed to cu stress, the rate of electrolytes formation was significantly higher in non-infected soybean plants as compared to p. funiculosum infected plants . the results suggest that endophyte-association reduced the functional membrane damage under cu stress. this was also in conformity with lipid peroxidation of leave tissues of endophyte-associated plants. it is known that with excursion of stress conditions the peroxides of polyunsaturated fatty acids generates malondialdehyde  which is the most abundant individual aldehydic lipid-layer breakdown product  <cit> . normally abiotic stress induces the rate of lipid peroxidation by producing higher amount of mda. however, this trend was minimized by the endophyte-symbiosis with soybean plants as compared to control plants during cu stress . additionally, the cu toxicity also develops oxidative stress inside plant tissues which is counteracted by the recruitment of antioxidants like glutathione. reduced glutathione  was extensively synthesized in endophyte-inoculated plants than the non-inoculated ones under cu stress and normal growth conditions .

regulation of free amino acid and abscisic acid in host-plants under cu stress
plants synthesize its amino acids using nitrogen and related intermediaries obtained through roots from the soil  <cit> . the free amino acid synthesis was higher during endophyte-association under normal growth conditions as compared to endophyte-free counterpart. the aspartic acid , threonine , glutamine , leucine , methionine  and proline  were significantly higher in e + plants than e- under normal conditions . the other amino acids were either similar or in-significantly higher in e + than e- plants. free amino acid production was further stimulated by cu stress in the presence of endophyte . the level of pro, glu, and leu was significantly higher in p. funiculosum associated plants as compared to non-infected  plants.

endogenous stress-responsive phytohormone abscisic acid  was accumulated upon exposure to abiotic stresses including heavy metal. the control plants  when treated with cu accumulated significantly higher level of aba. conversely, when endophyte-infected plants were treated with cu, the aba level was observed significantly lower as compared to non-inoculated control plants .

discussion
in the present study, bioactive endophytic fungal strains were initially screened for their growth potential in cd and cu polluted mediums. the results suggested that p. funiculosum had higher growth rate as compared to the other three m. anisopliae, promicromonospora sp. and exophiala sp endophytes. p. funiculosum had higher potential to dwell in excessive cu than cd. the role of endophytic fungi has been recently elucidate by li et al.  <cit>  however, this more concentrate on the bacterial strains than fungal strains. few endophytes like microsphaeropsis, mucor, phoma, alternaria, peyronellaea, steganosporium, and aspergillus have been known to grow well in polluted medium and protect plants from adverse effects of metal stress  <cit> . very little has been known about endophytic penicillium and its role in host-plant resistant to metal stress. some strains of penicillium janthinellum and p. simplicissimum have been found to grow well in high cu medium  <cit> , suggesting that they bears higher biosorption capacity against cu. previous studies showed that some strains of penicillium can extend tolerance to host plants against metal toxicity. for example, strains of p. janthinellum and p. simplicissimum reduced the aluminum and zinc toxicity as it produced citric acid  <cit> . similarly, an isolate of penicillium sp. bioaccumulated cd during incubation period  <cit> . the findings of studies suggest that strains/species of penicillium can mitigate the cd and other metal-related toxicity, which can be attributed to their potential to produce bioactive metabolites or enzymes  <cit> . previously, it was noted that p. funiculosum produce bioactive gibberellins which can contribute to the ability of a fungus to convert the toxic metal into stable complexes  <cit> . a similar effect of stabilizing the negative effects of sodium chloride toxicity was also observed when this endophyte was inoculated to soybean plants  <cit> .

association of endophytic fungi with crop plant can increase plant fitness under abiotic stress conditions  <cit> . the secretion of plant growth regulating compounds by the endophyte probably is the mechanism responsible for the enhancement of plant growth  <cit> . since the culture filtrate of p. funiculosum showed the presence of physiologically active gibberellins  <cit> , therefore, we inoculated soybean plants with the culture medium including propagules of the endophyte. application of such phytohormones producing endophytes can counteract adverse effects of abiotic stresses on plant growth as shown by khan et al.  <cit> . indeed the fungal associations have ameliorated the growth of arabidopsis  <cit> , rapes  <cit> , solanum nigrum <cit> , festuca arundinacea and festuca pratensis <cit> , lolium arundinaceum <cit>  under various cd/ni stresses. cu has been known to induce reduction in photosynthesis, water and nutrient uptake. plants grown in soil containing high levels of cu show visible symptoms of injury reflected in terms of chlorosis, growth inhibition, browning of root tips, and finally death  <cit> . in addition, cd causes decreased stomatal conductance  <cit>  which affect photosynthetic rates. in present study, we observed that endophytic-fungal association activated the growth of soybean plants by improving plant biomass and synthesizing high chlorophyll, carotenoid and protein to counteract the cu stress. the ameliorative impacts of endophyte-association were also rectified by the shoot’s carbon and hydrogen content after excursion of cu stress. a similar effect was also observed when neotyphodium endophytes were colonized to various grass species. its symbiosis protected the host plants from metal toxicity of aluminum  <cit> , cupper  <cit>  and zinc  <cit> .

in addition to plant biomass loss, excessive cu pollution also reduces the availability and uptake of essential micronutrients in both root and shoot  <cit> . conversely in present results, the endophyte-infection increased the k, ca and p contents in root tissues as compared to control  plants under cu stress. besides potassium’s role in plant cellular metabolism, it plays essential part in oxidative stress responses by helping the synthesis of glutathione  which is associated with stress tolerance  <cit> . in present study, the gsh level was significantly high in e + plants than e- under cu stress. these results suggest that copper alters the equilibrium between synthesis and utilization of gsh either due to its antioxidant role or by serving as a precursor in the synthesis of phytochelatins  <cit> . similarly, our results showed that ca content was high in the presence of endophyte during stress. ca has an essential role in plant growth and signal transduction related to many biotic and abiotic circumstances  <cit> . to minimize cu toxicity and rescue plant productivity, it is essential for plants to uptake freely available mineral nutrients . this also indicates that increased endophytic-fungal colonization with soybean plants resulted in activation of ca signaling to counteract stress. previously, kováčik et al.  <cit>  indicated activation of ca upon cu stress. among nutrients, phosphate is major macronutrient for plants to sustain cellular metabolism whilst availability of free phosphate can extend higher growth and metabolism in host plants  <cit> . microorganisms are major contributor in this function. previously, we found that p. funiculosum had high phosphate  solubilization potential  <cit>  and hence in present study, the same helped the host soybean plants to accumulate high p as compared to endophyte-free plants during cu stress. these ameliorative effects on soybean plants were also rectified by the reduced levels of cu accumulation in the roots of e + plants as compared to e- plants. it further suggests that endophyte might have higher sorption of cu during association with host-soybean plants thus accumulating low level of cu inside roots. however, the in-depth mechanism is still unclear.

it is evident that cu toxicity to plants also results in membrane damage due to generation of reactive oxygen species. during stress, the malondialdehyde  is generated which indicates impact on plant membrane  <cit> . the significantly higher level of mda in e- plants shows injury to functional membrane during cu stress. this was also confirmed by the high electrolytic leakage of e- plants. however, during symbiosis with endophyte, most of the adverse effects of cu toxicity were minimized which suggests the ameliorative function of endophyte. excessive cu toxicity, on the other hand, adversely affect the physiologically important free amino acid metabolism  <cit>  because it lies at the crossroad between nitrogen assimilation, carbon fixation and secondary metabolism  <cit> . current results showed reduced amino acid metabolism in e- plants as compared to e + plants during cu stress, which suggest rescuing role of endophyte-association to enhance cellular metabolism and improve plant growth. e + plants had significantly higher pro, glu, and leu under cu stress. proline  has been widely known to act as osmo-protectant during abiotic stress condition whilst its accumulation in e + plants showed restoration of growth against stress. current findings of higher nitrogen assimilation by e + plants further corroborate with the fact that even in stress conditions, the glutamate cycle and amino acid inter-conversion were not significantly affected as compared to e- plants.

heavy metals such as cu toxicity to the plants also increase the biosynthesis of endogenous abscisic acid  . higher aba may also inhibit the photosynthesis rate as stress perception causes the closure of stomata to avoid dehydration. this further reduces leaf area and plant shoot length with the passage of stress period just like e- plants under stress. in present study, aba level was significantly lower in e + plants as compared to e- plants under cu stress. while after ten days of stress period, the e + plants still maintained higher growth as was noticed during the quantification of free amino acids, essential nutrients and aba. previous studies suggest that fungal inoculation can increase aba content in leaves and roots as compared to non-inoculation control plants  <cit> . contrarily, current findings showed that endophyte-associated soybean plants had reduced aba as compared to control plants during stress. this altered level of aba confirms the findings of mauch-mani and mauch  <cit>  and jahromi et al.,  <cit> , who observed low level of aba under stress and fungal-association. this could be due the gibberellins secretion potential of the endophytes because the non-gibberellins producing strains did not contributed towards the bioaccumulation of cd/cu during the screening experiment. a similar behavior of endophytes was also observed in some of the previous studies  <cit> . sharp et al.  <cit>  reported similar results with flacca mutant, however, in present study, the phosphate solubilization and gibberellins production potential of endophyte p. funiculosum has not only reprogram the plant growth but also helped the soybean plants to tolerate cu stress.

CONCLUSIONS
the findings of the present study suggest that endophytes such as p. funiculosum can not only improve plant biomass but also resist to the toxic effects of metal contamination. such beneficial impacts are due to their potential to secrete bioactive gibberellins as noted previously which might help in converting the metal into stable complexes. this could be also attributed to the reduced level of metal inside roots and shoot of soybean plants in symbiosis with endophyte. influencing soybean plant’s root physiology whilst delineating ameliorative impacts on shoot growth is an ideal strategy to achieve the dual uses of increased crop productivity as well as reduced toxic effects of copper pollution. however, it is also essential to understand the in vivo mechanisms by which the gibberellins producing endophytes reduce the metal toxicity.

