BACKGROUND
geographic parthenogenesis, or the broader and higher-latitude geographic distribution of asexuals compared to their sexual counterparts in taxa where both types coexist, is well-established in both plants and animals
 <cit> . several non-exclusive explanations have been proposed to account for this pattern
 <cit> . popular hypotheses include higher phenotypic plasticity in asexuals due to efficient selection for general-purpose genotypes
 <cit> ; better colonizing abilities of asexuals that facilitate range expansion e.g. into previously glaciated areas
 <cit> ; and reduced pressure from pests and pathogens at higher latitudes that allows asexuals to capitalize on their reproductive advantage compared to sexuals
 <cit> .

the latter ‘biotic interactions’ hypothesis rests on two assumptions. first, it builds on the idea that sexual reproduction is inherently costly compared to asexual reproduction but is advantageous in the face of specialized coevolving pests and pathogens, presumably because sex generates genetically variable offspring which reduces the risk of infection. this red queen  hypothesis for the evolutionary maintenance of sexual reproduction
 <cit>  has received empirical support in several systems and ecological studies have confirmed key assumptions and predictions of the hypothesis
 <cit> . still, as modeling studies show
 <cit> , it remains under debate how general the rq hypothesis is in explaining host sexual reproduction and many alternative hypotheses for the maintenance of sexual reproduction exist
 <cit> .

the second assumption is that herbivory and pathogen pressure is less intense at higher latitudes. this has been a commonly accepted idea with considerable empirical support
 <cit> . recently, however, the existence of a latitudinal trend in plant herbivory and associated plant defenses was challenged by meta-analysis
 <cit>  and large-scale empirical screening, which both failed to support the idea
 <cit> . however, as argued by johnson and rasmann
 <cit> , the patterns predicted by coley and aide
 <cit>  may be more readily observed by comparing geographical trends in species with similar life history and roughly comparable habitats than in the type of meta-analyses conducted by moles et al.
 <cit> , which include a wide variety of plant growth forms, habitats, and sections of continuous latitudinal ranges. plant-pathogen interactions have been less studied than plant-herbivore interactions in a latitudinal context
 <cit>  and relatively little empirical evidence exists to support the idea that plant pathogen pressure is lower at higher latitudes. these studies have typically been performed either across small latitudinal ranges, spanning less than one
 <cit>  up to fifteen degrees latitude
 <cit> , or on wider geographic scales but focusing on microbial diversity in general rather than on pathogen pressure
 <cit> . if a pattern of decreasing herbivory and pathogen pressure with increasing latitude is in fact absent then the biotic interactions hypothesis cannot be a general explanation for geographic parthenogenesis.

in plants, little empirical support exists that geographic parthenogenesis is correlated with relaxed pest and pathogen pressure in high-latitude asexual populations compared to low-latitude sexual populations
 <cit> . here, we test for this pattern in the common dandelion , a species with well-established geographic parthenogenesis
 <cit> , by linking dandelion sex-asex variation to geographic variation in the occurrence of several specialized dandelion pathogens and herbivores. sexual t. officinale are diploid self-incompatible plants whereas asexual t. officinale are triploid obligate apomicts; both forms co-occur in south-central europe but only the asexuals extend much further northward into scandinavia. first, we experimentally evaluated pathogenic effects of natural soil microbial communities by comparing pathogenicity between soils from southern  populations and soils from northern  populations. soil pathogens are little explored in a rq context but they play important roles in shaping plant communities
 <cit> . second, we surveyed natural dandelion populations along the south–north axis of geographic parthenogenesis to record field prevalence of infection by a specialized rust fungus and a specialized seed-eating weevil. infection prevalence does not necessarily reflect pathogen pressure and the risk of infection, because prevalence also depends on host susceptibility which may differ between populations. however, prevalence is often used as an initial proxy for population-level differences in infection risk, and this can be a reasonable proxy especially when between-population differences in prevalence are large
 <cit> .

the overall hypothesis that we test is that the asexual dandelion populations in the northern part of the transect are exposed to lower herbivore and pathogen pressure compared to the mostly sexual dandelion populations from the southern part of the transect. this tests a key assumption of the hypothesis that antagonists are causally responsible for dandelion geographic parthenogenesis.

RESULTS
sex-asex variation between dandelion populations
ploidy analysis confirmed the previously established pattern of geographic parthenogenesis in this species. populations from the northern part of the transect  were all triploid and thus apomictic. the southern part  contained apomictic, sexual and mixed populations .

see figure
 <dig> for population locations. infection rates are the proportion of infected individuals within the population sample. weevil infection was not determined  in some populations.

soil inoculation effects on plant growth
effects of the soil inocula, measured across plants from all eight populations and expressed as the log ratio of biomass in inoculated soil compared to control soil , ranged from − <dig>  to − <dig>  for the southern soils  compared to + <dig>  to − <dig>  for the northern soils . soils from the southern sites tended to cause stronger plant growth suppression than soils from the northern sites . individual soils showed large variation in effects on different plant populations, with strong growth suppression effects observed more often in soils from southern populations. a significant effect of leaf length indicated, as expected, that plants that are larger at the start of the soil inoculation treatment have higher final biomass; by including this factor as a covariate in the statistical model our test for soil inoculum effects is independent of size differences between individuals at the start of the treatment. there was no evidence that plant populations showed a different growth response to soils from their local home sites compared to soils from other sites .

degrees of freedom are given in parentheses, the model residual has  <dig> degrees of freedom. the ‘south versus north soils’ contrast tests whether shoot biomass differs when plants are exposed to soils from the four southern  populations compared to soils from the four northern  populations.

to test whether prevalence of a specialized rust fungus and the specialized taraxacum weevil glocianus punctiger differ along the north–south transect we compared the proportions of infected plants per population between the northern part  and the southern part of the transect . northern populations showed lower levels of weevil infection . rust infection also tended to be lower in northern populations  but this difference was not statistically significant . consistent with the observed north–south patterns in rust and weevil incidence, infection levels by rust and weevils tended to be lower in apomictic populations than in sexual populations; however, these relations were not statistically significant .

discussion
the biotic interactions  hypothesis for geographic parthenogenesis assumes, first, that herbivory and pathogen pressure is less intense at higher latitudes; and second that pressure from coevolving pests and pathogens selects for host sexual reproduction while absence of this pressure selects for asexual reproduction. our study tested and tentatively confirmed the first assumption and is further consistent with the second assumption. for all three types of antagonists that we tested, northern dandelion populations on average showed reduced antagonist prevalence or impact compared to southern dandelion populations, and this was generally correlated to dandelion sex-asex variation and geographic parthenogenesis. the statistical support for this pattern varied among antagonists, being significant for weevils, very close to significant for soil pathogens  and non-significant for rust incidence. however, the consistency of the relationship in all antagonist types lends some confidence to the observed pattern. the lack of statistical significance may be a statistical power issue due to a comparatively limited number of populations included in our study, relative to large inter-population variation. for instance, similar surveys in other systems demonstrated the same pattern using larger numbers of populations
 <cit> . a positive correlation between pest/pathogen prevalence and host sexual reproduction has been found in some but not in all systems that have been comprehensively studied
 <cit> .

recent studies have challenged the existence of a latitudinal trend in herbivory
 <cit> . large scale studies of latitudinal trends in herbivory often compare different species and systems. it has been pointed out that better control for phylogenetic differences should provide better tests of the latitudinal trends
 <cit> . studies such as ours, which compare populations of the same species along a latitudinal transect, may provide the best possible test cases for the existence of a latitudinal trend in plant-antagonist interactions because the patterns are not confounded by species or community-specific differences along the latitudinal transect.

our results are consistent with, but do not directly confirm, the assumption that antagonists select for host sexual reproduction. better support for this hypothesis could come from observing the same correlation between antagonists and host sex-asex variation in randomly selected populations, not in populations sampled along the north–south transect of geographic parthenogenesis . population surveys in different species have previously explored a correlation between host sex-asex variation and antagonist prevalence, confirming rq predictions in some systems
 <cit>  but not in others
 <cit> . if we look at the populations only in the southern part of the dandelion transect, where sexuals and asexuals coexist, the association between infection rate and the proportion of asexuals also showed a negative trend across populations . this conforms to the rq predictions, however, the trends are not significant and the low number of populations makes it difficult to confidently interpret this result. in general, testing rq predictions in areas of mixed sex-asex dandelion populations may be complicated by potentially high levels of clonal diversity within apomictic dandelion populations
 <cit> . because pests and pathogens may select for host diversity rather than host sexual reproduction per se, sexual reproduction is not necessarily the winning strategy under high pest and pathogen pressure when competing with a diverse population of asexual genotypes
 <cit> .

our study provides a first evaluation of the patterns of incidence for some of the antagonists that are relevant in natural dandelion populations. of the tested antagonists, the rust fungus may be the most relevant in a rq context. our survey shows that it is widespread and often infects a large proportion of plants within a population. moreover, rusts can have severe fitness impacts in natural plant populations
 <cit>  and can track common host genotypes and potentially drive negative frequency dependent selection within populations
 <cit> . soil pathogens have not previously been considered in plant rq studies. we show that pathogenic effects of soil communities are common and can result in dandelion growth reduction of 20% or more . this is the net effect of all soil microbes present in the soil communities. identifying fitness effects of individual soil pathogen species may not be straightforward, but the widespread occurrence of soil pathogenic effects highlights the impact of soil antagonists for dandelion performance. we detected the weevil g. punctiger in all populations along the transect that we screened for weevil larvae presence. this widespread occurrence, combined with generally high infection rates within populations  and high levels of seed predation within infected capitula
 <cit> , suggest that g. punctiger is a dominant herbivore in dandelion. however, it is unknown whether the dandelion-weevil interaction shows enough genotype-specificity to play a role in rq dynamics.

in species with geographic parthenogenesis, including t. officinale, the asexual variant often has an increased ploidy level compared to the sexual variant. it has been argued that ploidy differences, not reproductive mode, can be responsible for patterns of geographic parthenogenesis
 <cit> . however, where sex-asex variation exists in plants without ploidy level change, a pattern of geographic parthenogenesis can still be observed
 <cit> . in boechera holboellii, where polyploidy and apomixis can be uncoupled and diploid and polyploid apomicts exist, diploids extend more extensively into previously glaciated areas than polyploids
 <cit> . although ploidy and not reproductive mode may contribute to geographic parthenogenesis in some systems
 <cit> , such observations suggest that polyploidy per se is not a general and sufficient explanation for geographic parthenogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
our study suggests that dandelion populations at higher latitudes are exposed to reduced herbivores and pathogens and this pattern generally correlates with dandelion geographic parthenogenesis. this highlights the possibility that antagonists drive patterns of geographic parthenogenesis. whether or not antagonists are in fact causal to dandelion geographic parthenogenesis depends on the validity of the rq hypothesis for sexual reproduction, which remains to be further demonstrated in this system.

