BACKGROUND
chromosomal organization in the nucleus has been gradually recognized as an important contributor to gene regulation and genome function. in the last decade, chromosome conformation capture  has been developed as a high-throughput assay to explore long-range chromatin-chromatin interactions in vivo <cit> . technologies derived from 3c, such as hi-c  <cit> , 5c  <cit>  and tcc  <cit> , explore global chromatin interactions. other methods like chip-3c  <cit>  and chia-pet  detect chromatin-chromatin interactions mediated by a specific dna binding protein  <cit> . a particular derivative of 3c method named circular chromosome conformation capture  enables de novo detection of all interacting partners of a known genomic region, such as differentially methylated h <dig> imprinting control region  <cit> . similar to 3c-based global mapping of chromatin-chromatin interactions, 4c follows the same concept of 1) crosslinking of protein-dna complexes in the cell nucleus to capture chromosome conformation and 2) proximity ligation of physically interacting chromatin fragments. however, instead of using immuno-precipitation to capture the ligated junction dna pieces in chip-3c and chia-pet, 4c utilizes pcr reactions to enrich genomic regions interacting with a known “bait” region. the pcr products generated from the 4c technology can be subsequently examined by different approaches: they can be cloned for sanger sequencing  <cit> , or hybridized to a microarray  <cit> . given the rapid development of next-generation sequencing, it is now feasible to directly interrogate the pcr products from the 4c technology . this technique enables genome-wide mapping of the chromatins interacting with the “bait” in greater resolution and precision.

in most of the published 4c studies to date  <cit> , 4c library preparation typically starts with formaldehyde crosslinking of chromosomes in vivo, followed by restriction enzyme digestion to fragment chromosomes. after proximity ligation in diluted condition, chromatin proteins are digested with proteinase k and formaldehyde crosslinks are reversed. finally “bait”-containing circular dna molecules generated from the ligation are amplified using bait-specific primers in nested pcr reactions. although enzyme digestion-based 4c method has limitations such as noisy/weak chromatin associations  <cit> , low chromatin accessibility-dependent digestion efficiency as well as uneven distribution of restriction digestion sites across the genome, it should be acknowledged that recent advance in enzyme-based 4c method greatly increased data resolution and robustness by using 4-bp cutter instead of 6-bp cutter in fragmentation  <cit> . compared to enzyme digestion, sonication is less accessibility-dependent and preferentially breaks crosslinked chromosomes at the edge of protein binding sites  <cit> . thus sonication-based approach provides an alternative choice for 4c-seq studies  <cit> , which is potentially more straightforward on exploring bound transcription factor that mediate the interactome.

unlike enzyme digestion-based 4c method  <cit> , sonication-based library presents a data analysis challenge which requires a different set of analytical approaches. the major reason is that each restriction enzyme has a set of known breakage sites in the genome, so that researchers typically align all reads against flanking sequences of this set of restriction enzyme site, and the restriction sites are the exact ligation sites between two interacting regions  <cit> . in contrast, sonication method has generally no preference of sequence motifs at breakage sites. without knowing the exact ligation sites a priori, the pipeline for data processing is anticipated to be different from enzyme digestion-based method. so far, the bioinformatics pipelines have not been well developed to process sonication-based 4c data generated by high-throughput short-read sequencers, such as illumina hi-seq. in the current study, we describe a sonication-based 4c-seq protocol that we applied to explore pou5f <dig> enhancer interactome in mouse es cells. the pou5f <dig> enhancer has been known to mediate expression of its own gene product – oct <dig>  a key reprogramming factor  <cit> . thus exploration of this enhancer interactome will provide better understanding of pou5f1-related regulatory network. to compare different 4c protocols, we also performed a parallel study using an enzyme-based method described in  <cit> . we analyzed consistency of processed 4c-seq data generated from biological replicates, applied statistical analysis to identify enriched interacting regions, compared the reproducible enriched interacting regions identified from enzyme and sonication methods, and explored epigenetic features enriched in the 4c interactome.

RESULTS
overview of sonication-based 4c library preparation
based on previously published 4c studies on krt gene cluster  <cit> , we slightly modified the experimental protocol for sonication-based 4c library preparation . we chose an upstream enhancer element of pou5f <dig> gene in mouse es cells as bait and constructed 4c libraries for two biological replicate samples br <dig> and br <dig>  compared to the study by huang et al.  <cit> , our method on post-processing of the generated 4c library for next-generation sequencing is notably different. huang et al. analyzed the amplified 4c products consisting of bait-target-bait dna pieces using  <dig> titanium sequencer. in our study, to adapt to illumina short-read sequencing, an additional sonication step fragments 4c products into ~200 bp dna pieces containing bait, targets, bait-target junctions as well as genomic contaminants, before subject to illumina hi-seq sequencing. sonication of ligated dna fragments to smaller pieces for hi-seq sequencing was also applied in a recent hi-c study  <cit> . we used an end-tag mapping method, similar to the one described in  <cit>  for identifying junction reads from sonication-based 4c-seq data. in our study, enzyme-based 4c-seq library preparation strictly followed the protocol described in  <cit> .

data processing framework
based on our experimental protocol, the short sequencing reads from illumina hi-seq platform should theoretically fall into four categories: 1) reads at the 4c bait locus, 2) reads at the bait interacting regions, 3) reads that spans ligation junctions between bait locus and its interacting region, as well as 4) noises caused by contamination of genomic or circular dna that are not amplified in pcr reactions . we therefore evaluated different strategies to identify these four types of reads.

we first attempted to separately map both forward and reverse reads  of the paired-end data to the reference genome  using burrows-wheeler aligner , to identify the reads that are completely aligned to the “bait” locus or other genomic regions. for sequencing data generated from the two biological replicates, the mapped reads account for ~77% of the total reads , with most of the mapped reads being uniquely mapped. with this mapping strategy, >99% of the uniquely mapped reads are within the bait locus, suggesting the presence of many proximal interactions or self-ligations in the data. only  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the uniquely mapped reads are mapped to distal genomic regions, that is, the majority of them should fall into category  <dig> described above, though it is possible that some of them may originate from genomic dna described in category  <dig>  we also note that unmapped reads in the biological replicates account for ~23% of total reads, which may correspond to ligation junctions that cannot be mapped to the reference genome, that is, category  <dig> above. given the limited amount of data supporting category  <dig>  we believe that this mapping strategy is not optimal for identifying bait interacting regions.

we next evaluated an end-tag mapping strategy  <cit> , generally applied in 3c-based studies to identify category  <dig> reads that are mosaic of the bait and its interacting regions. a similar strategy was also previously used in a chia-pet study  <cit> , with 20-bp end tags. here we define “bait region” as a ~1 kb region, which includes 500 bp extension from the locations of the 2nd set of forward and reverse pcr primers . we extracted 20-bp end tags from both forward and reverse sequencing reads and aligned them to the reference genome assembly separately using bwa  <cit> . the generated forward and reverse alignment files were merged together using samtools  <cit> . junction reads are identified, when one end-tag uniquely maps to the “bait” and the other end-tag maps to genomic locations > 300 bp away on the same chromosome  or to a different chromosome . the rationale to choose 300 bp is that our sonication approach generates small dna pieces with an average size of 200 bp for sequencing, so end-tags that are > 300 bp away should mostly be junction reads. we next classified junction reads as proximal junction reads and distal junction reads. proximal junction reads have two end tags mapped on the same chromosome with genomic distance between the tags between 300 bp and 10 kb. distal junction reads are either two tags on the same chromosome with distance greater than 10 kb or two tags on different chromosomes. proximal junction reads account for ~90% of total junction reads identified , with the distribution of relative genomic distance between the two ends following a continuous decay, starting from 300 bp to 2 kb, similar to the self-ligation events observed in a chia-pet study  <cit> . predominant proximal ligation may reflect disruption of weak chromatin-chromatin interactions under the shearing force, thus facilitating self-ligation events. since no interactions were identified within the distance range from 2 kb to 10 kb in both br <dig> and br <dig> biological replicate data, we used 10 kb distance cutoff to distinguish proximal vs. distal intra-chromosomal interactions.

to explore distal chromatin-chromatin interactions, we processed distal junction reads for further analysis. tags that were within 100 bp range on their genomic locations were considered as pcr products from a single ligation event and merged as one unique distal interacting site, given that the 4c library dna was fragmented before sequencing. unique distal interacting sites supported by only one read were removed from our analysis as they likely represent background noises. in total, using 20 bp end-tag mapping, we identified  <dig>  and  <dig>  filtered unique interacting sites respectively from two biological replicate data generated from sonication-based 4c method. in the following sections, we will discuss 4c sequencing data in the context of data reproducibility, effect of sequencing depth, statistical models for identifying enriched interacting regions, comparison of reproducible interacting regions identified in both enzyme and sonication methods, epigenetic histone features surrounding the interacting sites within the reproducible regions, and transcription factors enriched around sonication generated interacting sites.

reproducibility of the inter-chromosomal interactions
chromatin-chromatin interactions are highly dynamic  <cit> , and the interactions are probably more transient than protein-chromatin interactions in the nucleus. for example, ctcf mediated interactome in mouse es cells has only 38% overlap between biological replicates, suggesting dynamic feature of ctcf mediated chromatin-chromatin interactions; while 98% peaks identified in ctcf chia-pet study can be found in chip-seq peak data of ctcf, reflecting strong association of ctcf with chromatin fibers  <cit> . we note that the 4c-seq approach aims to take a snapshot of chromatin interacting patterns, which reflect the average state across hundreds of thousands of cells. genome-wide 3c/hi-c, chia-pet studies revealed more consistent proximal interactions than distal interactions. it is likely that sequencing depth for such studies is not sufficient for capturing less frequent distal interactions, such as inter-chromosomal interactions. compared to 3c-based studies, 4c-seq explores the interactions associated with only one bait area, thus in theory, it enables a more thorough search of less frequent long-range interactions, provided the same sequencing depth of the prepared dna libraries. therefore, we decided to determine the reproducibility of inter-chromosomal interactions between biological replicate samples by counting the number of observed interactions in every genomic bin and calculate the correlation between replicates. the correlation of the data is an indication whether the bait region has preferred interacting partners located on different chromosomes or the inter-chromosomal interactions mainly result from random collision between the chromosomes. as for 4c-seq data, the reproducibility can also be affected by many factors including efficiency of proximity ligation, pcr amplification, dna fragmentation, the quality and depth of next-generation sequencing, as well as the data processing strategy. theoretically, sticky-end ligation applied in enzyme-based method should result in higher ligation efficiency than blunt-end ligation in sonication-based method; however, smaller size of chromatin fragments generated by sonication may contribute to higher chance of collision frequency between two breakage points. in our analysis, the replicate interactome data of the pou5f <dig> enhancer generated from both methods were included for comparison . the recommended data processing protocol for analyzing enzyme-based inter-chromosomal interactions  <cit>  was used to count the number of ligated hindiii sites for each genomic segment that covers  <dig> hindiii sites. for 4c-seq data generated by sonication method, we counted the number of identified unique interacting sites in each 2 mb genomic bin  to explore the correlation between biological replicates. for inter-chromosomal interactions generated in biological replicate mouse es cells, we found pearson’s correlation coefficient values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for enzyme-based and sonication-based 4c libraries respectively . when we attempted to use smaller bin sizes  for sonication-based data, the correlation coefficient between the replicates decreased to  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively . for enzyme-based data, using smaller bin sizes  also resulted in a similar decrease of correlation coefficient values . thus, the two methods showed similar reproducibility, and sonication-based method doesn’t improve or degrade the resolution in this case. also in our experiments, the biological replicate data for enzyme-based 4c libraries showed that 36% of the inter-chromosomal interactions identified in the second replicate are in close proximity  to the interactions in the first replicate, whereas 46% of the inter-chromosomal interactions from sonication-based 4c libraries showed proximity between biological replicate. this analysis indicated that interacting regions identified from biological replicates are relatively consistent with each other, in spite of different methods applied in chromatin fragmentation.

evaluation of sequencing depth
intuitively, sequencing depth is directly related to the ability to find relatively rare interacting events, as well as the true fraction of the reads that can be informative to finding distal interacting events. we explored with 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 90% and 100% of the original sequencing data to perform the same set of analysis for the replicate data of sonication-based 4c libraries, and analyzed their correlation patterns. as shown in figure  <dig>  with sequencing depth rose from 10% to 100%, the coverage of identified clustered distal interacting sites in the two biological replicates  gradually increased from 30% to 46% . more importantly, pairwise correlation of interacting frequencies of 2 mb genomic bins between br <dig> and br <dig> showed an increment from  <dig>  to  <dig> . however, when more than 75% of the sequencing reads were used in analysis, both coverage of the interacting sites and correlation of the interacting frequencies in the two replicates reached a plateau. therefore, ~ <dig> million total short reads  from illumina sequencing is sufficient to capture most of the interacting events of this enhancer element in mouse es cells.

statistical analysis to identify enriched interacting regions from the inter-chromosomal interactions
as a high-throughput assay, 4c-seq revealed thousands of sites interacting with one bait region. however, it is unlikely that all the interactions identified are biologically significant, and many of them probably represent random collision between two genomic fragments in 3d space. to identify regions that are frequently associated with the bait region other than random collision, we applied statistical models to analyze interacting sites within each chromosome. we used a permutation-based false discovery rate  procedure to choose significantly enriched interacting regions. for enzyme-based 4c data, a z-score was assigned based on the number of 4c interacting sites per  <dig> hindiii sites  <cit> . for sonication-based data, each interacting site was assigned a z-score based on the nearby interactions observed within ±1 mb distance range . fdr was calculated by random permutation of the data  <dig> times, and the cutoff value of 5% was used to select positive sites. positive sites and the nearby interaction sites  were grouped together as enriched interacting regions. overlapping enriched regions were further merged together. the statistical models applied here aim to identify enriched interacting regions from the background, similar to the concept used in chip-seq peak calling.

comparison of enriched interacting regions identified from 4c-seq data generated from different methods
statistical analysis identified  <dig> and  <dig> enriched inter-chromosomal interacting regions for each replicate data generated from the enzyme approach, with about 40% overlap of the identified regions  between the two biological replicates . for sonication-based data,  <dig> and  <dig> regions were identified from each replicate, with nearly 50% of the regions are overlapping between the two replicates . thus those reproducible regions represent high-confidence interactions that might have biological consequences. it is interesting to note that one third of the reproducible inter-chromosomal regions identified in the enzyme method overlap with the reproducible regions from sonication-based data . thus, the pou5f <dig> enhancer shows preference in interacting with distal regions that are located on different chromosomes, and the identified reproducible regions even possess certain level of consistency between sonication-based and enzyme-based 4c-seq approaches.

comparison of distal intra-chromosomal interactions
intra-chromosomal interactions include both proximal cis-interactions around the bait locus and long-range cis-interactions distal to the bait area. both enzyme and sonication-based 4c-seq data revealed a majority of proximal cis-interactions in all the interaction reads identified . as shown in the distribution plot for the identified intra-chromosomal interaction reads , distal interactions occur even at 60 mb away from the bait location. interesting to note, sonication-based method generated less distal intra-chromosomal interactions compared to enzyme-based 4c-seq method . for enzyme-based 4c-seq,  <dig> % and  <dig> % of all the hindiii sites on chromosome  <dig> were identified as interaction sites for the two biological replicate data respectively, suggesting a high background  in intra-chromosomal interactions, similar to the observations published by de latt group  <cit> . data generated by sonication-based method is consistent with the 4c-seq data from ruan group with only a few distal intra-chromosomal interactions  <cit> . clearly, in our case, we did not observe predominant distal intra-chromosomal interactions within all the distal interactions from sonication-based method, contrasting to the data generated from the enzyme method we used. sequencing depth in general, affects interactions identified; however, since we are examining ratio of distal intra-chromosomal interactions among all interactions, differences in sequence coverage is unlikely to play a major role. interesting to note, a previous e4c study  <cit>  showed predominant inter-chromosomal interactions of hbb locus by using an array-based 4c technique. we suspect that sonication-based method may have shaken off a lot of weak interactions  <cit>  that were identified in the enzyme-based approach we applied.

for enzyme-based 4c-seq data, we followed a statistical model  <cit>  to identify enriched cis-interacting regions. in brief, z-scores in windows covering  <dig> enzyme sites  were calculated based on contact frequencies in each window, with a background window covering  <dig>  sites to calculate expected contact frequency. a permutation-based fdr method with a threshold  was used to select enriched-interacting regions as described above for the inter-chromosomal interactions. shown in figure  <dig>  the coverage between the biological replicate data is above 80%. for sonication-based method, windows of ± 200 kb around identified contact sites were used to identify enriched-interacting regions . the overlap of enriched-interacting regions between the two replicate data is ~33%, lower than enzyme-based method. still, 30% of the reproducible regions overlapped between the two methods.

epigenetic histone marks enriched in the interactomes
previous hi-c study unveiled chromosomal organization of open and closed chromatin compartments in the cell nucleus  <cit> , with open chromatin compartments enriched with active epigenetic features. we questioned whether the interactomes of active pou5f <dig> enhancer are associated with specific epigenetic features. thus we performed association study to calculate enrichment factors for a series of histone marks in the interactomes. for both enzyme-based and sonication-based data, histone marks related to gene activation, such as h3k27ac, h3k36me <dig>  h3k4me <dig>  h3k4me <dig> and h3k9ac were enriched around the identified contact sites  within the reproducible interacting regions . in contrast, enrichment for h3k27me <dig> repressor mark and h3k9me <dig> heterochromatin mark was either not obvious or not observed at all. thus in our study, 4c-seq data revealed physical proximity of an enhancer element with distally active genomic regions in mouse es cells, consistent with the concept of active genomic compartments from genome-wide 3c studies  <cit> . these results therefore serve as positive controls for our experiments, and confirmed that biological insights can be inferred from both enzyme-based and sonication-based 4c-seq data sets with appropriate analytical approaches.

transcription factors enriched in the interactomes
unlike enzyme-based method, sonication-based 4c method applied ultrasound to shear cross-linked chromosomes into smaller pieces, similar to the fragmentation step in chip-seq protocol. if particular dna-binding protein complexes are involved in mediating chromosomal interactions between the bait and other distal regions, the identified bait-interacting sites from sonication-based data should be in close proximity to the bound sites of those dna-binding proteins. we analyzed chip-seq raw read files of  <dig> dna-binding proteins reported in chen et al’s study  <cit> . briefly, the read tags within ±1 kb range of a 4c site was counted and normalized as having  <dig> million total read tags. the input data for the study was used to generate normalized background read counts. specific chip-seq read counts were calculated as background subtracted and plotted . compared to randomly iterated genomic sites, the 4c interacting sites were moderately enriched with several transcription factors. among them, transcription factors oct <dig>  klf <dig>  esrrb, tcfcp2i <dig> and zfx showed statistically significant enrichment , implying that these key pluripotency genes are mediating this enhancer interactome in mouse es cells.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we presented 4c-seq data of an enhancer element in mouse es cells, generated by two different methods: enzyme-based method and sonication-based method. our data showed consistency of the data generated by both methods for biological replicate samples. for inter-chromosomal interactions, both methods have similar reproducibility of enriched-interacting regions; however, for intra-chromosomal interactions, enzyme-based method showed more frequent distal interactions and higher reproducibility. both methods revealed that histone modifications related to gene activation were enriched in the interactomes. in addition, sonication-based data uncovered several key pluripotency genes enriched around the interaction sites. thus, we conclude that 1) both enzyme-based and sonication-based 4c-seq technique are very useful tools for mapping long-range chromatin-chromatin interactions; and 2) 4c-seq data together with chip-seq data can help us elucidate molecular events surrounding a particular regulatory region in 3d space.

