BACKGROUND
the effective dosage of a gene network – the number of network copies in a cell – can vary significantly both throughout a cell’s lifetime and across different cells in the same clonal population. such changes can arise from a variety of direct and indirect causes. for example, dna replication during the cell cycle  <cit>  would double the network dosage, and it has been shown that many promoters indeed display an increase in transcription consistent with gene dosage effects during the g <dig> phase of the cell cycle as compared to g <dig>  <cit> . similarly, organisms such as yeast that switch between haploid and diploid life forms  <cit>  must cope with the increased network dosage. global noise in gene expression  <cit>  could also lead to significant variations in effective network dosage. moreover, such changes can have significant effects on the cellular phenotypes  <cit> . for example, in multicellular organisms, widespread dosage changes can be fatal  <cit> . it stands to reason, therefore, that cells must have evolved mechanisms to compensate for such dosage alterations, including the inevitable alterations occurring at the gene network level. despite the presence of previous studies  <cit>  focusing on dosage variations of individual genes, there is very little work  <cit>  approaching this question from the gene network point of view. due to the presence of nonlinear feedback interactions among the individual genes of a gene network, dosage compensation analyses focusing on individual genes one at a time cannot reliably predict whether or not the activity of their network would be compensated.

a previous study  <cit>  has demonstrated that the galactose signaling pathway  in saccharomyces cerevisiae is dosage compensated on the network level: the activity of the network showed no significant change when the dosage of the entire regulatory network was halved in diploid cells. by mathematically and computationally analyzing 2-component networks, the study further demonstrated that such compensation effect could arise solely as a feature of the structure of the gene network. outside of a trivial case, 1-component networks could not be dosage invariant, but 2-component networks could be if they satisfied certain criteria: the two components had to have different regulatory signs, they had to interact with a 1: <dig> stoichiometry, and the effects of one of the two components had to be indirect and exerted its effects on transcription through action on the other component  <cit> .

the questions remain, however, regarding how the network-dosage compensation analysis can be extended to n-component networks, whether the compensation mechanism can robustly operate over broad gene expression ranges, and finally whether the specific dosage-compensation topologies are recurrent network motifs in natural gene networks. in this study, we first expand the mathematical compensation analysis beyond the 1-component and 2-component networks, so that the analysis includes gene networks of any size , demonstrating that a necessary condition for dosage compensation in such networks is the existence of a 2-component subnetwork with an activator and an inhibitor. we then perform a network-dosage compensation analysis on 2-component networks and show that the compensation mechanism acts over large gene expression and protein degradation ranges, not just the specific levels displayed by the gal network components. furthermore, we show that the conditions that are necessary for an inducible network to be network-dosage compensated are also sufficient. finally, using genome-wide protein-dna and protein-protein interaction data, we search the s. cerevisiae genome for the abundance of the special network topologies necessary for network-dosage compensation, and show that a substantial percentage of the natural networks identified contain at least one dosage-compensation topology.

RESULTS
mathematical analysis of network-dosage compensation in n-component gene networks
to investigate the necessary and sufficient conditions that can make an n-component gene network dosage-compensated, we consider a network composed of n genes that are under the control of the same transcription factor . in our analysis, we define gene networks as structures that have varying numbers of genes that are all under the control of a common tf for each gene network.

the network under consideration can be represented by the following set of differential equations describing the time evolution of the concentrations of proteins expressed from the network genes:

  dx1dt=θ1fρ,x <dig> …,xn−γx1⋮dxndt=θnfρ,x <dig> …,xn−γxn 

here, x
i
 represents the average total concentration of the i
th
 protein, θ
i
 represents the maximal expression rate for the i
th
 gene, γ represents the cell-division rate, ρ represents an external control parameter with which the network can be induced, and f represents the activity of the gene network or the fraction of active promoter sites. we assume that the network proteins are diluted at the cell-division rate , corresponding to cases in which protein lifetimes are much longer than the cell-division time. we further assume that network proteins interact with each other on fast timescales and that these interactions determine the fractional activity of the transcription center represented by the function f, whose value is limited to the range  <cit> . then, each gene is expressed proportionally to the activity of the common transcription center.

with this framework, we are interested in elucidating the general network features that can keep the activity of the transcriptional center to be compensated  to parallel changes in the maximal expression rate of the network genes. cells would experience such parallel changes due to the effects of global noise in expression, or when chromosomes are replicated during cell cycle progression.

from eq.  <dig>  we know that at steady state

  θ1x1=θ2x2=…=θnxn=γfρ,x <dig> x <dig> …,xn 

we consider cases in which θ
1
, θ
2
, …, θ
n
 are proportionally changed by introducing a new parameter:

  1+δθ1fρ,x <dig> …,xn=γx1⋮1+δθnfρ,x <dig> …,xn=γxn 

taking the derivative of both sides of the first equation above with respect to δ, we have

  θ1f+1+δθ1∂f∂x1dx1dδ+…+∂f∂xndxndδ=γdx1dδ 

from eq.  <dig>  we have

 xm=θmθ1x1form= <dig> …,n 

therefore,

  dxmdδ=θmθ1dx1dδform= <dig> …,n 

plugging this equation into eq.  <dig>  we obtain an equation that can be solved for dx1dδ:

  dx1dδ=θ1fγ−1+δθ1∂f∂x1+…+θn∂f∂xn 

at steady state. combining eq.  <dig> and eq.  <dig> for m =  <dig>  …, n, we have

  dxmdδ=θmfγ−1+δθ1∂f∂x1+…+θn∂f∂xn 

therefore,

  dfdδ=∑i=1n∂f∂xidxidδ=θ1∂f∂x1+…+θn∂f∂xnfγ−1+δθ1∂f∂x1+…+θn∂f∂xn 

for dfdδ to be zero with generality, we must have θ1∂f∂x1+…+θn∂f∂xn= <dig>  as all parameters here are positive and at least some of the partial derivatives are nonzero, at least one of the partial derivatives must be positive and at least one must be negative. therefore, in order to keep the activity of an n-component gene network compensated against parallel changes in the number of network components, a necessary condition is that the network has to be composed of components of different regulatory signs . in other words, the gene network must have a 2-component subnetwork with components of different regulatory signs .

how can certain interaction topologies between network components facilitate the dosage compensation behavior of the network activity? will the compensation mechanism operate for a wide range of gene expression levels and protein degradation rates, or is it limited to the specific parameter values used in the previous work  <cit> , which correspond to the gal network? 2-component subnetworks composed of one activator and one inhibitor provide effective minimal systems to address these questions. in the next section, we numerically analyze 2-component subnetworks to find out whether or not specific gene expression and protein degradation levels are required for observing compensated network activity in gene networks.

sensitivity analysis of the network-dosage compensation mechanism with respect to the gene expression and protein degradation levels
to explore if certain 2-component interaction topologies would make it easier or harder for cells to show network dosage compensation, we numerically analyzed 2-component topologies in which an activator  and an inhibitor  are controlled by a common transcriptional center and quantified their compensation and inducibility levels. the specific interaction schemes we analyzed are depicted in figure 1b-d. each interaction topology is represented by a mathematical form involving four parameters quantifying the scales of action for the activator  and inhibitor  and the nonlinearities with which the activator  and inhibitor  interacts with their downstream targets, as follows :topology in figure 1b:

  fg,a,i=11+saga1+siiβ−α 

topology in figure 1c:

  fg,a,i=11+sii1+sagaαβ 

topology in figure 1d:

  fg,a,i=11+saga−α⋅11+siiβ 

for each topology, our analysis involved numerically solving the following differential equations at t = 24 h:

  dadt=nθaλa1−fg,a,i+fg,a,i−γ0a−γaadidt=nθiλi1−fg,a,i+fg,a,i−γ0i−γii 

in the mathematical form describing f, the parameter values corresponding to s
a
, s
i
, α and β were sampled from large ranges as described in table  <dig>  to verify the generality of the compensation mechanism beyond the specific context of the gal network  <cit> , we chose a variety of different values for the parameters describing the maximal transcription/translation activity  and the rate of protein degradation  . in these equations, γ
0
 is the cell division rate and λ
a
 and λ
i
 quantifies the basal protein expression level. inserted into the above coupled differential equation, each set of the sampled parameters, the chosen parameters, and the external inducer level  corresponded to a new solution for . we used the resulting values for activator and inhibitor concentrations to obtain numerical inducibility curves, defined for each topology by f.

to quantify the degree of compensation in each network topology, we produced separate inducibility curves with one  or two  sets of the activator and inhibitor genes, and computed the area between those curves. the larger the area between the two curves, the higher the penalty to compensation in the network . in principle, dosage-varied networks that cannot be activated beyond their basal activity levels or networks that always stay ‘on’ irrespective of the inducer levels can also be classified as dosage-compensated, but they lack the ability to act as regulatory networks against external physiological signals. therefore, it is also important to determine if a dosage-compensated network’s inducibility level corresponds to physiologically relevant levels. for this, we quantified the relative inducibility levels of the numerical inducibility curves against a reference inducibility curve , and plotted them against the compensation levels. representative plots for a random sample containing approximately  <dig> % of the networks examined  are presented in additional file 1: figure s2d-f. we found that only networks with the topologies in figure 1b and c are capable of showing simultaneously high degrees of dosage-compensation and inducibility.

to better understand the distribution of parameters that can give rise to high degrees of compensation and inducibility, we analyzed the system parameters for all networks that are both dosage compensated and inducible. this analysis included examination of the effect of protein expression levels on the compensation behavior of each topology by looking at the maximal protein production rates θ and protein degradation rates γ. to conduct the compensation analysis at different expression levels, we selected parameter values for θ and γ from large ranges that were physiologically relevant . as shown in figure  <dig>  the different combinations of the values we used to run our simulations did not end up significantly affecting the population of data points falling into the compensated and inducible region of each dot plot . in other words, the compensation mechanism can robustly operate over large expression ranges and it is not limited to the expression values displayed by the gal network components.

analysis of the other parameters to the model demonstrate that, for each network topology, only the value of one parameter is strongly constrained in networks that are both dosage compensated and inducible . for both network topologies, the critical parameter is the parameter defining the nature of the stoichiometric interaction between the activator and inhibitor of the 2-component subnetwork , and in both topologies its values are tightly distributed around  <dig> . plotting the penalty to compensation against the strongly constrained parameter further confirms that having the value of the parameter to be very close to  <dig> is necessary for a small compensation penalty in an inducible network .

sufficiency analysis of the network-dosage compensation conditions for well-behaved gene networks
the analysis above shows that having one of the two network topologies shown in figure 1b and c, as well as a 1: <dig> stoichiometric interaction between the activator and the inhibitor, are necessary conditions for a network to be both inducible and dosage-compensated. the question remains, however, whether these conditions are sufficient for an inducible network to be network-dosage compensated. to answer this question, we examined the compensation penalty of all networks whose constrained parameter  is in the range , and whose inducibility penalty is below  <dig> .as shown in figure 4b, of the examined networks with the topology in figure 1c,  <dig> % have a compensation penalty below  <dig> , and  <dig> % have a compensation penalty below  <dig> . however, approximately  <dig> % of the examined networks with the topology in figure 1b have compensation penalties above  <dig> , with 23% above  <dig>  , necessitating a more detailed examination of those networks.

further examining those networks, we found that the networks with high compensation penalties uniformly have very small values of s
i
, the parameter representing the strength of the inhibitor . moreover, the maximum inhibitory effect achievable in such systems is very small  compared to those in compensated systems . in short, the inhibitory component of these networks is very weak, such that 1 + 
β
 ≈  <dig> and the networks become essentially 1-component networks with a single direct activator. such networks can still be fully inducible, but they cannot be dosage compensated  <cit> . moreover, an inhibitor with so weak an inhibitory effect is unlikely to play any significant part in the output of any naturally occurring gene network.

we define a well-behaved gene network as a gene network that satisfies the following two conditions: 1) the network is inducible and 2) the activating or inhibiting effect of each network component on overall network output is substantial, i.e., where the approximations 1 + 
β
 ≈  <dig> and 1 + 
α
 ≈  <dig> do not hold. the above analysis supports the conclusion that for a well-behaved 2-component subnetwork to show dosage compensation, it is sufficient that the subnetwork has a topology shown in figure 1b or c, and that the stoichiometry between the activator and the inhibitor is 1: <dig>  as naturally occurring gene regulatory networks are very likely to be well-behaved, if a natural gene network satisfies these two requirements, it would be expected to be network-dosage compensated.

recurrent nature of the dosage-compensation motifs in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome
to find out how frequently the dosage compensation structures occur in the yeast genome, we examined a set of  <dig>  genes that have regulatory roles in s. cerevisiae, and  <dig> transcription factors  that, in turn, regulate their transcription . we limited our search to regulators because our dosage compensation structure requires both network components to affect their own transcription, directly or indirectly.

since the network components in our dosage compensation structures are expected to affect the activity of the tf, they should physically interact with the tf either directly or indirectly. moreover, since they are regulatory components of this network, they should genetically interact with each other, and with the tf. therefore, we defined a potentially compensated unit  to be composed of two regulators and a tf that binds to the promoter of both of them, and in which 1) at least one regulator has a physical interaction with the tf, 2) each regulator has a reported physical interaction with either the tf or the other regulator, 3) the two regulators have at least one reported genetic interaction, and 4) at least one regulator has a reported genetic interaction with the tf.

using this definition, we enumerated all possible pcus using tf-dna binding and physical and genetic interaction data . pcus whose components involve global regulators, which does not regulate a small set of genes or process, were excluded. this resulted in a list of  <dig> pcus, involving  <dig> unique regulators and  <dig> unique tfs  .we then determined if the two regulators in each pcu have different regulatory signs, as required by the dosage compensation structure. since the network structure requires the regulators to be co-expressed, we are not able to use gene expression data. instead, we examined the documented genetic interactions between the two regulators. if the genetic interaction suggests that one regulator could compensate for the deletion of the other, we interpreted this as their having the same regulatory sign; conversely, if deletion of one regulator could compensate for the deletion of the other, then the two regulators would have different regulatory signs. further, we looked at the physical interactions in each pcu to ensure that only one regulator physically interacts with the tf, as required by the topologies .

in many cases, a regulator was part of multiple pcus, some compensated and others non-compensated, because we enumerated all possible combinations. in addition, we observed several instances of false positives in pcus reported to be potentially compensated. to get a more accurate picture of the prevalence of dosage compensation structures, we manually combined the  <dig> pcus into  <dig> larger networks  and verified the dosage compensation structure against the literature to ensure that the topology requirements are satisfied. out of those  <dig> networks, we found that  <dig> networks have at least one verified dosage compensation structure . one of the five we found is the gal network  <cit> , while the others were related to pheromone response  <cit> , response to osmotic stress  <cit> , cell cycle control  <cit> , and nitrogen catabolite repression  <cit> , respectively.

networks 1– <dig> have at least one dosage compensation structure satisfying all topological constraints. for these networks, the transcription factor involved in the structure is bolded, the two network components in that structure are italicized and references documenting the interactions among those components and the tf are listed in the rightmost column. if a network contains more than one such structure, only one is shown.

we then checked if those  <dig> networks satisfied the stoichiometry requirement. for the gal network, the gal3p-gal80p interaction was reported in the literature to be of 1: <dig> stoichiometry  <cit> . for the networks regulating pheromone response  <cit> , and response to osmotic stress  <cit> , we found evidence that both gpa1p and ptp3p has only one known mapk-binding motif, whose mutation abolished mapk binding  <cit> , and mutations in a single amino acid residue in fus3p and hog1p were sufficient to abolish their binding to ptp3p  <cit> , indicating that they have only one binding site each for the mapk-binding motif. similarly, for the cell-cycle control network  <cit> , mutation of two amino acid residues close together were sufficient to abolish clb2p-swe1p binding, suggesting that clb2p only has a single binding site for swe1p  <cit> . finally, for the network regulating nitrogen catabolite repression  <cit> , we found that, although ure2p exists as a dimer in solution  <cit> , gln3p has only one domain that interacts with ure2p  <cit> .

discussion
although dosage compensation characteristics of individual genes have received some attention over the years  <cit> , we are not aware of any studies into the dosage compensation characteristics of entire gene networks, with the exception of the previous work  <cit>  carried out by one of the authors of this manuscript. it is worth emphasizing that changes in gene dosage, whether by loss of a single copy of the gene, or by larger scale chromosomal structural changes, such as those that frequently occur in cancerous cells  <cit> , typically result in changes in the dosage of some, but not all, genes in a gene network, to which network-dosage compensation does not apply. we expect changes in the effective dosage of entire gene networks to typically arise from far more mundane situations such as normal cell growth, global transcriptional variations, and other normal biological processes, but the very mundaneness of these situations is strongly indicative of the need for cells to be able to compensate for network-dosage changes. thus, while it is perhaps unsurprising that most of the yeast genes are not compensated with respect to single gene dosage changes  <cit> , our results here show that several gene networks with diverse biological functions carry the structure necessary for network-dosage compensation.

it should be noted that, while not all natural networks are expected to display the compensation requirements, our results are highly likely to underrepresent the actual number of natural networks satisfying such requirements. this is because, in cases where the “direct” activator or inhibitor in the network actually affects its own transcription via some intermediary protein, the network may well have the dosage compensation topology, but our method would not be able to detect them. in addition, our classification of genes into activators and inhibitors, necessary to detect the required network topology, is based on genetic interaction data and hence is necessarily limited by the availability of such data. in particular, as large-scale genetic interaction studies are frequently reliant on generation of double mutants  <cit> , genetic interaction data are of relatively limited assistance with interactions among essential transcription regulators whose mutations can be lethal. yet, those essential transcription regulators are likely the ones most in need of dosage compensation mechanisms. thus, we believe that in reality the number of gene networks carrying the dosage compensation topology would likely be significantly larger.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our work provides the most general network-dosage compensation analysis to date, expanding the analysis from 2-component gene networks to n-component networks. here we show that the network-dosage compensation mechanism is not restricted to network components with specific gene expression and protein degradation levels, but the mechanism can robustly operate over large ranges. furthermore, we show that the conditions that are necessary for an inducible network to be dosage compensated are also sufficient. finally, using genome-wide binding and gene expression datasets, here we demonstrate the recurrent nature of the special topologies or motifs needed for network-dosage compensation. as a result of identifying and merging  <dig> compensation units  in yeast, we obtained  <dig> larger networks . out of these  <dig> large networks, we were able to find evidence in the literature that  <dig> of them  carried the dosage compensation requirements identified in our work . this number, as we explain above, is likely to significantly underrepresent the actual number of dosage-compensated networks.

the dosage compensation motifs we analyzed show strong similarity to the sequestration-based regulatory networks  <cit> . sequestration-based mechanisms are widely present in eukaryotic organisms, and regulate a wide variety of biological processes  <cit> . dosage compensation is expected to be advantageous during natural selection. the widespread occurrence of sequestration-based mechanisms lends further support to the conclusion that network dosage compensation can be an important component of nature’s design for gene network architecture in cells.

