BACKGROUND
there is general agreement that in cats and monkeys  the spike discharge activity a mechanical stimulus sets up in rapidly adapting , slowly adapting , and pacinian  skin mechanoreceptors is projected centrally, at short latency and with relatively minor transformation, to primary somatosensory cortex  in the contralateral hemisphere. there is no consensus, however, about the way in which the stimulus-evoked response in the ipsilateral hemisphere contributes to cerebral cortical somatosensory information processing and somatosensation. a distinctive property of sii is that it is the first cortical stage of the somatosensory projection pathway that integrates information arising from both sides of the body. similar to si, sii possesses a clear topographic organization  <cit> , but unlike si, a significant fraction of sii neurons possess bilateral receptive fields . the fraction of sii neurons with bilateral rfs varies from one topographic region of sii to the next. while ipsilateral input to sii is widely accepted, the role of this input in somatosensory information processing remains uncertain. to investigate the effects on sii input deriving from mechanoreceptors in ipsilateral skin regions, the technique of optical intrinsic signal  imaging was used to assess the impact on sii of ipsilateral input on the response of sii to a contralateral input. the responses to contralateral, ipsilateral and bilateral vibrotactile stimulation  of the forepaw of the cat were quantified and compared to make this assessment. although evoked responses in both si and sii were imaged in the studies, the primary focus of this report is the response of sii to the aforementioned stimuli.

RESULTS
to more accurately characterize the spatial disparity between sii loci activated by contralateral vs. ipsilateral stimulation, the absorbance values were obtained and plotted along the posterior-anterior axis of sii. figure  <dig> shows an absorbance vs. distance plot for each of the  <dig> subjects whose images are shown in figure  <dig>  note that the distance between the peak absorbance values obtained under the ipsilateral and contralateral conditions is approximately  <dig> mm for subject  <dig>  and approximately  <dig> mm for subject  <dig> . the average across-subject  distance between the peaks of sii activation evoked by contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation is  <dig>  +/-  <dig>  mm  <cit> . interestingly, for both subjects, in the posterior region of sii, the magnitude of the response to bilateral stimulation exceeds that of the response to either contralateral or ipsilateral stimulation, but, in the anterior region of sii, the magnitude of response to contralateral stimulation is greater than that of the response to bilateral stimulation. the center of the distribution of the peaks of absorbance evoked by contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation, such as those shown in figure  <dig>  were used to define the anterior and posterior regions of sii in subsequent analyses .

a more comprehensive view of the sii response to the contralateral and bilateral stimulus conditions can be better appreciated with a multi-dimensional surface plot of the data. figure  <dig> compares the stimulus evoked response of sii in the two subjects to contralateral and bilateral stimulation, and from these plots, it is quite apparent that a large area  of the anterior region of sii is suppressed in the bilateral stimulus condition, relative to the response evoked by the contralateral stimulus. the surface plots of figure  <dig> enable direct comparison of specific modules that exhibit a particular profile in one condition  with that of another condition . in this comparison, the absorbance values at loci  <dig> and  <dig>  are clearly larger than those at locus  <dig>  in the contralateral response, and the absorbance values at locations 1' and 2'  are much smaller than those at loci  <dig> and  <dig> of the contralateral response. additionally, the response at locus  <dig>  in the contralateral response is very weak, but is larger in the response to the bilateral stimulus. thus, the increase in activity observed at locus 3' , in the posterior region of sii, evoked by bilateral stimulation parallels a decrease in activity at loci 1' and 2', in the anterior region of sii. in the case of subject  <dig>  the decrease in activity in anterior sii is not as pronounced as that seen in subject  <dig> , although the concurrent increase in posterior sii activity  with decreased anterior sii activity  is consistent with the shift in activation along the posterior-anterior axis observed in subject  <dig>  responses evoked by ipsilateral stimulation are also displayed in figure  <dig>  note that in both subjects  <dig> and  <dig>  absorbance values in the posterior region are much greater than those in the anterior region of sii.

to directly compare the time course of the response of the anterior and posterior regions of sii to the three stimulus conditions, we determined the time course of the absorbance changes in each region under each stimulus condition . the plots in figure  <dig> show that in each of these  <dig> subjects and under each stimulus condition, the magnitude of the absorbance change evoked in either the posterior or anterior region of sii by ipsilateral stimulation was less than that evoked in the same region by contralateral or bilateral stimulation. moreover, in both subjects, the magnitude of the response of the posterior region to bilateral stimulation was greater than that evoked by contralateral stimulation, whereas in the anterior region of sii, the magnitude of the response evoked by bilateral stimulation is either less than or approximately equal to the response evoked by contralateral stimulation.

cluster plots were used to directly compare the response of sii to the different conditions of ipsilateral and contralateral stimulation. in each plot in figure  <dig>  the absorbance value obtained at each pixel to the  <dig> different stimulus conditions is plotted against each other – i.e., the x-axis is the absorbance value evoked by the contralateral stimulus and the y-axis is the absorbance value evoked by the ipsilateral stimulus. the clusters reveal a distinct differentiation in the population of sii neurons to the different stimulus conditions. additionally, it appears that this could be a time dependent process, as there is little difference in the behavior of the pixels localized to the sii region in the early stages of the response , there is some grouping after  <dig> seconds, and there are two distinct clusters formed after several seconds . it should be emphasized that this type of graphic does not necessarily reflect spatial differences in the responses of two different stimulus conditions, but rather, it emphasizes whether or not different members of a set respond differently to different stimulus conditions. thus, the information demonstrated by the cluster plots in figure  <dig> can be summarized by stating that with an increase in stimulus duration , there is an increase in the segregation of the behavior of the different groups of pixels whose values are more predominantly affected by a contralateral vs. an ipsilateral stimulus.

the contralateral and bilateral stimulus conditions can also be compared using cluster analysis. however, because the difference between the contralateral and ipsilateral responses is more robust than the difference between the contralateral and bilateral responses, figure  <dig> displays the results of cluster analysis of the anterior and posterior regions of sii independently. independent analysis of the two regions allows for better resolution of shifts in the behavior of activity within particular regions. for each subject, the peak response was identified in both the anterior and posterior regions. cluster plots were obtained by plotting the response  at each location within a  <dig> ×  <dig> mm <dig> boxel surrounding the peak. in anterior sii, the majority of the responses to contralateral stimulation are stronger than the responses to bilateral stimulation – hence, the majority of the points plotted fall below the reference line . in the posterior region, the majority of the points plotted are above the reference line – indicating that the response to the bilateral stimulus was greater than the response to the contralateral stimulus.

thus far, the results suggest that the anterior and posterior regions of sii are differentially activated by contralateral, ipsilateral and bilateral stimulation. to determine the across-subject consistency of these findings, the average absorbance values evoked by the  <dig> different stimulus conditions were determined for all  <dig> of the subjects . clearly, in the anterior region of sii, the contralateral stimulus condition evoked the largest magnitude of response, and therefore, the values of the absorbance increase obtained in this and the posterior region under each stimulus condition were normalized to this absorbance value . whereas in the anterior region of sii, the response evoked by bilateral stimulation is approximately 35% less than that evoked by contralateral stimulation, in the posterior region of sii, the bilateral stimulus evoked a response approximately 25% larger than that evoked by the contralateral stimulus. analysis of variance showed that, at a 95% confidence interval, the average bilateral:contralateral response ratio was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  in the anterior region of sii. in the posterior region of sii, the same analysis showed the bilateral:contralateral response ratio to be between  <dig>  and  <dig>  at a 95% confidence interval. although the response of the posterior region to the bilateral stimulus is larger than that evoked by the contralateral stimulus, it is less than that predicted by summation of the responses to the ipsilateral and contralateral stimuli . furthermore, while the response of neither the anterior or posterior regions of sii to bilateral stimulation approximate a linear summation of the responses to independent stimulation of each central pad, the approximation of the bilateral response by summation of responses evoked by independent stimuli is much closer to being accurate in the posterior region of sii.

discussion
the findings of this study demonstrated clearly that the anterior and posterior regions of sii process bilateral inputs very differently. at the locus of the maximal ois response evoked in the posterior region by an ipsilateral stimulus, bilateral stimulation evoked a response that was, on average, about 25% larger than that evoked from the contralateral stimulus site. conversely, at the locus of the maximal ois response evoked by contralateral stimulation in the anterior region, bilateral stimulation evoked a response that was, on average, 35% lower than the activity evoked by a contralateral stimulus. this discrepancy between the optical responses of the anterior and posterior regions could be related to neurophysiological observations reported in earlier studies. for example, carreras and andersson  <cit>  found that for a sizable fraction of the cat sii neurons in their study, ipsilateral mechanical skin stimulation inhibited the response to contralateral stimulation, whereas in contrast, picard et al.  <cit>  found in their study of neurons in the distal forelimb regions of cat sii that simultaneous delivery of contralateral and ipsilateral mechanical skin stimuli led to strong facilitation of sii neuron response. in the study of picard et al.  <cit> , the responses of cells to bilateral stimulation were found to exceed the stronger of the responses to unilateral stimulation by, on average, 230%. their study was limited, however, to the very low numbers of sii neurons that had bilateral rfs on the distal limbs. burton, et al.  <cit> , similar to carreras and andersson  <cit> , reported that sii cells with bilateral receptive fields  exhibited a reduction in mean firing rate of 30% when the contralateral stimulus was preceded by an ipsilateral stimulus. finally, other workers have found that callosally-transmitted inputs tend to have excitatory effects on sii neurons that have bilateral rfs, and exert inhibitory effects on sii neurons that have exclusively contralateral rfs  <cit> . simoes et al.  <cit>  showed significant suppression of the meg sii response in humans, with simultaneous inputs delivered to the same skin sites, and hoechstetter et al.  <cit>  described "interactions" in sii cortex  to simultaneous bilateral stimuli. definitive establishment of the relationship between stimulus-evoked sii neuroelectrical and ois activation, however, must await the performance of combined imaging and neurophysiological investigations which utilize both methodologies in the same subjects and under the same stimulus conditions.

the main, although not the only, route for ipsilateral input to sii is through the corpus callosum, from cells located in si and sii of the opposite cerebral hemisphere  <cit> . even those regions in sii that represent most distal parts of the limbs receive significant numbers of connections from the homologous zones of the contralateral si and sii  <cit> . graziosi  <cit>  showed that separate populations of cells in si provide callosal projections to si and sii in the opposite hemisphere and ipsilateral projections to sii. some separation within sii of the responses to ipsilateral and contralateral stimulation was also shown by friedman et al.  <cit>  and juliano et al.  <cit> .

the neurons in the distal limb regions of sii do receive substantial callosal connections, but these neurons have been reported to lack ipsilateral rfs  <cit> , indicating that callosal inputs are not strong enough to generate action potentials . this suggests that sii neurons do not use their sensory inputs from the ipsilateral side of the body to construct functional properties dependent on bilateral inputs; in other words, to extract information about higher-order properties of bi-manually contacted objects from coordinated patterns of sensory stimulation of the two hands. instead, it could be postulated that neurons in the distal limb regions of sii use their ipsilateral peripheral inputs to modulate the responses to contralateral peripheral stimulation. on the other hand, bennett et al.  <cit>  found that bilateral convergence on sii neurons varies markedly with the different classes of tactile neurons, and modulation of the sii response by ipsilateral inputs may vary from one cortical area to another with different stimulus modalities.

a number of interactions between stimuli applied to both hands have been demonstrated in human psychophysical studies. gilson  <cit>  found that the threshold for detection of vibrotactile stimuli applied to a fingertip is elevated by parallel stimulation of the other hand's fingers. in addition, gescheider and verrillo  <cit>  reported that the magnitude of vibrotactile sensation, elicited by brief  <dig> or  <dig> hz stimuli applied to thenar eminence, was decreased by stimuli applied simultaneously to the opposite hand, but was enhanced when the contralateral stimulus was applied  <dig> msec prior to the test stimuli. essick and whitsel  <cit>  reported that the perception of the direction of motion of brushing stimuli on the skin is enhanced by the presence of a simultaneous contralateral brushing stimulus when the two stimuli move in the same direction, but is weakened when the contralateral stimulus moves in a direction opposite to that on the other arm. while the above described reports provide possible perceptual correlates for bilateral interactions that might occur in sii, such as those identified in the present study, it will remain uncertain until anterior or posterior sii cortical activity is studied under conditions that permit direct correlations of perceptual performance and cortical activity under precisely controlled conditions of contralateral vs. bilateral skin stimulation.

a recent report  <cit>  demonstrated  <dig> separate functional cortical fields along the anterior-posterior axis in the macaque. these functional fields were defined based on differential neural responses from three distinct cortical fields, and their report was unique in that it described cortical areas within sii based on functional properties of cortical areas. in this report, we demonstrate at least two functional subdivisions within sii in the cat based on functional properties as well. however, the modes of stimulation used to distinguish the functional differences along the anterior-posterior axis of sii were very different in this study , and subsequent investigations using other stimulus modalities could reveal that sii of the cat is organized in a very similar fashion to sii of primates. the multiple fields found in sii, based on functional differences, could be, as suggested by fitzgerald, et al.  <cit> , indicative of the existence of a number of distributed processing streams. the significance of the presented work is that the response of these different cortical areas, which could represent information from so-called separate information streams, changes in a manner dependent upon the activity of neighboring cortical areas. distinction of cortical areas within sii, identified by functional characteristics, demonstrates the nonlinearity of the integration of information from different sources .

one question that the results suggest is whether or not sii can be segregated by laterality preference, in a manner similar to that observed in other sensory systems. laterality has been demonstrated in the primary sensory cortex of both the visual system and the auditory system of both primates and cats, and the data in this report strongly suggest that there are cortical areas within sii that exhibit preference to ipsilateral or contralateral inputs. in terms of processing information from simultaneous contralateral and ipsilateral stimuli, there could be further similarities between the somatosensory, auditory and visual systems that have yet to be described. future investigations will aim to further clarify the role of sii in integration of information from inputs across the body midline.

CONCLUSIONS
the responses evoked by contralateral and ipsilateral flutter stimulation of the central pad of the cat forepaw define functional subdivisions in sii: the two modes of stimulation maximally activate cortical regions that are anterior and posterior to one another, respectively. bilateral stimulation, or providing simultaneous contralateral and ipsilateral stimulation, reveals, additionally, that the two adjacent cortical areas process bilateral inputs differently. in the posterior region, where ipsilateral stimulation evokes a maximal response, bilateral stimuli evoke a response that is greater than the response evoked by either the individual ipsilateral or contralateral response. in the anterior region of sii, where the contralateral stimulus evokes a maximal response, bilateral stimuli evoke responses that are smaller in magnitude than the responses evoked by the contralateral stimulus.

