BACKGROUND
during the folding of a protein some residues become exposed to the environment while others become buried in the protein interior. for water-soluble proteins the dominant driving force during folding is the hydrophobic effect, which minimizes unfavorable interactions between hydrophobic residues and  water  <cit> . therefore, water-soluble proteins consist of a hydrophobic interior and hydrophilic exterior. in contrast, the tendency to bury polar residues from the  solvent environment within the membrane is much weaker. in membrane proteins residues face three distinct environments; a hydrophobic lipid environment inside the membrane, a hydrophilic water environment outside the membrane and an interface region in between. studies of the bacteriorhodopsin structure suggested that membrane proteins are "inside-out", i.e. that they consist of a hydrophilic interior and a hydrophobic exterior  <cit> . however, later studies indicated that the "inside-out" rule is not generally applicable  <cit> . since membrane proteins are exposed to distinctly different environments, the composition of exposed residues will differ significantly in different regions. also, the main driving forces of folding and stabilization are different from water-soluble proteins and less well understood. however, irrespectively of environment, buried residues are in general under stronger evolutionary constraints than exposed sites  <cit> .

for membrane proteins most bioinformatical efforts have been focused on the development of methods to predict the topology, i.e. the location of residues relative to the membrane. a topology prediction might be a useful first step towards structure prediction, while a predictor of solvent accessibility provides complementary information. such a predictor might also be useful for predicting functional relevance of individual residues, since residues responsible for e.g. catalysis or substrate binding, are often buried in the protein interior  <cit> , while residues involved in protein-protein-interactions occur on solvent exposed sites. for water-soluble proteins many methods for predicting the accessibility have been developed  <cit> .

however, only a few attempts have been made to predict the accessibility of membrane proteins  <cit> . to our knowledge all existing methods have been specialized to predict the exposure within the membrane. therefore, these methods require an initial prediction step to determine the exact location of the transmembrane segment, which current topology predictors only can do with a limited accuracy  <cit> . here, we constructed a single accessibility predictor for entire membrane proteins. first, the amino acid distributions and evolutionary conservation in a set of α-helical transmembrane proteins of known structures were analyzed. thereafter, we examined the ability of state-of-the-art predictors to identify exposed and buried residues. in particular, we analyzed the performance of the predictors in regions for which they had been optimized as well as of the regions where they had not. subsequently, we developed a novel predictor, mprap, optimized to perform well in all regions. finally, we investigated some additional potential uses of mprap.

RESULTS
membrane protein surfaces adapt to the environment
all residues in the dataset were classified by their distance from the membrane center into non-membrane , lipid-water interface  or membrane core . alternatively, residues were classified to be within or outside the membrane using the membrane boundaries from opm  <cit> . further, residues were divided into two accessibility classes, by using a cutoff of 25% exposed accessible surface area. outside the membrane solvent exposed sites consist of 19% hydrophobic residues , while buried sites consist to 49% of such residues, see figure  <dig>  thus, as in soluble proteins, the non-membrane regions of α-helical transmembrane proteins have a hydrophilic exterior and a hydrophobic interior. the membrane exposed sites consist of 73% hydrophobic residues and buried of 60%. this means that both exposed and buried sites are more hydrophobic inside the membrane, but the difference for buried sites is much smaller, see figure 1c and 1d. another observation is that the solvent accessibility and selective pressure is tightly connected; buried residues are replaced at a slower rate than exposed residues in all solvent environments, figure 2a <cit> . actually, the relative substitution rate is approximately linearly related to the accessibility, figure 2b. this supports earlier observation that substitution rates might be useful for identifying exposed residues in membrane proteins  <cit> .

surface area predictors optimized for one of the environments performs badly in the other environments
quite a few methods for predicting accessibility of soluble proteins have been developed in the past  <cit> . due to the low number of determined membrane protein structures most methods have been developed primarily for water-soluble proteins. however, there exist a few methods that have been developed for membrane proteins, including bw  <cit> , lips  <cit> , asapmem  <cit>  and tmx  <cit> . here, we investigated the performance of the two most recent membrane predictors, asapmem and tmx, as well as three recent predictors for soluble proteins, asapglob  <cit> , sable  <cit>  and accpro  <cit> . the ability to accurately predict the accessibility state of residues in membrane proteins was examined. the predictors differ in their output; accpro and tmx predict accessibility in a binary alphabet, i.e. exposed and buried, with an approximately equal fraction in both classes, while sable, asapglob, and asapmem predict the relative accessibility. therefore, for comparisons the real value predictions were transformed to binary states. the specific cutoffs for transformations were optimized for each method independently, resulting in an approximately equal frequency of buried and exposed residues.

we found that the best method in the membrane region is the membrane specific predictor tmx , and the best method in the non-membrane region is the water-soluble predictor accpro , see table  <dig>  however, tmx performs badly in the non-membrane region  and accpro performs badly inside the membrane . thus, the surface area predictors optimized for one of the environments performs badly in the other environment, see figure  <dig>  from these results a reasonable solution would be to use a combination of a membrane predictor and a soluble predictor. to test such an approach we used zpred  <cit> , a predictor of the distance from membrane center, together with tmx and accpro. after optimization it was found that the best performance was obtained using tmx if a residue was predicted to be closer than  <dig> Å from the membrane center and accpro for all other residues. we found that the combination performed acceptable in the membrane core  and well in the soluble region . however, within the water-lipid interface region the combination performs suboptimally, most likely due to that none of the predictors were optimized for this region , see figure  <dig> 

a comparison of the performance for different accessibility predictors using two-state predictions in water-soluble  proteins and membrane  proteins. the reported values are the matthew correlation coefficients for identifying buried residues in a binary alphabet. analysis was performed the entire protein  or regions in the membrane either divided by z-coordinate or by membrane definitions from opm. due to computational limitations only three predictors were applied on the water-soluble dataset.

optimization of mprap
to overcome the problems with the environment specialized prediction methods we developed a novel support vector machine  based predictor. it was named membrane protein residue accessibility predictor or mprap. in contrast to earlier methods mprap was not optimized to predict the accessibility in a particular region, but predicts the accessibility both inside and outside the membrane. this was simply done by using the complete tm-proteins in the training of the predictor. during the development of mprap different combinations of sequence derived input parameters were evaluated, see table  <dig> 

different combinations of input parameters used to train a support vector machine to predict surface accessibility in a two state alphabet. for each predictor the specificity, sensitivity, accuracy and the matthew correlation coefficient for predicting buried residues in a binary alphabet is reported. the first five lines contain the prediction results using a single type of information, where aa is amino acid encoded using sparse encoding, r4s is the substitution rate calculated from rate4site scores, zpred is predicted distance from membrane center, zcoord is the real  distance from the membrane center and psiscr is psiblast-pssm. the next group of predictors was obtained using combinations of these inputs. the next two lines contain the results for two predictors using the optimal combination of inputs but other kernels than the radial-basis kernel. the last line is the performance of the final version of mprap, i.e. the one trained to predict absolute accessibility.

as shown above, there are two major factors that differentiate between exposed and buried residues in a membrane protein, substitution rate  and amino acid preferences. exposed residues are evolving faster than buried residues both inside and outside the membrane, see figure  <dig>  the preference for certain amino acids to be buried or exposed is, however, dependent on the location relative to the membrane; polar residues are more likely to be exposed outside the membrane than within the membrane, see figure  <dig>  therefore, an optimal predictor needs to be able to determine the location of a residue in relationship to the membrane. this can be done either by explicitly providing this information as an input to the predictor or by assuming that the predictor indirectly will learn this.

during the optimization of mprap a two state binary classification of exposed and buried residues was used. during the testing 5-fold cross validation was used. the performance of the svm was optimized by a systematic search of model parameters and the best performance was used. first, it was found that a window size of  <dig> seemed to be optimal and was therefore used for all different inputs. several alternative methods to identify membrane and non-membrane residues, including topology predictions by octopus  <cit> , were tested and the best performance was obtained using predicted distance from membrane center by zpred  <cit> . it was also found that a slightly higher performance was obtained using a radial basis kernel than alternative kernels, see table  <dig> 

after these initial optimizations four different inputs to the svm were examined, amino acid information , predicted distance to the membrane center , substitution rate  and pssm information , see table  <dig>  all these inputs contain some information that is useful for predicting accessibility by themselves. however, the useful information in aa and zpred is much lower  than for r4s and psiscr . the good prediction performance of r4s is due to the strong correlation between accessibility and substitution rates, see figure 2b. since the pssms in similarity to r4s also contain conservation information this is most likely also the reason why input consisting of only psiscr perform so well. however, accessibility is also dependent on the topology and the polarity of the residue  <cit> . consequently, amino acid information  in combination with r4s increased the prediction accuracy to mcc =  <dig> , while using the pssms provides another slight increase to mcc =  <dig> . the inclusion of a predicted distance from membrane center by zpred  <cit>  increased the performance only marginally. interestingly, using the z-coordinates from the structures provide slightly lower prediction accuracies than using the predicted z-coordinates. this might very well be due to the observations that the most hydrophobic region not always correspond to the central membrane regions in the structures of membrane proteins  <cit> .

performance of mprap
finally the optimal input parameters found during the optimization were used to develop a predictor for real accessibility. the mean absolute error  and pearson correlation coefficient  of this predictor was found to be better than the other real value predictors, see table  <dig>  these values are comparable to the performance of predictors for soluble proteins  <cit> .

performance of the final version of mprap and other predictors that predict relative surface area.

the reason for the improved prediction in the membrane region is probably mainly due to that mprap is trained on a larger dataset than earlier methods. increasing the dataset size from  <dig> to  <dig> proteins increased the performance of the predictions from mcc =  <dig>  to mcc =  <dig> . this also suggests that one reason why accpro outperforms mprap in the non-membrane regions might be because it was trained on a considerably larger dataset. however, including a larger set of soluble proteins into the training set of mprap did not improve the performance significantly .

in order to investigate the predictive performance on different proteins in the dataset the proteins were divided into subgroups by the number of transmembrane regions, fraction of tm-residues and their multimeric state. in all these subgroups the performance was similar . thus, no particular type of membrane proteins was identified where mprap performed significantly better or worse for.

above, a van der waals radii of  <dig> Å, mimicking the size of a water molecule, was used to calculate the accessibility of membrane proteins. however, within the membrane, a more realistic choice for calculating the accessibility might be to use a larger probe  to mimic a ch <dig> group. therefore, at the end three different versions of mprap were developed, using probes of  <dig> Å,  <dig> Å or a combination of these. they all perform similar, see table  <dig>  and the probe size of  <dig> Å is set as default.

the most important improvement over earlier predictors is that mprap is the first accessibility predictor that shows an acceptable prediction quality in all regions of membrane proteins. this is obtained without any pre-processing. we believe this is predominantly the result of careful selection of an appropriate training set consisting of entire membrane proteins.

mprap can identify some erroneous protein structures
one application of accessibility predictors is model quality assessment of a protein model. we may assume that a correct model should have higher agreement with predicted accessibility than an incorrect model. recently, three structures of msba and two of emre have been retracted from pdb  <cit> . it has been shown that comparison between the predicted versus the "true" distances from the membrane center  can be used to indicate that some of these models are problematic  <cit> . here, we wanted to examine if mprap can identify the problems with these models. all five structures were found to have low  agreement between observed and predicted accessibility, table  <dig>  in contrast the new, presumably correct, structures of msba were found to have a higher agreement . this indicates that mprap might be useful for model quality assessment, at least in some cases.

agreement between predicted and structurally derived accessibility on six pdb-structures. the four structures at the top are published structures that have been removed from the database due to discovered anomalies. the two structure at the bottom are recent structures of proteins from the same protein families that are present in pdb.

some interaction surfaces can be identified
many transmembrane proteins consist of several peptide chains positioned in a complex. during the calculation of accessibilities, all chains in a complex were included, i.e. if a residue is located in the interface between two peptide chains it was classified as buried. however, in some cases the biological unit of the full complex is not completely known and therefore it might be of interest to identify interface areas. here, we define interface residues as residues that are buried  in the full complex, but exposed in the single protein chain. among the interface residues 50% are predicted as exposed and 50% as buried, table  <dig>  clearly distinguishing this group of residues from those exposed in the complex or buried in the single chain.

fraction of residues predicted by mprap to be buried , bmprap, or exposed, emprap, among the buried, interface and exposed residues.

this indicates that mprap could be used to suggest possible interaction sites in membrane protein structures where some interaction partners are missing. if mprap predicts that some exposed residues should be buried this might indicate that they are involved in an interaction with another protein chain. in line with this idea mprap was applied to all exposed residues in the single protein chains. then it was assumed that residues predicted to be buried belonged to an interface area, see figure  <dig>  it was found that among the sites predicted to have less than 30% accessibility 80% were true interface residues.

CONCLUSIONS
one prominent feature of membrane proteins is that their surfaces face three distinct environments; a hydrophobic lipid environment inside the membrane, an interface environment and a hydrophilic water environment outside the membrane. here, we have analyzed the properties of exposed and buried sites in a set of membrane proteins of known structures. as expected, we found that exposed sites are different inside and outside the membrane. in contrast, residues at buried sites are more similar but also on average more hydrophobic inside the membrane than outside. further, in all regions exposed residues are less conserved than buried residues.

the problem of predicting accessibility of individual residues is a well-studied problem for non-membrane proteins but less so for membrane proteins. we found that all state-of-the-art predictors for surface area are optimized for one of the environments and therefore perform poorly in the non-optimized environments. to circumvent this problem we included complete membrane proteins in the training set and developed a new predictor, the membrane protein surface accessibility predictor . the new predictor performs well both inside and outside the membrane. further, mprap is better than the combination of two specialized predictors. this shows that mprap is capable of recognizing the fact that there are different preferences for exposed sites within and outside the membrane, i.e. it can adjust the predictions depending on the relative localization to the membrane. one reason why this is possible is the strong correlation between exposure and conservation.

