BACKGROUND
we report the simultaneous suppression of multiple genes in intact adult human pancreatic islets. the study of human islets is hindered by obstacles including difficulty of maintaining islet cells in vitro but within their native complex tissue environment, the intact islet, and difficulty modulating gene expression in a majority of islet cells without significantly damaging islet viability, function and architecture. the complexity of islet biology results in part from the physical interactions and communication between the various islet cell types . this intercellular network is disrupted when islets are dissociated and cultured, which is a commonly used approach to study islet cells that facilitates transfection or infection with virus . by contrast, modification of islet cell gene expression in the context of intact intercellular relationships should increase the relevance of the information obtained. thus, the establishment of techniques that expand our ability to study intact islets is merited.

translational efforts towards clinical applications using intact islets could also benefit from the advances described here. as transplantation of intact islets advances in clinical trials, clinical applications requiring direct modification of gene expression to improve islet survival and engraftment would likely rely on transient modifications that do not result in permanent integration of genetic constructs. in the case of islet transplantation the period of ex vivo culture prior to transplantation affords an opportunity for transient delivery of sirna to modulate gene expression in efforts to improve transplantation protocols  <cit> . moreover, the importance of developing protocols that facilitate mechanistic studies using human islets is underscored by the observations that insights gained from studies of rodent islets often do not translate directly when applied to human tissue  <cit> .

islet study also has inherent technical challenges shared by other cell types. although it has been demonstrated that single molecules can significantly influence human beta cell mitogenic responses  <cit> , the ability to commandeer positive and negative proliferation pathways requires modulation of multiple genes at a time. this is in part due to inherent genetic redundancy that often makes single gene modulation insufficient, and also to the need to evaluate upstream and downstream events relating to an initial perturbation. for example, the retinoblastoma  pathway contains three partially redundant pocket proteins, prb, p <dig> and p <dig> in addition to multiple upstream and downstream modulators and effectors  <cit> . a generally assumed limitation of rna interference experiments has been the number of targeted genes that can be directly suppressed at one time. in islets, to date single genes have been efficiently suppressed by electroporation  <cit> . however, whether it is possible in intact islets to efficiently silence multiple genes simultaneously, which may be obligatory to promote robust biological endpoints remains unknown. a number of potentially complicating factors include delivery of adequate amounts of sirna molecules into individual cells, saturation of the risc complex, and toxicity to individual cells throughout the islet.

here we use electroporation to suppress gene expression using sirna in intact human islets. we show that suppression of multiple transcripts can occur simultaneously using an approach that preserves morphology, viability and glucose responsiveness. suppression of genes within the rb and p <dig> pathways illustrates the capacity to use sirna to dissect functional interactions among multiple pathway members. these findings should prove useful, as they demonstrate a potent and safe approach to transiently modulate gene expression within the native islet environment.

RESULTS
we sought to determine an optimal method for modulation of gene expression in intact adult human islets that would be transient and would be minimally disruptive in terms of islet architecture, function and viability. in order to be a sufficiently potent approach to achieve biological endpoints, another goal was to successfully modulate more than a single gene at a time. prior studies by others have shown that adenoviral infection can target the surface cells of the islet, but not the core , and it has recently been shown that enzymatic partial disruption of islets with accutase followed by electroporation was effective for suppressing expression of a single gene  <cit> .

we initially evaluated suppression of a single gene rb, using standard lipid based transfection . evaluation of gene expression compared to control using quantitative rt-pcr showed modest suppression of total rna rb transcript levels by about 30% relative to controls. this could reflect poor transfection efficiency or inability of the lipid reagent to penetrate the core of the islet. in light of prior reported success with electroporation we explored this approach. we used a capillary tip based system  to electroporate islets in suspension. multiple parameters of voltage and pulse times were evaluated first for their effects on islet morphology and viability, and then for gene suppression . ultimately we found that with this system voltages of 1000- <dig> volts and a single 40 msec pulse preserved islet morphology and achieved robust suppression of rb gene expression by 78% relative to controls . this robust silencing was attained without digestion of the islet membrane with proteases. therefore in subsequent experiments we avoided accutase treatment in order to maximally preserve native architecture and islet cell interactions. this level of suppression of rb transcript levels indicates both good efficiency of sirna penetration into islet cells as well as targeting of a majority of cells within the islets.although a range of voltages and pulse times were effective for suppression, voltages in the 1000- <dig> range using a single pulse of 40 msec resulted in robust gene knockdown and spared islets from marked morphological and functional changes. to determine whether electroporation significantly altered islet function we evaluated insulin secretion in response to glucose stimulation. similar to untreated islets, islets electroporated at various voltages including  <dig> volts responded to glucose stimulation by secreting insulin, and the insulin secretion returned to baseline upon exposure to 3 mm glucose . we did observe lower total insulin levels in the electroporated islets compared to non-electroporated controls. it is possible that this could reflect a decrease in insulin production by islets as a result of electroporation. we found that within this relatively narrow range of electroporation parameters, normal islet morphology was essentially preserved  and the typical cell types remained, including c-peptide-expressing beta cells . finally, we assessed islet viability after electroporation by ethidium bromide incorporation, and found that although electroporation caused a modest increase in the number of non-viable islets, the majority of islets  remained impermeable, indicating good viability . thus, glucose stimulation of insulin secretion, morphology and cell type composition are preserved after electroporation, supporting the utilization of this approach as a practical method for gene suppression experiments that is minimally disruptive to islet structure and function.figure  <dig> 
electroporation and sirna delivery in intact human islets.  graph showing rt-qpcr results of rb knockdown following lipid or electroporation transfection. intact human islets were transfected with non-targeting control sirna  or sirna targeting rb  using lipid  or electroporation , cultured for two days, and rt-qpcr was performed to assess knockdown. error bars indicate sem .  graph showing representative results of glucose stimulation of insulin secretion assay. intact islets were electroporated with control, non-targeting sirna at a range of voltages  and a glucose stimulation of insulin secretion assay was performed 72 hours following electroporation. media was collected after exposure to 3 mm glucose , then after switch to 20 mm glucose , followed by return to 3 mm glucose , and total insulin .  images showing morphological comparison between non-electroporated  and electroporated  islets. images of islets stained with hematoxylin and eosin , immunostained for for c-peptide  and nuclei dapi , and after exposure to ethidium bromide to test viability 72 hours after electroporation .


taqman pcr primers and probes


the potent suppression of a single gene transcript using electroporation prompted us to examine whether this approach would be useful for targeting multiple transcripts simultaneously and thereby enable the perturbation of multiple interacting gene products in the rb and p <dig> pathways. we found  <dig> nm to be the optimal concentration of each sirna for individual gene products. when two distinct gene products were targeted simultaneously, each with a  <dig> nm concentration of specific sirna, suppression of mrna transcript levels was similarly robust as when a single gene was targeted . specific sirnas targeting the pocket protein gene products rb and p <dig> when combined each at a concentration of  <dig> nm, and electroporated into intact human islets  resulted in suppression of rb and p <dig> mrna levels by approximately 80% of baseline levels when compared to islets electroporated with control sirna at the same concentration.figure  <dig> 
simultaneous knockdown of multiple genes in primary human islets following electroporation.  graph shows rt-qpcr results of islets electroporated with non-targeting control sirna or sirna targeting rb and p <dig> .  graph shows rt-qpcr results of islets electroporated with non-targeted control sirna or sirnas targeting the indicated gene products. the housekeeping gene gapdh was used as the control. representative experiment shown from  <dig> separate experiments. error bars indicate standard deviation.  western blot for rb protein in human islet lysates after electroporation of control or targeting sirna. gapdh was used as a loading control. rb appears as a characteristic doublet representing the hypo and hyperphosphorylated protein. representative experiment shown from  <dig> different experiments.



major growth control pathways such as rb and p <dig> contain multiple upstream and downstream members as well as redundant family members that can compensate for loss of one another  <cit> . such complexity significantly complicates experiments designed to study pathway function and presents a challenge for developing practical applications that require modulation of one or more pathways. we targeted various combinations of the rb and p <dig> pathway members, including rb, p <dig>  p <dig>  p <dig>  and p <dig> each with validated sirnas  at  <dig> nm or  <dig> nm concentrations, and also measured p14arf transcript levels for changes in response to modulation of other genes. indeed, we detected a modest induction of arf gene expression after suppression of rb and p <dig> pathway members, an expected effect based on the known function of arf to detect aberrant rb/p <dig> pathway signaling. quantitative rt-pcr showed that at least  <dig> out of  <dig> targeted gene products were suppressed to levels considered standard in sirna experiments. for example rb, p <dig> and p <dig> levels were suppressed by approximately 80% compared to control levels in samples treated for rb, p <dig>  p <dig>  p <dig> and p <dig> . in multiple experiments  suppression of 4- <dig> genes resulted in variability in terms of reduction of each targeted mrna. likely contributing factors include saturation of the intracellular rna interference machinery or induction of gene expression by activation of compensating pathway members in response to suppression of others . we did not observe any significant increased toxicity when using higher total sirna concentrations  required for these experiments. to confirm that electroporation of sirna and gene suppression measured by mrna was an indicator of decreased protein levels, western blotting for rb protein was performed after treatment with control sirnas and after combinations of targeting sirnas. we found expected suppression of rb protein as suggested by the mrna data, confirming the validity of the pcr data .

the ability to suppress multiple genes simultaneously using electroporated sirna indicated that this approach might be useful for functional modulation of the rb and p <dig> pathways. we tested this by attempting to target multiple interacting genes simultaneously in the rb and p <dig> pathways to achieve the phenotypic endpoint of cell cycle reentry in mature post mitotic islet cells. this would indicate reversal of relatively stringent maintenance of the islet postmitotic state. after exposure to various sirna combinations , islets were incubated in 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine  for 5 days. whereas islets treated with control sirna did not incorporate edu and those treated for suppression of only rb and p <dig> sirna rarely contained cells that incorporated edu, those that had targeted multiple pathway members often contained clusters of edu positive nuclei . up to 10% of nuclei incorporated edu when  <dig> or  <dig> genes were targeted . together, the experiments targeting multiple members of the rb and p <dig> pathways clearly demonstrate that by simultaneously targeting several genes, the postmitotic state of human islet cells can be reversed to induce cell cycle reentry as evidenced by dna synthesis and edu incorporation. this biological effect was not achieved by suppression of single genes in these pathways, a demonstration of the potential utility of this sirna combination approach.figure  <dig> 
cell cycle reentry in primary human islets following knockdown of rb and p <dig> pathway members. primary human islets were electroporated with sirnas against non-targeting control, or combinations of rb, p <dig> , p <dig> , p <dig> , p <dig>  and arf/cdkn2a . islets were cultured in the presence of 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine  for 7 days following electroporation then fixed and stained with dapi and for edu.  images showing edu incorporation in islets with nuclei stained with dapi , edu  and a composite image .  graph showing percentage of edu incorporating cells in islets following transfection. total cells counted in the representative experiment presented are: sicontrol ; rb + p <dig> ; rbfamily + p53 + p <dig> ; rbfamily + p53 + p21 + arf . the experiment was repeated  <dig> separate times.



discussion
one challenge facing the development of therapeutics to treat disorders of pancreatic islets is the difficulty of studying intact human islets. although many important insights have and will continue to come from studies of rodent islets, the significant differences between islets from rodents and humans and the failure of many rodent findings to be conserved in human islet biology underscores the need for studies using human tissue. for example, adult rodent islets can readily undergo islet expansion in different circumstances including increased beta cell stress from type  <dig> diabetes  <cit> . but adult human islets are more refractory, and efforts to demonstrate adult beta cell expansion have met with great difficulty  <cit> . moreover, rodents are genetically tractable and germline targeting of genes of interest is routine, but the limited lifespan of human islets in culture makes such studies using primary human tissue not possible at present. therefore there is an unmet need for approaches to modify gene expression in intact human islets for translational application. the present study furthers that effort by demonstrating culture and transfection parameters that permit suppression of multiple genes at once, resulting in a phenotypic outcome not achievable with single gene manipulations.

this study builds on previously established approaches to transfect primary cells including islets using electroporation. in contrast to previous work  <cit> , we used intact human islets transfected without accutase digestion and by modifying the electroporation parameters of voltage and frequency, pervasive suppression of targeted genes could be achieved without enzymatic disruption of the islet architecture. this advance is potentially beneficial because of the comparatively lesser manipulation of islets. survival of electroporated islets and the maintenance of function after electroporation may have been aided in our study by the use of developed culture conditions and media designed to optimize islet survival and resistance to stress  <cit> .

this study extends previous work  <cit>  by showing that electroporation is a superior means of delivering sirna into islets than liposome-based transfection. we compared the two approaches directly and electroporation caused a significantly greater reduction in targeted mrna compared to lipofection. we show here that after optimization of sirna concentrations and electroporation parameters two simultaneous knockdowns were possible to levels comparable to standards for easily transfected immortalized cell lines. remarkably, we found that significant robust suppression of at least three genes simultaneously is possible using this method. despite the preservation of islet structure and glucose responsiveness achieved with the present approach, it is likely that this system could be further optimized, for example by decreasing voltage in combination with use of newer sirna modifications that endow greater transfection efficiency and potency  <cit> . it is possible that subtle alterations in islet viability or function not detected in the assays used in this study would be better preserved at lower voltages.

multiple gene suppression in the absence of damage to islet structure or glucose responsiveness allowed us to effectively target two central growth control pathways with inherent redundancies in each. simultaneous compromise of the rb and p <dig> pathways led to entry of postmitotic islet cells into the cell cycle. this phenotypic outcome was a result of specific inhibition of the targeted genes and required suppression of multiple pathway members. these findings demonstrate the potential of transient suppression of multiple genes to have significant functional impact in situations where single gene targeting is inadequate. future experiments will address global changes in islet differentiated and metabolic state after rb/p <dig> suppression by electroporation. electroporation of human islets should prove a useful approach to aid the study of other important pathways containing multiple members.

CONCLUSIONS
the application of electroporation in optimized culture conditions is an effective approach to deliver sirna molecules targeting multiple genes into a majority of cells within intact human islets. benefits are that it is transient, avoids genetic integration and is well tolerated by islets. the capacity to significantly impact molecular pathways by targeting multiple genes within them should prove to be a valuable tool for both basic study and for practical applications.

