BACKGROUND
chinese hamster ovary  cells are one of the most widely used host cells for therapeutic protein production. the selection of cho cells for high therapeutic protein production is of particular interest in cho cell culture for a wide variety of individual clones for productivity from a random integration and gene amplification system  <cit> . due to the large number of candidates that need their productivity evaluated, an efficient high-throughput cell screening system needs to be developed.

flow cytometry can efficiently evaluate a number of cells at the single-cell level in a short time and isolate a single clone from sub-populations. various fluorescence-activated cell sorting -based cell screening methods have been developed for cho cells with the benefits of flow cytometry  <cit> . the use of an antibody conjugated with a fluorescent molecule, which is the target to the membrane-retained therapeutic proteins has been used to find high-producing clones in the combination with facs. although its mechanism has not been fully elucidated, the incubation of antibody-producing cho cells at 4°c could lead to the transient association of the desired antibody with the cell surface  <cit> . the target antibody at cell surface can be detected by another fluorescent-conjugated antibody and the highly fluorescent-labeled clones are isolated as high producers using facs system, evidenced from correlating the mean fluorescence intensity with specific productivity . similarly, to capture the secreted protein in a small droplet or matrix generated on the cell surface, gel microdrop technology and affinity capture surface display method combined with fluorescent-conjugated antibody have been developed  <cit> . instead of direct measurement of desired antibody by anchoring membrane, the cell surface reporter, cd <dig> not normally expressed in cho cells, is co-expressed with the target protein by internal ribosome entry site -linking and the high producer is detected using a fluorescent-conjugated anti-cd <dig> antibody  <cit> .

being different from the direct detection of a target protein, intracellular fluorescent materials, such as green fluorescence protein  and yellow fluorescence protein , were a widely used fluorescent protein for facs because of easy activation without co-factors and substrates. meng et al.  evaluated the usefulness of gfp as an indicator for finding high-producing clone when it is co-expressed with therapeutic protein in one vector system  <cit> . due to the close relationship between fluorescence intensity and q, clones with high q could easily be isolated from sub-populations based on fluorescence level using facs. in a similar way, clones with high fluorescence level were selected as for high q in fitc-conjugated mtx-mediated gene amplification system on the basis of correlation of q with amplified gene copy number  <cit> . however, in the case of isolation of antibody-producing cells, there is a limitation in the applications of these systems because antibody is composed of two fragment proteins which are heavy and light chains. therefore, sleiman et al.  developed two color fluorescent protein-based facs to select clone possessing the high level of the heavy chain and the light chain by detecting gfp and yfp, respectively  <cit> .

for the characteristics of an antibody composed of two fragments, a heavy chain and a light chain, the fragment complementation system can be useful in finding antibody-producing cells. previously, bianchi and mcgrew  developed an efficient system for the selection of cho cells with high levels of both antibody chains using a dhfr fragment  <cit> . the fragment complementation systems for split gfp by means of anti-parallel leucine zipper and ef-hand calcium binding motifs of calbindin d9k have been reported  <cit> . expression of two fragments of gfp does not achieve folding and fluorescence of gfp by itself. however, gfp is reassembled through the introduction of strong mediator such as anti-parallel leucine zipper and ef-hand calcium binding motifs of calbindin d9k by non-covalent reconnection. despite the merits in using split gfp, such as the extensive use of flow cytometry and efficient complementation system for gfp, there is, to date, no report introducing it related to cell line development in mammalian cell culture. in the present study, we developed a new cell screening method for high antibody-producing cho cells based on the reassembly of split gfp combined with facs.

RESULTS
to evaluate the role of split gfp as a reporter for antibody production, we constructed an overexpression vector for split gfp and antibody chains expressed simultaneously. figure 1a shows the schematic diagram representing the way the assembly of split gfp works as a reporter for the selection of antibody-producing cells. the gfp fragments, called n-gfp and c-gfp , are co-linked with a light chain and heavy chain gene using an ires sequence, respectively. these constructs containing an ires sequence, pngfp-light and pcgfp-heavy, led us to hypothesis that the transcription level of the light and heavy chains is highly correlated with that of n-gfp and c-gfp. from this hypothesis, our speculation extends to the idea that the high gfp-expressing clone may be the high antibody-producing clone.

to confirm both the antibody expression and the assembly of the gfp with a constructed vector, a bicistronic vector containing gfp fragments and an antibody gene, pngfp-light and pcgfp-heavy, was transfected into hek293t cells. as a control, a gfp-overexpressing vector, pegfp-c <dig>  was also transfected into hek293t cells. figure 1b shows the confocal microscopic images of transfected cells and antibody titer produced from them. the emission of green fluorescence from reconstituted split gfp was efficiently detected when the two fragments were co-expressed. in addition, the cells with green fluorescence could produce the antibody simultaneously. the same results were confirmed in cho-k <dig> cells . accordingly, we proceeded with these constructs to evaluate the efficiency of this screening system in cho cells.

to investigate whether the sorted cells by facs are the antibody-producing cho cells, the cho cells with intracellular green fluorescence  were generated by two rounds of facs from the cho cells co-transfected with pngfp-light and pcgfp-heavy . figure  <dig> shows the flow cytometry analysis and specific antibody productivity  of unsorted and facs-sorted cells. the discrimination of cells with green fluorescence was performed on a fitc/ssc diagram. the percentage of the cell population with gfp expression in the first sort pool and second sort pool was much higher than that in the unsorted pool. interestingly, the increase in qab was highly associated with the increase in the cell population with gfp expression. taken together, we found that the facs-sorted cells with gfp expression are the antibody-producing cho cells.

to evaluate the efficiency of split gfp-based clone selection for high antibody-producing cells, individual clones were isolated from the unsorted pool and the second sort pool by the limiting dilution method. table  <dig> shows the distribution of  <dig> isolated clones from the unsorted pool and the second sort pool with regard to antibody titer, respectively. all of the unsorted pool-derived clones have low antibody production . eighty-two out of  <dig> clones in the second sorted pool have antibody production exceeding 1 mg/l. moreover, there are four clones having over 10 mg/l in the second sort pool-derived clones, while there are none in the unsorted pool-derived clones. altogether, the clone selection with split gfp-based facs appears to be an efficient strategy to select high antibody-producing cho cells.

acells were inoculated at a concentration of  <dig> ×  <dig> cells/ml into a 6-well plate. the samples were measured by elsia after 3-days cultivation.

a major issue in the development of a cell screening method using a reporter is to verify the co-relationship between the expression level of the reporter and the antibody. especially, the screening system dealing with intracellular reporter should be evaluated because antibody is generally secreted protein. in the same context, previous reports utilizing a fluorescent protein as an intracellular reporter proved the mutual relation between productivity of desired protein and fluorescence intensity  <cit> .

to address this issue, the median gfp and qab of  <dig> selected clones were estimated. figure  <dig> shows the relationship of the median gfp and qab for individual selected clones. the qab is highly correlated with the fluorescence intensity as indicated by the high correlation coefficient . accordingly, we confirmed that the selected clone having high fluorescence intensity by gfp-based cell sorting is the high antibody producer with high qab.

another issue that arises with the usage of intracellular reporter is the determination of the optimum time-point for sorting and metabolic burden by co-expressing reporter gene. unlike the use of non-split fluorescent protein, we can exclude the issue of determining the optimal point in split fluorescent protein because the split fluorescent protein can be assembled at specific conditions, such as low temperature in the case of split gfp. previously, bochkov and palmenberg  showed that the level of gene expression linked with attenuated ires was about 11-fold lower than wild-type ires  <cit> . also, the modified form of gfp with increased fluorescence intensity was reported  <cit> . the introduction of attenuated ires and improved form of gfp can be a solution to reduce the metabolic burden of fluorescent protein.

the intracellular fluorescent protein-based facs for clone selection in rcho cells is a reasonable strategy as it does not require complex preparation steps to capture and detect a secreted antibody. previously, sleiman et al.  developed an efficient dual intracellular auto-fluorescent protein-associated facs to select antibody-producing cho cells with a high level of both antibody chains  <cit> . in this system, two reporters, gfp and yfp, are applied for the heavy and light chain, respectively. in general, a correct compensation is necessary for accurate analysis when more than two colors are used as a parameter in flow cytometry  <cit> . moreover, a similar level of fluorescence intensity in gfp and yfp does not guarantee a similar expression level of the heavy chain and the light chain because fluorescence intensity is a relative value, not an absolute value. also, the split gfp-based cell screening method developed in this study is advantageous in that one reporter is introduced for quantitative analysis. by employing this type of complementation system, we can omit the process of compensation.

the additional validation for dynamic range of the gfp assay and long-term stability of constructed cell line may be needed to successfully apply the split gfp-based cell screening method for commercial production cell line. the expanded result for dynamic range of gfp expression in high antibody-producing clones with enhanced qab via gene amplification system and/or cis-acting element for augmenting gene expression may be helpful to meet the industrial standard. the genetic instability of antibody-producing cho cell line during long-term culture in the absence of selective pressure is one of main issues in cho cell culture  <cit> . the data provided from long-term culture with constructed cell lines based on split gfp system to determine the association of gfp expression with reduced qab will be an interesting extension of this work.

CONCLUSIONS
the considerable clonal variation attributed from transfection and gene amplification makes it difficult to establish high-producing rcho cell line. for large number of analytes, it is necessary to develop an efficient high-throughput cell screening system. in this study, we developed an efficient screening method based on reconstitution of split gfp to select high antibody-producing cho cells using a facs analysis. on the basis of correlation between q and fluorescence intensity by reconstituting gfp, the fragment complementation system for split gfp could be a powerful tool for antibody production in cho cells.

