BACKGROUND
finite state automata operating at molecular scale  <cit>  can conceptually be used for applications in the living cell. head et al.  <cit>  proposed an in vivo biomolecular model in which computations manipulate a plasmid dna. the solution of the problem is given by either the longest or shortest plasmid at the end of the computation. henkel et al.  <cit>  implemented a similar in vivo mechanism in which computations are conducted on a dna sequence constituting of an open reading frame controlled through a strong promoter. sequential plasmid manipulation finds a final plasmid construct containing the computational solution allowing the in vivo transcription and translation into a protein. the first autonomous finite state automaton was proposed in  <cit> . it is a 2-state 2-symbol automaton composed of dna strands and enzymes. benenson et al.  <cit>  used this automaton to carry out in vitro molecular diagnosis and therapy. for this, an anti-sense drug  is released if certain diagnostic conditions are true, i.e., low expression levels of certain mrnas and high expression levels of others. the diagnostic conditions can be viewed as transitional steps in a finite state automaton. if the automaton reached a final state, indicating that all conditions are met, then the drug enclosed in the loop of a hairpin shaped oligonucleotide is released. this if-then mechanism is a new element of autonomous molecular computation. unfortunately, the proposed mechanisms would not work in a living cell as unwanted side effects raised by supporting molecules  would be a major problem  <cit> . moreover, this molecular mechanism is limited in its ability to logically control gene expression as it allows for administering as output only small molecules.

nevertheless, this work is an important conceptual step forward to link molecular automata to molecular diagnosis and therapy. the first autonomous finite state machine working in the living cell of e. coli was proposed by nakagawa et al.  <cit> . this approach is based on a length encoding automaton model  <cit>  whose input string is encoded by an mrna molecule. the computation of this mrna molecule is accomplished by the biosynthesis mechanism of the cell combined with four-base codon techniques  <cit>  yielding a protein of interest.

RESULTS
computational genes
here we present a new molecular automaton, called computational gene, consisting of a structural and functional moiety which is designed such that it might work in a cellular environment. the structural part is a naturally occurring gene, which is used as a skeleton to encode the input and the transitions of the automaton . the conserved features of a structural gene  serve as constants of the computational gene, while the coding regions, the number of exons and introns, the position of start and stop codon, and the automata theoretical variables  are the design parameters of the computational gene. the constants and the design parameters are linked by several logical and biochemical constraints . the input of the automaton are molecular markers given by single stranded dna  molecules. these markers are signalling aberrant  molecular phenotype  <cit>  and turn on the self-assembly of the functional gene. if the input is accepted, the output encodes a double stranded dna  molecule, a functional gene which should be successfully integrated into the cellular transcription and translation machinery producing a wild type protein or an anti-drug  . otherwise, a rejected input will assemble into a partially dsdna molecule which cannot be translated. a computational gene can be described by a finite automaton m such that the set of strings accepted by m  is given by those dsdna molecules that a translation system recognises as genes. to this end, observe that linear self-assembly is equivalent to regular languages  <cit> , and regular languages are exactly those languages that are accepted by finite automata. therefore, we can expect to construct a functional gene based only on the linear self-assembly of oligonucleotides or duplex dna with sticky ends, controlled by a finite state machine. the structural gene resembles the natural structure of the genetic information in the cell and bears all the regulatory elements allowing the functional gene to be successfully translated into a protein. as there is no size restriction on the structural gene, there would be also no size limitation for the functional gene.

diagnosis and therapy
we study the hypothetical application of simple molecular computations to correct an aberrant mutation in a gene that can trigger a disease-phenotype. one of the most prominent examples is the tumor suppressor p <dig> gene, which is present in every cell, and acts as a guard to control the growth. mutations in this gene can abolish its function, allowing uncontrolled growth that can lead to cancer  <cit> .

a single disease-related mutation can be diagnosed and treated by the following diagnostic rule,

 if proteinx_mutated_at_codon_ythen produce_drug fi
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaafaqaaegabaaabagaeeyaakmaeeozaymaeeiiaaiaeeicaanaeeocainaee4ba8maeeidaqnaeeyzaumaeeyaakmaeeoba4gcbigae8hwaglaee4xa8laeeyba0maeeydaunaeeidaqnaeeyyaemaeeidaqnaeeyzaumaeeizaqmaee4xa8laeeyyaemaeeidaqnaee4xa8laee4yammaee4ba8maeeizaqmaee4ba8maeeoba4maee4xa8lae8xwakfabagaeeidaqnaeeiaagmaeeyzaumaeeoba4maeeiiaaiaeeicaanaeeocainaee4ba8maeeizaqmaeeydaunaee4yammaeeyzaumaee4xa8laeeizaqmaeeocainaeeydaunaee4zacmaeeiiaaiaeeozaymaeeyaakgaaaaa@6e91@ 

this rule could allow a protein with a pathogenic mutation to execute its natural physiological function. for instance, a mutation at codon  <dig> in the p <dig> protein is characteristic for hepatocellular cancer  <cit>  and the cdb <dig> peptide  binds to the p <dig> core domain and stabilises its fold  <cit> . although restoring the tumor suppressor activity of the p <dig> mutants with small stabilising molecules is a promising strategy in cancer therapy, different classes of mutations will require different rescue strategies  <cit> . the rule  can be implemented by a two-state one-symbol automaton consisting of two partially dsdna molecules and one ssdna molecule , which corresponds to the disease-related mutation and provides a molecular switch for the linear self-assembly of the functional gene .

to process diagnostic rule , the molecular automaton must be able to detect point mutations. this task is based on a diagnostic complex, a dsdna molecule consisting of a single-stranded mutation signal and a single-stranded diagnostic signal . both strands imperfectly pair in the region that resembles an aberrant mutation to be detected. an mrna molecule bearing a mutation  will trigger the dissociation of the diagnostic complex and will pair to the mutation signal. the latter process is thermodynamically driven by the higher stability of the dna/rna duplex over the mismatched dna/dna diagnostic complex and favourable due to its increased complementarity  <cit> .

moreover, the resulting dna/rna hybrid complex will act as a substrate for the cellular rnase h, destroying the rna component of the duplex  <cit> . the released single-stranded diagnostic signal links the assembly of the functional gene , whose structure is completed by cellular ligase present in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. the transcription and translation machinery of the cell is then in charge of therapy and administers either a wild-type protein or an anti-drug. in both cases, the pathogenic phenotype is suppressed, either by a replacement with the wild-type protein or by a release of a small molecule that may stabilise the aberrant mutant protein, and thus providing the physiological functionality of the wild-type. this idea of favouring the full over the partial complementarity of the base pairing was implemented in robust dna-based machines 'fuelled' by the dna/dna-cross-pairing  <cit> . although mechanistically simple and quite robust on molecular level, several issues need to be addressed before an in vivo implementation of computational genes can be considered. first, the dna material must be internalised into the cell, specifically into the nucleus. the transfer of dna or rna through biological membranes is a key step in the drug delivery  <cit> . nuclear localisation signals can be irreversibly linked to one end of oligonucleotides, forming an oligonucleotide-peptide conjugate that allows effective internalisation of dna into the nucleus  <cit> . in addition, the dna complexes should have low immunogenicity to guarantee their integrity in the cell and their resistance to cellular nucleases. current strategies to eliminate nuclease sensitivity include modifications of the oligonucleotide backbone such as methylphosphonate  <cit>  and phosphorothioate  oligodeoxynucleotides  <cit> , but along with their increased stability, modified oligonucleotides often have altered pharmacologic properties  <cit> . finally, similar to any other drug, dna complexes could cause nonspecific and toxic side effects. in vivo applications of antisense oligonucleotides showed that toxicity is largely due to impurities in the oligonucleotide preparation and lack of specifity of the particular sequence used  <cit> . undoubtedly, progress on antisense biotechnology will also result in a direct benefit to the model of computational genes.

implementation
to test the feasibility of the principle of computational genes, we developed an in vitro system making use of the following assumptions:  diagnostic and therapy reactions are simulated in one-single step process;  diagnostic complexes contain three adjacent mismatches representing a whole codon replacement ;  rna molecules are replaced by ssdna during simulations.

diagnostic complexes
clearly, the diagnostic complexes must be thermodynamically stable in the cell in order to avoid misactivations  of functional genes. for this, we conducted strand exchange experiments with single-stranded and double-stranded dna to determine the strand displacement conditions in in vitro experiments . the single strand am' mimics the mutated 'cancerous' mrna sequence and its addition to the diagnostic complex am/ab' triggers the release of the diagnostic signal ab', and the increase in the am' concentration enhanced the strand displacement rate . the pairing of am' with the mutation signal am is thermodynamically favorable due to the new complementary base pairs added in the am/am' duplex and increased stability of the complex at physiological temperature: melting temperature tm = 60°c in buffer and 62°c in buffer containing crowding agent mimicking the cellular environment  <cit> ; for comparison the tm of am/ab' duplex is 51°c in buffer and 53°c in crowded conditions. the crowding environment did not influence the melting temperature of the duplexes. the diagnostic complexes were stable at physiological temperature and only  <dig> % of the diagnostic signals  underwent spontaneous release . the results suggest that the perfect matching is a favorable state and based on this we can conclude a displacement of the diagnostic signal by the mutant mrna. the stability of the diagnostic complexes can be further optimised by designing diagnostic complexes comprising longer sequences, which will increase melting temperature and reduce spontaneous disassembly. the latter will decrease the displacement rate and the dissociation of a duplex longer than 10– <dig> bp will take an enormous amount of time  in vivo. therefore, an optimal design of a diagnostic complex should be based on consideration of those three variables.

in vitro translation
we tested the concept of computational gene in an in vitro translation system. as structural gene of the computational gene we took the human inhibitor of dna binding  <dig>  gene  <cit>  comprised of two exons  separated by one intron . its original intron sequence was modified to construct the initial and accepting final sites: the intron was split into two parts , releasing intact exons and the upstream promoter region. the conserved splicing signals, i.e., 5'-splice signal, ag/gtrag , ctsay branch point , strong poly signal between branch point and 3'-splice signal consisting of 13/ <dig> pyrimidines , and an nyag/g 3'-splice signal  were used as constants in the computational gene and remained unchanged. two  <dig> nt long ssdnas  were attached to the released free overhangs after enzyme digestion, leaving  <dig> nt free overhangs, complementary to the  <dig> nt long activated diagnostic signal ab' . note that the ligation point between overhangs a and b is located precisely at the mismatched positions in the diagnostic signal ab' . addition of the mutated dna and diagnostic complexes, whose diagnostic signal is complementary to the single stranded overhangs in the initial and final accepting state, led to successful self-assembly of the double stranded long fragment, resembling the expected size of the gene of interest . a viable functional gene was assembled in an in vitro translation system . all the components, the diagnostic complex , the mutated dna , and the non-assembled gene fragments , were mixed together and added simultaneously to an eukaryotic in vitro translation system and the reaction proceeded for  <dig>  h at the optimal conditions . the addition of mutated dna  initiated the programmed cascade reaction specified by the path:  mutation detection,  gene self-assembly and linking, and  transcription and translation, yielding a  <dig> amino acid long protein  as output. the size of the output was verified by a control reaction, containing the intact hid <dig> gene . even thought the yield of the output is very low , it points out the potential for feasibility of the model. without a released diagnostic signal no self-ligation of the therapeutic gene could be detected . the in vitro translation system is representative of intact transcription/translation machinery in the cell and the results from this experiment suggest that successful self-assembly of the computational gene and translation into a viable product  might occur in living cells.

if the promotor-containing fragment starts transcription before the gene self-assembly , the reliability of the computation would not be affected. in eukaryotic cells, quality control mechanisms ensure that an mrna molecule is complete before translation is initiated. these mechanisms include cleavage and polyadenylation of the 3' end of proper rna transcripts protecting them from cellular degradation  <cit> .

generalisation
the diagnostic rule  can be generalised to n ≥  <dig> disease-related mutations,

 if proteinx_mutated_at_codon_y1 and……and proteinx_mutated_at_codon_ynthen produce_drug fi
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=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@a165@ 

this rule can be realized by using an -state n-symbol automaton . in the -th state, the input symbol given by the i-th mutation lets the automaton transit into the i-th state. the automaton can be implemented by two partially dsdna molecules, ssdna molecules related one-to-one with the mutations, and further  ssdna molecules necessary for self-assembly. the functional gene will be self-assembled only if the n-th  state is reached, that is, if all n diagnosed mutations are present . in this way, computational genes may be used for the diagnosis and therapy of diseases related to mutation of transcribed genetic material. the rule  may even be generalised to involve mutations from different proteins allowing a combined diagnosis and therapy. furthermore, computational genes are extendable to prokaryotic genes evidencing the generality of the principle. a prokaryotic model could release several different output molecules in response to different environmental conditions . diagnostic rule  can be implemented by linear self-assembly that was successfully demonstrated in the adleman's first experiment  <cit> , and recently has been used to implement in vitro finite small-state automata  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our work demonstrated the basic principles of computational genes and particularly, their potential to detect mutations, and as a response thereafter to administer an output that suppresses the aberrant disease phenotype and/or restores the lost physiological function. in this way, computational genes might allow implementation in situ of a therapy as soon as the cell starts developing defective material. computational genes combine the techniques of gene therapy which allows to insert a healthy gene into the genome replacing an aberrant gene, as well as antisense technology mediating gene silencing. in addition, a computational gene can theoretically implement general m-state n-symbol automata and could be designed to solve all types of finite state applications at the molecular level, thus offering tremendous advantage for broader applicability than previous approaches  <cit> , whose complexity is limited to fewer states and symbols. clearly, in vivo application of computational genes is the ultimate goal, but before this some hurdles need to be overcome, i.e., the internalisation of the computational gene into the cell, its longevity, and its integrity in the cell. the issue of integrating computational genes into cellular regulatory pathways is directly linked to other biomolecular computing approaches in which gene regulation is the basis for making computations  <cit> . computational genes provide a major step towards bringing molecular computers to work inside living organisms, to detect and correct physiological abnormalities, and to administer healthy solutions.

