BACKGROUND
in humans there are more than  <dig> relatively rare progressive neurodegenerative, neurological and neuromuscular diseases linked with repeat instability mutations  <cit> . a distinct subset of this group, which includes for example huntington disease and spinocerebellar ataxias, is caused by polymorphic variation in trinucleotide repeats, typically cag repeats, often present in the coding sequences of specific genes  <cit> . in this group of  <dig> diseases the repeats usually encode long poly-glutamine  tracts, although other poly-amino acid tracts also occur but at lower frequencies. these human diseases are caused by extreme expansions of the repeats, which adversely impact protein structure, often causing intracellular protein aggregation and altered protein function  <cit> . however, trinucleotide repeat tracts which are impure, but maintain the ability to encode poly-q tracts, have less severe impacts on function in model systems. this suggests that repeat expansions influence both protein and mrna structure and function  <cit> .

the length of the expanded repeat is typically inversely related to the age of disease onset and directly related to the severity of the disease  <cit> . moreover, there is often a tendency for the expanded repeat to further increase in size in subsequent generations thereby resulting in greater disease severity and earlier onset, a phenomenon called genetic anticipation  <cit> . trinucleotide coding sequence repeats in many genes are often polymorphic in the normal population but these repeats are typically shorter in length compared with disease-causing alleles. in some instances the distinction between normal and disease states can be minor in terms of repeat length  <cit> .

in a restricted examination of  <dig>  human, rat and mouse orthologs  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively, containing poly-q encoding cag repeats  were identified  <cit> . another analysis of the human genome reported a total of  <dig> cag poly-q genes  <cit> . these regions were defined as containing five or more cag repeats encoding poly-q. although poly-q containing proteins are generally more highly conserved in mammals, paradoxically their repeat regions are typically poorly conserved both in sequence and length, and they have been implicated in the rapid functional diversification of these proteins and the continuous morphological evolution of mammals  <cit> . it has also been suggested that normal polymorphic variation in these genes contributes to morphological variation within a species, as many of the affected genes are involved in regulating aspects of development and often encode transcription factors and transcription co-regulators  <cit> . indeed, polymorphic trinucleotide repeats in two genes, runx <dig>  and alx <dig> , have been linked with morphological variation in canine skulls and limbs  <cit> . it is possible therefore that those genes containing polymorphic coding sequence trinucleotide repeats may contribute to variation in a broad range of phenotypes within a species.

what is not clear is whether the propensity for normal polymorphic variation in the cag repeats of some of these genes also occurs in non-primates. there is significant positive correlation between the length of a pure cag repeat and its propensity for polymorphic variation in human genes  <cit> . interruptions of the cag repeat, even with the alternate codon for glutamine, caa, decrease the likelihood of polymorphic variation, as do reading frame shifts maintaining the cag repeat structure but encoding different amino acids  <cit> . moreover, the potential for a gene to cause known human diseases was also associated with greater cag repeat polymorphic diversity  <cit> . thus, it is probable that long and pure cag tracts encoding poly-q are predictors of polymorphic variation that is likely to impact on phenotype.

identification of poly-q encoding genes in additional mammalian species may identify species-specific differences in both the repertoire of these genes as well as the diversity of polymorphic variants in a subgroup of these genes. the former genes may contribute to an understanding of morphological and functional differences between mammalian species while the latter may contribute to phenotypic variation within a species. the current investigation has identified all bovine poly-q encoding genes and within this group a number of genes whose orthologs in human and mouse do not contain these repeats. the bovine poly-q encoding genes were prioritised using multiple criteria for their likelihood of being polymorphic and then the highest ranking group was experimentally tested for polymorphic variation within a cattle diversity panel. extensive polymorphic variation was identified. the poly-q encoding genes were strongly enriched for molecular functions relating to transcriptional regulation and their encoded proteins are involved in large transcriptional regulatory complexes in the cell nucleus.

RESULTS
identification of poly-q encoding bovine genes
bovine genes encoding tracts of five or more glutamines  were initially identified using the ncbi refseq collection  <cit>  and glean <dig> gene models in conjunction with the btau  <dig>  bovine genome sequence assembly  <cit> . they were subsequently manually confirmed using the current btau_ <dig>  assembly. a tract of five or more q in a protein sequence has been identified as statistically different from the average protein with average composition  <cit> . a total of  <dig> poly-q encoding genes were identified of which  <dig> contained multiple tracts and  <dig> contained pure cag encoding poly-q repeats .

the presence of a polymorphic repeat tract occasionally confused automated gene model annotation pipelines which utilised cdna and genomic sequence information representing different alleles in the repeat region. for example, most gene models for bovine fxc <dig>  are incorrect as they attribute an additional intron to the repeat region, which clearly showed allelic differences between genomic dna and est sequences  <cit> . this annotation error is prevalent in other unrelated gene models where polymorphic repeats are prevalent . the mean poly-q length encoded by the  <dig> genes was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the longest tract, containing  <dig> q residues, was present in foxp <dig>  while mll <dig>  contained the greatest number of repeat tracts,  <dig>  a similar analysis revealed that the human genome contained  <dig> poly-q encoding genes of which  <dig> are orthologs of bovine poly-q encoding genes . figure  <dig> shows that most bovine poly-q proteins have poly-q tract sizes approximately similar to their human orthologs. twenty six bovine poly-q encoding genes were identified with q-tracts that were not evident in their human and murine orthologs when examined using homologene  <cit>  . the mean size of the bovine poly-q proteins ) deduced from the longest ensembl gene model information  <cit>  was significantly larger than for all bovine proteins . poly-q tracts were not enriched in any one third of the protein sequence lengths . therefore, they were not biased toward the ends of the polypeptides where they may be expected to be better tolerated in terms of their impacts on polypeptide functions.

polymorphic variation of bovine poly-q encoding genes
several criteria have been associated with the propensity for polymorphic variation in poly-q encoding genes  <cit> . bovine poly-q encoding genes were prioritised in a hierarchical manner according to the following criteria:  length and purity of cag repeat;  lack of conservation of cag repeat length in mammalian orthologs;  evidence for polymorphic variation in other mammalian species;  evidence that polymorphic variations in the human or mouse orthologs caused diseases, and;  disparities between bovine cdna sequences and the btau <dig>  reference genome sequence in regions of bovine genes encoding poly-q tracts. the top ranked  <dig> genes were initially screened by pcr for polymorphic variation in amplicon size using a small diversity panel consisting of eight cattle. five of these genes contained two poly-q tracts and in each case both were independently assayed. in addition, three genes that were not highly ranked were also tested , ar  and nfya ). the latter analysis was used as a control for the prioritization process. odam is situated within a cluster of casein genes and hence it is also of biological interest due to potential strong selection at this locus. polymorphic poly-q variants of human ar have been linked with a number of reproductive traits  <cit> , while nfya was particularly interesting as its poly-q encoding tract traverses a splice site .

of the total of  <dig> genes tested,  <dig> showed suggestive evidence for polymorphic variation in the initial  <dig> animal screen. figure  <dig> shows representative profiles for a number of these genes as well as two  that showed no amplicon size variation in the small cattle diversity panel. fxc <dig> was the most polymorphic gene in the initial analysis.

a larger cattle diversity panel consisting of  <dig> animals  was then used for automated genotyping of the polymorphic regions in the  <dig> genes identified in the initial screen. the analysis also included poly-q encoding regions within odam, nfya and ar, all of which were found to be monomorphic in this larger cattle diversity panel, as they were in the initial small animal screen. the results of this analysis are presented in table  <dig>  a total of  <dig> of the  <dig> genes identified in the preliminary screen were confirmed as polymorphic in the large diversity panel, with nearly all , having more than two alleles. representatives of each gene were sequenced to confirm the allelic variation. as anticipated from the preliminary screen, fxc <dig> was the most polymorphic gene with  <dig> alleles. also of note were the nine htt  alleles. the latter gene is the prototypical cag poly-q gene in humans. extreme repeat expansions in this gene are associated with the autosomal dominant neurological disorder, huntington disease  <cit> . cag repeat expansions or mutations in  <dig> of  <dig> human orthologs of the polymorphic bovine poly-q genes are associated with diseases  <cit> . the mean size of the proteins encoded by the  <dig> bovine polymorphic genes was not different from all bovine poly-q proteins . figure  <dig> shows that for these  <dig> genes there is a linear relationship between the largest number of repeats in an allele of a gene and the number of alleles. an independent analysis of these  <dig> genes in  <dig> holstein dairy cattle, representing  <dig> trios, each consisting of both parents and one offspring, revealed stable inheritance of all  <dig> polymorphic genes .

1btau <dig>  bovine genome assembly . bta, chromosome number; un, chromosome unknown; c, complementary strand.

2length and purity of repeat triplet codon. g, a and n followed by a number represent cag, caa and other triplet codon tracts, respectively, that were present in the btau  <dig>  bovine genome assembly. multiple closely linked q-tracts are shown as a single entity connected by ns. multiple discontinuous q-tracts within a gene that were assayed are separated by a semi-colon. the q-tract for nfya traversed a splice site and is represented by two genomic regions each of which was genotyped.

3these genes were not ranked highly for potential polymorphic variation using the hierarchical prioritisation criteria.

4probability of difference in allele frequencies between bos taurus taurus and bos taurus indicus animals . ns, not significant.

5probability of difference in allele frequencies between bos taurus taurus beef and dairy breeds . ns, not significant.

6bolded gene symbols have been linked with human diseases caused by poly-q tract expansions or mutations  <cit> .

the allele frequencies in the large cattle diversity panel showed significant differences between bos taurus taurus and bos taurus indicus animals for  <dig> of  <dig> of the polymorphic poly-q genes  . for some genes there was a clearly predominant allele  and thap <dig> ) while others showed broad distribution profiles  . allele frequencies of four genes, cacna1a , fxc <dig>  htt and tbp , were also different  in bos taurus taurus cattle breeds specialised for beef or dairy uses. larger cattle populations will need to be assessed in subsequent studies to confirm these results and to also re-examine some of the highly ranked genes that were apparently monomorphic as the process used for gene selection was likely to exclude low frequency allelic variation.

enrichment of poly-q encoding genes for functional terms
to test the hypothesis that particular functional classes of genes are enriched in the full repertoire of bovine poly-q encoding genes we undertook gene function enrichment analyses. the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery  functional analysis tool was used to identify over-represented  gene ontology  terms, pathways and keywords  <cit> . david was then used to group the significantly enriched terms into functional annotation clusters as many functional terms were associated with overlapping gene contents. this process provided a higher level perspective of the enriched functions associated with these genes. there were  <dig> functional annotation clusters with enrichment scores greater than  <dig> , which is considered a significance threshold. additional file  <dig> contains the complete analysis. cluster  <dig> was the most significant  and it contained the most terms. this cluster was over-represented with many terms relating to control of gene transcription, as well as terms associated with regulation of metabolism and biological processes. strikingly, clusters  <dig>  5- <dig>  9- <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> all contained terms linked with transcriptional regulation and consistent with this there was corresponding enrichment for nuclear organelle structure . as might be expected, there was enrichment for themes relating to trinucleotide repeats . the analysis also highlighted metabolic processes . only one kegg pathway was over-represented i.e. the notch signalling pathway . although not reaching significance after correction for multiple testing, neurodegenerative diseases and huntington's disease kegg pathways were close to the significance threshold. in humans both of these pathways are closely associated with coding sequence cag repeat expansions that generate diseases.

human orthologs of the bovine poly-q encoding genes were enriched for gene expression  in epithelium , brain  and testis  . manual examination of the expression of these genes using human and murine gene expression databases  and gds <dig> ;  <cit> ) generally revealed ubiquitous expression patterns but with bias towards greater expression in epithelia. the  <dig> poly-q genes unique to bovine  were not significantly different from all of the bovine poly-q encoding genes with respect to functional terms as measured by david or by examination of gene expression patterns. likewise, the  <dig> polymorphic genes were also not enriched for functional terms relative to all poly-q encoding genes.

the gene function analysis indicated strong enrichment for transcription factors and transcriptional co-regulators in the bovine poly-q genes. many transcription factors and their co-regulators physically interact to form functional units controlling gene expression. we therefore tested the extent of interactions for the proteins encoded by human orthologs of the bovine poly-q genes by using the innatedb database  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the network of human orthologs to the bovine poly-q proteins that have been experimentally documented to be involved in physical interactions with other proteins from the same group. the diagram emphasises the nuclear location of many poly-q proteins and that they have potentially extensive physical interactions within the nucleus. some poly-q proteins, such as crebbp  protein), ep <dig>  and sp <dig>  had more extensive heterologous interactions. in addition, the transcription of several genes in this group was also controlled, at least in part, by proteins present in the same group . figure  <dig> shows a smaller interaction network involving only those proteins whose bovine orthologs were shown to be polymorphic. crebbp and ncor <dig>  are both directly involved in physical associations with htt  <cit> .

the impact of cag repeat regions on mrna splicing
during analysis of the bovine genome sequence we identified discordant ests associated with poly-q encoding tracts of bovine genes, which subsequently led to the identification of a number of polymorphic variants. the same analysis also highlighted discordances potentially arising from alternative mrna splicing events. nfya is a ubiquitously expressed highly conserved transcription factor subunit that, in conjunction with nfyb and nfyc, binds to ccaat motifs in the promoters of many genes that are expressed in a tissue specific manner  <cit> . reverse transcriptase-pcr  results demonstrated that nfya was expressed in a broad spectrum of bovine tissues . this result was confirmed by manual inspection of murine and human gene expression databases  and gds <dig>   <cit> ). close inspection of the cdna amplicons, which traversed the poly-q encoding region, suggested that they were not all equivalent in size. figure  <dig> shows a diagrammatic representation of the organisation of exons  <dig> and  <dig> of the nfya gene and includes the sequences flanking the exon  <dig> - intron  <dig> and intron  <dig> - exon  <dig> boundaries. the poly-q encoding region traversed the mrna splice site i.e. three cag codons were present in exon  <dig> and two in exon  <dig>  neither of these flanking regions was polymorphic in four individuals when genomic dna was assayed by pcr ). nor was this region polymorphic in the large cattle diversity panel. however, when cdna from mammary tissue was used as template, two amplicons differing by three nucleotides were evident. when sequenced, these amplicons contained either four or five cag codons in the poly-q encoding region. moreover, there were clear tissue-specific nfya expression differences for these two variants ). only the longer variant was expressed in fat, spleen and liver while both variants were expressed in mammary and brain tissues. thus, different splice donor or acceptor sites in the cag repeat region of the gene were used to generate tissue specific mrna sequence variation. since the n-terminal region of nfya, and in particular its poly-q segment, possesses significant transcriptional activation activity, then the splice site variation could be generating tissue specific differences in the activity of this transcription factor  <cit> .

examination of the gene models for abcf <dig>   <cit> , one of the polymorphic poly-q encoding genes, as well as mll <dig> and foxp <dig>  revealed that their repeat regions also traversed splice sites. moreover, several of the poly-q encoding genes had repeats that were juxtaposed at or very close  to splice sites , foxp <dig> , med <dig> , tnrc <dig> , tnrc <dig> , cxxc <dig> , cdc2l <dig> , ankrd <dig> , amot , while some repeats were contained within small alternatively spliced exons , ncor1; amot). thus, there is potential for poly-q tracts and their allelic variants to influence alternative splicing through a number of possible mechanisms.

additional file  <dig> shows ucsc bovine genome browser  <cit>  representations of the 3' and 5' ends of two adjacent exons in med <dig>  the exons are separated by an ~  <dig> bp intron. both exons encode large poly-q tracts. also included is protein sequence information for cow, dog, human and mouse as well as informative bovine ests. it is evident from the ests that there is considerable transcriptional diversity being generated from these two exons. this diversity could comprise the effects of polymorphic variation as well as alternative splicing because the ests are derived from a number of individuals. however, within one library from a single individual there are a number of very different ests . the splice donor and acceptor sites in all of these cases are situated within cag repeat tracts suggesting a direct involvement of these tracts in generating transcriptional diversity through their influence on alternative splicing. alternatively, there is a possibility that the transcriptional diversity reflects heterozygosity for polymorphic alleles within this individual. however, this explanation cannot account for the full scope of the transcriptional diversity.

discussion
the current study identified  <dig> bovine poly-q encoding genes and demonstrated that a substantial number of the ranked genes were polymorphic in their repeat containing regions. assessment of larger populations of cattle will be required to define the full repertoire of polymorphic poly-q encoding genes as lower frequency alleles were probably excluded in the current analysis. the lack of conservation of the repeat regions associated with polymorphic variation in poly-q encoding genes indicate that these are rapidly evolving gene regions  <cit> . indeed, it has been estimated that the insertion-deletion mutation rate of microsatellites, such as cag repeats in mammals, is approximately  <dig>  fold greater than single nucleotide substitutions  <cit> . as alterations in the number of trinucleotide repeats do not cause frameshifts in coding sequences, variation in these regions both between and within species is probably much better tolerated than other types of indels. longer cag repeats with little interruption by the alternative glutamine encoding codon caa, are more likely to be associated with higher allele diversity   <cit> . polymerase slippage, unequal crossing-over during replication, and repair associated mechanisms, are the most likely explanations for this increased genetic diversity  <cit> . the overall balance between the mutational mechanisms that promote repeat expansions and the accumulation of point mutations that decrease repeat purity and therefore decrease the probability of repeat expansion is likely to dictate the nature of the poly-q tract within a gene and its propensity for allelic variation.

although there are a number of human diseases that are caused by instability in the repeat regions of poly-q encoding genes, particularly expansion in subsequent generations  and during aging, there was no evidence for meiotic instability in the  <dig> polymorphic poly-q encoding bovine genes that were tested. a similar result was also demonstrated for porcine htt  <cit> . one likely explanation is that the identified bovine polymorphic gene variants represented normal alleles of relatively short lengths and not the extreme expansions characteristic of some poly-q encoding genes that cause human diseases  <cit> .

it has been argued that proteins containing repeats simply reflect the propensity for variation and that these regions are not subject to selection and have no functional impact  <cit> . these conclusions are at odds with substantial evidence demonstrating that amino acid repeat size in a wide spectrum of human genes impacts on molecular function and that these regions are indeed subject to strong selection  <cit> . in particular, q-tracts have been shown to be autonomous length-dependent activators of dna binding activities in transcription factors  <cit> . it is noted that there was strong enrichment for transcription factors in the bovine poly-q encoding genes and thus it is likely that intra-species and inter-species poly-q tract expansions  directly impact the transcriptional activities of these proteins. this is an appealing concept as it links propensity for increased genetic diversity with subtle functional differences in a class of proteins that can amplify these genetic influences because they impact the transcriptional regulation of a much broader group of genes. moreover, based on evidence linking normal polymorphic variations in two poly-q encoding genes, runx <dig> and alx <dig>  with morphological variation in dogs, it has been proposed that poly-q encoded genes contribute raw genetic material for rapid evolutionary change in a species  <cit> .

those genes containing conserved repeats, which often tend toward shorter and less pure repeat sequences, may reflect strong functional constraints on the encoded proteins in these regions and therefore selective pressure against variation despite increased mutational opportunity. consistent with this concept, these genes are rarely polymorphic in their repeat regions within a species population  <cit> . this information highlights local regions which may have important functions. the absence of polymorphic variation in the poly-q tract of the bovine androgen receptor , a co-activator for androgen dependent gene transcription, is interesting in view of the links between poly-q variation in the human protein and androgen-dependent diseases, many of which influence reproductive success  <cit> . as the ar gene is carried on the x chromosome some of these diseases result in somatic mosaicism  <cit> . the long history of cattle domestication involving intensive sire-based selection, primarily focussed on growth and reproductive traits, may have selected against variation in the ar gene in cattle.

comparison of allele frequencies in bos taurus indicus and bos taurus taurus breeds showed significant differences for  <dig> of  <dig> polymorphic poly-q encoding genes. since the repeat regions in these genes are subject to relatively high rates of mutation, then these data could suggest differences in the microsatellite mutational rates within the two breeds. this possibility seems unlikely as there were no systematic effects on the repeat sizes or the number of alleles for each gene. an alternative explanation is that the allele frequency differences reflect variation that has independently arisen since divergence of these two cattle breeds from an ancestral population. the frequencies of alleles for four genes, cacna1a, fxc <dig>  htt and tbp were significantly different for bos taurus taurus cattle specialised for milk or meat production. all of these genes have ubiquitous expression patterns  and gds <dig> ). tbp  and htt are transcriptional co-regulators located in the nucleus, cacna1a is a subunit of a plasma membrane voltage dependent calcium channel and, fxc <dig> is a component of a hetero-oligomeric translocase complex present in the mitochondrial inner membrane where it plays a role in the import of proteins into the inner mitochondrial membrane. thus, structural variations that impact on the functions of these proteins have potential to modify broad transcriptional activities and metabolism. these influences may be subject to different selective pressures in beef and dairy cattle populations. notably, extreme polymorphic repeats in three of four of these genes  are associated with a spectrum of human diseases  <cit> .

fxc <dig> was the most polymorphic gene with  <dig> detected alleles. although the evolutionary conserved fxc <dig> encoded protein has not been directly associated with any human diseases, a loss of function mutation in a related component of the mitochondrial hetero-oligomeric translocase complex, timm8a, has been linked with the neurodegenerative disorder, mohr-tranebjaerg syndrome  <cit> . the extensive protein-protein interactions occurring in the inner mitochondrial membrane translocase complex suggest that variation in fxc <dig> protein sequence caused by polymorphisms in its poly-q region may have potential for impacting mitochondrial function  <cit> . alternatively, the positioning of the poly-q tract near the n-terminus of this small protein may have insulated its primary functions from the influence of polymorphic variation.

the number of poly-q encoding genes in the cow  was similar to human  especially taking into account that the former number was determined using a draft genome assembly which is missing representation of all genomic sequence  and does not have completed gene models for all genes  <cit> . surprisingly, there was only 61%  gene overlap between cow and human indicating substantial differences between the species, although the functional enrichments in both groups were similar  <cit> . the figure of  <dig> human poly-q encoding genes  is consistent with an independent figure of  <dig> human poly-q genes  in a dataset of  <dig>  vertebrate orthologs  <cit> . however, the subset of  <dig> bovine cag poly-q genes 5) was substantially larger than that estimated for humans  and rodents   <cit> . this observation may partially reflect the impact of the large expansion of cag repeats in cow genomic dna compared with other mammalian species   <cit> . as the scale of the repeat expansions in bovine coding sequences is much less than the genome-wide figure, it is likely that coding sequence cag repeats are subject to different selective pressures compared with non-coding intergenic cag repeats, as has been previously reported  <cit> .

a total of  <dig> bovine poly-q encoding genes did not have murine and human orthologs with poly-q tracts. this group of genes potentially highlights evolutionary adaptations that contribute to the unique biology of ruminants. while some of these encoded proteins contained unique poly-q tracts, others were identified because there were no orthologs in either the mouse or human genomes or the protein models did not contain sequence corresponding to the orthologous region of the bovine poly-q tract proteins. the latter case may reflect species specific differences in alternative splicing. more trivial explanations include potentially incomplete gene and protein models or that the q-tracts in the human and murine orthologs did not reach the threshold size of five residues used to define a q tract. notably, these  <dig> genes were not different from all bovine poly-q encoding genes in relation to encoded protein size or function.

comparison of bovine and human poly-q proteins revealed that the lengths of ortholog q-tracts were generally similar . this result is different from the finding that rodent q-tracts were generally shorter than human q-tracts  <cit> . as the maximum length of the bovine cag q-tract was directly related to allelic diversity  then it may be concluded that the overall extent of polymorphic variation in the poly-q encoding genes of cattle is likely to be similar to human populations.

poly-q encoding genes can potentially generate considerable transcriptional diversity through a variety of mechanisms. the tissue-specific mrna splicing of nfya alters the length of the poly-q encoded region in the absence of polymorphic variation. the poly-q region is part of the activation domain of this transcription factor and modifications to the region have marked effects on function  <cit> . thus, the tissue specific splicing may be a means of generating nfya functional variants which could impact the transcription of the larger repertoire of genes that are regulated by nfya. although no poly-q tract polymorphic variants in nfya were demonstrated in the current analysis, if they existed, such allelic variants could exert additional tissue specific functional influences through this splicing mechanism. polymorphic repeat regions in other poly-q encoding genes traverse splice sites  or are closely juxtapositioned with splice sites . moreover, a considerable number of poly-q encoding genes contained repeats immediately adjacent to or at splice sites. in the case of med <dig> this was associated with considerable transcriptional variation likely caused by the influence of coding sequence cag repeats on splicing. there are similarities between cag repeats and splice donors ag at the 3' end of the exon) and splice acceptors ag at the 3' end of the intron). this similarity could cause additional mrna splicing variation in poly-q encoding genes. notably the protein mbnl <dig>  is involved in pre-mrna splicing site choice and it also binds strongly to transcribed cag repeats  <cit> . this dual function reinforces the view that splice site choice can be influenced by coding sequence cag repeats. the presence of poly-q encoding tracts contained within small alternatively spliced exons for a considerable number of poly-q encoding genes suggests that this is another mechanism which generates considerable transcriptional and functional diversity. indeed, the latter is accentuated by the large size of many poly-q encoding genes, which often encode multiple autonomous functional domains each encoded by discrete exons. alternative splicing of these exons is frequent and can generate many combinatorial mrnas for each of these genes, possibly producing a range of protein products with subtle functional variations and a diversity of tissue specific variants.

the bovine poly-q proteins were strongly enriched for large multi-domain transcriptional regulators . moreover, many of these proteins participate in large and common physical interaction networks as well as an extensive network associated with their transcriptional regulation . the central importance of crebbp in this nuclear network is emphasised by its ability to act as a transcriptional co-activator in conjunction with ep <dig> to help assemble large regulatory protein complexes at sites of active transcription. both of these proteins have intrinsic histone acetylase activity, which is involved in modifying chromatin structure in nucleosomes and thereby regulating gene expression  <cit> . the broad tissue expression patterns of the proteins in these nuclear complexes indicate that they are co-expressed in cells and hence these regulatory networks are likely to be biologically operational, with their components acting cooperatively in large transcriptional regulatory complexes. there could be even greater functional complexity inherent in these complexes caused by polymorphic variation in some of these proteins. indeed, there is potential for amplification of the phenotypic impact of poly-q polymorphic variations of multiple components in this regulatory complex - an epistatic effect in genetics terms. even in the absence of polymorphic variation, alternative splicing influenced by cag tracts may generate poly-q protein functional diversity that could impact the activities of large transcriptional regulatory complexes in the nucleus. this process could generate additional functional complexity tailored to the needs of specific tissues, developmental pathways or tissue responses to external stimuli.

CONCLUSIONS
a total of  <dig> poly-q encoding genes have been identified in the bovine genome. by using a hierarchical prioritization process we established that at least  <dig> of  <dig> top ranked genes were polymorphic in regions encoding poly-q tracts. there was significant correlation between the extent of allelic diversity and the length of the poly-q tract. this information, in conjunction with the purity of the repeat region encoding the poly-q tract and the lack of conservation of repeat length, provide indicators for the propensity for polymorphic variation in the full repertoire of poly-q encoding genes. unlike some human poly-q encoding genes there was no evidence for repeat instability, which may be attributable to the lack of large repeat expansions in the normal cattle population. this may be an inherent biological characteristic of cattle or a reflection of strong selective pressures in breeding programs that exclude these variants. polymorphic variations in bovine poly-q proteins have strong potential to generate epistatic biological effects due to the involvement of these proteins in transcriptional regulatory complexes and protein-gene regulatory interactions. thus, the bovine poly-q encoding genes may be contributing to phenotypic variation in cattle populations both directly and indirectly through epistatic interactions. cag repeat tracts in poly-q encoding genes can also influence splice site choice and thereby increase the functional diversity of transcripts from these genes.

