BACKGROUND
the threat of a highly lethal viral pandemic remains large in the 21st century. in  <dig> sars-coronavirus  appeared in asia and then spread globally, causing greater than 40% mortality in individuals over  <dig> years of age  <cit> . since  <dig> highly pathogenic avian influenza, influenza a subtype h5n <dig>  has resulted in high mortality rates   <cit> . finally in  <dig> swine-origin influenza virus a  subtype h1n <dig> emerged in the americas and led to a pandemic. as neumann et al. have observed, this virus shares many characteristics with  <dig> influenza which resulted in an estimated  <dig> million deaths  <cit> . furthermore, as ilyushina et al. have shown, soiv may mutate into more pathogenic forms in as little as ten passages in cell culture  <cit> .

injury to the host during respiratory viral infections such as influenza now appears to be the result of inappropriate host responses  <cit> . deriving gene expression signatures of high pathogenicity that are robust to biological and experimental variation would be immensely valuable, both in the understanding of pathogenicity as well as in the surveillance of emerging infections. we define a signature as the minimum number of biological variables  required to  discriminate the phenotype of interest from other phenotypes,  identify replicates of the same phenotype, and  provide cohesive information about the underlying biological complexity  <cit> . however, the derivation of gene expression signatures from multiple, independent studies is hindered by a number of factors including the absence of standard experimental protocols, biological variability, and limited sample sizes. meta-analysis, the analysis of independent but related studies, offers one strategy for overcoming these obstacles.

what host responses are the hallmarks of high pathogenicity? to approach this question we assembled a compendium of host transcriptional responses to low-, medium-, and high-pathogenic infections  and applied a battery of meta-analysis techniques. using these techniques we identified signatures of either a digital nature  or an analog nature . we then compared these signatures on the basis of their capacity to predict the outcome of an independent transcriptome experiment. the most accurate signature was analog in nature and implicated excessive chemokine expression and cell recruitment in the development of lethal respiratory infections.

RESULTS
compendium assembly and signature derivation
we assembled a compendium of microarray data from  <dig> studies that measured host transcription in mouse lungs following infection with respiratory viruses . six of these studies contained experiments where 100% of the animals succumbed to infection; these involved influenza a subtype h5n <dig> , reconstructed  <dig> influenza a, or sars-cov strain ichc/sz/61/ <dig> . after merging technical replicates the compendium comprised  <dig> individual transcriptome measurements with similar numbers of arrays associated with lpis, mpis, and hpis . data were quality-controlled, further pre-processed, and converted to gene-level data.

influenza a
influenza a
* note "dpi" refers to days post-infection. other annotations are stated as in primary publications. the last row  refers to a data set external to the compendium that was used as a test set for predictions.

we then applied three different methods of meta-analysis to derive gene signatures from the compendium. hierarchical clustering of the log-ratio data showed that two clusters of genes differed in expression with respect to each other and with respect to hpi vs. lpi . this suggested that gene signatures could be identified on the basis of opposite directionality with respect to mock infections. to identify these signatures more rigorously we applied two methods of meta-analysis. the first signature comprised  <dig> genes identified on the basis of statistical tests for differential expression in each biological condition whose results were combined by fisher's summary statistic . the second signature comprised  <dig> genes identified as a module by similar patterns of co-expression and annotation co-membership . due to their opposite directionality in different pathogenicities, we referred to these signatures as digital in nature. a third signature comprised  <dig> genes and was derived from the direct comparison of expression in hpis vs. lpis without reference to mock infections. additional normalization allowed inter-array comparisons, and a fold-change-based z-test was used to determine differential expression . because these genes varied directly between pathogenicities, we referred to this signature as analog in nature. limited degrees of overlap were observed among the different signatures indicating that the three methods identified different features in the data.

capacity of analog and digital signatures to classify host transcription
we initially compared the signatures on the basis of their capacity to structure the biological conditions in the compendium. the expression of each signature set of genes was analyzed by principal components analysis , and the degree to which lpi-, mpi-, and hpi-associated conditions clustered proximally to conditions of the same pathogenicity and distally from conditions of other pathogenicities was compared. we also compared the ordering and overall separation of the pathogenicity clusters, both by visual inspection and by percentage variance explained. we reasoned that a more effective signature would result in greater separation of pathogenicities oriented along a dimension that also explained a higher proportion of the total variance  <cit> . using all the genes in the compendium as input for pca , the native compendium showed little apparent structure . conditions did not discretely cluster by pathogenicity, nor did pathogenicities separate along either first or second principal components . using the digital gene signatures, more structure became apparent . conditions were ordered by severity of pathogenicity along pc <dig>  and the total variance explained by pc <dig> ranged from 9% to 13% . however, the highest degree of clustering and separation was obtained using the analog signature. conditions clustered more tightly by pathogenicity  using this signature than other signatures, and pc <dig> accounted for a greater proportion of the total variance, 18% . pca therefore indicated that the analog signature resulted in the most effective discrimination of host profiles by pathogenicity. we note that the relatively low amount of variance explained by pc <dig> in the case of each signature was consistent with the presence of significant heterogeneity in the compendium. this heterogeneity may be attributable to a number of different factors including the variety of viruses, times post-infection, mouse strains, laboratories, and technical platforms represented in the compendium. therefore, we compared signatures on the basis of the relative increases in variance explained by pc <dig> which aligned with pathogenicity in each case.

we also compared signatures by their capacity to generate sample expression profiles that correlated with other profiles of the same pathogenicity. we reasoned that a more effective signature would result in stronger correlations  among similar pathogenicities and weaker correlations  among dissimilar pathogenicities. on a scatter plot of pccs to exemplar lpi and hpi profiles, more samples would appear in two quadrants, with more lpi samples in quadrant ii  and more hpi samples in quadrant iv  where quadrants are defined by an equal partitioning of the pcc scatter plot plane at . using all of the genes in the native compendium, lpi and hpi samples appeared primarily in one quadrant, high for both lpi and hpi . this indicated that lpi and hpi transcriptional profiles were correlated overall  and that lpi and hpi samples separated poorly from each other on the basis of overall transcriptional profiles. digital gene signatures resulted in improved segregation of samples by pathogenicity, as indicated by increased numbers of lpi and hpi samples in quadrants ii and iv, respectively . however, the analog signature resulted in the largest overall segregation of biological samples, with the highest number of lpi and hpi samples appearing in opposite quadrants . therefore pca and pcc scatter plots were consistent in indicating that the analog signature achieved the best separation of transcriptional profiles by pathogenicity.

capacity of the analog signature to predict test set pathogenicity
we then tested the capacity of each signature to predict the pathogenicity of a data set external to the compendium. specifically we utilized a microarray data set measuring transcription in the lungs of mice infected with either swine-origin influenza a virus  subtype h1n <dig> strain ca/ <dig>  or the mouse-adapted variant ma <dig> ca/ <dig>  at days  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> post-infection . pcc scatter plots were generated using the test set samples and the same lpi and hpi exemplars as above . we again reasoned that the most effective gene signature would yield the best opposite-quadrant separation of lpi and hpi samples. comparing the better-scoring digital signature  and the analog signature, we found that the analog signature yielded the best segregation of test set samples . in particular samples from the lethal variant ma <dig> ca/ <dig> correlated strongly with the exemplar hpi, indicating that this and other hpis resulted in similar transcriptional profiles for these genes . counting the number of lpi and hpi test set samples appearing in quadrants ii and iv, respectively, and considering these as correctly predicted, we found that the analog signature resulted in an accuracy rate of 83% , exceeding the rates obtained using all genes  or the better-scoring digital signature .

characterization of the digital and analog signatures and the role of chemokines
signature genes may in turn identify mechanisms of pathogenesis. to identify functions and pathways dysregulated across hpis, we analyzed the annotations associated with each set of signature genes. annotations for the better-performing digital signature  indicated that a number of pathways may have been altered during hpis. genes up-regulated in hpi were associated with inflammation, apoptosis, cell signaling, and cell proliferation, while genes down-regulated in hpi were associated with cytochrome p450-related enzymatic activity. protein-protein interactions linked many of these genes together indicating possible cooperative effects . similar annotations were found to be enriched among the genes of the remaining digital signature  including cell differentiation, inflammatory response, and chemical homeostasis.

the analog signature, which outperformed both digital signatures in our tests, was significantly enriched in genes associated with the inflammatory response  and chemokine activity . a network showing known interactions among analog signature gene products highlighted cooperativity between the inflammatory/interferon-response pathway and chemokines such as cxcl <dig> . this analysis indicated that different gene signatures identified inflammation as dysregulated during hpis despite limited overlap at the gene level.

closer examination of the analog signature genes indicated a relationship between signature expression and pathogenicity. we determined the proportion of signature genes whose expression was ordered by pathogenicity  and compared this proportion to those expected by chance or observed among all genes. assuming an equal distribution of genes among pathogenicity groups, we expected 33% to display one of these two patterns by chance. by comparison we observed that 43% of all genes in the compendium displayed these patterns . however, an even greater proportion of analog signature genes displayed these patterns, 81%, consistent with a correlation between expression and pathogenicity . using a binomial distribution we calculated the chance enrichment of genes being proportionally expressed with pathogenicity to be p <  <dig>  in the case of figure 5b  and p <  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in the case of figure 5c . furthermore, if we considered the distribution of gene profiles among all compendium genes to be expected, the enrichment of proportionally expressed genes in the analog signature was statistically significant at p <  <dig>  × 10- <dig> 

analog signature genes expressed in proportion to pathogenicity could in turn be ranked by level of expression in hpis . the most highly expressed signature genes in hpis were interferon-induced including ifit <dig>  cxcl <dig>  iigp <dig>  and igtp, consistent with the prominence of these genes in functional and network analyses .

we also examined the temporal expression dynamics of analog signature genes during infection. more detailed examination of the pcc scatter plot  showed that early time points during hpis clustered closely with early time points from lpis and middle time points from mpis . these conditions were in turn intermediate to extrema from other hpi and lpi conditions . this suggested that lpi, mpi, and hpi may have activated  the same set of genes but that hpi may have done so more rapidly or to higher levels, resulting in levels of expression not reached during lpi or mpi .

finally to gain an overall perspective of the expression of analog signature genes in all pathogenicity groups, we generated a pcc scatter plot that included all samples in the compendium, including mpi-associated samples . new exemplars were generated for each pathogenicity group representing the average expression of signature genes during lpis, mpis, and hpis, and pccs were calculated to each new exemplar. the resulting scatter plot showed that analog signature genes were expressed similarly within each pathogenicity group . in particular lpi samples correlated highly with each other  as did mpi and hpi samples. however, expression also varied continuously among different groups, with expression overlapping between lpi and mpi, as well as between mpi and hpi, consistent with an analog relationship between this signature and pathogenicity.

discussion
experiments on the host responses to infection have generated a wealth of data over the past decade. a number of these have focused on respiratory viruses including several which resulted in lethality in experimental animal models. what distinguished these infections from others where experimental animals recovered was the subject of our analysis. to this end we assembled a compendium of transcriptome measurements from the lungs of mice and used meta-analysis to determine gene signatures that distinguished high- from low-pathogenicity infections. to our knowledge ours is the first meta-analysis study to focus on high-pathogenicity infections . previous studies have applied meta-analysis to infection data but focused on more general features of disease. for example, jenner and young analyzed the transcriptomes of various host species  infected by bacteria or viruses and identified a signature of approximately  <dig> genes  <cit> . this signature showed that tlrs and pathogen-mediated signalling were broadly activated during infection but did not identify features resulting in animal lethality. likewise pennings et al. examined the transcriptional profiles of lung inflammation  due to various factors  and derived a 383-gene signature up-regulated during inflammation  <cit> . this signature focused on the interferon response and immune signalling, but likewise no correlate of pathogenicity was identified. in addition both studies relied mainly on hierarchical clustering to determine signatures of interest. while hierarchical clustering provides a useful overview of high-dimensional data, it has the disadvantage of lacking a strong statistical basis  and its results  can be difficult to relate to specific outcomes.

in contrast to previous studies, our goal was to determine a gene signature specific for hpis. we therefore applied an ensemble of meta-analysis methods and derived multiple signatures which we compared by multiple criteria including the capacity to predict the outcome of a test data set. each method had a different statistical rationale and could be expected to identify different features of the compendium. we had no a priori expectation of which signature would produce the best outcome in terms of these criteria.

the 74-gene signature derived using fisher's summary statistic showed a modest capacity to separate samples into pathogenicity groups and to predict test set pathogenicity. a number of the genes in this signature have known connections to the immune response and the outcome of respiratory infections, e.g., genes for the chemokines osteopontin  and rantes  and the chemokine receptor ccr <dig>  in previous studies mice lacking spp <dig> and ccl <dig> were found to clear influenza infection with no adverse effects  <cit> , while mice lacking ccr <dig> survived infection by a mouse-adapted influenza a virus that killed wild-type mice  <cit> . these studies suggest that at least some of the genes up-regulated during hpis are non-essential to resolving influenza infection and that dysregulated activation may even be detrimental to the host.

the best performing signature, however, comprised  <dig> genes derived using the fold change-based z-test. strikingly the majority of the genes in this signature were expressed at levels that corresponded with pathogenicity. for the majority of these genes, expression was lowest in lpi, highest in hpi, and intermediate in mpi . in this case the signature appeared to provide a continuously variable signal that matched with output, a characteristic of analog signals. this finding also suggests that high- and low-pathogenic infections may result in the expression of the same key genes but with different kinetics. in particular hpis may result in increased expression of signature gene products beyond the capacity of the host to cope, resulting in irreversible damage.

genes of the analog signature largely differed from those in the digital signatures but overlapped at the pathway level. for example, chemokine genes were present in both fisher's statistic-derived and analog signatures. however, the analog signature displayed additional coherence, encoding multiple chemokines for the same receptor, namely mig , ip- <dig> , and i-tac  which all serve as ligands for the receptor cxcr <dig>  <cit> . cxcr <dig> is expressed on the surface of th <dig> cells as well as nk and nkt cells and regulates the migration of these cells to sites of infection. recent evidence indicates that cxcr <dig> engagement may drive further recruitment and inflammation, resulting in a positive feedback loop that may contribute to pathogenicity  <cit> . the analog signature also included genes for chemokines that bind the ccr <dig> receptor, specifically mcp- <dig>  and mcp- <dig> . ccr <dig> is the major receptor expressed on eosinophils and has previously been shown to have a role in the promotion of lung inflammation  <cit> . interestingly cxcr <dig> ligands have been postulated to be antagonists for ccr <dig>  <cit> , and the expression of both sets of chemokines may reflect a high degree of dysregulation during hpis and the recruitment of multiple immune cell types that may not normally co-localize during a controlled infection.

in addition our signatures also identified genes that were down-regulated during hpi, relative to either mock infection or lpi. for example the fisher's statistic-derived signature included several genes whose products may normally help to resolve infection. hepsin  has been found to cleave influenza hemagglutinin directly resulting in non-infectious virus particles  <cit> . likewise surfactant-associated protein a <dig>  and surfactant-associated protein d  maintain pulmonary structure but have also been found to inhibit infectivity by mechanisms that remain to be elucidated  <cit> . the analog signature contained a similar set of genes but expressed at lower levels in hpis compared to lpis rather than to mock infections. among these genes were several members of the secretoglobin family including scgb1a <dig>  scgb3a <dig>  and scgb3a <dig>  interestingly many secretoglobins are expressed specifically in the lung epithelium and may contribute to lung repair following damage  <cit> . for example, uteroglobin/cc <dig>  is secreted by bronchiolar clara cells and postulated to have a role in reducing airway inflammation, though its exact function remains to be elucidated  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
together these results implicate dysregulated cell recruitment and inflammation  and impaired lung protection  in the events leading to lethality in mice. the different meta-analysis methods all aimed to identify pathology-relevant gene expression, and concordance at the pathway level offered a degree of cross-validation. however, our results also demonstrate that the methods identified different features of the data and argue for the application of multiple methods in future studies when the most predictive features of the data are not known in advance.

finally our finding that pathogenicity corresponds to the expression levels of a defined set of genes may help to inform future therapies. altering the outcome of infection may not require opposite regulation to be achieved in particular pathways; instead, adequate tempering or delay of those pathways may be sufficient. for example a large number of potential cxcr <dig> antagonists have been developed recently in the context of other inflammatory diseases  <cit> . these may provide the basis for novel therapeutic strategies that reduce, but need not completely eliminate, receptor activation to effect control of highly pathogenic respiratory infections.

