BACKGROUND
the myelin sheath is a tightly packed multilamellar membrane structure crucial for the correct functioning of the vertebrate nervous system. myelin carries a specific set of proteins, whose expression is tightly regulated during development. biochemically, the composition of myelin in the central and peripheral nervous system  is different from each other  <cit> . mutations in myelin proteins or an autoimmune attack towards them can lead to devastating neurological diseases.

one of the most abundant proteins of myelin is the myelin basic protein   <cit> . mbp is a protein family, of which the  <dig> -kda isoform predominates in adult myelin  <cit> . in cns myelin, it comprises 30% of the total protein; it is also present in pns myelin  <cit> . mbp is thought to be involved in the tight association of the cytoplasmic leaflets of apposing myelin membranes within compact myelin, where there is little, if any, cytoplasm present  <cit> . several segments of mbp are target autoantigens that have been characterised in multiple sclerosis  <cit> .

a bewildering amount of post-translational modifications, in addition to extensive alternative splicing, have been observed for mbp, leading to a number of size and charge isoforms  <cit> . mbp has also been characterised as being intrinsically unstructured, with a possibility of local folding, especially upon binding to ligands  <cit> . a low-resolution 3-dimensional model for mbp adsorbed to a lipid monolayer has been built based on electron microscopy  <cit> . solution scattering experiments have also indicated an unfolded structure for lipid-free mbp; in the lipid-bound state, however, the protein seems compact but not globular  <cit> .

several interaction partners for mbp have been characterised, including actin  <cit> , tubulin  <cit> , and calmodulin   <cit> . although the interaction between mbp and cam was initially reported already in  <dig>  <cit> , relatively little structural information is available about the interaction  <cit> . in addition, mbp seems to have multiple regions capable of binding cam  <cit> , and it is not fully clear which of the cam-binding sites are of physiological relevance. some assays have also indicated a heterogeneous mode for the interaction  <cit> , and the interaction is affected by mbp post-translational modifications, such as citrullination  <cit> . the main cam-binding site has been suggested to reside in the c-terminal region of cam, between residues 132– <dig>  <cit> . at least one more site lies in the central/n-terminal region of mbp  <cit> .

in the present study, we have used a synthetic peptide from the predicted cam-binding segment near the c-terminus of human mbp to study the mbp-cam interaction. we have used a number of biochemical and biophysical methods to confirm the interaction, thus accurately mapping the binding site of the peptide in cam, and to obtain thermodynamic and structural data regarding complex formation in solution.

RESULTS
native human brain mbp binds to cam
affinity chromatography on cam-sepharose was used to investigate the binding of human brain native mbp by cam. the results clearly indicated that in the presence of calcium ions, mbp is retained in the affinity matrix, and that upon complexation of calcium by using egta, mbp is released . thus, the interaction is calcium-dependent, as earlier shown for bovine, murine, and human brain mbp  <cit> . mass spectroscopic analysis indicated that the main human adult mbp isoforms,  <dig>  and  <dig>  kda, were both present in the egta eluate, indicating that neither one of them is deficient in binding cam . both in gel electrophoresis and mass spectroscopy, the  <dig> -kda isoform was more abundant.

selection of a putative cam-binding peptide
previously, a region near the c-terminus of mbp has been suggested to be its major cam-binding site  <cit> . we used a number of sequence analysis methods to select a peptide from this region that would be expected to bind cam with high affinity. a combination of the following parameters was used: predicted propensity to fold into a helix, a low score in disorder predictions, the presence of a putative cam-binding site according to the cam target database  <cit> , and detectable sequence homology to other well-characterised cam targets. in addition, a search for putative functionally flexible regions was carried out using wiggle. the results of these analyses are shown in figure  <dig> 

the peptide hkgfkgvdaqgtlskifkl, corresponding to residues 138– <dig> of human  <dig> -kda mbp, was selected for the experiments. in brief, this is one of the two regions recognised as putative cam targets by the cam target database, and clearly one of the few regions in mbp that are consistently not predicted to be disordered by various disorder prediction algorithms. it is also predicted to be able to fold into an α-helix.

conformational analysis by circular dichroism spectroscopy
circular dichroism  experiments were performed to compare the secondary structure, folding, and thermal stability of cam in the presence and absence of the mbp peptide. the cd spectrum of cam alone showed a shape typical of α-helical proteins, with negative minima at  <dig> and  <dig> nm and a positive maximum at  <dig> nm . the cd spectrum of the complex was only slightly different from the spectrum of cam, indicating that no major conformational changes take place upon complex formation. the k2d program  <cit>  was used to predict the secondary structure contents . the proportional content of α-helix was somewhat smaller in the complex than in cam, reflecting the observation that the peptide in the absence of cam contained no α-helix under the employed conditions . while the fitting method suggests a large fraction of β-strand in the peptide in the absence of cam, this reflects, rather, the inadequacy of the method for calculating the structure of a short peptide , which is mostly unfolded, and probably contains a mixture of transient structures. for the structure modeling , the peptide was modeled as a helix due to its homology to other  peptides that always bind cam in a helical conformation .

a thermal scan from + <dig> to +98°c demonstrated that the complex as well as cam is thermally very stable, showing the presence of folded structure even at temperatures exceeding +95°c . a major transition, increasing the denaturation speed, occurs at a temperature of around +90°c for both samples. this transition is more pronounced in the absence of the peptide , which may indicate a stabilising effect by the peptide. furthermore, cooling the samples back to +20°c in a similar fashion induced refolding of cam , and the presence of the peptide did not cause significant differences in the refolding.

calorimetric binding assay
isothermal titration calorimetry was used to study the interaction between the mbp peptide and cam . experiments were done at four different temperatures , and the calculated thermodynamic parameters are presented in table  <dig>  the kd values obtained were similar at temperatures below +35°c, and the heat-dependent conformational change of cam – most likely slight unfolding of the central linker helix  <cit> , starting around +35°c, can be seen in the measured Δh values, that also become unreliable at +40°c while the affinity is decreased. the binding reaction has favourable enthalpy and entropy, being mainly entropically driven. the favourable entropy is, at least partially, a result of releasing ordered water into solution from the surfaces of the binding components.

the binding isotherms were characteristic of a biphasic binding event, in which first, a high-affinity specific binding occurs, and in the later stages of titration, a low-affinity nonspecific binding, with a large number of binding sites and favourable enthalpy, can be detected. the latter is probably due to electrostatic interactions between the peptide and cam, after the single specific binding site is saturated. the measured dilution heat was basically zero , and it was assumed that the titrations will each time approach zero.

to characterize the binding of the peptide to the specific binding site of cam, only the peaks 2– <dig> were chosen for curve fitting to model 1: <dig> binding . when using all data , the best curve fitting could be obtained by using an artificial model implementing four sequential binding sites . in both cases, the thermodynamic parameters for the first, high-affinity, binding event are highly similar . this indicates that accurate values could be obtained for the high-affinity binding event even in the presence of non-specific background.

the effect of temperature on the enthalpy of binding, which can be reliably measured even in the presence of secondary low-affinity binding sites, is presented in figure 3d. the enthalpies from the calorimetric studies were plotted against temperature and the formed slope  represents the heat capacity change Δcp upon complex formation. the heat capacity, estimated from the two data points at + <dig> and +30°c, - <dig>  kcal mol- <dig> k- <dig> , is negative for the complex. it is clear that more assays should be performed to obtain an accurate value for Δcp of the complex.

surface plasmon resonance
the interaction of the peptide and cam was further studied by real-time biomolecular interaction analysis with surface plasmon resonance . the kinetics of the binding reaction were studied by injecting different concentrations of the mbp peptide over an immobilised cam surface . the data confirm the binding of the mbp peptide by immobilised cam, and a kd value of  <dig> μm can be estimated from the data. the difference in the kd values obtained by spr and itc may be explained by the fact that cam was immobilised on a solid support for the spr analysis. the data could only be properly fit by a conformational change model , in which, upon initial complex  formation, the conformation of the complex alters . even so, it became clear that the signal for the second conformation  is lower than for the first , which significantly complicates the analysis and makes the calculated kon and koff values , especially for the second step of the reaction, unreliable. it is not possible to take such a situation into account in the biaevaluation software, and in order to obtain a good fit, it was necessary to use additional parameters to describe the background level. a decrease in the spr signal between two conformations has been observed previously for the binding of small molecules by a maltose-binding protein  <cit> . ligand binding to a receptor that correspondingly decreases in hydrodynamic radius yielded a negative change in resonance units . it was also proposed that the sign of the ru change is a function of the net change in hydrodynamic radius that occurs upon ligand binding  <cit> . since by using the equilibrium ru values, the obtained scatchard plot is curved , it is possible that similarly to the itc experiment, the spr signal is a combination of low- and high-affinity binding events. a further analysis of the data by non-linear regression by using a 2-site binding model  and the ru values at equilibrium gives evidence that a low-affinity binding event is seen at high concentrations of the peptide, and the corresponding kd values are approximately  <dig> and  <dig> μm for the two binding events.

the conformational change model for the interaction was also suggested by the linked reaction control experiment, in which the dissociation rates of one analyte concentration  after different injection times were compared . an increased stability of the complex with longer injection times can be observed from the fact that the dissociation rates get slower with increased injection time. the experiment clearly showed that longer injections of the mbp peptide give a more stable cam-peptide complex, which also suggests the occurrence of a conformational change. furthermore, during longer injections, the signal decreases already during the injection, indicating that the signal for the ab* state is indeed lower than that for the ab state.

mapping the mbp-binding site of cam by nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy
nmr spectroscopy was used to identify cam residues whose chemical shifts change upon forming the ca2+/cam-mbp peptide complex . to the most part, these residues are concentrated around the known peptide binding pocket of the cam c-terminal lobe. identified residues in this region include, for example, leu <dig>  arg <dig>  ala <dig>  phe <dig>  gln <dig>  ala <dig>  and lys <dig> 

the result that chemical shift perturbations were also observed for residues in the central helix indicates either bending of the helix upon peptide binding or a direct interaction between the peptide and the central helix. the chemical shift perturbations of some residues, mainly phe <dig> and lys <dig>  of the n-terminal lobe suggest that the peptide is not only bound to the c-terminal lobe, but rather, interacts also weakly with the n-terminal lobe. taken together, the nmr data show that the mbp peptide interacts most significantly with the hydrophobic pocket in the cam c-terminal lobe, but also with parts of the central helix and the n-terminal lobe. these data were further used as restraints when building and refining a solution structure of the complex using small-angle x-ray scattering  .

solution structure from saxs
overall parameters
the experimental scattering patterns from free cam and the complex are presented in figure 6a, and the overall structural parameters computed from the saxs data are given in table  <dig>  the molecular mass and the volume of the complex exceed those of free cam by about 14%. this increase is fully compatible with that expected  from the sequences of cam and the peptide, which proves the formation of a 1: <dig> complex. on the other hand, the maximum diameter of the complex is practically unchanged, and its radius of gyration is even smaller than that of free cam. this suggests that cam keeps the extended conformation in the complex and that the peptide is bound to the central part of cam, rather than to its periphery. the scattering curve from the atomic model of cam was computed by the program crysol  <cit> . it agrees reasonably with the experimental data showing only some minor deviations , which may be attributed to incompleteness of the crystallographic model.

distance distribution functions
the distance distributions p of the two samples computed from the experimental data by the program gnom  <cit>  are given in figure 6b. these functions are similar up to intraparticle distances of  <dig>  nm but display different profiles at larger distances. the p of free cam has a skewed form characteristic for elongated particles, and the maximum in the p function at about  <dig> nm, corresponding to the distance between the two lobes of cam, whereas the more symmetric p of the complex clearly points to a more globular shape. taken together, the comparison of distance distribution functions also confirms the complex formation, with the interface at the central part of cam. a decrease in cam length upon peptide binding, as observed in a number of structures of high-affinity cam-peptide complexes  <cit>  is not observed. ab initio shapes of free and loaded cam generated by dammin  also confirm that there is no significant change in the maximum dimension of cam upon peptide binding.

shape determination
the ab initio model of the complex highlighting the location of the peptide was generated by the multiphase bead modeling program monsa  <cit> . several independent runs yielded reproducible results, in which experimental scattering profiles were neatly fitted . the models created by monsa were very similar to those generated by dammin independently for free and loaded cam. this finding supports the assumption that no significant change of overall shape occurs upon binding and the use of the two curves for simultaneous fitting by monsa is valid. a typical model selected by damaver  <cit>  presented in figure  <dig> yielded an average normalised spatial discrepancy  value below  <dig>  . it demonstrates that the peptide is positioned between the two lobes of cam, being closer to one of them. the overall appearance is, thus, in agreement with the conclusions made from primary data processing.

molecular modelling
the crystallographic model of cam is compatible with the experimental saxs data from the free protein, and no significant compaction of cam was observed in the complex. as small conformational changes upon peptide binding could still not be excluded, we split cam into three fragments  for the molecular modelling of the complex. the peptide was modelled as a helix for simplicity and due to homology, but the low resolution of the saxs data does not allow for the determination of the exact conformation of the peptide. the program sasref  <cit>  was employed to construct a low-resolution 3d model of cam loaded with the peptide by using distance restraints from nmr data and requirement of chain compatibility for the three cam segments . this approach assumes that the cam residues with the largest chemical shift perturbations in the nmr experiment interact closely with the peptide, which may not be strictly true for all of them. a typical rigid body model of the complex generated in multiple sasref runs  yields a good fit to the experimental data of the complex . the overall shape of cam in the rigid body modelling remains similar to that of free cam. similarly to the ab initio modelling results, the results suggest that the peptide is located between the two lobes, and more specifically, the tighter contact between the peptide and the c-terminal lobe observed by nmr is compatible with the saxs results. it should be mentioned that at the given resolution, the models with antiparallel orientations of the peptide-helix are not distinguishable from each other, and solutions with both peptide directions were obtained, yielding the same fit to the saxs data.

size exclusion chromatography
to further validate the determined solution structure of the complex, we carried out gel filtration chromatography and analysed the fractions by sds-page and silver staining, allowing the visualisation of both cam and the peptide . due to its highly extended conformation, free cam routinely runs at an apparent molecular weight of approximately  <dig> kda in gel filtration. a superposition of the chromatograms  in the presence and absence of the peptide indicates that the hydrodynamic radius of cam is indeed decreased in the presence of the peptide. an analysis of the collected fractions clearly shows that the large, slightly shifted, peak contains both cam and the peptide .

discussion
native human brain mbp and a peptide from the mbp c-terminus bind cam
an analysis of native human brain mbp indicated that it interacts directly with cam in a calcium-dependent manner. a calcium-dependent interaction between human mbp and cam has previously been reported for two mbp charge isoforms isolated from a patient suffering from multiple sclerosis  <cit> , as have calcium-dependent interactions between bovine and murine mbp and cam  <cit> .

the human brain mbp sample contained isoforms of  <dig>  and  <dig>   kda after calmodulin affinity chromatography. thus, the regions encoded by neither exon ii  nor exon vb  are required for the interaction. only these two major isoforms are expressed in adult brain  <cit> . the two other major isoforms,  <dig>  and  <dig>  kda, are expressed during myelination, as well as during remyelination in ms lesions  <cit> .

a cam-binding site of mbp has been localised to the c-terminal region, but so far, a detailed mapping has been lacking  <cit> . by the use of various bioinformatics methods and sequence comparisons to known cam ligands, we were able to design a 19-residue peptide based on the sequence of human mbp that binds to cam with micromolar affinity. the measured affinity for the peptide towards cam was similar or slightly weaker than observed previously for full-length mbp and a c-terminal proteolytic fragment thereof  <cit> . although the observed affinity, in the low micromolar range, is lower than for some other cam targets, it suggests a physiological relevance for the interaction, taking into account the following points: firstly, the concentration of mbp in myelin is very high, and the concentration of cam in cells is also in the order of 1– <dig> μm  <cit> , even higher in the nervous system  <cit> . thus, the measured affinity is in the range that can regulate the interactions between these two highly abundant proteins. secondly, it is likely that the surrounding regions of mbp, being highly positively charged, can interact with and possibly even wrap around cam, once the specific recognition of the binding site has occurred; this would be expected to increase the affinity for complex formation. furthermore, the presence of more than one binding site for cam in mbp raises the possibility of so-called allovalency  <cit> , effectively increasing the affinity.

it should be noted that in other vertebrate species, insertions of 1– <dig> residues are seen near the middle of the peptide that was used . this implies either that there may be subtle species-specific differences in the interaction between cam and this mbp segment, or that the entire length of the peptide is not necessary for the interaction. for example, it is possible that only one half of the used mbp peptide is in close contact with the c-terminal lobe of cam; high-resolution structural data would be required to fully address this issue.

the region, from which the peptide was selected, is also a target for mbp posttranslational modifications. ser <dig> can be phosphorylated  <cit>  and gln <dig> deamidated  <cit> . both of these modifications will add a negative charge to the corresponding position, thus likely decreasing the affinity for cam. no citrullination sites are present in the peptide, however, due to the lack of arginine residues. on both sides of the used peptide, the mbp sequence does harbour characterised citrullination sites  <cit> , which could, in principle, also regulate binding to cam.

energetics of the cam-mbp peptide interaction
the heat capacities of several cam-associated reactions have been reported and discussed earlier  <cit> . temperatures below +30°c have been systematically used for itc binding studies with cam and cam-binding peptides. this is important in order to prevent temperature-induced conformational changes in cam  <cit> ; this effect is also seen in our data, making measurements at high temperatures unreliable. cam-binding peptides have been roughly divided into two groups depending on the heat capacity upon their complex formation with cam  <cit> . cam-dependent protein kinase i, constitutive cerebellar nitric-oxide synthase, and melittin peptides have Δcp values around - <dig>  kcal mol- <dig> k- <dig>  which reflects their preference for the formation of a globular cam-peptide complex. the second group, having a Δcp of - <dig>  kcal mol- <dig> k- <dig>  is composed of phosphodiesterase, the c-terminal fragment of melittin, and chicken gizzard caldesmon peptides, which interact mainly with one lobe of cam  <cit> . in our current study, the estimated Δcp of the formed complex is - <dig>  kcal mol- <dig> k- <dig>  which is different from the above cases and can indicate different type of binding compared to the two previously discussed groups of peptides. in fact, it directly suggests a smaller buried surface area than in the other cam-peptide complexes – an idea which is indeed confirmed by our nmr and saxs studies.

the structure of the cam-mbp peptide complex in solution
spr indicated that the complex formed between immobilised cam and the mbp peptide underwent a conformational change upon binding. a conformational change was also detected by spr when the complex between cam and the err <dig> receptor was studied  <cit> . a negative change in ru, as observed here for the cam-mbp complex, during the injection may reflect a decrease in the hydrodynamic radius of the forming complex  <cit> . this is also in line with our results from gel filtration chromatography, in which the apparent size of cam is decreased in the presence of the peptide, indicating a smaller hydrodynamic radius for the complex than for unliganded cam. on the other hand, as expected, cd spectroscopy clearly indicated that no large-scale changes in secondary structure content occur upon binding.

the solution structure of the cam-mbp peptide complex obtained with saxs is compatible with all of the other experiments we carried out on the complex. in essence, the saxs results indicate that the maximum diameter of cam does not change when bound to the mbp peptide, and the radius of gyration for the complex is slightly smaller than that of free cam. this result is fully compatible with the result from gel filtration chromatography. the peptide can be seen bound to a groove in the central region of cam , which remains in the extended conformation. in other words, cam does not collapse around the mbp peptide, as seen in several other instances of cam-peptide recognition  <cit> .

it is possible that the cam-mbp peptide complex has several conformations in solution; however, the fact that both the ab initio and rigid body models from saxs fit the measured data well  indicates that it is likely that only one major conformation is present, at the resolution that has been used in the current study. this is also supported by gel filtration chromatography , where significantly different conformations of the complex could yield different peaks or peaks with non-symmetric shapes, since the starting point is cam, an elongated dumbbell-shaped molecule.

our nmr data indicate that although the main binding site for the mbp peptide resides in the c-terminal lobe of cam, also the central helix and the n-terminal lobe interact with the peptide. comparing the structures of our model and free cam, the nmr data suggest that a rotation of the c-terminal lobe takes place upon binding, such that its hydrophobic pocket interacts closely with the peptide . furthermore, it should be noted that molecular modelling was used in an earlier study to predict the modes and energetics of binding of different short mbp peptides to cam, including one overlapping with the peptide used in this study  <cit> . as a starting point in these simulations, the fully collapsed cam structure from a kinase peptide complex was used. our results indicate that this may have been an oversimplification, and that the conformation of cam may be significantly different in the cam-mbp complex.

for cam-dependent protein kinases, it has been suggested that studies on cam-binding peptides accurately reflect the interactions between cam and the kinase  <cit> . it is possible that for mbp, regions outside the peptide studied here also participate in complex formation, possibly altering the affinity and/or conformation of the complex, as has been observed for the deiminated form of mbp  <cit> . interestingly, it has also been suggested that cam might be able to bind two molecules of mbp simultaneously in a cooperative fashion, where both lobes of cam would mainly interact with one mbp molecule  <cit> . thus, the structure of the complex determined here may also represent an intermediate in the binding of full-length mbp by cam.

CONCLUSIONS
structural knowledge about myelin proteins in general is underrepresented in current databases  <cit> , despite the presence of a well-characterised but relatively small set of specific proteins in the myelin sheath. we have carried out a detailed analysis of the interaction between cam and a 19-mer peptide from the c-terminal region of human mbp, a major protein in the myelin sheath. mbp has been characterised as being intrinsically unstructured by nature  <cit> ; however, it presents a multitude of post-translational modifications and binding partners, which, in turn, affect its functions in e.g. signaling and regulating the cytoskeleton  <cit> . we have shown that the complex formed between cam and the mbp peptide does not collapse, although a conformational change takes place on a smaller scale, the main binding site for the mbp peptide residing in the hydrophobic pocket of the c-terminal lobe of cam. with relatively weak binding, such as that observed between mbp and cam, a massive conformational change may indeed not be required, and the binding affinity may be low in order to maintain the possibility of regulation, because the concentrations of both interaction partners in the cell are high. thus, mbp is another cam target that cannot be thought of as being analogous to cam kinases with respect to the mode of cam binding  <cit> . our results provide an important structural insight into the factors that may regulate myelin formation and maintenance and further highlight the plasticity of cam in target recognition.

