BACKGROUND
the superior colliculus has long been studied as a center for visual sensory and motor responses  <cit> , and is involved in orienting attention  <cit>  and multimodal processing  <cit> . the functions of the colliculus have been characterized principally in relation to vision and eye movements, whereas its role in other sensorimotor transformations has received less attention. we seek to explore the function of the superior colliculus using the vibrissa system, a vital sensorimotor system for the rat. although previous studies demonstrated the existence of vibrissa-responsive collicular neurons  <cit> , there have been no systematic, quantitative analyses of their response properties to controlled stimuli. the goal of this study was to correct this deficiency.

the superior colliculus is thought to be part of a sensorimotor loop in the rat vibrissa system, receiving input from trigeminal nuclei and projecting to the vibrissa motoneurons . in addition, the superior colliculus interacts with other structures of the vibrissa-barrel system: it receives input from the barrel cortex and from the vibrissa area of the motor cortex  <cit> , and receives inputs from the cerebellum and basal ganglia . it is reciprocally connected with the zona incerta  <cit> , a structure recently shown to be involved in state dependent gating of vibrissal inputs in the thalamus  <cit> . because of these anatomical relationships, and because of their role in orienting responses, we hypothesized that collicular neurons respond with short latency and strong directional selectivity to vibrissal stimuli.

RESULTS
location of vibrissa responsive units
we report data from  <dig> vibrissa-responsive units recorded from  <dig> animals. we used histological analyses, stereotaxic coordinates and depth readings from the manipulator to determine the location of the recorded units. due to the size of the lesions, we did not separate intermediate gray and white layers, but divided the colliculus into superficial, intermediate, and deep layers. vibrissa responsive units were located in the intermediate layers of the lateral and posterior parts of the colliculus. stereotaxic coordinates were  <dig>  to  <dig>  mm lateral and  <dig>  to  <dig>  mm posterior to bregma, at a depth of  <dig>  to  <dig>  below the cortical surface. clusters of vibrissa responsive neurons were interspersed with clusters responding to manual stimulation of other body parts. vibrissa-responsive clusters ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> microns along the axis of penetration; it was not possible to reliably determine the cluster size in the horizontal plane without fine-grained mapping in a single animal. the clustering of vibrissa responses may reflect the clustering in the colliculus of afferents from the trigeminal nuclei  <cit> .

waveform morphology
neurons in several brain regions have been classified according to their action potential waveforms  <cit> . for example, cortical vibrissa-responsive units include regular and fast spiking neurons  <cit> . in extracellular recordings, inhibitory, fast spiking neurons have action potentials with a brief  negativity followed by a brief positivity , whereas regular spiking neurons have longer waveform components . the superior colliculus contains both excitatory  and inhibitory  neurons, which may segregate into similar categories  <cit> . to test this, we measured the two components of their extracellularly recorded waveforms, and plotted the positive component against the negative component . all data points  formed a single cluster with values encompassing those of cortical regular and fast spiking units. while we cannot exclude the possibility that our sample included a heterogeneous population of neurons, these findings suggest that our recordings could not distinguish neuronal subclasses based on their waveforms.

spontaneous activity
vibrissa-responsive neurons had low or no spontaneous activity . therefore, to avoid biasing our recording to spontaneously active units, we searched for units while manually stimulating the vibrissae. we did find many spontaneously active, albeit non-responsive units near these relatively quiescent, responsive neurons. we found no neurons for which stimulation evoked a decrease in spontaneous activity.

response latency
the superior colliculus receives input from a variety of structures that process vibrissa inputs, including the trigeminal nuclear complex and the neocortex . we reasoned that if collicular responses represent direct inputs from the trigeminal nuclei, these responses would have relatively short latencies, similar to those of thalamic neurons that receive trigeminal inputs. figures 2a–b depict responses recorded from two representative collicular neurons, showing the latency of their responses to vibrissa stimuli delivered as an air-puff  or delivered with the piezoelectric device . for consistency, here and in subsequent analyses , we report responses to the vibrissa deflections in the caudal direction, the direction mimicking most vibrissa contacts during active whisking. when using the piezoelectric device, we stimulated the vibrissa evoking the largest response.

group data are depicted in the boxplots in figure 2d. piezoelectric stimulation of a single vibrissa elicited a response with median latency of  <dig>  msec . in response to air-puff stimulation of multiple vibrissae, the median latency was  <dig>  msec . there is no significant difference in latency between these two groups . thus, collicular neurons display short latency responses to vibrissa inputs, similar to their counterparts in the ventrobasal thalamus.

response kinetics
ramp-and-hold stimuli, delivered with the piezoelectric device, evoked phasic responses in all  <dig> neurons tested, with robust spiking only at the onset  and offset  of the stimuli . the durations of on responses evoked with piezoelectric deflections were very short, with all  <dig> neurons showing durations less than  <dig> msec . air-puff stimuli produced more temporally dispersed responses , and, as a result, response duration was more varied but not significantly different from the piezoelectric evoked responses . using criteria introduced by simons and carvell  <cit>  we classified all the neurons tested as rapidly adapting .

mean response magnitudes to caudal vibrissa deflections  were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for air-puff stimulation , and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for piezoelectric stimulation . we also tested the response to stimuli in the preferred direction ; piezoelectric stimulation produced a mean response magnitude of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the angular selectivity of these neurons is described in detail below.

in both cortex and thalamus, off response magnitudes are generally smaller than on response magnitudes  <cit> . when we applied a  <dig> msec caudal deflection with the piezoelectric device, the off:on ratio was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , larger than that reported previously in barrel cortex . when the stimulus duration was decreased to  <dig> msec , the off response decreased somewhat, though the evoked off:on ratio was statistically indistinguishable from that of the longer deflection . thus, changing stimulus duration had no significant effect on off:on response magnitude ratios.

receptive field size
receptive field size varies along the vibrissa-barrel neural axis, from a single vibrissa in the trigeminal ganglion to a median of nine vibrissae in sii cortex  <cit> . we tested the receptive field of  <dig> neurons by manually deflecting individual vibrissae, and monitoring the responses on an oscilloscope and through an audio amplifier. figure 4b shows the distribution of receptive field sizes for collicular neurons . vibrissae encompassing the receptive field of a particular neuron were always located contiguously on the whisker pad . these large receptive fields are compared below to others in the vibrissa-barrel axis.

principal vibrissa analysis
in the barrel cortex, neurons responding to stimulation of more than one vibrissa respond preferentially to the vibrissa associated with their anatomically defined barrel. this vibrissa is referred to as the principal whisker, and its stimulation evokes a response with larger magnitude and shorter onset latency than stimulation of other vibrissae in the receptive field  <cit> . we examined both response magnitude and latency as potential metrics for distinguishing principal whiskers in the superior colliculus.

we examined responses to individual vibrissae within a receptive field using piezoelectric deflections. in cases where unit isolation degraded before the experiment was completed, it was not possible to test all the vibrissae associated with a particular neuron. because of the smaller amplitude of vibrissa deflections produced with the piezoelectric device, not all the vibrissae within the receptive field–defined with manual stimulation–produced significant responses to piezoelectric stimuli.

this analysis was performed on  <dig> neurons for which we tested at least  <dig> vibrissae. for each neuron, we rank-ordered the vibrissae according to the magnitude of evoked responses. the vibrissa evoking the largest response magnitude was defined as v <dig>  the next largest as v <dig>  etc. we compared response magnitudes for v <dig> and v <dig> using a t-test. these response magnitudes were significantly different in 69% of neurons  indicating that deflection of this vibrissa evoked a larger magnitude response than any other vibrissa in the receptive field.

in addition, we rank-ordered these vibrissae according to the latency of evoked responses . although the response latencies increase somewhat , we found only  <dig> of  <dig> neurons  where the increase was significant between the v <dig> and v <dig>  this indicates that v <dig> did not always evoke a response significantly faster than the vibrissa evoking responses at the next shortest latency. in eight of  <dig> neurons, the vibrissa evoking the largest magnitude response was also the vibrissa with the shortest latency.

thus, collicular neurons respond to multiple vibrissae with similar latency but with different response magnitudes. this indicates that superior colliculus neurons have a principal whisker, despite their large receptive fields. responses to non-principal  vibrissae continue to be robust: for example, the vibrissae ranked v <dig> evoked a response of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  spikes/stimulus , a value that was 44% of the principal whisker response. for consistency, in other analyses we focused on the vibrissa evoking the largest response, that is, the principal whisker.

angular tuning characteristics
neurons throughout the vibrissa-to-cortex pathway of the rat are selective for the angle of vibrissa deflection  <cit> , eliciting larger magnitude responses to preferred angle deflections. the strength of neuronal angular preference varies along this neuroaxis; for example, thalamocortical neurons have stronger angular selectivity than barrel neurons  <cit> . to test the angular preference of collicular neurons, we deflected vibrissae in eight different directions pseudo-randomly, for a total of  <dig> deflections . figure 5b presents a polar tuning curve from a neuron with strong angular preference, and figure 5c depicts results from a poorly tuned neuron. in these tuning curves, the distance from the origin represents the magnitude of the on response to a deflection at that angle, with 0° representing the caudal direction and 90° representing the dorsal direction.

to quantify angular preference we determined, for each neuron-vibrissa pair, the number of deflection angles evoking an on response magnitude that was statistically smaller than the response to the maximally activating angle . we then categorized tuning curves into eight groups  representing the number of angles with significantly smaller responses. category  <dig> represents the least-tuned responses  and category  <dig> represents the best-tuned responses . figure 5d shows the distribution of selectivity indices for  <dig> neurons, computed from responses to the vibrissa evoking the largest magnitude response. the mean selectivity index was  <dig> , with well-tuned cells  constituting 43% of these neuron-vibrissa pairs.

when we included in this analysis responses to all vibrissae , the distribution of selectivity indices shifted to less-tuned values . this is because these vibrissae evoked smaller responses, many of which were statistically indistinguishable from zero. as a result, the contrast between responses to deflections at different angles was reduced. we therefore applied a second metric, the angular tuning ratio  <cit> , computed by dividing the response magnitude in the preferred direction by the overall response magnitude. although this metric does not allow for statistical comparisons, it is less sensitive to zero responses in a particular direction. this ratio was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   for vibrissa producing the largest response in each neuron, and  <dig>  ±  <dig>   for all vibrissa-neuron pairs. thus, both the selectivity index and tuning ratio metrics indicate that collicular neurons respond preferentially to vibrissa deflections at particular angles.

response adaptation
we tested the ability of collicular neurons to respond to a range of stimulation frequencies . as stimulation frequency increased, response magnitude decreased for both air-puff and piezoelectric stimulation . there were no significant differences between magnitudes of responses to piezoelectric or air-puff stimulation at any stimulation frequency . response magnitude at the highest frequencies tested  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  spikes/stimulus for air-puff stimulation, and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for piezoelectric stimulation.

even when response magnitudes are reduced, phase locking of a response to a stimulus can be important in transmitting information. to test phase locking of collicular neurons at different frequencies, we computed the coefficient of variation  of response latencies, using only the first spike of each response. because the piezoelectric device generates the most temporally accurate stimulation onset, we analyze only responses to this device. the average cv for  <dig>  hz stimulation was  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the cv decreased significantly as stimulation frequency increased . the mean cv did not exceed  <dig>  , a value reached at the highest stimulus frequency  capable of producing linear responses from the piezoelectric device. these findings indicate that, even in response to high frequency stimulation, when response magnitude is decreased, the entrainment of collicular neurons is still appreciable.

discussion
spontaneous activity
the spontaneous activity of these neurons is quite low. values  are lower than those recorded in the ventroposterior medial thalamus  and somatosensory cortex . this is unlikely due to a general anesthesia-induced suppression of spontaneous activity, as we found many neurons with high rates of spontaneous activity in all layers of the colliculus. the low rate of spontaneous activity in vibrissa-responsive units suggests that this pathway is equipped to respond with high signal-to-noise ratios.

receptive fields
the receptive fields of collicular neurons are unique compared to those in other areas of the vibrissa-barrel pathway. receptive fields are large , with none of the cells responding only to a single vibrissa. receptive fields in barrel cortex tend to be smaller, with 55% of neurons responding only to a single vibrissa  <cit> . the vpm nucleus of the thalamus contains neurons which respond to an average of three vibrissae, , receptive fields that are considerably smaller that those of collicular neurons. collicular receptive fields are also larger than those in the second somatosensory cortex, previously characterized as having unusually large receptive fields . in the paralemniscal pom , where receptive fields are also large, usually only stimulation of many vibrissae can evoke a response  <cit> . by contrast, all collicular neurons were capable of responding to deflections of an individual vibrissa. a principal whisker could be identified based on response magnitude, while responses to adjacent vibrissae were also robust. the broad receptive fields we observed could be an artifact of anesthesia. however, anesthesia tends to sharpen vibrissa receptive fields, and not to broaden them  <cit> .

angular preference
collicular neurons are more selective to the angle of vibrissa deflection, compared to neurons in vpm or barrel cortex:  <dig> percent of collicular neurons have a selectivity index of  <dig> or greater, whereas only 31% of vpm cells and 16% of barrel cortex neurons have an equally high selectivity index  <cit> . the superior colliculus receives its main trigeminal input from the trigeminal sub-nucleus interpolaris , and angular tuning of collicular neurons may reflect the properties of these input neurons, which contains a population of highly tuned neurons  <cit> . however, this tuning is not always consistent across the receptive field of collicular neurons . this may be a result of convergence from neurons in spvi that are tuned to different directions.

response kinetics
collicular neurons respond to whisker deflections at short latencies . these latencies are similar to those previously reported in vpm ), and are shorter than those in pom . thus, consistent with anatomical findings , this suggests that collicular neurons are receiving input directly from the trigeminal nucleus, and are not being activated by cortical or thalamic loops.

because the superior colliculus receives its main trigeminal input from the spvi, it is considered part of the paralemniscal system  <cit> . however, the colliculus displays more robust responses than pom, which also receives direct input from spvi. responses in pom are characterized by their long latency  and low magnitude , compared to collicular responses . additionally, neurons in the paralemniscal system, including pom, typically respond poorly at increasing stimulation frequencies  <cit> . collicular neurons, in comparison, respond to  <dig> hz stimulation with 38% of the response magnitude evoked by  <dig>  hz stimulation . however, pom responses are enhanced when inhibition from zona incerta to pom is suppressed  <cit> . it remains to be determined if the colliculus, which is reciprocally connected with zona incerta  <cit> , is also regulated by inhibition from this structure.

even when inhibition from zona incerta is intact, collicular responses are large , and similar to those seen at several levels of the lemniscal system:  <dig>  spikes/stimulus in vpm  <cit>  and  <dig>  spikes/stimulus in barrel cortex  <cit> . the superior colliculus does receive some input from the trigeminal nucleus principalis  <cit> , and these inputs could be driving these robust collicular responses.

the ratio of rapidly adapting to slowly adapting neurons decreases along the vibrissa-to-cortex neuroaxis. this reduction is greater in the paralemniscal system. the proportion of slowly adapting neurons in the lemniscal system is relatively large: 93% in the principal trigeminal nucleus  <cit> , 37% in vpm, and 15% in barrel cortex  <cit> . the paralemniscal pathway begins with a smaller proportion of slowly adapting neurons, with 54% of the cells in spvi  <cit>  and only 3% of the neurons in the second somatosensory cortex  <cit> . in the superior colliculus, none of the neurons we recorded from were slowly adapting, lending further support to the assumption that the colliculus is part of the paralemniscal system.

off:on response magnitude ratios in the superior colliculus  are larger than those of excitatory barrel cortex neurons . experimental and modeling studies indicate that smaller off:on ratios in barrel cortex are a consequence of the dominance of inhibition in the layer iv damping circuit  <cit> . the larger off:on ratios in the colliculus may reflect a lesser role for inhibition in this structure, at least under our experimental conditions. whereas inhibition in barrel cortex may be important for spatiotemporal discrimination, lesser inhibition in the superior colliculus may optimize this structure for alerting and orienting functions.

collicular neurons had decreased response magnitude and increased cv in response to higher frequency stimuli . nevertheless, collicular neurons displayed precise phase locking at all frequencies tested, with low average coefficient of variance for the latency . these values are much smaller than those reported in pom, which ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  over  <dig>  to  <dig> hz  <cit> . thus, collicular neurons respond to high-frequency stimulation with more temporal precision than neurons in other parts of the paralemniscal system. the high response fidelity of superior colliculus neurons demonstrates that this structure is well equipped for accurate frequency discrimination.

the high off:on ratios and robust, time-locked responses indicate that the superior colliculus is well suited for the accurate detection of a novel or relevant stimuli. although collicular neurons entrain to repetitive stimuli, response probability decreases as the cells habituate . this suggests that non-novel stimuli may result in reduced output from collicular circuits. these issues need to be addressed in unanesthetized, behaving animals.

CONCLUSIONS
several aspects of the neuronal response properties discussed here are consistent with superior colliculus involvement in orienting responses and alerting or attentive functions related to somatosensation in the rat. the low levels of spontaneous activity create the potential for high signal-to-noise levels both in collicular processing and in efferent signaling. the short latency, large magnitude, and reliability of the responses are behaviorally advantageous for rapid and consistent awareness of novel or relevant stimuli. the apparent minor role of inhibition, as evidenced in the large off:on ratios, may also be optimized for alerting functions. the interconnections of the superior colliculus with many other structures involved in sensation  and arousal  suggests this structure may play a role in regulating awareness of vital stimuli.

