BACKGROUND
polyploidy occurs either through the combination of two or more genomes from different parents , or the multiplication of an endogenous genome . the majority of flowering plants have undergone polyploidization  during their evolutionary history, suggesting that it provides a mechanism that can increase the fitness of an organism  <cit> , possibly through heterosis  <cit> . two wgd events are dated to have occurred before the diversification of extant seed plants and extant angiosperms  <cit> . analysis of the arabidopsis thaliana genome supports three more recent wgd events . evidence from investigations on the genome sequences of vitis vinifera and medicago truncatula <cit> , suggests that the first, or γ event, extends to all the core-eudicots and many other plant species. polyploidization is relatively common in agricultural and commercial species, such as wheat , potato , coffee  and cotton , indicating that this evolutionary mechanism may be important in plant domestication.

polyploidization involves complex genetic and epigenetic process and genome duplication is often followed by changes in gene expression and gene loss  <cit> . complementary hypotheses that explain this phenomena suggest that either selection is based on absolute gene dosage, or relative gene dosage   <cit> . the absolute gene dosage hypothesis states that gene networks have balanced states of interaction that are critical for proper function and any disturbances on the network’s stoichiometry of interaction are not optimal for plant survival. the relative dosage hypothesis argues that a gene product can have multiple interactions that may assist in the survival of the plant, upon which selection is based.

duplicated genes generated by polyploidization events are referred to as homeologs. the fate of homeologous genes can be divided in four general categories; conservation or redundancy, nonfunctionalization , subfunctionalization  and neofunctionalization   <cit> . the relative ratio of these gene fates may differ between species.

nicotiana species are excellent models for investigating plant polyploidization. approximately 40% of nicotiana genera are allotetraploids  <cit> . with an estimated age of  <dig>  myr  <cit> , nicotiana tabacum is a relatively young allotetraploid originating through the hybridization of nicotiana sylvesteris   <cit>  and nicotiana tomentosiformis   <cit> . extensive studies within the nicotiana genus, and specifically within n. tabacum including the first generation of a synthetic n. tabacum, have revealed a complex landscape for polyploid genome evolution  <cit> . many evolutionary changes in the tobacco genome have been elucidated. they include evidence for an early genomic shock  <cit> , a great increase in the frequency of heterozygosity and t-genome repeat losses leading to genome size reduction  <cit> . other evolutionary events, such as intergenomic translocations  <cit>  and epigenetic patterns of 45s rdna expression have been characterized as well  <cit> . in addition, gene expression studies of n. tabacum have been performed using microarrays  <cit> , although the technology may have limited ability to distinguish between homeologs.

this study presents a characterization of the n. tabacum transcriptome constructed from an evolutionary perspective by combining a next generation sequencing  and expression analysis with a phylogenetic approach applied on a genomic scale.

RESULTS
transcriptome assembly and annotation for a polyploid species
a set of expressed sequence tags  was generated from leaves of n. tabacum and modern day representatives of its progenitor species n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis. test assemblies of the n. sylvesteris ests were generated using several programs . gsassembler produced longer contigs and was significantly faster than the other assembly programs  so it was selected for further optimization.

an assembly strategy was adopted to maximize contig length while attempting to separate homeologous genes within n. tabacum. to identify optimal parameters, a set of assemblies were conducted using four est datasets generated with  <dig> sequencing chemistry: i- n. tabacum ests, ii- n. tomentosiformis ests, iii- n. sylvesteris  ests and iv- a combined dataset of the n. sylvesteris  and n. tomentosiformis ests . the contigs generated from the four data sets were analyzed for a minimum overlap identity parameter set to a range of values between 75% and 99% . the n. tabacum ests and the synthetic polyploid data set produced a similar profile. an increase in the number of contigs was observed using a 97% identity setting . unlike the n. tabacum and combined assemblies, the number of contigs in the individual n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis assemblies did not increase at this level . the result suggested that 97% was the optimal identity threshold that could be used to separate homeologous sequences in the n. tabacum data set and homologous sequences in the combined data set without having a detrimental impact on the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis assemblies.

all four data sets showed an increase in the number of contigs when an identity setting of 99% was used. this level was considered too stringent as it was likely to be separating sequences based on sequencing errors . the assemblies based on an identity of 97% therefore provided the best data sets for subsequent analysis. this was further supported by manual inspection of contigs from the n. tabacum assemblies using the tablet assembly viewer  <cit> . manual inspection confirmed that contigs with more than  <dig> snps per  <dig> bp generated in the 95% identity assembly had correctly been separated into two contigs in the 97% identity assembly .

relative to the number of contigs in either individual assembly, the total number of contigs in the combined n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis assembly was reduced, suggesting the collapse of orthologous sequences in the combined assembly. the lower number of contigs for the n. tabacum assembly compared with the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis assemblies may be partially explained by the higher number of sequences included in these assemblies. increasing the number of n. tabacum reads with additional sequencing libraries, not included in this study, did indeed increase the number of contigs in the assembly . however, a more likely explanation for the lower number of contigs in the n. tabacum and combined assemblies was there being no, or very low sequence polymorphisms between the orthologous genes of the ancestral parents, making it impossible to separate them during assembly at 97%.

to investigate the percentage of homeologs that were collapsed during the assembly process, reads from n. tabacum, n. sylvesteris  and n. tomentosiformis were mapped onto the n. tabacum assembly produced with the 97% identity setting. sequence polymorphisms could not be detected between the reads from the three species for 67% of the n. tabacum contigs , indicating that sequences for a large portion of the assembly, were likely to have collapsed. this also meant that these sequences were not amenable to subsequent phylogenetic analysis. the remaining 33% of the sequences showed snps between the n. tomentosiformis and n. sylvesteris orthologs. when mapped against the n. tabacum assembly, a low number of n. tabacum sequences  showed snps either supporting the possibility of collapsing of homeologous sequences in the assembly, or sequencing errors.

the three separate assemblies for n. tabacum, n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis transcripts were further assembled using gsassembler. in order to cluster the homeologous and homologous sequences across all three assemblies, the identity parameter of this combined nicotiana assembly was set to the lower stringency level of 95%. phygomicss, a custom data processing pipeline was developed in order to carry out a phylogenetic analysis of the sequences for the entire transcriptome. the  <dig>  clusters generated from the combined nicotiana assembly were processed through the pipeline which selected  <dig> clusters containing at least one contig of each individual species for further analysis. alignments were then extracted and filtered by the length of the sequence overlap  and the average alignment percentage identity .

the consensus sequences for each of the clusters were annotated based on homology using blastx  <cit> . searches were conducted against four datasets and annotation results are summarized in table  <dig>  as expected, the nicotiana clusters demonstrated the highest number of matches against the tomato gene model dataset . interproscan  <cit>  was used to perform a protein domain analysis on  <dig>  of the clusters,  <dig> of which had been annotated using the blastx method previously described.

topology analysis of nicotiana genes
the combined nicotiana assembly was used to construct a set of phylogenetic trees for each cluster of sequences. phylogenetic trees were constructed for  <dig>  nicotiana clusters that also contained at least one possible solanum lycopersicum homolog as an out group. bootstrapping analysis and filtering of these clusters  identified  <dig> as containing either a single n. tabacum sequence, or two n. tabacum sequences along with the n. tomentosiformis, n. sylvesteris and s. lycopersicum sequence members.

neighbor join  and maximum likelihood  methods were used to build phylogenetic trees for each of the  <dig> clusters . the topologies of these trees were grouped into  <dig> categories. the distribution of the results in these  <dig> categories was similar between the nj and ml methods . approximately 10% of the clusters contained two n. tabacum sequences, each of which could be associated with the respective n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis sequences. this topology would be expected if both the t and s homeologs had been maintained and expressed by the plant following polyploidization . the majority  of clusters, however, contained only a single n. tabacum sequence the majority of which could be associated with either the n. sylvesteris  or n. tomentosiformis  sequence . given that these clusters contained genes where snps existed between the parental homeologs, reducing the likelihood of collapse of the sequences during assembly, the abundance of this latter topology is most likely explained by either gene subfunctionalization , or gene loss/nonfunctionalization.

gene ontology  analysis of the most abundant topologies from the nicotiana data  was performed  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the representation of go biological process terms  for these topologies. no significant differences between ab_ac, ab_c and ac_b were observed relative to the biological process categories. the same was true when comparing ab_c and ac_b topologies for cellular component and molecular function categories compared to the global list of the combined nicotiana consensus sequences. three percent of the trees showed an unexpected topology with the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis sequences being more closely related to each other than to the n. tabacum sequences . while false clustering of an n. tabacum paralog with the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis sequences is the most likely explanation for the anomaly, go analysis showed significant overrepresentation  in some categories, such as pathogenesis signaling , for these clusters, suggesting that they may contain genes with an interesting evolutionary history. however, it should be noted that this set of clusters contained fewer than  <dig> members.

identification and expression analysis of nicotiana tabacum homeologs
estimations of gene expression levels were calculated based on the number of sequence reads and used to compare gene expression levels for the three different nicotiana species. for the  <dig> n. tabacum transcript clusters  where there were no reliable inter-specific snps that could be used to identify the ancestral origin, only  <dig> transcript clusters contained five or more reads for each of the three nicotiana species. the same expression levels  across all three species were observed for  <dig> % of these genes. among the remaining differentially expressed genes, the most frequent category was n. tabacum genes  overexpressed in comparison with n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis , followed by n. tabacum genes with similar expression to the n. sylvesteris homolog  and n. tomentosiformis homolog . only  <dig> % of the n. tabacum genes were expressed at a lower level when compared with both parental sequences. the rest of the transcripts  showed variable trends relative to differential expression between all the transcripts .

 <dig> of the  <dig> gene clusters described above contained  <dig> n. tabacum consensus sequences  that could be assigned ancestral origin based on the phylogenetic trees.  <dig> of these sequences were assigned to n. sylvesteris  origin and  <dig> sequences were assigned to n. tomentosiformis  origin. a total of  <dig> gene clusters  showed differential expression :  <dig> gene clusters  for n. tabacum s-homeologs , of which  <dig> clusters  were overexpressed in comparison with n. sylvesteris homeologs. similar results were observed for n. tabacum t-homeologs ;  <dig> clusters  showed differential expression  and of them  <dig> n. tabacum clusters  were overexpressed in comparison with n. tomentosiformis.

of the  <dig> ab_ac gene clusters containing two n. tabacum sequences,  <dig> clusters were selected where the consensus sequences were built with at least  <dig> reads. figure  <dig> shows scatter plots comparing expression levels of the homeologous and homologous gene pairs for these gene clusters.

differential expression  was observed for  <dig> % of the n. tabacum homeologous gene pairs . in comparison to the parental homeologs,  <dig> % of the t-genes  and  <dig> % of the s-gene  were over-expressed. only  <dig> % of the genes demonstrated differential expression when comparing t-genes with s-genes in n. tabacum . in comparison,  <dig> % of the homologous genes in this set were differentially expressed between the n. tomentosiformis and n. sylvesteris samples. a more consistent level of gene expression between n. tabacum homeologs was also indicated by the pearson correlation coefficient, which was higher between these genes than between the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis homeologs . the increased level of differential expression between the homologous genes pairs may simply reflect that the comparison was conducted using independent samples and may be due to experimental/biological variation. the homeologs comparison was conducted between genes from the same n. tabacum sample. however, the data clearly suggests that in the vast majority of cases when both n. tabacum homeologs are expressed in the same tissue  there is little difference in expression on a transcriptional level.

given the small number of homeologous gene pairs showing differential expression, the function of these genes were analyzed. genes with higher expression of the s homeolog showed over-representation of go terms associated with the biological processes for proteolysis, protein folding and aldehyde metabolism. genes with higher expression of the t homeolog showed over-representation of go terms associated with the biological processes for oligopeptide transport and translation.

non-synonymous and synonymous site substitution rates between n. tabacum, n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis species
comparison of expression in only a single tissue/organ is too limited to differentiate between redundancy and subfunctionalization. a more extensive expression study might provide the ability to distinguish between these two evolutionary processes. cases of neofunctionalization, however, could be distinguished by a comparison of the gene sequences in the current data set.

changes to a gene sequence resulting in an altered protein sequence potentially alters the function of that gene. a comparison of the rate of synonymous  and non-synonymous  nucleotide substitutions provides insights into the evolutionary history of a gene  <cit> . genes showing a low rate of non-synonymous substitutions are likely to have undergone strong selective pressure to be conserved more faithfully and thus their function maintained. genes showing a relatively high level of non-synonymous substitutions are likely to have undergone positive selection and possible neofunctionalization  <cit> .

to estimate the rate of synonymous  and non-synonymous  nucleotide substitutions, an analysis was carried out using clusters of genes selected when topology analysis suggested that either one or both n. tabacum homeologs were maintained and could be assigned to t or s origin, . the ratio between kn and ks  for each pair of sequences was also calculated. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of ks for sequence pair comparisons between the nicotiana species. for reference, a comparison between n. tabacum and s. lycopersicum genes is also shown . this older divergence event showed a higher rate of ks relative to the comparisons between the nicotiana species. peak distribution of ks values were approximately  <dig> , compared to approximately  <dig>  for the n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis. ks values were even lower for the n. tabacum to n. sylvesteris  and n. tomentosiformis comparisons . the high number of sequence pairs with a ks value <  <dig>  in the comparison between n. tabacum and n. sylvesteris  , or n. tomentosiformis  as compared to the number between n. tabacum and s. lycopersicum  or between n. sylvesteris  and n. tomentosiformis  suggests that a high percentage of the n. tabacum genes have not diverged from their ancestral sequences .

analysis of the kn/ks ratio demonstrated that the majority of genes had an ω value lower than  <dig>  suggesting that few genes had undergone positive selection during the evolution of n. tabacum . only 3% of the clusters showed positive selection associated to n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis homeologs and the correspondent homeologs , but no positive selection between the n. tabacum and the parental homeologs pairs . the go annotations associated with the small number of genes that were undergoing positive selection showed a similar distribution across the three species and corresponded to the more representative go term categories such as metabolic process, cellular process, cell, catalytic activity and binding . genes with an ω >  <dig> for the n. sylvesteris and n. tabacum  homolog pairs  showed overrepresentation of the level  <dig> biological process ontologies: biological regulation, cellular component organization and regulation of a biological process. examples of these genes include cluster  <dig>  and  <dig> . the  <dig> genes with an ω >  <dig> for the n. tomentosiformis and n. tabacum  homolog pairs showed over-representation of the go terms cellular process, developmental process and metabolic process. this included clusters  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> .

within the set of genes analyzed, there were no instances of homeologous genes from n. tabacum demonstrating positive selection . a comparison between the respective n. tomentosiformis and n. sylvesteris homeologs also did not show any instances of positive selection. this absence of positive selection suggests that the majority of positive selection represented in the gene set analyzed occurred following the divergence of the two ancestral species rather than since the formation of n. tabacum. it also suggests that the rate of neofunctionalization in n. tabacum has been relatively low.

discussion
polyploid species sequence assembly
using a next generation sequencing approach, leaf transcriptome sequence data was generated for the allotetraploid n. tabacum and its progenitor species n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis. these sequences were assembled into species specific sets of unigenes and then further combined into a consensus set of clusters for the three species. the process of assembly revealed that default parameters of sequence assemblers were probably not stringent enough when working with sequences originating from polyploid species. sequencing errors, such as homopolymer length issues associated with pyrosequencing, can further confound this problem by potentially masking low polymorphism content between homeologs. other sequencing technologies, such as illumina, may not be impacted by this homopolymer problem, but read length may be a limiting factor given the requirement that a single read must contain at least one polymorphism per overlapping region. these factors should be taken into consideration for any future assembly attempts on polyploid species and the methodology applied for the assembly of an allopolyploid transcriptome in this study could be useful for guiding future genome assembly work in polyploidy.

additionally, the number of collapsed homeologs was estimated in n. tabacum assembled transcripts  based on snps shared with n. sylvesteris or n. tomentosiformis reads. in this analysis, only  <dig> % of n. tabacum transcripts were polymorphic and shared snps with the parental transcripts. this methodology cannot be applied for transcripts lacking snps in the transcript fragment analyzed . more information could be obtained by deeper transcriptomic sequencing , use of longer sequences  or genomic dna sequencing .

homeologous gene fate in nicotiana tabacum
based on the leaf transcriptome data for the nicotiana species generated in this study, a pipeline was developed to carry out a phylogenetic analysis on a genomic scale. the phygomicss pipeline works on a single transcriptome set, but can be applied to transcriptomic data from multiple tissues/organs, or gene models from genomic sequence data.

the majority of the n. tabacum transcripts  did not show any polymorphisms with the parental sequences, making it impossible to distinguish the homeologous genes and excluding the possibility of neofunctionalization in these genes. additionally the expression analysis of clusters with genes expressed above background level , revealed that the expression of a majority of these genes was not changed  between these three species. with this level of conserved expression, the possibility of subfunctionalization is low.

a more specific topology analysis with the newly developed phygomicss pipeline revealed that in n. tabacum transcripts where homeologous genes can be differentiated there was evidence for the presence of only a single homeolog . given that the data is transcriptomic, it is not possible to distinguish between gene loss and subfunctionalizaton. tissue-specific gene silencing  <cit>  provides one possible mechanism of gene subfunctionalization and may partially explain the pattern observed in the nicotiana topologies. an analysis of a broader set of tissues might resolve the question and increase the chance of detecting expression differences in any individual genes. however, studies in other polyploid plants suggest that only a small number of genes display tissue specific gene silencing. for example, a similarly low level of gene silencing  was estimated in both synthetic allotetraploid wheat  <cit>  and synthetic cotton  <cit> , and results from gene expression analysis of tragopogon miscellus showed a similar trend   <cit> . even lower estimates of silencing were suggested from experiments with an early allotetraploid formed by the hybridization of arabidopsis thaliana and cardaminopsis arenosa   <cit> .

based on the distribution of topologies and the relative expression level of homeologous genes, there was little evidence to suggest preferential loss, or transcriptional silencing of genes from one or other progenitor genomes from the sub-set of nicotiana sequences that this analysis could be completed on. this is in contrast to the apparent preferential loss of repetitive sequences from the t genome in n. tabacum, as shown in a recent study also using  <dig> sequencing in these nicotiana species  <cit> . previous studies in other allotetraploids have shown preferential expression of homeologous genes. for example, there is evidence of preferential expression of the d genome in cotton  <cit> . differential expression was shown for 22% of homeologous genes pairs in the  <dig> generation-old allotetraploid t. miscellus <cit> , similar to the 27% of n. tabacum genes observed in this study. it should also be noted that genes expressed in the leaf tissue at a very low level may have been missed in the transcriptome sets, particularly since clusters with less than  <dig> sequence members were removed from the analysis. as such, increasing the sequence depth might reveal more differentially expressed homeologous genes, but it is unlikely that this will increase the contribution of subfunctionalization extensively.

with the caveat that this study was based on a subset of genes identified in the leaf transcriptomes of nicotiana species, the data would suggest the expression of homeologous genes is mostly conserved between n. tabacum and its parent relatives and supporting the hypothesis of gene dosage compensation  <cit>  reported previously in other species  <cit> . this level may be over-estimated as the transcriptome was sampled in only one tissue type, thus reducing the possibility of observing subfunctionalization. however, based on the levels observed in other species  <cit>  subfunctionalization is unlikely to account for a large proportion of genes.

there is also limited evidence of neofunctionalization having occurred in n. tabacum, based on comparison of the homeologous and homologous gene sequences. indeed, no genes could be identified as undergoing positive selection in n. tabacum that did not also show the same response between n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis. this suggests that these differences may have predated the formation of tobacco. again, the apparent low level of neofunctionalization may be explained by only having sampled the leaf transcriptome. sequencing transcripts from other tissues, perhaps more specifically involved in secondary metabolite synthesis, may increase the likelihood of identifying genes showing positive selection in tobacco; two such examples are trichomes  <cit>  or roots, where alkaloids, including nicotine, are synthesized  <cit> .

in addition to an increased spatial and temporal coverage of the transcriptome for the nicotiana species covered in this study, it would be interesting to compare the proportion of subfunctionalization and neofunctionalization in tobacco with an older nicotiana allotetraploid species, such as nicotiana nesophila , or nicotiana benthamiana   <cit> . similarly, a comparative analysis of allele selection between wild and cultivated n. tabacum varieties might provide insight into the role of homologous genes in the species’ domestication process. gene duplication plays an important role in the successful transition of a wild species into its cultivated relatives, as shown for several wheat loci  <cit> . indeed there are also examples for duplicated genes from diploid species playing an important role in domestication, including grain incomplete filling  <dig>  and the cell wall invertase oscin <dig> in  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study represents the first time that a phylogenetic analysis of the tobacco genes has been carried out on a genome scale to further elucidate the complex evolutionary history of the species. transcriptome assembly for polyploid species possesses the intrinsic difficulty of homeolog collapse. 67% of the n. tabacum assembled transcripts lack any polymorphism that can be used to elucidate the sequence origin. read depth, read length and use of more variable regions such as introns will be critical to dissecting these genes.

there was evidence of a general maintenance of the expression levels between n. tabacum, n. sylvesteris and n. tomentosiformis homeologs. despite the conservation of transcriptomic levels in tobacco, there was little evidence for the occurrence of neofunctionalization, suggesting that, at  <dig>  myr old, tobacco may be too young evolutionarily and that this is a more common fate for duplicated genes in older polyploidy species. there may, however, be particular interest in comparing cultivated with more primitive varieties using the method developed here in order to identify the genes selected during the domestication of tobacco. the low level of neofunctionalization may make such an analysis easier.

