BACKGROUND
complex biological functions are performed by the integrated activity of functional modules consisting of highly interacting cellular components  <cit> . network motifs are localized patterns of interconnections that occur at significantly higher numbers than in randomized networks and thus may represent components of functional modules  <cit> . motifs identified in the transcriptional regulatory network of the bacteria e. coli were found to have important roles in information processing performed by the network and were used to obtain a compact representation of the network  <cit> . specifically, a motif called "feed-forward loop" found in transcriptional regulatory networks was shown to have an important role in the regulation of genes in response to persistent stimuli in contrast to transient signals  <cit> . superfamilies of various biological and other networks were identified to have similar local structure based on the significance profiles of network patterns  <cit> . overall, network motifs have become a widely used method for identifying functionally significant network components.

a number of recent studies suggest that over-represented network patterns, i.e. network motifs, may not necessarily have functional significance:  network motifs are found by testing a "random null hypothesis", comparing the abundance of patterns in an observed network with those found in an ensemble of randomized networks  <cit> . it was recently claimed that an ill-posed null hypothesis may lead to the false identification of significant network patterns, as such a randomization process may not correctly represent naturally evolved networks  <cit> . for example, it was claimed that the network motifs found in the neural-connectivity network of the nematode c. elegans may be the result of using a null hypothesis which does not account for localized aggregation of neural connections.  another recent work  <cit>  has claimed that localized network patterns may not necessarily reflect evolutionary selection of functional components as the density of the patterns may be determined by the global structure of the network, which is characterized by its degree distribution and clustering coefficient.  further work  <cit>  claims that network motifs do not seem to be of evolutionary or functional prominence. they compare the evolutionary conservation of motifs to that of randomly chosen network patterns and conclude that motifs are not subject to any particular evolutionary pressure acting for their preservation. a close examination of motif occurrences in well-studied pathways serving specific biological functions is then employed to show that motifs do not play a central regulatory role.

these results call for a reexamination of two fundamental questions concerning network patterns' analysis:  do localized network patterns constitute an essential design principle of the underlying network?  is over-representation of network patterns a suitable measurement of evolutionary pressure and thus of functional significance?

aiming to answer these questions, we conduct a large-scale analysis of functional enrichment and evolutionary conservation of all 3-node patterns in different dynamic regulatory networks in the yeast s. cerevisiae. dynamic regulatory networks are subsets of the static regulatory network which are active under specific cellular conditions. a recent study  <cit>  has uncovered large changes in the underlying network architecture between the static regulatory network of s. cerevisiae and "dynamic" subsets of this network. structural properties of several dynamic networks were studied for  <dig> different cellular conditions:  cell cycle,  sporulation,  diauxic shift,  dna damage, and  stress response  <cit> .

functionally enriched occurrences of network patterns in these dynamic networks may represent important functional modules reflecting essential design principles. to measure functional enrichment we define a mean functional enrichment score which is based on the genes' go annotation. extending the work of  <cit>  who studied the function of over-represented network patterns within the context of a small number of well known biological modules, our analysis examines the function of an ensemble of network patterns using large-scale annotation data. a previous study by  <cit>  claimed that over-represented network patterns are functionally enriched without considering the enrichment of the non over-represented patterns as a background model. to determine that a specific pattern is functionally enriched we take a different approach and compare the enrichment of a pattern to that of the remaining patterns.

to measure evolutionary conservation of network patterns we generalize the standard scores of conservation of single genes to 3-node patterns via two conceptually distinct ways:

 <dig>  "bag of nodes" – inspecting the conservation scores within each occurrence induced by each 3-node pattern. we define the mean conservation score for each 3-node pattern as the mean conservation scores of all genes that form the pattern's occurrences .

 <dig>  "coherency" – inspecting the coherency of conservation scores within each occurrence induced by the 3-node pattern. genes that together form a functional component are expected to be coherently conserved through evolution. we define the conservation coherency score as the percentage of the pattern's occurrences with coherent conservation, .

a similar definition for conservation coherency has been used in  <cit> , where they study evolutionary conservation of network patterns in the protein-protein interaction network of the yeast s. cerevisiae. another recent study by  <cit>  has also measured the coherency of evolutionary conservation of interaction patterns in an integrated network of s. cerevisiae comprising transcriptional and protein-protein interaction data. they define a "fragility" score for a pattern's occurrence that reflects the tendency of its constituting genes to be uniformly present or absent in an ensemble of  <dig> related organisms. our conservation coherency score is different as it is based on a large-scale prediction of the presence of genes in ancestral species of s. cerevisiae .

applying these measures to various dynamic networks, we examine whether there are functionally enriched patterns that may represent specific regulatory mechanisms, and examine their evolutionary conservation. finally, we turn to answer the second question, i.e. whether over-representation of network patterns is a good indicator of their functional significance.

RESULTS
occurrences and over-representation of 3-node patterns
we searched for all occurrences of all  <dig> possible 3-node patterns in all dynamic networks and found that only  <dig> patterns occurred in at least one network . pattern  <dig>  was found only in the stress-response network with six occurrences, which is too few to detect significant functional enrichment or conservation measures and was thus excluded from further analysis. pattern  <dig> was also found only in the stress-response network with  <dig> occurrences, suggesting that both patterns  <dig> and  <dig> may represent functions that are specific only to stress-response. pattern  <dig>  representing a transcription factor regulating two target genes, is significantly more common than the remaining patterns, in all dynamic networks.

we computed the over-representation scores for all patterns in each dynamic network and found that pattern  <dig>  is over-represented  in the cell-cycle, sporulation and dna-damage networks . the over-representation of the feed-forward loop is in agreement with previous results in the static regulatory networks of the bacteria e. coli and the yeast s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

functional enrichment and conservation scores of 3-node patterns
we searched the dynamic networks for functionally enriched patterns that may represent design principles underlying specific regulatory mechanisms. for each pattern in each dynamic network we computed the mean functional enrichment score that measures the tendency of genes composing an instance of the pattern to have the same go annotation . we found that pattern  <dig> is functionally enriched in dna damage and stress response conditions while pattern  <dig> is enriched in diauxic shift and stress response conditions, which are all exogenous conditions. in addition, patterns  <dig> is enriched in the endogenous cell cycle condition, while pattern  <dig> in enriched in the endogenous sporulation condition. examining the functional enrichment of the over-represented network patterns in the various dynamic networks revealed no significant correlation between the two measures. that is, pattern number  <dig> which is significantly over-represented in  <dig> dynamic networks is functionally enriched only in a single dynamic network, which is not statistically significant 

we computed the mean conservation score and conservation coherency score for all patterns in each dynamic network . pattern  <dig> has a significantly low mean conservation score in both diauxic shift and stress response dynamic networks, and patterns  <dig> has a significantly low score in the stress response dynamic network. the significantly low mean conservation score for these patterns suggest that the genes composing these patterns are recently evolved. the same patterns,  <dig> and  <dig>  have significantly high conservation coherency scores in the diauxic shift and stress response dynamic networks.

a high conservation coherency score indicates that the genes composing the pattern's occurrences tend to have similar conservation score. specifically, 96% of the occurrences of patterns  <dig> and  <dig> in these conditions have a coherent conservation score of zero, representing  <dig> genes that do not have orthologs in the direct ancestors of s. cerevisiae. the fact that no pattern is coherently conserved for longer timescales is surprising considering the fact that 15% of the regulatory genes have conservation scores higher than  <dig>  this may suggest that although some of the regulatory genes of s. cerevisiae are highly conserved through evolution there is no evolutionary pressure to maintain their pattern of interactions prior to the direct ancestors of s. cerevisiae. this observation is in agreement with previous work by  <cit>  where it was shown that occurrences of motifs in the regulatory networks of e. coli and s. cerevisiae are not likely to have evolved from the same ancestral pattern by successive duplications. instead, interaction patterns have converged independently by the interaction of unrelated genes in a process dubbed "convergent evolution".

examining the conservation of functionally enriched network patterns we find that functionally enriched patterns have significantly low mean conservation score and significantly high conservation coherency score . these results suggest that specific patterns  may represent functional components. however, the structure of such functional components may not be conserved through evolution for long timescales as we do not find highly conserved, functionally enriched patterns. the distinction between regulatory mechanisms operating in endogenous  and exogenous  conditions conforms with previous results showing different topological properties in these conditions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
to find whether localized network patterns constitute essential design principles of the underlying network we studied functional enrichment and evolutionary conservation of patterns occurrences using large-scale gene annotation and conservation data. we find some functionally enriched network patterns in different dynamic regulatory networks, supporting the view that network patterns may play a functional role. the same functionally enriched patterns have significantly high conservation coherency scores and significantly low mean conservation scores in exogenous conditions, representing recently evolved functional components. in a similar analysis of the static regulatory network consisting of all regulatory interactions we found no statistically significant correlation between functionally enriched and recently evolved patterns .

over-representation of network patterns as a method for finding functionally significant network components has attracted significant attention in the system biology community and their examination is of prime interest. previously,  <cit>  have claimed that over-represented network patterns  do not play a central regulatory role by examining a small number of specific well-known biological modules. our results extend their findings showing that over-represented network patterns do not tend to be functionally enriched or evolutionary conserved and thus may not represent significant functional components.

specifically, we find that the over-represented pattern  <dig>  is not functionally enriched  or conserved. however, over-representation of network patterns may become valuable if the correct background model is used to generate random naturally evolved networks. having found significant network patterns using functional enrichment and conservation criteria, it may be possible to use reverse-engineering techniques to find a correct background model under which over-represented patterns would represent significant modules.

