BACKGROUND
kin selection theory can explain the evolution of cooperation within groups of related individuals, but unless group members are clones, there is also potential for conflict  <cit> . because relatedness establishes the basis for cooperation and conflict within family groups, it has overshadowed other factors that affect the degree of conflict  <cit> . variations in relatedness are not necessarily the most important force determining the extent of conflict in a social group; costs and benefits of altruism can be the dominant predictors of social behaviour  <cit> . in cooperative groups with a predetermined life cycle, such as a social insect colony, the group's developmental stage is one factor that may affect the degree of conflict within the group  <cit> .

in the social hymenoptera , conflict may exist over male production  <cit> . in most species, workers retain functional ovaries and are capable of laying viable, male-destined eggs. because workers are more closely related to their own sons than the queen's sons, workers are predicted to prefer producing their own sons over rearing the queen's sons. in reality, male production by workers is often absent or repressed under queenright conditions  <cit> . worker sterility is hypothesized to be enforced by mutual policing. worker policing occurs in two forms:  physical policing, in which workers with activated ovaries are attacked by nestmates  <cit> , and  egg policing, in which workers detect and destroy worker-laid eggs  <cit> . the importance of policing in maintaining worker sterility has been emphasized in several recent papers  <cit> .

mutual worker policing can evolve if workers are more closely related to the queen's sons than to the sons of other workers . this is the case in polygynous or polyandrous species  <cit> , but policing behaviour has also been described in species that are monogynous and monoandrous  <cit> , and even in a clonal species  <cit> . in these species, workers are more related to other worker's sons than the sons of the queen, and thus worker policing cannot be explained solely on the grounds of relatedness. instead, policing behaviour may have evolved in these species because the costs of worker reproduction reduce the inclusive fitness of workers   <cit> .

the costs of worker reproduction are not constant across colony development  <cit> . incipient social insect colonies undergo a period of ergonomic growth in which new workers are added to the colony but no sexuals are produced  <cit> . presumably, this reflects the relative value of colony growth over reproduction in the early stages of a colony's development. worker reproduction is necessarily an investment in reproduction because worker-laid eggs can only develop into males, which do not work  <cit> . worker reproduction further undermines ergonomic growth because reproductive workers are less productive than their non-reproductive counterparts  <cit> . loss of worker productivity is especially costly to incipient colonies because the relative contribution of each worker is greatest when the colony is small  <cit> , and colony mortality is highest in incipient colonies  <cit> . because worker reproduction is more costly in incipient colonies than large colonies, worker policing is predicted to be strongest when the colony is young  <cit> . however, workers from incipient colonies have less incentive to reproduce, so the policing mechanisms present in large colonies may not be the same as in incipient colonies.

effective policing requires that workers be able to identify cheaters or their eggs. much evidence indicates hydrocarbons on the cuticles of adults or on the surfaces of eggs provide the information workers use to recognize the presence of accepted reproductives and to target reproductive cheaters. hydrocarbons correlate reliably with fertility in more than  <dig> genera of ants, wasps, bees, and termites  <cit> . physical policing can occur when reproductive workers exhibit fertility-related hydrocarbons on their cuticle  <cit> . egg policing can occur when the surface hydrocarbons of worker-laid eggs lack the fertility-related hydrocarbons present on the eggs of the queen  <cit> .

fertility information may not be available as an informational basis for policing in incipient colonies. as predicted by the hypothesis that hydrocarbons are an honest indicator of reproductive capacity  <cit> , the concentration of fertility compounds on both the cuticle and egg surface increases with egg-laying rate  <cit> . queen egg-laying rate is positively correlated with colony size; queens of small colonies lay very few eggs per day  <cit> . therefore, founding queens and their eggs are expected to lack the hydrocarbons characteristic of highly productive reproductives. this prediction has been tested in two species, camponotus floridanus  <cit>  and lasius niger <cit> . as predicted, the abundance of fertility-related hydrocarbons on a queen's cuticle increases as the colony grows and the queen becomes more productive. incipient queens of c. floridanus lack the shorter-chained compounds present on the cuticles of established queens. eggs laid by founding queens are chemically indistinguishable from worker-laid eggs, and workers from large colonies destroy incipient-queen-laid eggs as frequently as worker-laid eggs  <cit> . this presents an interesting discrepancy. worker policing is theoretically predicted to be strongest in growing colonies, but the informational basis for policing used in large colonies is not available in incipient colonies.

we explore worker-policing behaviour across colony development. because relatedness within a colony is constant across development, variations in relatedness cannot explain any change in policing behaviour we observe between incipient and large colonies. we also address the proximate mechanisms of worker policing to understand how workers accommodate the changes in fertility signalling that accompany colony growth.

fertility signalling and worker policing have been studied extensively in the monogynous carpenter ant c. floridanus <cit> , in which queens are only single-mated  <cit> . in this species, qualitative and quantitative differences exist between the cuticular hydrocarbons of workers and established queens. approximately half of the total amount of hydrocarbons present on an established queen's cuticle represent compounds that correlate with fertility  <cit> . queens bearing these fertility-related hydrocarbons can be transferred between established colonies without aggression  <cit> . the eggs of established queens are coated with a blend of hydrocarbons similar to the hydrocarbons on the queen's cuticle  <cit> . worker-laid eggs lack the shorter-chained, fertility-related hydrocarbons present on queen-laid eggs. when worker-laid eggs are introduced into a large, queenright colony, they are destroyed. worker-laid eggs coated in queen hydrocarbons are destroyed less often than unmanipulated eggs, strongly suggesting hydrocarbons are responsible for the recognition of queen- and worker-laid eggs  <cit> . physical policing does not occur in c. floridanus  <cit> .

in this study, we tested the egg-policing behaviour of c. floridanus workers at three points in colony development. at each of the three points, we tested the response of workers to eggs laid by their own queen, eggs laid by an established queen , and worker-laid eggs. we collected egg surface hydrocarbon data to correlate our behavioural results with the availability of relevant fertility information. in a second experiment, we explored the response to fertility information further by contrasting the response of workers from small colonies and large colonies to the introduction of foreign queens.

RESULTS
the egg-policing behaviour of c. floridanus workers changed dramatically during colony growth . in small colonies , workers tolerated all eggs, regardless of origin. there was no significant difference in the median percentage of eggs recovered after  <dig> hours from workers receiving eggs laid by their own queen , an established queen , or foreign workers . egg-policing behaviour emerged only with colony growth. in large colonies , the percentage of eggs surviving the 24-hour discrimination assay remained high for workers receiving their own queen eggs , but dropped to zero for eggs laid by workers . acceptance of eggs laid by foreign, established queens by workers from large colonies was highly variable .

the proportion of fertility-related compounds on the surface of queen eggs increased with colony size, as reported in endler et al.  <cit> . shorter-chained, fertility-related compounds  comprised a greater percentage of surface hydrocarbons on eggs laid by queens of large experimental colonies , than by established-queen-egg donors , intermediate queens , incipient queens , and workers . straight-chain alkanes n-pentacosane  and n-heptacosane  comprise the majority of the fertility-related compounds on the eggs of workers and incipient queens.

although it is not yet known which of the fertility-related hydrocarbons c. floridanus workers use to distinguish eggs laid by established queens from eggs laid by incipient queens and workers, 3-methylheptacosane is the most prominent of the fertility-related hydrocarbons in the profile of an established-queen-laid egg. another 3-methyl alkane, 3-methylhentricontane, was recently identified as the queen fertility pheromone in the ant lasius niger  <cit> , and 3-methyl alkanes correlate with fertility in a number of species  <cit> . the median percentage of 3-methylheptacosane was greatest for eggs laid by the queen of large experimental colonies , followed by eggs laid by established-queen-laid-egg donors , queens of intermediate experimental colonies , queens of small experimental colonies , and workers .

to show that workers from small colonies can perceive and respond to complex hydrocarbon blends, we conducted nestmate recognition bioassays within a week of the egg-discrimination bioassay. cuticular hydrocarbons are used to discriminate nestmates from non-nestmates  <cit> . in c. floridanus, the difference between hydrocarbons of workers from different colonies is much more subtle than the difference in the surface hydrocarbons between eggs laid by individuals of high  and low fertility   <cit> . we thus reasoned that ants that can detect the subtle differences between nestmates and non-nestmates can also detect the dramatic differences between eggs laid by workers and established queens  <cit> . workers from small colonies were highly effective at recognizing and attacking non-nestmates. in  <dig> replicates, ants never attacked their own nestmate, but they attacked workers from foreign colonies of the same size in all  <dig> trials and workers from large foreign colonies in  <dig> out of  <dig> trials .

in a previous study, we showed workers from established colonies tolerate established queens from foreign colonies  <cit> . tolerance of established queens is thought to occur because the queen's fertility overrides information regarding colony membership. to test if workers from incipient colonies responded to fertility information on established queens in the same manner as workers from large colonies, we presented established queens from large colonies  to workers from incipient colonies . the same queens were also introduced to workers from large colonies as a control . workers from incipient colonies were highly aggressive toward foreign, established queens. workers from incipient colonies attacked foreign, high-fertility queens in all  <dig> replicates. in contrast, workers from large colonies were rarely aggressive toward foreign, high-fertility queens, attacking the introduced queen in only  <dig> of the  <dig> trials . we then performed the study using foreign queens from incipient colonies. workers from both incipient and large colonies were highly aggressive to foreign, incipient queens. foreign, incipient queens were attacked in all  <dig> introductions to workers from incipient colonies and in all  <dig> introductions to workers from large colonies. in both treatments, queens were attacked significantly more often than expected by chance .

discussion
our study investigates worker policing behaviour across colony development and addresses both the proximate and ultimate causes of worker policing in social insect colonies. we find a dramatic change in the response to worker-laid eggs between workers from incipient and established colonies. specifically, we find workers from incipient colonies do not police worker-laid eggs; egg-policing behaviour emerges only when colonies grew sufficiently large . at the ultimate level, our results suggest that the level of conflict within a colony changes across colony development, despite constant relatedness. at the proximate level, our results show the response to fertility information is facultative and changes across colony development.

our results underscore the importance of factors besides relatedness as the ultimate explanation for patterns of policing behaviour. relatedness is constant across colony growth in c. floridanus, but policing behaviour is absent in incipient colonies and present in large colonies . relatedness alone cannot account for the pattern of policing behaviour observed in c. floridanus.

mutual worker policing can also evolve when the costs of worker reproduction are high  <cit> . surprisingly, our results show worker policing is absent in incipient colonies, when the costs of worker reproduction are greatest  <cit> . nevertheless, worker reproduction seems not to occur in incipient colonies, since males are not produced and workers do not have developed ovaries . why is egg policing unnecessary in incipient colonies? while we cannot exclude coercion by alternate mechanisms, we hypothesize policing behaviour is not expressed in incipient colonies because the costs of worker reproduction are so high that there is no incentive for workers to reproduce  <cit> . worker reproduction diverts resources to reproduction at the expense of somatic growth  <cit> , and incipient colonies are especially vulnerable to failure  <cit> . the number of sexuals that can be produced by an incipient colony is negligible compared to the number of sexuals that can be produced if the colony survives to maturity. it is in the workers' self-interest to channel their efforts toward colony growth  rather than divert resources for immediate male production. mechanisms for enforcing sterility, including egg policing, are unnecessary if worker sterility is voluntary. early in colony development, cooperation can occur without external enforcement.

a second, non-mutually exclusive hypothesis for the absence of worker policing in incipient colonies is the cost of recognition errors or informational constraints  <cit> . as our chemical data indicate, eggs laid by workers are very similar to eggs laid by incipient queens in the composition of their surface hydrocarbons, which may be an information constraint or provide insufficient information for a sufficiently large number of correct decisions . to avoid cannibalizing the queen's eggs, workers may be selected to have permissive acceptance thresholds for conspecific eggs in incipient colonies. this is consistent with the general egg tolerance we observed in incipient colonies . in a previous study, we showed that physical policing of reproductive workers is absent in larger colonies of c. floridanus <cit> . the lack of informational differences potentially encoded in cuticular hydrocarbons between reproductive and non-reproductive workers may be involved here as well.

our results show that the response of a worker to a conspecific egg changes with the developmental stage of the worker's colony. workers from incipient colonies tolerated all conspecific eggs, regardless of origin, whereas workers from large colonies destroyed worker-laid eggs. egg destruction by workers from large colonies is mediated by fertility-related hydrocarbons on the egg surface  <cit> ; workers from large colonies destroy eggs laid by incipient queens and workers, which lack the shorter-chained, fertility-related hydrocarbons found on the surface of eggs laid by established queens  <cit> . our results show the absence of fertility-related hydrocarbons does not trigger egg-policing behaviour in workers from incipient colonies. the response of workers to fertility information on eggs changes with colony growth.

interestingly, workers from the largest colony size class tested in the present study showed a trend toward the destruction of eggs laid by foreign, established queens . although the trend was non-significant, it seemingly conflicts with earlier studies, which show high survival of eggs laid by foreign, established queens  <cit> . one potential explanation for the discrepancy between the current results and those reported previously is that the source colony of the established, queen-laid eggs used in the current study was  <dig> to  <dig> years older than the discriminator colony. in previous experiments, the source colony was the same age or younger than the discriminator colony. our chemical data indicate the median abundance of fertility-related hydrocarbons on the eggs of the older queens was less than the median abundance of fertility-related hydrocarbons on the eggs of yearling queens , potentially as a consequence of limited growth under laboratory conditions  <cit> . workers from 1-year-old colonies may have destroyed eggs from older queens when the strength of the foreign queen's fertility signal was weaker than that of their own queen.

workers from incipient and established colonies also differed in their response to fertility information in the context of queen introductions. workers from incipient colonies attacked foreign, established queens in every trial, whereas workers from large colonies tolerated foreign, established queens in all but two trials . workers from both incipient and large colonies attacked foreign, incipient queens . tolerance of foreign, established queens by workers from large colonies is thought to occur because the queen's fertility status overrides colony membership information  <cit> . incipient queens lack a strong fertility signal, and thus workers from both incipient and large colonies attack them. the rejection of established queens by workers from incipient colonies shows that a strong fertility signal does not guarantee acceptance in every context. it also contrasts with our findings from the egg-policing assay, in which workers from incipient colonies tolerated eggs laid by foreign, established queens. this indicates a worker's response to fertility information depends on the recognition context: eggs or adults. together, our egg-policing and queen-tolerance assays demonstrate the response to fertility information is not fixed, but changes across colony development.

this paper is the first to show that a worker's response to fertility signals changes with colony life stage, but we expect it is a widespread phenomenon. if queen fertility pheromones indeed serve as an honest indication of reproductive capacity  <cit> , then changes in fertility signals corresponding with colony size should be a common feature of social insect colonies. when the queen's fertility signal changes throughout colony development, we predict workers' response to fertility information also changes  <cit> .

further research is necessary to identify the proximate mechanisms that account for the change in workers' responses to fertility signals. the change in behaviour may be the result of physiological differences between workers from incipient and large colonies , or the behaviour may be triggered by environmental cues. in particular, experience with fertility signals may change workers' acceptance thresholds  <cit> . it is also possible that the egg-tolerance observed in small colonies is due to age-dependent expression of policing behaviour; for example, if ants do not show policing behaviour until they reach a certain age, then egg policing may be absent from small colonies because the workers are not sufficiently old to demonstrate policing behaviour  <cit> . similarly, if worker sterility in incipient colonies is voluntary, then it is necessary to determine the mechanism that induces worker sterility in incipient colonies. in large colonies, queen-laid eggs with fertility-related hydrocarbons have been shown to induce worker sterility  <cit> , but no such eggs exist in incipient colonies. determining the proximate mechanisms that generate the behavioural change we report here is critical to understanding the regulation of reproduction across colony development.

although the regulation of worker reproduction has been studied intensively in social insects, very few studies have investigated the regulation of worker reproduction across the colony life cycle. this is problematic at two levels. first, the proximate mechanisms regulating worker reproduction can change across colony ontogeny  <cit> , and these changes will only be apparent in studies that consider a range of developmental stages. second, the intensity of regulation may change during colony development, according to the ultimate explanations for the evolution of policing behaviour. ohtsuki & tsuji were the first to predict that the level of policing behaviour in a colony depends on the colony's developmental stage  <cit> . specifically, their model predicts policing behaviour will be expressed in growing colonies because male production early in the colony life cycle reduces the future inclusive fitness of colony members. our results do not match this prediction; we find workers from incipient colonies do not destroy worker-laid eggs, and policing behaviour emerges only with colony growth. however, our results are consistent with the broader prediction of ohtsuki & tsuji's model, which is that the expression of policing behaviour depends on the stage of colony growth. perhaps the absence of egg policing in very small colonies, such as the incipient colonies tested here, represents an unanticipated phase of colony growth in which worker sterility is self-imposed and policing is not necessary. it is also possible that the self-restraint of workers from incipient colonies is the result of strong policing in the past, which has subsequently resulted in reproductive acquiescence in c. floridanus workers from small colonies.

another prediction of ohtsuki & tsuji's model is that worker policing should subside in monogynous, monandrous species once the colony reaches reproductive maturity  <cit> . the largest colonies tested in the current study contained only  <dig> to  <dig> workers, whereas field colonies can grow up to  <dig>  workers in size. just as our current results show that the behaviour of a colony with  <dig> workers cannot be extrapolated from the behaviour of a colony with  <dig> workers, the behaviour of a colony with  <dig>  workers cannot be extrapolated from the behaviour of a colony one-tenth its size. to understand the ultimate causes of social regulations in social insects, it is essential to test regulatory behaviour across the life cycle of the colony.

CONCLUSIONS
the response to fertility information in an ant colony changes radically during colony ontogeny. we found workers from incipient colonies tolerate all conspecific eggs, but are aggressive toward foreign, established queens. in contrast, workers from large colonies discriminate against worker-laid eggs, but tolerate foreign, established queens. together, these results show the response of workers to the presence or absence of fertility information changes over the course of a colony's life cycle. at the ultimate level, our results stress the importance of factors other than relatedness for understanding the regulation of reproduction. in particular, we suggest levels of intracolonial conflict change across colony development, and as a consequence, mechanisms for managing conflict also change.

nearly everything we know about social regulation in social insects comes from colonies beyond the earliest phases of colony growth. this study shows that regulatory mechanisms observed in one stage of colony development cannot be generalized to all stages of a social insect colony's life cycle. we are missing critical parts of the colony's life cycle in our understanding of social regulation of reproduction. further research is necessary to understand how social insect colonies are organized across the colony life cycle.

