BACKGROUND
understanding metabolic behavior in terms of a system is important for the design and fabrication of useful substances by biotechnological approaches  <cit> . due to the progress in -omics studies and bioinformatics, including computer simulation, we can now integrate knowledge from different levels such as that pertaining to gene expression, protein expression, and metabolite concentrations. this information is useful for designing a strain for producing a particular substance  <cit> . dynamic metabolic modeling is a useful approach for studying the regulation of metabolism by integration of biological knowledge from different biochemical systems. for example, mathematical modeling of the tryptophan operon in escherichia coli clearly showed that trpr and trpl were responsible for high and low intracellular tryptophan concentrations, respectively  <cit> . this knowledge formed the theoretical basis for engineering a tryptophan-production strain  <cit> .

l-glutamic acid, a flavor enhancer that is produced worldwide in quantities of over  <dig> million metric tons per year, is a very important fermentation product and is typically produced by fermentation using corynebacterium glutamicum <cit> . studies on the mechanism underlying l-glutamic acid overproduction in c. glutamicum are in progress and have shown the importance of α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activity  <cit> . additionally, e. coli has been used as a model microorganism for research and also as an industrial producer of useful substances, including amino acids and organic acids  <cit> . specifically, the e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca strain, which lacks α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase activity, has been used as a model l-glutamic acid-production strain  <cit> .

to optimize carbon flux through gene deletion or gene amplification is one of the key technologies for production of substances based on fermentation. several algorithms and methodologies have been proposed for the identification of a target for molecular breeding in metabolic engineering. flux balance analysis is commonly used to obtain the theoretical maximum yield and the optimal biosynthesis pathway  <cit> . additionally, optknock is used as a strategy for knocking out genes or pathways in order to find optimal biosynthesis pathways  <cit> . elementary mode analysis is also used to analyze metabolic network analysis to obtain all possible combinations of reaction networks  <cit> . these approaches are based on a stoichiometric matrix of chemical reactions and static analyses. in contrast, dynamic simulation of cell metabolism is expected to become a useful method for analyzing and elucidating not only a metabolic state but also all transient in vivo cellular bioprocesses; such dynamic modeling requires knowledge of kinetic parameters.

there are mainly  <dig> approaches to obtaining kinetic parameters. one is parameter estimation, used for determining the coefficients in power-law equations utilizing the s-system  <cit> . the other involves obtaining the michaelis constants and catalytic constants from biochemical experiments, in which michaelis-menten-type equations are used for modeling  <cit> . in a previous study, we constructed our own model for the glucose phosphotransferase system  in e. coli. it included the transcription of genes and their regulatory mechanisms, protein translation, and michaelis-menten-based approximations of enzymatic reactions, using parameters adopted from scientific literature. in a simulation study, this model indicated that amplification of ptsi would increase the specific glucose consumption rate; we subsequently validated this prediction experimentally  <cit> . we expanded this model and constructed a large-scale metabolic and regulatory model of e. coli central metabolism, which included the metabolic enzymes related to pts, glycolysis, the pentose-phosphate pathway, the tricarboxylic acid  cycle, anaplerotic enzymes, and the glyoxylate shunt, as well as transcriptional regulation by the cyclic amp receptor protein , making large colonies protein , catabolite repressor/activator , pyruvate dehydrogenase complex repressor , and acetate operon repressor   <cit> . we also proposed a modeling approach to describe the successive transient phases in batch or fed-batch cultivation and successfully simulated the l-glutamic acid fermentation process using e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca as a model strain  <cit> . in this study, we improved our previous model, performed sensitivity analyses and simulation, and validated our model mathematically. this model led us to discover a new factor influencing l-glutamate production, which we then verified experimentally.

RESULTS
sensitivity analysis for l-glutamic acid production
using a dynamic simulation model, we calculated the difference in l-glutamic acid production yields in response to variation in gene copy number. we defined the ratio of this difference to the variation in copy number as sensitivity. because the sensitivity value changes depending on copy number variation, we obtained a maximum sensitivity value by changing the copy number variation from  <dig>  to  <dig>  moreover, we defined a scaling factor in table  <dig> as the copy number that provides the maximum sensitivity value. the maximum sensitivity of l-glutamic acid production to the increase or decrease in copy number of  <dig> individual gene species is shown in table 1; in this table, the top  <dig> genes  are arranged in descending order of maximum sensitivities. based on this result, we classified the  <dig> factors that affected l-glutamic acid production in our model into  <dig> groups. the first group consisted of factors for which the enhancements directly involved the biosynthetic pathway of l-glutamic acid, including the sugar uptake system. the genes icda, gdha, glta, fba, tpia, gapa, pgk, and pykf, corresponding to the 1st, 4th, 5th, 6th, 8th, 11th, 12th, and 14th items, respectively, in table  <dig>  encode the biosynthetic enzymes of l-glutamic acid. the genes ptsg and crr, corresponding to the 9th and 13th items in table  <dig>  respectively, encode components of the sugar-uptake system . enhancement of these factors is estimated to result in positive changes in l-glutamic acid production. in previous studies, an increase in citrate synthetase or glutamate dehydrogenase activity has been shown to be a factor leading to an increase in l-glutamic acid production in c. glutamicum <cit> . through sensitivity analysis, we confirmed a similar effect in e. coli. the maximum sensitivities for an increase in the copy number of glta, which encodes citrate synthetase, and of gdha, which encodes glutamate dehydrogenase, are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . furthermore, in e. coli, we observed a  <dig>  g/l increase of l-glutamic acid production in the glta amplification strain and a similar  <dig>  g/l increase in the icda amplification strain in the fermentation experiment after  <dig> h cultivation . these results suggested that there are similar metabolic principles for l-glutamic acid production in e. coli and in c. glutamicum.

the second group of factors comprised those that decreased the carbon flux in the glyoxylate shunt, that is, acebak and iclr, which corresponded to the 2nd and 3rd items, respectively, in table  <dig>  the increase in iclr expression levels and the decrease in the acebak operon expression level led to a decrease in the carbon flux of the glyoxylate shunt. furthermore, icda, encoding isocitrate dehydrogenase, which caused maximum sensitivity, was also related to carbon flux distribution at the branch point of the tca cycle and the glyoxylate shunt, indicating that the balance of the metabolic flux between the tca cycle and the glyoxylate shunt is of critical importance for l-glutamic acid production.

for the third group of factors, including the pdhr , gpma , and eno  genes, it was difficult to determine the reason why decreased expression would lead to an increase in l-glutamic acid production. the reason why a 3-fold increase in the expression of pdhr resulted in maximum sensitivity for l-glutamic acid production is discussed later in the subsection “perturbation analysis by pykf amplification.” attenuation of the activity of phosphoglyceride mutase  and enolase  led to a decrease in l-glutamic acid production, although both enzymes catalyzed reactions in the l-glutamate biosynthetic pathway. we assumed that a decrease in the expression of gpma may lead to accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate. a decrease in the expression of eno would also result in accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate, since reactions catalyzed by gpma and eno are reversible. the detailed mechanism of the effect of 3-phosphoglycerate accumulation on glutamate production has been described later.

perturbation analysis by pgk amplification
the top  <dig> entries in table  <dig> are factors known to influence l-glutamic acid production. to identify novel factors using our simulation model, we analyzed the effects of enzyme concentration and gene copy number on l-glutamic acid production. in this analysis, we perturbed gene copy number by multiplying the copy number with factors from  <dig>  to  <dig> in a logarithmic manner. the results were plotted on graphs in which the horizontal axis corresponded to gene copy number and the vertical axis corresponded to l-glutamic acid and other metabolite concentrations. through this analysis, we found that an increase in pgk copy number correlates with an increase in l-glutamic acid production .

amplification of pgk was a novel important factor for l-glutamic acid production, and we attempted to interpret the mechanism underlying this observation. in e. coli, pgk encodes phosphoglycerate kinase. phosphoglycerate kinase is known to catalyze the reaction converting  <dig> -bisphosphoglycerate and adp to 3-phosphoglycerate and atp  <cit> . an increase in the pgk copy number would cause accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate, which seemed to be closely correlated with the relationship between the decreased expression of gpma and eno and accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate. it is known that 3-phosphoglycerate acts as an inhibitor of isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase, which is encoded by acek in e. coli <cit> . since unphosphorylated isocitrate dehydrogenase retains its activity, an increase in unphosphorylated isocitrate dehydrogenase is associated with an increase in l-glutamic acid production . in figure  <dig>  we have shown the accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate and the consequential increase in l-glutamic acid production observed when simulating a100-fold amplification of pgk. if our model, simulation, and interpretation are appropriate, then the data indicate that more than  <dig> copies of pgk would increase l-glutamic acid production experimentally.

l-glutamic acid production in a strain with amplification of pgk
to confirm the effect of pgk gene amplification in l-glutamic acid fermentation in e. coli, we constructed a pgk-expression plasmid by using the high copy-number plasmid puc <dig>  the gene pgk was cloned into this vector with its native regulatory sequence, promoter, and shine-dalgarno sequence  <cit> . the pgk expression vector was introduced into a model l-glutamate-producing strain, e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca. the results for l-glutamic acid fermentation are shown in table  <dig>  after  <dig> h of cultivation, no residual glucose was observed in all the strains. a  <dig>  g/l increase in l-glutamic acid accumulation and a decrease in optical density at  <dig> nm by  <dig>  were observed for cultures in which puc118-pgk had been introduced, in comparison with those into which puc <dig> had been introduced as a control. this result suggested that our hypothesis regarding the increase in l-glutamic acid production by pgk gene amplification was validated qualitatively.

during sensitivity analysis, an increase in glta and gdha expression levels was predicted to lead to an increase in l-glutamic acid production . in a previous study, the rsf-ppg plasmid, containing the genes ppc, prpc, and gdha was used in l-glutamic acid fermentation by pantoea ananatis, a member of the enterobacteriaceae family  <cit> . the genes ppc and gdha encode pep carboxylase and glutamate dehydrogenase, respectively, and prpc encodes citrate synthase activity in addition to methylcitrate synthase activity  <cit> . by introducing the rsf-ppg plasmid into e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca/puc <dig>  a  <dig>  g/l increase in l-glutamic acid accumulation was observed, in comparison with a strain into which puc <dig> had been introduced as a control . this result qualitatively supported our sensitivity analysis results. after72-h cultivation, there was almost no residual glucose in the medium. by introducing the puc118-pgk plasmid into e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca/rsf-ppg, a  <dig>  g/l increase in l-glutamic acid accumulation and a decrease of  <dig>  in the optical density at  <dig> nm were observed, when compared with e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca/rsf-ppg . this experimental result suggested that our hypothesis regarding pgk amplification was also valid in a higher l-glutamic acid-accumulating strain and that the increase in l-glutamic acid production was at least partially due to a decrease in biomass production.

perturbation analysis by pykf amplification
an interesting phenomenon was observed when we perturbed the copy number of pykf, which encodes pyruvate kinase. a maximum increase in l-glutamic acid production was observed at 5-fold amplification of the pykf copy number . further enhancement of the pykf copy number led to a decrease in l-glutamic acid production. we propose that the mechanism underlying these findings involves the following. on increase in the pykf copy number, the conversion of pyruvate to pep increases, resulting in a decrease in the acetyl-coa supply from pyruvate and an increase in glucose incorporation via glucose pts . the decrease in acetyl-coa supply was closely related to the decrease in isocitrate supply . as a result of pykf amplification, which raised pep consumption, the concentration of 3-phosphoglycerate would be decreased, which would lead to increased inactivation of isocitrate dehydrogenase by the activation of isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase . our simulation study suggested that, even though the amount of the activated form of isocitrate dehydrogenase was reduced, the carbon flux toward α-ketoglutarate could be slightly enhanced by reduction of the carbon flux into the glyoxylate shunt when the isocitrate concentration is low. as a result, the l-glutamic acid production would increase. when the copy number of pykf is amplified more than  <dig> times, it leads to a decrease in 3-phosphoglycerate concentration, while most of isocitrate dehydrogenase would be inactivated . as a result, l-glutamic acid production would be decreased. we suggest that this is why moderate enhancement of pdhr expression could have the same effect on pyruvate concentration as pykf amplification.

discussion
in our previous study, we constructed a dynamic simulation model of e. coli based on biological knowledge and reproduced the experimental cultivation results by parameter fitting  <cit> . in this study, we attempted to elucidate novel factors that affect l-glutamic acid fermentation by using dynamic simulation based on a computer-aided rational design of biochemical networks. first, we refined the model with respect to biomass production through model validation. then, a precise sensitivity analysis was performed and revealed many factors that would be important for l-glutamic acid fermentation. for example, an increase in the expression of glta, which encodes citrate synthase, icda, which encodes isocitrate dehydrogenase, and a combined increase in the expression of both these genes were predicted to have a high impact on l-glutamic acid production. in fact, an increase in the expression of glta or icda enhanced l-glutamic acid production in e. coli . these genes have already been utilized to optimize l-glutamic acid fermentation in an industrial strain, c. glutamicum <cit> , thus supporting the accuracy of our dynamic simulation model for understanding e. coli metabolism. in a previous study, we proposed that the putative transcriptional regulator ydci controls carbon flux into the tca cycle in e. coli <cit> . we observed that an increase of citrate synthase activity by deletion of ydci led to an increase in l-glutamic acid production, and a decrease of citrate synthase activity due to ydci amplification led to a decrease in l-glutamic acid production. our sensitivity analysis results support a clear relationship between ydci and l-glutamic acid production, because both sensitivity analysis and experimental results clearly showed that a change in citrate synthase expression levels exert a significant effect on l-glutamic acid production in e. coli. integration of the transcriptional regulator ydci into our dynamic simulation model is a subject for future studies.

in theoretical flux analysis, the metabolic flux distribution, which facilitates the maximal theoretical yield of l-glutamic acid in e. coli, indicated that flux through α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase  and the glyoxylate shunt pathway  should be  <dig>  thus, to achieve maximal l-glutamic acid production from the mg <dig> Δsuca strain, deletion of the acebak operon, which encodes enzymes in the glyoxylate shunt pathway and isocitrate dehydrogenase kinase/phosphatase, or amplification of iclr, which encodes a negative regulator of the glyoxylate shunt, would be a plausible approach. in contrast, using the dynamic simulation model in addition to sensitivity analysis, we identified unexpected factors. this approach indicated that amplification of pgk and attenuation of gpma and/or eno would induce accumulation of 3-phosphoglycerate, which inhibits the phosphorylation of isocitrate dehydrogenase, and consequently results in increased glutamate production. furthermore, the effects of amplification of pykf or pdhr on l-glutamate production could be explained according to a different mechanism. this type of working hypothesis cannot be generated using conventional theoretical flux analysis because it requires that the modification systems that control enzyme activity be taken into account. thus, a critical advantage in using the dynamic simulation model is to be able to take various modes of regulation into consideration simultaneously and comprehensively.

in biotechnology, both production yield and productivity are important. in general, it is not simple to maintain productivity while improving production strains because the achievable yield and productivity can vary, depending on the strains and production conditions. from an engineering point of view, improving yield or productivity from a current production strain is a practical issue. one of the key features that affect productivity is biomass formation. in this study, we improved our simulation model to describe biomass production as precisely as possible; however, it was not sufficiently accurate to predict productivity. in e. coli, the carbon flux through the tca cycle is known to affect biomass production directly  <cit> . our dynamic simulation predicted the changes in concentrations of each molecule with response to gene amplification or deletion, and based on simulation results, we could speculate whether these perturbations would affect cell growth through carbon flux into the tca cycle. in this study, we predicted that the concentration of 3-phosphoglycerate could play an important role in controlling the carbon flux through the tca cycle; we subsequently validated this hypothesis experimentally. we also estimated that metabolic regulation through 3-phosphoglycerate would contribute to the changes in biomass production and fermentation productivity. in future, we plan to describe these changes more precisely in our model.

our model requires further refinement. when we perturbed the copy number of ppc, which encodes pep carboxylase, the sensitivity was  <dig>  and the ranking of this gene was 17th. in a previous study on c. glutamicum, it had been experimentally shown that an increase in pep carboxylase activity led to an increase in l-glutamic acid yield, with a reduction in organic acid byproducts  <cit> . we speculated that one of the reasons for the low sensitivity of ppc was related to the process of parameter tuning because the catalytic constant of pep carboxylase was modified to  <dig> times greater than the reported value. thus, an increase in pep carboxylase was not sensitively related to l-glutamate concentration in our model  <cit> . however, there is a difference in anaplerotic pathway enzymes and their regulation in e. coli and c. glutamicum <cit> . together with these facts, we speculate that unknown mechanisms, related to pep carboxylase or an anaplerotic pathway in e. coli, could exist and result in inadequate modeling. the citrate synthase reaction requires both oxaloacetate and acetyl-coa as substrates. an increase in pep carboxylase expression will intensify the carbon flux toward oxaloacetate. however, to enhance citrate synthase activity, acetyl-coa would be required. in our simulation model, the current acetate production model may be too simplistic to describe the dynamic changes in acetyl-coa concentration inside the cell because the regulation of acetate metabolism, including formation, excretion, uptake, and utilization of this substance, is quite complex in reality  <cit> . in the future, improvement in simulating the metabolism of acetate, including its excretion, is a priority for refining our model.

we recognize that our model is currently limited in terms of quantitative predictive power. according to our sensitivity analysis, amplification of pgk would increase glutamate production yield by 106%, whereas, experimentally, we found a 120% increase. one of the factors that affect the prediction seems to be the difference between the experimental conditions considered for simulation and those used for validation. in the simulation model, data for the parameters were obtained using jar fermenters; however, experimental validation involved the use of shake flasks  <cit> . we assume that the most important issue related to the predictive power is the modeling of cell growth. in l-glutamic acid production using e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca, the succinyl-coa used for biomass formation should be supplied through the glyoxylate shunt. amplification of pgk in e. coli mg <dig> Δsuca decreases the carbon flux toward the glyoxylate shunt pathway. consequently, we observed  <dig> phenomena, viz., increased l-glutamic acid production and decreased biomass production. at present, this trade-off has not been accommodated in our simulation because the cell growth profile is fixed in accordance with experimental results obtained using jar fermenters  <cit> . to further refine our model, the cell growth profile should be allowed to be variable, based on the concentration of biomass precursor molecules. experimentally verified biological evidence will continue to be appropriately incorporated into our model during further refinements.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we evaluated a literature-based dynamic metabolic pathway model of e. coli by computational analysis and verified it experimentally. our kinetic metabolism model was particularly useful for analysis of feedback regulation systems, and it was stable and robust against perturbation. in future, we would need to improve cell growth modelling to improve the flexibility and quantitative prediction capability of the current model. this resource will contribute to metabolic engineering that predicts the key factors for substance production.

