BACKGROUND
maternal resources are essential to initiate development and to embryo growth. early embryonic development in animals is a collaborative effort whose control is shared by genes in both the maternal and embryonic genomes. thousands of rna transcripts and proteins from the maternal genome are deposited into the egg during oogenesis. these maternal gene transcripts direct and sustain embryonic development until they are replaced with zygotic transcripts  <cit> . maternal rnas are known to be important for regulating cellular and developmental processes as well as establishing embryonic axes  <cit> . evolutionary differences in the maternal rnas may thus affect the future developmental trajectory of an embryo.

because of their critical influence on early development, maternal rnas are believed to play an important role in the developmental differences among species  <cit> . thus, identifying maternal rna transcripts is an important step for studying differences in development between taxa. we use recent technological advances in dna tiling arrays to identify maternal transcripts deposited in the oocyte prior to fertilization in the red flour beetle, tribolium castaneum, characterizing the eggs laid by virgin female beetles. we compare these transcripts to those present in 24-hour fertilized eggs to identify the array of early acting genes after fertilization. the identification of maternal transcripts introduced here will spark future work to identify species-specific and conserved maternally acting genes.

because maternal genes are transmitted via rna across generations, they are uniquely situated to position offspring to meet environmental challenges. in some species, the composition of oocyte maternal transcripts is believed to be influenced by the environment, resulting in offspring polyphenisms  <cit>  which in turn affect the evolutionary and selective forces acting on genes. thus, identifying maternally contributed rnas and studying their regulation may yield insights into how trans-generational processes affect the development of complex phenotypes.

evolutionary theory  <cit>  has shown that genes with strictly maternal expression evolve differently than constitutively expressed genes, because selection on sex-specific genes is weaker  <cit> . however, the strength of selection on genes with both maternal and zygotic function may be equal to or greater than that of a similar gene with only zygotic function  <cit> . thus, the ability to accurately assign genes with pleiotropic function to a specific expression pattern allows more accurate tests of theoretical predictions with empirical data.

to characterize the maternal transcriptome, we identified rnas present in unfertilized eggs and in early developing eggs  of t. castaneum, an emerging model system. additionally, our design also allowed us to identify novel transcriptionally active regions  outside of the annotated genes. these tars represent potential transcripts not yet included in the t. castaneum genome as it is currently annotated. these novel results provide a framework for utilizing t. castaneum as a model for understanding the role of maternal genes in evolution.

RESULTS
maternal expression in virgin eggs using a tiled whole-genome microarray
we used a tiled whole-genome microarray to identify transcripts present in total rna isolated from unfertilized and fertilized  <dig> hour egg collections at 30°c. the microarray design allowed us to test expression levels for  <dig>   of the  <dig>  annotated genes on the assigned chromosomal linkage groups of the tcas_ <dig>  assembly  <cit> . we found that  <dig> %  of the testable annotated genes on assigned chromosomes  were expressed in unfertilized eggs . all of the maternally expressed genes in the unfertilized eggs were also present in the fertilized eggs. fertilized eggs , which contain both maternal and zygotic transcripts, express only  <dig> more annotated genes than the maternally loaded complement found in unfertilized eggs. our expression results agreed with the previously reported expression of known early developmental genes in t. castaneum . we found a total of  <dig>  genes differentially expressed between unfertilized and fertilized eggs . of those  <dig>  genes,  <dig>  had twofold or greater expression in unfertilized eggs than in fertilized eggs. approximately twice that number of genes,  <dig>  , had a twofold or greater expression level in fertilized eggs relative to unfertilized eggs.

we examined the chromosomal location of maternally expressed genes in the unfertilized eggs . we found that the x-chromosome  was enriched with maternally loaded annotated genes, relative to the autosomes . there are more maternally loaded genes on the x-chromosome than expected based on gene number alone.

expression of maternal drosophila melanogaster orthologs
we examined the expression of t. castaneum orthologs of known maternal genes in drosophila melanogaster from four publically available datasets . among the datasets,  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the d. melanogaster maternal genes with a t. castaneum ortholog on assembled chromosomal scaffolds had at least one t. castaneum ortholog that was maternally loaded into t. castaneum eggs . between  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the d. melanogaster maternal genes had t. castaneum orthologs which were zygotically expressed in fertilized eggs, but not maternally expressed in unfertilized eggs . there were  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the d. melanogaster maternal genes with orthologs that were not expressed in 0– <dig> h t. castaneum eggs . we also analyzed the gene ontology categories of the three groupings of d. melanogaster genes for enriched terms. the four enriched terms with the smallest p-value of each grouping using the berkeley drosophila genome project in situ database comparison are displayed in table  <dig> . of the  <dig> d. melanogaster genes from the berkeley drosophila genome project in situ database with t. castaneum orthologs,  <dig>  of the d. melanogaster genes had associated gene ontologies. of the  <dig> d. melanogaster genes with associated gene ontologies,  <dig>  were in group a,  <dig>  were in group b, and  <dig>  were in group c.

the four enriched molecular function terms with the lowest p-values for each group within the comparison of the berkeley drosophila genome project in situ database maternal genes to the t. castaneum findings. group a consists of d. melanogaster maternal genes with t castaneum maternally loaded orthologs. group b consists of d. melanogaster maternal genes with t. castaneum orthologs which were expressed in fertilized eggs but not maternally loaded. group c consists of drosophila melanogaster maternal genes with t. castaneum orthologs which were not expressed in eggs.

comparison of maternal expression and female-biased expression genes in t. castaneum
overall,  <dig>  of the  <dig> testable female expression-biased genes identified in t. castaneum by prince, et al.  <cit>  were present as maternal transcripts in unfertilized eggs; this substantially exceeds the expected frequency based on the overall average of  <dig> % of genes expressed in unfertilized eggs as maternal transcripts . similarly, the  <dig> transcripts of autosomal genes with female-biased expression in the study of prince, et al.  <cit>  were enriched in unfertilized eggs  relative to the overall number of total autosomal genes with expression in unfertilized eggs  . however, for the  <dig> x-linked female-biased expression genes,  <dig>  were also found as transcripts in unfertilized eggs. this finding is not different from the expectation based on the number of total x-linked genes  . thus, autosomal genes with adult female-biased expression are enriched for maternal expression in unfertilized eggs, but similarly female-biased expressed genes on the x-chromosome are not.

comparison of maternal expression and male-linked genes in t. castaneum
genes in t. castaneum have been linked to male function by their expression in male accessory glands  <cit> , by patterns of male-biased whole-body gene expression  <cit> , or mass spectrometry of seminal fluid proteins  <cit> . we compared these genes designated male-biased in these earlier studies to the genes whose maternal transcripts were found in unfertilized eggs. surprisingly, we found that virgin females load rna transcripts into unfertilized eggs for  <dig> % of male accessory gland genes,  <dig> % of male-biased whole-body genes, and  <dig> % seminal fluid protein genes .

novel transcriptionally active regions
using a previously published methodology  <cit> , our analysis also revealed the presence of novel “transcriptionally active regions” . these are defined as contiguous regions of expression that do not overlap with annotated genes within the genome. intron size in the t. castaneum genome is non-normally distributed, with a primary peak at  <dig> bp and a secondary peak at  <dig> bp, while exon size has a unimodal average of  <dig> bp  <cit> . we examined only tars longer than  <dig> bp  located more than  <dig> bp  away from the nearest annotated gene on assigned chromosomal contigs. we found  <dig> and  <dig> tars in unfertilized and fertilized eggs, respectively. there were  <dig> tars unique to unfertilized eggs, with no overlap with tars from the fertilized eggs. in fertilized eggs, there were  <dig> tars that were unique, with no overlap with tars from unfertilized eggs.

these tars represent novel exons of potentially novel genes. the size distributions of the tars from unfertilized and fertilized eggs were not different . the number of tars per chromosome was very highly correlated with chromosomal length in both unfertilized and fertilized eggs .

discussion
our study is the first unbiased, genome-wide survey of maternally-loaded transcripts in unfertilized eggs of t. castaneum. we find the majority of annotated genes  are maternally loaded as transcripts into eggs prior to fertilization. our findings reinforce previous work indicating that a large fraction of genes are maternally loaded into eggs  <cit> . our findings provide a foundation for studying the evolutionary dynamics of trans-generational processes.

early expression dynamics
early development in metazoans is a collaborative effort between the maternal rnas allocated to the egg and the expression of early zygotic transcripts. maternal rnas are often rapidly degraded as part of the developmental process  <cit> . we identified  <dig> maternal genes with a more than two fold greater amount of rna in unfertilized eggs relative to fertilized eggs. other groups have taken such changes in expression level as indicative of maternal rnas which are degraded as part of the developmental process  <cit> . additionally, we found  <dig>  genes which were showed a greater than two fold increase in expression level in fertilized eggs relative to unfertilized eggs, suggesting that these genes are early expressed zygotic genes. the proper regulation of rna transcripts within the developing zygote is vital to ontogeny. both of these gene groups represent potentially important candidate genes in studying the maternal-to-zygotic transition in t. castaneum.

conservation of maternal gene expression in insects
because of their critical role in early development, maternal genes may play an important role in producing phenotypic differences between species. we compared four previously published datasets identifying maternal genes from drosophila melanogaster to our findings from t. castaneum. we found that  <dig> % to  <dig> % of d. melanogaster maternal genes had a t. castaneum ortholog that was also maternally deposited into eggs . our analysis of the gene ontology functions of this group showed an enrichment of genes related to maintaining basic cellular and metabolic processes. the common maternal transcriptome of these two species thus contains genes which are fundamentally important for the basic cellular functions of the developing embryo.

we also found that  <dig> % to  <dig> % of d. melanogaster maternal genes had a t. castaneum ortholog that was zygotically expressed in early fertilized t. castaneum eggs, but was not maternally loaded into the eggs . although these genes are expressed during early embryonic development in both t. castaneum and d. melanogaster, they have either acquired maternal gene expression in d. melanogaster or lost maternal gene expression in t. castaneum. these genes were enriched for gene ontology terms related to transcription factor activity and cuticle structural elements. it is possible that these genes function similarly in the ontogeny of both species despite the divergence in expression. if so, these genes may be of interest for studying the evolutionary forces affecting the maintenance or acquisition of maternal gene expression. alternatively, the difference in expression between these two species may be related to morphological and developmental differences between these species. under these conditions, the acquisition or loss of maternal gene expression may be involved in novel trait development. understanding the evolutionary forces that have altered the expression of these genes in each species may yield insight about the forces affecting either the origination or elimination of maternal gene expression and possibly the origination of morphological novelties.

finally, a few d. melanogaster maternal genes  had no detectable expression of their t. castaneum orthologs in either fertilized or unfertilized eggs, indicating that these genes may be important for early embryonic development in d. melanogaster, but not t. castaneum . this group of genes was enriched primarily for different forms of peptidase activity. these findings suggest that dietary differences between t. castaneum and d. melanogaster may play an important role in species-specific gene expression. although the amino acid requirements of tribolium and drosophila species may be similar  <cit> , each species may be adapted to a particular protein source. further study of such species-specific genes may give insight into the unique aspects of d. melanogaster development.

although our findings warrant further investigation, such basic groupings should assist in the identification of candidate genes involved in general early insect development as well as those genes that may be involved in the specific developmental differences between t. castaneum and d. melanogastser. these types of comparisons make it possible to target general versus species-specific developmental processes, thus providing as starting point for investigation into the evolutionary dynamics affecting maternally expressed genes.

genomic location of maternally loaded and female-biased expression genes
the x-chromosome of t. castaneum is known to be enriched for female expression-biased genes  <cit> . genes that are maternally loaded into eggs must be transcribed at levels sufficient for egg production and may therefore be more highly expressed in females. thus, the location of maternally loaded genes within the genome may influence the location of female-biased expression genes. indeed, we found that maternally loaded genes were also enriched on the x chromosome of t. castaneum . on the autosomes, we found that female-biased expression genes were more likely than expected to also be maternally loaded. however, on the x chromosome, female-biased expression genes are not enriched for maternal gene function. these findings suggest that although the basis for the female-bias expression for autosomal genes may be related to maternal loading into eggs, this is not the case for female-biased expression genes located on the x chromosome. these findings suggest the feminization of the x chromosome observed by prince, et al.  <cit>  is unlikely due to the location of maternal genes. furthermore, although most of the female-biased expression genes in t. castaneum are also maternally loaded genes, the locations of genes which are both female expression-biased and maternally loaded are skewed against the x-chromosome and in favor of an autosomal location. thus, the forces affecting gene movement, such as sexually antagonistic selection, may be acting differently on genes that are only female-biased or maternally loaded than those genes that are both female expression-biased and maternally loaded.

pleiotropic gene functions
in any model system, particularly in emerging systems like t. castaneum, it is important to understand genes in the context of the organism as a whole. recent studies in t. castaneum have examined specific evolutionary or developmental aspects of genes, classifying them as sex or tissue specific. however, we find that many of genes with reported male-linked function are also found in our unfertilized egg samples . this indicates that sex-biases in gene expression in adult tissues may not be sufficient to classify a gene as male or female specific in its function. such widespread pleiotropy must be taken into account in the modeling and testing of population genetic theory of sexual selection processes. indeed, our data on maternally loaded genes in t. castaneum should not be construed as having strict-maternal expression. although our data can indicate a gene is maternally expressed and deposited into eggs, we cannot exclude later zygotic expression. taken together, these results indicate that more gene expression data from different life-stages and sexes is needed to classify sex or tissue specificity.

prevalence of tars
one of the advantages of the microarray design in the present study is the ability to identify throughout the genome transcriptionally active regions  not associated with annotated genes. these tars represent the exons of genes, which include both potentially novel protein coding and non-coding genes. we found  <dig> and  <dig> tars longer than  <dig> bp in unfertilized and fertilized eggs, respectively, representing over  <dig> and  <dig> potentially novel genes assuming the average number of exons per gene of  <dig>   <cit> . we also found  <dig> tars which were unique to unfertilized eggs. these  <dig> tars may represent yet unknown maternal transcripts which are rapidly degraded upon fertilization. we found that the distribution of tar locations was highly correlated to chromosomal length, which is similar to the distribution of annotated genes. this suggests that tars may represent types of exons or genes which, although widespread, are not typically detected by the current annotation methods. further investigation of these tars will provide a clearer picture of the diversity of gene types and features which may improve the annotation process, which is particularly important given the number of novel genomes being sequenced.

CONCLUSIONS
our study provides the first transcriptome of maternally loaded rnas of a representative species of the largest eukaryotic order. these findings have allowed for the identification of common and species-specific maternally loaded genes between d. melanogaster and t. castaneum, making it possible to begin to explore the divergence among taxa of early developmental processes. the high prevalence of maternally loaded genes in t. castaneum also highlights the necessity for understanding the many contexts in which a gene functions in order to model and test population genetic theory. we also detected a large number tars, representing the discovery of many potentially novel genes. these results provide a framework for utilizing t. castaneum as a model for understanding the role of maternal genes in evolution.

