BACKGROUND
contemporary patterns of genetic diversity and population structure reflect not only current patterns of genetic exchange but also past dispersal processes and levels of gene flow among populations during historical climatic events  <cit> . in many species inhabiting temperate zones, climate-vegetation feedbacks during the pleistocene caused range contractions to lower latitudes followed by range expansions during interglacial periods  <cit> , which in turn promoted much of the diversification observed today. however, not all species responded similarly to these past climatic events. species-specific responses to these changes are the result of a complex interplay between the behavioral, physiological and ecological characteristics of the species, including their biogeographic origin, habitat preferences and dispersal capabilities  <cit> . climatic conditions prevailing at different time periods strongly influenced the extent of each habitat type in the past, which should in turn influence the length of time during which a species underwent isolation or range expansion and, consequently, the opportunities for genetic diversification  <cit> . for example, species inhabiting arctic or boreal areas seem to have experienced range expansions during the long glacial periods, but remained isolated during the short interglacial ones  <cit> , leading to a pattern of contemporary genetic structure different from that of species inhabiting temperate areas. the phylogeography of temperate and arctic species is rather well studied. in contrast, the phylogeography of steppe species, which are biogeographically in-between the temperate and arctic-boreal fauna, remains scarcely known  <cit> . during the glacial periods, many of these species were widely distributed throughout the periglacial steppes of the northern hemisphere. for these steppe species, gene flow at large geographic scales might have been interrupted by the postglacial retreat and reduction of steppe vegetation during the short interglacial phases. therefore, the amount of time spent in isolation, and the resulting genetic differentiation, should be smaller for steppe species as compared with temperate ones. the distribution of steppe species during the glacial periods is well documented by fossil evidence  <cit> , but the genetic evidence is still relatively poor  <cit> . in addition, steppe-like ecosystems  are probably amongst the most altered habitats nowadays, due to human pressure and rapid changes in land use  <cit> . consequently, the abundance and distribution range of many steppe/farmland species has greatly declined in recent years  <cit> .

the montagu's harrier circus pygargus is perhaps the best example of raptor species specialized in such steppe habitats, which has also adapted well to farmland habitats  <cit> . this species is widely but patchily distributed across the palearctic region and undertakes long-distance migrations  <cit>  . migration studies based on satellite tracking and ringing recoveries show that european and asian breeding populations follow different migratory pathways and overwinter in different continents . central asian populations, where it is accepted that the stronghold of the species occurs , migrate along an eastern route and overwinter in the indian subcontinent . european populations migrate through the mediterranean peninsulas and overwinter in the sahel belt from western to eastern africa  <cit> . to date, no specific study has evaluated the genetic structure and gene flow among populations of this species or closely related ones.

we used molecular analyses to evaluate levels of genetic diversity and connectivity among montagu's harrier breeding populations. we collected genetic material from across the whole breeding range  and from two overwintering populations . with this information, we analyzed historical demographic patterns, in order to better understand how past climatic dynamics may have affected the species and shaped its current distribution and population genetic structuring. specifically, our aims were: first, to evaluate the genetic diversity of montagu's harrier populations and analyze different scenarios that may explain the observed genetic structure ; second, to investigate past demographic changes in the species, and patterns of gene flow between genetically structured populations, looking for evidence of asymmetrical exchanges between these. finally, we discuss the implications of these results for the understanding of the patterns shaping the phylogeographic structure of the fauna associated with steppe ecosystems.

RESULTS
we sequenced a total of  <dig> bp of t-rna trp and nd <dig> and  <dig> bp of coi genes from all samples , which were collapsed into  <dig> and  <dig> haplotypes, respectively . the concatenated data set  yielded  <dig> different haplotypes defined by  <dig> polymorphic sites. overall, gene and nucleotide diversities were hd =  <dig>   and π =  <dig>  , respectively . most of the observed genetic variability was in the form of single nucleotide substitutions. the mean number of pairwise nucleotide differences for all samples  was  <dig>  .

summary of the number of samples , number of haplotypes , haplotype diversity  and nucleotide diversity  for the concatenated data set in each sampling locality. tajima's , fu's  measure departure of the data from neutrality. the significance  of these statistics is indicated with an asterisk  for each breeding population and for the sw and ne demes . sd = standard deviation.

french populations showed the highest nucleotide and haplotype diversities when considering each gene partition separately  or the concatenated data set . haplotype diversities were also high in the coastal regions of spain . the lowest haplotype diversities were found in populations from germany and netherlands . regarding the two wintering sites, levels of genetic diversity were greater in pakistan than in senegal .

genetic structure
the two phylogenetic methods used  were largely consistent in the  relationships recovered. despite the broad geographic sampling , there was little phylogenetic structure and low branch support . the haplotype network revealed no major branching events , although two groups of haplotypes could be differentiated. the first group was distributed around haplotype hap <dig>  which was observed in 57% of individuals and had a widespread geographical distribution. the other haplotypes were generally site-specific and occurred at low frequencies. the second group consisted mostly of rare haplotypes from all geographic regions except senegal. in general, haplotypes specific to certain geographic regions did not form monophyletic groups, but appeared to be randomly distributed across the network .

differences among montagu's harrier populations accounted for a significant  <dig> % of total molecular variance . hierarchical analyses testing for differences between populations in relation to their geographic origin showed low but significant differentiation among groups of populations located in the south-western  vs. north-eastern  parts of the breeding range , with low levels of genetic variation among populations within each group. in contrast, the structure scenarios based on geographic barriers  or based on an intercontinental migratory divide  revealed no significant among-group differences . the Φct estimate obtained for scenario  <dig> was similar to that obtained for scenario  <dig>  and close to significance . this suggested some structuring in relation to the migratory divide, although the higher and significant value of Φst indicated larger heterogeneity among populations within groups than in scenario  <dig>  including samples from wintering areas might affect, to some extent, these results, but the exclusion of these wintering samples also entails the loss of important genetic information. we repeated these analyses without including the samples from the two overwinter sites, and results were qualitatively the same.

results of amova  testing for differences between montagu's harrier populations and geographic areas. the analysis partitions out total molecular variance into different components, and statistical significance is obtained by randomization after  <dig> permutations. significant differences between groups are shown in bold.

overall,  <dig> out of  <dig> pairwise Φst comparisons between populations were significant. comparisons involving pakistan were significant in all but four cases . differences were smallest between pakistan and czech republic  and largest between pakistan and western spain . in contrast, comparisons involving senegal were significant only with central france  and pakistan . considering only breeding populations, eastern spain  showed the highest number of significant pairwise comparisons , while the largest differentiation among populations was found between western spain  and central france  . finally, the correlation between population pairwise Φst values and their geographical distances was not significant .

below the diagonal, pairwise Φst values . above the diagonal, p-values for significant Φst values obtained after  <dig> permutations .

demographic analyses
the whole breeding population exhibited significantly negative values for both tajima's d  and fu's fs , suggesting that the overall population size has fluctuated in the past. the majority of d and fs values were negative for most of the studied populations, but fu's fs rejected neutrality  in only two breeding populations, whereas tajima's d rejected neutrality  in five populations . we further considered the two groups of populations  whose genetic structure differed according to amova analysis . each group of populations also showed negative d and fs values that were all significant except for the tajima's d of the ne group .

the effective population sizes and demographic trends estimated by the bayesian skyline plot  analysis indicated recent population size increases in both regions . however, the overall increase was much less marked for the sw populations, which showed a roughly linear increase during the second part of the holocene. based on a range of mutation rates from  <dig>  to  <dig>  s/s/myr, population growth started at approximately  <dig> years before present  in sw and  <dig> years bp in ne . the time to the most recent common ancestor  was estimated at  <dig>   and  <dig>  years bp  for sw and ne groups, respectively. independent runs of ima gave similar results, and plots of parameter trends indicated sufficient mixing among chains. the estimated effective population size for the sw region  was similar to that of the ne region , despite larger hpd in ne than in sw group. both descendant populations had effective population sizes that were over one order of magnitude larger than the ancestral population , which peaked at  <dig>  . based on these values of θ, both populations appeared to have grown substantially following divergence. the average estimate for the scaled splitting time was t =  <dig>  , suggesting that the ne and sw groups of populations started to diverge about  <dig> years bp . the gene flow estimate from sw into ne was low , and close to null from ne into sw . conversion of these values of m resulted in an estimated number of migrants of approximately  <dig>  females per generation from ne to sw populations , and  <dig> females per generation from sw to ne populations. however, the associated error to these estimates was large .

discussion
genetic diversity of montagu's harrier
overall, we found little mitochondrial dna variation among populations of montagu's harrier throughout the breeding range. although variability was low, we nevertheless found significant differentiation between southwestern and northeastern populations. in contrast to the low among-population variability, our study revealed a relatively high degree of genetic diversity at the mtdna for this species as compared with those found in other sympatric raptor species. these other raptors often show much less polymorphism, even when using genetic markers that are more variable than the mitochondrial control region . some of these studies have associated these low levels of genetic diversity with recent decreases in population sizes, like for instance in the spanish imperial eagle aquila adalberti  <cit> , red kite milvus milvus  <cit> , bonelli's eagle hieraaetus fasciatus  <cit> , white-tailed eagle haliaeetus albicilla  <cit> , and bearded vulture gypaetus barbatus  <cit> . the mtdna diversity of the montagu's harrier is not consistent with a recent population decline, unlike in these other studied raptor species. however, genetic diversity is rarely homogeneously distributed within a species range, because it reflects the long-term effects of historical events  <cit> . despite relatively small sample sizes for some localities, we were able to identify two strongholds of genetic diversity for the montagu's harrier, one in the western part of the range , and another in central asia. this coincides with the distribution of open vegetation in the mid holocene, which was restricted to the iberian peninsula and coastal areas of france and to central asia  <cit>  suggesting that these areas may have acted as refuges for the species at a time when most of europe was covered by dense forest  <cit> . fossil records confirm the presence of montagu's harriers in the western region from the pleistocene through the holocene  <cit> . however, our lack of sampling locations in east asia prevents us from pinpointing primary areas of montagu's harrier diversity in this region. additional sampling would help to establish if the diversity found in kazakhstan reflects higher levels of diversity in the asian steppes, as suggested by the high diversity found in the wintering grounds of asian breeding populations  compared to their west european counterparts .

the haplotype network consisted of two distinct, but closely related, lineages  that could also be indicative of two refugia or nuclei from where the species expanded. the existence in eurasia of a western and an eastern or central refuge area has been proposed for other bird species  <cit> , and the highest values of genetic diversity observed in france and in kazakhstan would be consistent with such scenario. however, we found no relationship between lineages and their geographic origin . this could be a consequence of the low divergence between the two haplotype groups, suggesting a short time of isolation for these populations. this would be expected for a steppe bird whose habitat was potentially reduced during a short period within the present interglacial period, rather than during the longer glacial periods, as postulated for temperate species  <cit> . during the pleistocene, the duration of the steppe-favorable period would have allowed harriers to fully expand their range, leading to a high connectivity between different demes. this could have erased any phylogeographic signal, as is commonly observed in species characterized by a high dispersal capability and exploiting a wide ecological niche  <cit> .

population structure and phylogeography
in many animal species, the patterns of genetic differentiation and gene flow are highly influenced by the geographical characteristics of the places they inhabit and by their migratory behavior. however, in the montagu's harrier, neither the geographical barriers  nor the intercontinental migratory divide  represented significant barriers against gene flow. interestingly, the levels of genetic differentiation between populations were unrelated to the geographical distances separating these populations. this could be explained by the long-distance migration behavior of the species. western european breeding birds  winter primarily in west africa , while central and eastern-european harriers  winter further east . montagu's harriers may perform winter movements following outbreaks of locusts and grasshoppers   <cit> . additionally, wind conditions may influence the migratory routes, particularly in spring  <cit> . some individuals might thus migrate through a different route upon their return  migration, and finally disperse and breed far away from their natal place. this could explain the lack of significant genetic structure between populations a priori assigned to different overwintering areas. this hypothesis of different migration routes between spring and autumn is supported by ring recoveries  <cit>  and counts of migratory birds in the central mediterranean  <cit> , although satellite telemetry-based studies  indicate that most birds follow the same route in spring and autumn migrations  <cit> . while the correlation between genetic and geographical distances for all populations was non-significant, the amova test gave statistical evidence for a differentiation between the sw and ne populations . in other words, location of the breeding areas may be important when explaining the genetic structure of populations at a broad scale, whereas geographical distance between populations is not. these observations, together with the low number of significant comparisons between pairs of populations, points to dispersal as a major factor preventing genetic differentiation within these two regions of the breeding range of montagu's harriers. such a relaxed philopatric behavior has indeed been described for the species  <cit> .

demographic history
our results strongly support a recent population expansion as an important cause of the relative homogeneity across populations. such expansion is indicated by the shallow phylogenetic tree and by the star-like haplotype network . the genetic signature observed in the two main montagu's harrier groups of populations  is consistent with the occurrence of postglacial demographic expansions during the second half of the holocene, as evidenced by the bsp analyses. these revealed two events of population growth that occurred first in the sw , and later in the ne part of the range . the effective population size increases also appeared more pronounced in the ne than in the sw populations . furthermore, these two groups of populations diverged around  <dig> years ago, between the two waves of population growth. this pattern may be explained by regional differences in the impact of both climate changes and human activity on vegetation during the holocene. ample evidence support that during the last glacial maximum , the tundra-steppe vegetation was widespread from france to the bering strait . therefore, according to the preference of montagu's harrier for open steppe-like landscapes, the species would have been widely distributed throughout eurasia. then, during the following interglacial period at the beginning of the holocene, about  <dig>  years ago, this vast system disappeared almost completely as a consequence of the quick expansion of temperate forests  and taigas  from their ice-age refugia  <cit> . this probably led to strong range contraction and population declines in steppe-associated communities. unfortunately, based on our data set, coalescent times go back only  <dig>  years, therefore changes in population size before that date  cannot be inferred.

although this particular issue has received little attention so far , our data are consistent with the recent idea of interglacial refugia, which proposes that, in addition to the traditional high-latitude refugia of boreal species, cryptic refugia might have existed in other areas in the south during the interglacials  <cit> . in fact, climate reconstructions based on pollen records have shown that, during the holocene, the climate was neither stable nor uniform across eurasia  <cit> . therefore, the occurrence of these cryptic refugia, and consequently the severity of climate change impacts on species, might have been qualitatively different among regions of europe and asia  <cit> . during the holocene, steppe biomes occurred recurrently  <cit> , coinciding with major dry events leading up to glacial conditions at different time intervals: ~  <dig> - <dig>  years bp, ~ 8000- <dig> years bp and 4000- <dig> years bp  <cit> . more recently, an overall more arid period has been described in eurasia during the last  <dig> years . this, together with the increasing anthropogenic landscape transformations from 4000-- <dig> years ago , may have provided, either naturally or artificially, new steppe-like habitats for many species to colonize  <cit> . this temporal pattern is consistent with our data and could explain the recent population growths detected in both groups. the earlier and slower population growth detected in the sw group might have been associated with an increase in the extent of suitable open habitats after a major holocene climate change dated around  <dig> years bp  <cit> . in contrast, the existence of large steppe extensions in the east together with a lack of evidence supporting the aforementioned cooling event  <dig> years ago in this region  <cit>  would explain the lack of synchronous expansions of montagu's harrier population groups. additionally, studies on pollen spectra have clearly indicated that around  <dig> and 1000- <dig> years bp steppe biomes were relatively abundant in the eastern part of the range , thus agreeing with the fast population growth observed in the northeastern populations of montagu's harrier around that period of time .

CONCLUSIONS
our results point to a short isolation time, relatively recent population expansions and relaxed philopatry as the main factors determining the relative genetic homogeneity observed across populations of a steppe-associated raptor species. in contrast to the traditional view  <cit> , our findings do not support an important role of southern mediterranean peninsulas for extensive colonization of formerly treeless northern regions. in our case, rather than a source of postglacial colonization, the iberian peninsula would represent an area of postglacial refuge for steppe fauna. this finding implies that the population genetic models of glacial isolation and postglacial colonization developed for temperate taxa might have limited applications for steppe species. however, there is still little evidence for the direct effect of past climatic events on the genetic variability and phylogeographic structure in steppe-associated fauna at a regional or continental scale . our study has added new insights into the knowledge of how genetic variation in steppe-associated taxa has been influenced by late pleistocene and holocene climatic changes. future research should include a comparative approach, which would allow the comparison of phylogeographic patterns in a wider range of co-distributed species. this would contribute to a better understanding of how glacial cycles have sculpted the genetic variation of steppe-associated taxa in eurasia.

