BACKGROUND
gastric dilatation-volvulus  is a condition in which the stomach dilates and rotates on itself, leading progressively to hypotension, shock, and death. large breed dogs are frequently affected, although it can affect many animal species including humans  <cit> .

the physical mechanisms involved in this condition and its treatment are well understood, but the causes are not  <cit> . causes of gdv may be considered predisposing  or precipitating . several predisposing risk factors in dogs have been suggested, including temperament of the dog , large or giant breed, increased thoracic depth to width ratio, and rapid food consumption  <cit> . however, many questions related to the actual onset of this life-threatening disease remain unexplained by these risk factors.

the study of precipitating causes for gdv is an important and not very well researched area. in many cases of gdv, the stomach is distended with gas; among possible sources of this gas, aerophagia, fermentation-putrefaction, chemical gas genesis and gas diffusion have been suggested. this, coupled with observed seasonal variation in gdv cases, gave rise to suspicions about the possible association between gdv and weather conditions shortly before its occurrence  <cit> . methods applied by herbold et al in  <cit> , i.e. principal components analysis, to select possibly important climatologic factors may have obscured the impact of a single weather-related variable. other studies have used logistic regression to investigate the probability of a day being a gdv day, given certain atmospheric pressure or temperature conditions  <cit> . such approaches are based on a premise that gdv events are mutually independent and there is no strong correlation between events over time, as would occur if the disease were infectious. however, as a matter of fact, most meteorological covariates thought to influence gdv occurrence, are autocorrelated over time and should be thought of as time series. if some of them have not been included in a potential model, but they do influence the gdv occurrence, gdv incidences recorded over time may be correlated.

thus, viewing the gdv occurrence data as time series may be advisable in practice. although traditional time series modeling has had limited applicability in the study of uncommon diseases, it has been recently used to demonstrate a seasonal component to another gastrointestinal disease, namely, colic in horses  <cit> . since the gdv occurrence data is clearly integer valued , the more traditional time series methods, such as those used in the classical autoregressive integrated moving average  framework  <cit>  cannot be used. one of the earlier references  <cit>  suggests that"...one possibility lies in the use of a poisson distribution to model count data within a framework broadly analogous to that of generalized linear modeling..."; this suggestion effectively amounts to using the approach based on generalized linear model  framework that is utilized in this manuscript.

the objective of this study was to use a time-series approach to investigate the association between meteorological variables and gdv occurrence in dogs. to reduce the variability of predisposing risk factors and confounding variables such as diet and housing environment  <cit> , the dataset of large breed dogs housed at the military working dog  training center at lackland air force base  was used. in this common environment, the dogs are fed a standard diet, housed in outdoor runs, and are under observation  <dig> hrs a day. this dataset has been used before in a logistic regression approach to investigating meteorological variables and gdv  <cit> , and a comparison of the methodological approaches can therefore also be made.

RESULTS
several models that had some of the lowest values of aic  are shown in the table  <dig>  for each of them, the systematic part is given, together with the type of the model  and values of aic. only models that had log-likelihood ratio p-values of all covariates below  <dig>  had been included. since the dog census varies from day to day, the amount of exposure present is variable. this may make strictly poisson/binary assumption about the data unrealistic. in the poisson case, this means that the variance may not be exactly equal to the mean. in the binary case, the variance may not be exactly equal to the variance of bernoulli distribution for a given set of covariate values. thus, it seems reasonable to check for possible overdispersion in the data. a simple quasi-likelihood approach was used to look for evidence of overdispersion  <cit> . the estimated coefficient is always close to  <dig> and thus there does not seem to be any serious evidence of overdispersion in this setting.

examination of the residual autocorrelation plots indicated that the working residuals autocorrelation plots were nearly identical, and all of them did not show any substantial remaining autocorrelation. based on this, these three models appear to provide an adequate fit for the gdv occurrence data yt.

the coefficients in these models were interpreted as either log odds  in binary glm models or multiplicative factors  in poisson glm models. table  <dig> contains the values of odds ratios and multiplicative factors for the lagged response yt- <dig> and the external covariate for all the models from the table  <dig>  it also contains log-likelihood p-values for all of the odds ratios. in the names of the columns of table  <dig>  or stand for the odds ratio and the mf for the multiplicative factor; the "other covariate or" is either minimum daily atmospheric pressure on gdv day pmint, the maximum daily atmospheric pressure on the gdv day pmaxt or the maximum daily atmospheric pressure on the day before the gdv day pmaxt- <dig>  ll stands for the log-likelihood. since the probability of gdv event on any given day is small and the values of the dog census are in the hundreds, the model can be fit as either binary glm or poisson glm. both approaches are employed for comparison purposes. there was very little difference between the binary glm and poisson glm in the case for all the sets of covariates considered.

among the final group of models shown there were none that considered external covariates at the lag of more than  <dig> day. such models were considered during the model selection stage, however. in all of those cases, the log-likelihood ratio p-value of the external covariate lags of more than  <dig> day was significantly above  <dig>  whereas the coefficient of the 2-day lag of the response yt- <dig> had the log-likelihood ratio p-value consistently below  <dig> . thus, the choice of covariates is not biased in favor of the lags of response yt at the expense of the external covariate lags.

based on these models, it seems that the factors that influence the rate of gdv most noticeably are thus the minimum daily atmospheric pressure on the day of gdv event, the maximum daily atmospheric pressure on the day of gdv event and the maximum daily atmospheric pressure on the day before the gdv event. the odds ratios/multiplicative factors of the external covariate in all models are slightly greater than  <dig> which indicates positive association between these factors and the probability of the gdv event on a given day. for example, the minimum daily atmospheric pressure on the day of gdv event has an odds ratio of  <dig>  for the binary glm model. this suggests that for each increase of the minimum daily atmospheric pressure by  <dig> unit, the odds of the gdv case occurring on that day increase by the factor of  <dig> . for the respective poisson model, the multiplicative impact factor is  <dig>  which means that for each increase of the minimum daily atmospheric pressure by  <dig> unit the probability of the day being a gdv day gets multiplied by the factor  <dig> . note that all of the results for the external covariate should be interpreted conditionally on what happened two days before the observation day. thus, it is more precise to say that the odds of gdv occurrence on any given day increase by the factor of  <dig>  for each unit increase in the minimum daily atmospheric pressure given that we know whether there was or was not a case of gdv two days earlier. the above statement cannot be made without knowing what happened two days before the day of observation. this is the important difference between our approach and that of the regular glm modelling, whether binary glm  or a poisson model.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
first, each of the models selected provided important information about the possible etiological factor of gdv and thus plays a useful role. it is not necessary to make a choice between them if the only purpose is to look into possible explanatory covariates for gdv occurrence. however, this becomes necessary if the forecasting of future gdv incidences is the main focus. we do not investigate this subject in the current paper.

second, the variables identified as factors significantly influencing the rate of gdv occurrence were the minimum daily pressure on the day of gdv, the maximum daily pressure on the day of gdv and the maximum daily pressure on the day before the gdv event. minimum daily pressure on the day of gdv was also identified as important and statistically significant factors in  <cit> . it is known that there is association between changes in barometric pressure and the onset of labor in humans and sids   <cit> . less is known about the association between the atmospheric pressure and canine diseases. the current study suggests that the atmospheric pressure and changes in it may be the most important factors explaining the onset of gdv in dogs.

the value of a 2-day lag response in modeling for gdv was somewhat unexpected. this 2-day period may not necessarily correlate to a 48-hour period between events, however. the exact onset of the cascade of events leading to gdv is difficult to ascertain, and pathophysiological events leading to clinical signs may occur at different speeds in different dogs. gastric distension has been noted to occur quickly in some dogs, and more slowly in others. the role of covariates that might be linked to delays in clinical manifestation, as well as the possible relationship among meteorological phenomena during such a window of time, remain to be elucidated.

the approach using the logistic model for binary time series appears to be adequate in the case where there are at most a few daily observations with more than  <dig> gdv case. however, this may not be the case if a larger group of dogs is observed and, as a consequence, the number of days with more than one case of gdv becomes sizable. if this happens, poisson glm approach may have to be used exclusively.

a related paper  <cit>  uses the latent variable modeling based on the hierarchical bayes approach to incorporate the dependence between the observations. this approach is somewhat less flexible than the approach advocated in this paper. the reason is the fact that the hierarchical bayesian approach requires certain specific prior assumptions, such as normality  of the data, that are not always easy to justify in practice. also, their choice of the order  <dig> autoregressive process for the latent variable seems to be subjective and not based on any particular model selection algorithm whereas this research offers some insight into the possible selection mechanism based on criteria such as aic. finally, it is important to notice here that the time series approach is very natural when there are series of observations recorded over time. if it happens, such observations are almost always correlated; ignoring this correlation may result in the distorted inference concerning parameters of interest. in particular, it often results in exaggerated levels of significance for explanatory variables. therefore, the time series based approach is, probably, the appropriate research tool in many clinical studies where the observations have been recorded over a period of time.

