BACKGROUND
enterobacter sakazakii is an emergent pathogen associated with ingestion of infant formula milk that can lead to neonatal meningitis, necrotising enterocolitis and sepsis  <cit> . the international commission for microbiological specifications for foods  <cit>  has ranked e. sakazakii as 'severe hazard for restricted populations, life threatening or substantial chronic sequelae or long duration'. therefore as there is no accepted gold standard methodology, the correct definition and identification of e. sakazakii is important for powdered infant formula manufacturers, as well as regulators, clinicians and epidemiologists.

in  <dig>  farmer and co-workers  <cit>  defined the species and described fifteen biogroups according to biochemical profiles. a defining characteristic has been activity of the α-glucosidase enzyme. consequently selective, differential media incorporating chromogenic or fluorogenic α-glucosides such as the indolyl substrate 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-α, d-glucopyranoside have been developed  <cit> . it has been reported that 100% of e. sakazakii  were positive for α-glucosidase in comparison to 0% of other enterobacter species   <cit> ; however a small number of other enterobacteriaceae test positive for this enzyme.

recently 16s rdna sequencing has revealed that commercial biochemical test kits identified more than one species as 'e. sakazakii'  <cit> , and that there are at least four genetically and biochemically distinct subgroups of e. sakazakii. in this study we applied artificial neural networks   <cit>  to biochemical and 16s rdna data in order to identify key phenotypic characteristics and nucleotide sequences which could improve the identification of e. sakazakii in respect to, a) other enterobacteriaceae, and b) non-e. sakazakii α-glucosidase positive enterobacteriaceae.

anns are adaptive, non linear forms of artificial intelligence  inspired by the way the human brain learns and processes information in order to solve specific problems, such as pattern recognition and classification problems. the multi-layer perceptron  ann is a form of feed-forward ann architecture which contains several layers, with each node in one layer being connected to every node in the next by a series of weighted links. when used with the back-propagation algorithm, this type of ann learns in a fashion analogous to the way learning in the human brain is carried out, that is, by example. in humans, learning involves minor adjustments being made to the synaptic connections between neurons, in anns, learning is achieved by updating the weights that exist between the processing elements that constitute the network topology.

anns were applied to biochemical and 16s rdna data derived from  <dig> strains of enterobacteriaceae, including  <dig> e. sakazakii isolates, in order to identify key characteristics which could improve the identification of e. sakazakii. results show that anns have the potential to identify key features from the data, both for biochemical tests and sequence data. these key features may then be used to form the basis of novel rapid identification systems, which have the ability to classify samples by strain and eliminate the risk of false positive and negative results.

RESULTS
food, clinical and environmental isolates of e. sakazakii were shown by 16s rdna analysis to form four clusters. a summary of the main cluster groups is shown in figure  <dig>  the clusters that were positive for constitutive x-α-glucoside metabolism were the four enterobacter sakazakii groups, buttiauxella noakiae, and two clusters of enterobacteriaceae  that could not be matched, either by genomic or biochemical profile, to any currently named species.

model development and classification analysis
a mlp ann was used together with the back-propagation algorithm. inputs to the network represented biochemical test results or sequence id; two hidden nodes were used in the hidden layer for mathematical feature detection and a single output node was used to represent species class, with a class assignment of  <dig> representing e. sakazakii strains, and  <dig> representing all other strains. models were developed utilising a random sample cross validation approach where  <dig> random training/test/validation sub-models were run and evaluated. this repeated random sampling guarantees that all samples are treated as blind data a number of times, to ensure model generality and to enable confidence intervals to be calculated for each sample. for each of the models a full analysis was conducted including sensitivity analysis to determine the importance ratio of each input. this process removed all of the inputs singularly from the model. the error of predictions was then measured for each of the inputs removed. the sensitivity ratio was then calculated based on the performance with and without the given input. the hypothesis here is that if a given input is important its removal will have strong negative effect on predictive performance. therefore a sensitivity ratio greater than one indicates an input whose removal is detrimental for the model. additionally, the analysis of predictive performance was performed to evaluate model accuracy, sensitivity and specificity, and assessment of the raw ann predictions was conducted for the positioning of individuals within the population.

phenotypic data
using the phenotypic data, the models developed resulted in a predictive performance for blind  data of  <dig>  %  correct discrimination between e. sakazakii and closely related species. the population distribution was also examined by plotting the individual predictions from the ann models . a model prediction of one indicates a sample is e. sakazakii whilst a two is indicative of another species, so as this value increases from one to two, the more characteristic a sample is of non-e. sakazakii origin. this distribution shows the variation that is present not only between the same strains, but also across species, which is why correct identification of pathogens can often be extremely difficult, with strains having the potential for frequent mutation and change.

16s rdna sequence data
the analysis was also repeated using 16s rdna sequence data to identify any areas of the sequence that could potentially be used to differentiate between the different species. the models developed produced predictive performances for blind  data to an accuracy of once again,  <dig>  %  of samples correctly identified as e. sakazakii or other species. there were three main regions of the sequence which were key in discriminating between the species. these regions all occur amongst regions that vary structurally among domains . table  <dig> shows the  <dig> nucleotides with greatest relative importance and it is evident that they all appear to be derived from these focal positions in the sequence.

classification of α-glucosidase positive strains
furthermore, the study was expanded in order to elucidate whether the anns could be used to differentiate between e. sakazakii and a number of other enterobacteriaceae which test positive for constitutive metabolism of x-α-glucoside. the same approach was used as above, with both phenotypic tests and 16s rdna sequencing used as inputs in the ann models. once again analysis using the ann based approach proved to be extremely successful. using the 16s rdna sequence data as inputs, the predictive performance of the ann models was  <dig>  % . this improved further still when the biochemical test data results were used as inputs into the model. here,  <dig> % of the strains were correctly predicted into their respective classes, further highlighting the capabilities of ann modelling in bacterial identification, which could potentially reduce the risk of false positive identification. the most relevant biochemical tests are summarised in table  <dig>  showing percent positive strains for e. sakazakii as well as other α-glucosidase positive and negative enterobacteriaceae.

discussion
models have been developed to identify  key biochemical tests and  important areas of the dna sequence which can be used in the accurate discrimination of e. sakazakii from other closely related species. furthermore, the study was expanded to differentiate between e. sakazakii strains and other α-glucosidase positive enterobacteriaceae. to date methods for the isolation and identification of e. sakazakii have used the α-glucosidase reaction and production of yellow pigment as presumptive differentiating characteristics. however these methods can result in presumptive false positives due to groups of as yet undefined non-e. sakazakii enterobacteriaceae which are also positive for both of these characteristics. use of yellow pigment as a defining characteristic can also result in false negatives due to the occurrence of non-pigmented e. sakazakii and the occasional transient nature of this trait. while there is no single test that can be used to differentiate e. sakazakii from other species we identified biochemical profiles that may help to improve the likelihood of correct species identification.

deriving a population distribution  from the analysis of the influence of biochemical tests in sample classification showed samples to appear in distinct clusters. this supports the interpretation of the partial 16s rdna clustering . the ann model incorrectly identified two of the non-e. sakazakii strains as being e. sakazakii. the identities of these strains are highlighted in figure  <dig>  and these samples may provide a basis for further studies because they are being incorrectly classified as a result of them displaying characteristics of both of the two groups, but are being determined to be more related to the e. sakazakii group. alternatively, since the 16s identification is based on differences between a number of nucleotide bases, the combinations of these is different for different species. the ann models search for common elements of these bases, which are consistently represented in each class, and classifies based on these commonalities. considering this, together with the incorrectly identified non- e. sakazakii strains, leads to the view that there may not be one base, or a series of bases, that are unique to e. sakazakii, and in some strains, such as those incorrectly identified by the model, common elements exist between e. sakazakii, and other strains.

results from the analysis of the 16s rdna data indicate that the key inputs identified were present in three distinct areas of the sequence and these areas were subsequently all regions that varied structurally among domains .

CONCLUSIONS
anns display their potential use in reducing model dimensionality and complexity, in order to facilitate the speed and reliability of a potential strain identification system. these methods are also able to provide valuable information regarding the population structure and distribution of individual species. these technologies may provide the foundations for novel assays and diagnostic tests for rapid identification of pathogens, and subsequently reducing the risk of incorrect diagnosis due to the occurrence of false positive and negative test results.

