BACKGROUND
liposomes are self-assembled phospholipids enclosing a droplet of the aqueous medium in which they are formed  <cit> . liposomes have numerous applications namely as in vivo drug delivery vehicles  <cit> . drugs interact with liposomes in several different ways depending on their solubility and polarity characteristics. they can be inserted in the lipid chain bilayer region, intercalated in the polar head group region, adsorbed on the membrane surface, anchored by a hydrophobic tail or entrapped in the inner aqueous compartment. a prerequisite for the use of drug-loaded liposomes is to be able to separate encapsulated from free drugs. recently, we encapsulated enzymes in liposomes to enhance the enzyme stability with respect to dilution and proteases  <cit> . size exclusion chromatography  is an old and widely used tool to separate small solutes from liposomes or to narrow the size distribution  <cit> . for example, sepharose 2b, 4b sephacryl s- <dig> and high performance exclusion gels of the tsk-pw series are suitable for separating small unilamellar vesicles from larger ones  <cit> . in  <dig>  sorensen et al.  <cit>  showed loss of lipid material during sec of liposomes. in  <dig>  van renswoude et al.  <cit>  observed by microscopy the retention of fluorescent liposomes between and on the polymer beads. the loss of lipids could reach  <dig> to 40% of the deposited material  <cit> . these findings suggested a step of gel pre-saturation with lipids to avoid loss during sec  <cit> . to achieve high quality separation, the column pre-treatment is preferentially carried out with sonicated liposomes as their small sizes ensure efficient penetration of the lipids within the gel pores  <cit> .

here we show that when liposomes containing a hydrophilic protein pass through a sec column, lipids and protein are simultaneously retained suggesting that the liposomes retained remain whole. retention is, however, transitory and reversible: there is an equilibrium between retained liposomes and eluting ones. a pre-saturation step should thus be performed with liposomes of the same composition as that of the liposomes to be chromatographied in accordance with previous recommendations  <cit> .

RESULTS
sec elution pattern of liposomes
in order to quantify the amount of lipid retained on a freshly prepared column  we injected  <dig> μl liposomes incorporating  <dig> mol % rhod-pe as fluorescent label and loaded with  <dig> to  <dig> acetylcholinesterase molecules as internal material. the sample was passed through an  <dig> ml g <dig> column. the majority of lipid and enzyme was excluded from the pores of the gel beads and eluted together at the void volume of the column . to determine the amount of lipid and enzyme retained in the gel, tx- <dig> was added to the elution buffer such that the final eluent concentration was  <dig> % . this caused co-elution of a significant amount of lipid and enzyme. control measurements performed either with free enzyme, or with a mixture of free enzyme and empty liposomes, did not show any retention of enzyme under similar conditions. a further experiment was performed with calcein-loaded liposomes. identical results were obtained: tx- <dig> treatment led to the concomitant elution of lipids and calcein under a broader peak than in the case of enzyme-loaded liposomes, due to the smaller molecular mass of calcein . retention of lipids and of hydrophilic encapsulated materials were identical, suggesting that intact liposomes were retained during sec.

column saturation
we observed lipid retention when the chromatography gel was incubated with liposomes prior to being poured into the column. for convenience, we used this method to characterize the relationship between the amount of lipid added to the gel and the amount retained.  <dig> ml of swollen g <dig> were incubated in  <dig> ml buffer containing various concentrations of rhod-pe labeled liposomes to evaluate the parameters underlying liposome retention. apparently lipid retention onto the gel beads shows a saturation limit . it appears that saturation is obtained by passing at least  <dig> μmole of lipids per ml gel.

relationship between retention of lipids and encapsulated enzyme
liposomes loaded with ache were incubated with  <dig> ml of fresh g <dig> in  <dig> ml buffer. different concentrations of liposome were used to obtain different retention efficiencies. after  <dig> h, the gel was poured into a column, washed and eluted with tx- <dig>  the lipid and enzyme content of the fractions were quantified. we observed a linear correlation between lipid and protein retention . in a control experiment, when liposomes and free enzyme were loaded together on the column, no enzyme retention was observed. this suggests that retention of membrane and intravesicular content are linked, consistent with the hypothesis of non-damaged liposome retention. furthermore, we observed greater retention of ache than of lipids suggesting liposome reorganization during the washing step.

retention depends on gel exclusion limits
labeled liposomes were incubated with different gels and retention was estimated by elution with tx- <dig>  retention appeared to depend on the pore size of the beads responsible for the size exclusion . the smaller the pore sizes, the greater the amount of liposomes retained. the exclusion limit of the gels in our study was significantly smaller than the liposomes size. exception was noted for sepharose 4b, this gel reached the range of  <dig> nm diameters exclusion limit, which is enough to allow small liposomes to penetrate the pores of the sec gel and to obey an effective permeation process. this chromatography may explain the apparent higher retention than expected. on the other hand, retention was independent of the size of the gel beads since g <dig> beads of different sizes, fine , medium  and coarse  exhibited the same retention efficiency .

elution by extensive washing step, flow inversion or column repacking
in order to distinguish binding from kinetic trapping, we modified the washing volume.  <dig> μl of liposome solution were loaded onto  <dig> ml g <dig> gels and washed with different amounts of buffer. the remaining retained liposomes were quantified with tx- <dig> elution. fig.  <dig> shows that retention decreased as the washing step was increased.

to test if liposomes were trapped between the beads due to column packing, elution was applied backwards. first  <dig> μl of rhod-pe labeled liposomes were loaded on  <dig> ml g <dig> and washed. after exclusion of non-retained liposomes, the buffer flow was inverted. the elution profile  showed that some lipids were eluted by the flow inversion. however, only a small proportion of the retained liposomes were eluted as evidence by the amount of lipids eluted by adding tx- <dig>  identically, depacking a gel and pouring it into a column once more resulted to partial elution of the retained liposomes.

direct observation by scanning electron microscopy 
sem photographs of sephadex beads were performed to observe how lipids are retained in sec columns and to investigate how lipids bind to the beads, as individual molecules, as membranes or as liposomes at the surface or inside the beads. liposomes containing 40% of pe and extruded at  <dig> nm were passed onto a sephadex g- <dig> fine column. after intensive washing, samples diluted in sorensen buffer were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde. without liposomes, the beads appeared homogeneous . in contrast, beads originating from the column were covered by lipid aggregates resembling liposomes. thus, it seems that entire liposomes are retained on the beads. some liposome aggregation appeared on the beads which may result from the glutaraldehyde cross-linking. liposomes appeared to be larger than expected with a  <dig> nm diameter compared to the  <dig> nm estimated by dynamic light scattering before loading. this difference suggests that liposomes fused either during the chromatography process or during fixation. it also appeared that some beads retained few liposomes  while others were completely covered . this heterogeneity might result from heterogeneity of column saturation from the top to the bottom.

elution of retained lipids by liposomes in the mobile phase
we tested if liposomes could be dissociated from the column by other liposomes. liposomes labeled with fluorescent lipids and containing ache, were loaded on a g <dig> column. following exclusion of non-retained liposomes, unlabeled liposomes were loaded on the column. it appeared that some retained lipids and enzymes were co-eluted by the unlabeled liposomes . enzymes eluted by liposome were encapsulated because their activity was detectable only by using tx- <dig> in the solution. tx- <dig> disrupted liposome bilayers and allows the enzyme substrate to reach ache which is unable to cross the lipid membrane  <cit> . the same experiment was performed with an intravesicular tracer of smaller size: calcein. this fluorescent probe was loaded in rhod-pe labeled liposomes. the elution profile  shows one peak for excluded liposomes. passing unlabeled liposomes resulted in an elution of both retained labeled lipids and calcein.

in order to test lipid exchanges between liposomes in the column, the previous experiment was repeated replacing the unlabeled passing liposomes by nbd-pe labeled liposome on rhod-pe ones retained in the gel. as previously, passage of nbd-pe labeled liposomes, led to the elution of rhod-pe liposomes. in addition, we observed elution of nbd-pe liposomes by adding tx- <dig>  thus, it appears that binding and release of liposomes on sephadex columns is a dynamic process.

discussion
what is retained, lipids or liposomes?
lipid retention has been observed since the beginning of the 80's  <cit>  and usually pre-saturation steps are used to avoid this phenomenon. however, a question remained: are liposomes or lipids retained? to address this, we compared the retention of lipids and the retention of encapsulated materials, enzyme or calcein. it appeared that intravesicular material is also retained suggesting that lipids are retained as intact liposomes without leakage . furthermore sem observations of the beads clearly showed the presence of lipid aggregates resembling liposomes, attached to the beads . the next question should be: why are liposomes retained in sec gels, whereas their size and shape would predict their exclusion? a first hypothesis is a direct interaction of lipids with the beads at the liquid/solid interface of water and the poly-dextran beads, this interaction may promote lipid reorganization as in liquid/air monolayer experiments. as full liposomes are retained in columns, this hypothesis seems less probable because such an interaction would destroy the liposome integrity and its contents would be released. a second hypothesis arises from liposomes' flexibility: they may be deformed and thereby pass through the polymer net and remain stuck  <cit> . several experiments favor this hypothesis. i) retention depends on the bead pore size  ii) partial elution can be performed by inversion of the buffer flow , depacking and repacking the gel in the column or extensive washing .

is it possible to saturate a column to avoid liposome retention?
interaction of liposome with beads and leakage
two observations suggest that retention of liposomes inside the beads is associated with liposome reorganization. first, retention of enzyme appeared to be higher than lipid retention suggesting that entrapped liposomes lose their lipids  and second, free liposomes passing through the column are able to elute fixed liposomes , most probably by fusion and fission. is there some leakage of encapsulated molecules during sec? andersson and lundahl  <cit>  hypothesized leakage of glucose from the liposome due to interaction between the liposomes and the gel bead surfaces, and disruption of liposomes by shear forces from the liquid flow. however, simple permeation of glucose across the lipid bilayer is significant and does not allow permeation to be distinguished from leakage during the several minutes needed to perform sec. however, our enzymatic test did not provide evidence of any liposome leakage or internal content release with time. this strongly supports that the transitory retention of lipids does not induce dramatic vesicle leakage or bilayer permeability enhancement and rather agrees with intact liposome trapping.

relation with immobilized-liposome chromatography
immobilized-liposome chromatography is used for studying the partitioning of compounds into phospholipid bilayers. several methods are used to bind liposomes to the matrix. specific ligands such as hydrophobic ligands  <cit>  can be coupled to the gel beads. liposomes can be formed in the presence of beads using the detergent dialysis method. in this method, lipids, detergent and beads are mixed and dialyzed. elimination of detergent molecules during the dialysis results in the formation of liposomes entrapped in the beads  <cit> . a third method comes close to liposome chromatography: beads are mixed with liposomes and binding is achieved by several cycles of freezing and thawing  <cit> . entrapped liposomes are thought to be suspended in micro cavities of gel beads  <cit> . our results suggest that part of the liposomes spontaneously rearrange in gel beads without outer stress. buffer flow would be sufficient to push the liposomes inside the bead net and to immobilize them.

CONCLUSIONS
how should sec be performed with liposomes? as retention is inversely related to the bead exclusion limit, the larger-pore gels should be preferred for liposome separation from small molecules as suggested by grabielle-madelmont et al  <cit> . as retention is proportional to the gel volume, the bed volume of the column has to be calculated at minima for optimal separation, which also avoids sample dilution. the pre-saturation step diminishes liposome retention but as there are liposome exchanges, the purity of the sample may be affected if the retained liposomes are different from the free liposomes. two ways are possible:  for analytic purposes, it is thus better to inject the liposomes to be sized several times until gel saturation and then perform size analysis  for preparative purposes like separation of loaded liposomes from non-encapsulated material, the problem is trickier and the experimental conditions should be adapted to minimize loss of lipid and contamination.

