BACKGROUND
in laboratory animals the environmental contaminant,  <dig> , <dig> -tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin  causes a wide variety of toxic effects, even at extraordinarily low levels of exposure , leading to concern about potential harm to health of humans exposed to these agents  <cit> .

all major toxic effects of tcdd and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons appear to be mediated by a soluble protein, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor   <cit> . the ahr resides quiescent in the cytoplasm in a multi-component complex until ligand-binding  <cit> , which triggers a conformational change that leads to nuclear translocation. once in the nucleus, the ahr and its heterodimerization partner, arnt, can function either as a transcription-factor  <cit> , a coactivator  <cit> , or potentially as an e <dig> ubiquitin ligase  <cit> . as a transcription-factor, the ahr binds to a cognate response element termed the ahre-i   <cit> . as a coactivator, the ahr interacts with other dna binding proteins including the estrogen receptor  <cit> , sp <dig>  <cit> , and other uncharacterized transcription-factors  <cit> .

despite a fairly detailed molecular understanding of the manner in which the ahr regulates expression of genes, such as those encoding cyp1a enzymes  <cit> , the linkage between the ahr molecular mechanism and biological manifestations of tcdd-induced toxicity remain, with few exceptions  <cit> , elusive. the primary difficulty is that the ahr regulates – either directly or indirectly – hundreds of genes, often in tissue-specific patterns  <cit> . many groups, including our own, have sought to associate specific genes with specific toxicologic outcomes by using intra-species models, where different strains vary in their sensitivity to tcdd . however, these intra-species models are confounded by the extensive strain-to-strain variability observed in both mice  <cit>  and rats . further, generating model systems where animals vary in sensitivity is a difficult problem lacking a general solution.

these challenges of intra-species models are not exclusive to tcdd but are common to the study of all drugs and toxicants in model organisms. one alternative approach is to compare the response to a drug or toxicant between closely-related species. for example, because mice and rats show largely similar phenotypic responses to tcdd one might hypothesize that transcriptional responses will be conserved. to test this hypothesis, boverhof and coworkers compared the changes in mrna abundance induced by tcdd in c57bl/ <dig> mice and sprague-dawley rats using custom cdna arrays  <cit> . they tested  <dig>  orthologous genes and found only  <dig> that responded to tcdd in both species. this set of conserved, species-independent responses represents only  <dig> % of rat genes and  <dig> % of mouse genes that respond to tcdd. thus approximately 85% of responses to tcdd are species-specific.

this has major implications for the use of mouse and rat as model organisms to study toxic responses, making it important to evaluate and extend this finding. we analyzed the transcriptional response to tcdd in tcdd-sensitive strains of mouse  and rat  using commercial oligonucleotide arrays. our arrays contained  <dig>  orthologous genes, allowing us to analyze a much larger portion of the transcriptome than the previous study. we confirmed that a very small fraction of tcdd-responsive genes show conserved patterns in mouse and rat liver, and that these represent specific go categories. further, we performed library-based and de novo transcription-factor binding-site analyses to rationalize the patterns of expression. finally we validated our results with a gene-by-gene comparison to a public dataset.

RESULTS
we used mrna expression microarray analysis to study the transcriptional response to tcdd in young adult male c57bl/ <dig> mice and l-e rats. eleven mice were used, five treated with corn-oil vehicle and six treated with  <dig> μg/kg tcdd for  <dig> hours  <cit> . eight rats were used, four treated with corn-oil vehicle and four treated with  <dig> μg/kg of tcdd for  <dig> hours. for both c57bl/ <dig> mice  <cit>  and l-e rats  <cit>  the respective tcdd doses given in this study are about 5-fold higher than the single-dose ld <dig> values for male animals . at the 19-hour exposure time, we expect that most responses are likely to represent primary events although some early morphological manifestations of hepatic toxicity emerge within one day, at least in mice  <cit> . rna extracted from each animal was hybridized to an oligonucleotide array. all microarray data have been deposited in the geo repository . we carefully validated array quality; none were excluded .

overall transcriptional response to tcdd
we first analyzed the rat and mouse data separately. the arrays from each species were pre-processed independently and subjected to probeset-wise linear modeling. following a multiple-testing correction, we identified extensive responses to tcdd in both species . the moe430- <dig> array used for the mouse studies contains  <dig>  probesets while the rae230a array used for the rat experiments contains only  <dig> . this difference may contribute to the larger apparent transcriptional response in mouse relative to rat . complete gene lists are available .

the induction of phase-i enzymes in response to tcdd treatment is well-characterized  <cit>  so we hypothesized that more genes would induced by exposure to tcdd than would be repressed. to test this we plotted the fraction of differentially-expressed genes that were induced as a function of the threshold . at stringent p-value thresholds  both species exhibited primarily inductive responses. at less stringent thresholds, however, the rat showed similar amounts of induction and repression whereas the mouse response remained predominately induction .

next, we selected those genes that are most variable in each species and subjected them to pattern-recognition analysis  <cit> . this unsupervised analysis perfectly separated treated from control animals for both rats  and mice , indicating that the largest trend in the dataset is the differential response to tcdd, not inter-individual variability.

conserved transcriptional responses to tcdd
to control for the different sizes and contents of the rat and mouse microarrays used in this study we performed an ortholog mapping. we used build  <dig> of the homologene database to identify orthologous genes based on their entrez gene ids. for each ortholog pair we selected a single representative probeset. we tested four independent probeset-selection techniques: maximum mean signal, maximum absolute fold-change, minimum p-value, and a probe-to-gene mapping that remapped all probes on the array into probesets corresponding to distinct entrez gene ids  <cit> . because all four methods yielded similar results  all downstream analyses focused on probesets aggregated using the minimum p-value method.

in total  <dig>  orthologous genes were represented on both microarray platforms . of these only  <dig> exhibited statistically significant  changes in response to tcdd in both species . further,  <dig> of these  <dig> genes  showed divergent responses – they were induced in one species and repressed in the other. the remaining  <dig> genes form a common "core" of species-independent responses to tcdd and include many of the best-characterized tcdd-inducible genes, such as cyp1a <dig>  cyp1a <dig>  cyp1b <dig>  nqo <dig> and tiparp. some genes, despite being altered in both species, showed responses of divergent magnitude. for example, inmt was repressed  <dig> -fold in mouse liver, but  <dig> -fold in rat liver. pmm <dig> was induced  <dig> -fold in mouse liver, but only  <dig> -fold in rat liver. these divergences may reflect, in part, differences in the basal mrna levels across species, but specialized microarray platforms are required to evaluate this  <cit> .

following pre-processing, a linear-modeling approach was used to identify probesets associated with tcdd response in each species. probesets were mapped to entrez gene ids using the affymetrix annotation . orthologous genes were identified using the homologene database . this table lists genes that display statistically significant  changes in mrna abundance in both species. the m-values represent the magnitude of difference in expression caused by tcdd exposure in log <dig> space. for example, cyp1a <dig> has an m-value of  <dig>  in rat, indicating  <dig> -fold induction in response to tcdd treatment

to assess if the direction of response to tcdd was conserved across species we plotted the fold-changes of the rat and mouse orthologs against one another . the fold-changes are moderately but statistically significantly correlated , suggesting that orthologs respond similarly in the two species. this result is independent of the padjusted threshold of  <dig>  used .

to corroborate this finding we again exploited machine-learning techniques. we extracted the gcrma-pre-processed signal intensities for orthologous genes showing evidence for differential expression  in either species. to normalize signal across species we employed gene-wise median-centering and root-mean-square-scaling. the normalized matrices were then merged gene-wise and subjected to divisive hierarchical clustering . the six tcdd-treated mice  and four tcdd-treated rats  cluster separately from the five control mice  and four control rats . this demonstrates that a core response to tcdd is conserved across species. these results are independent of the significance threshold employed . scaling genes within each species is critical: if this normalization step is omitted  or is performed after the two species are aggregated  artefacts caused by the different microarrays used for each species predominate over the transcriptomic response.

divergent transcriptional responses to tcdd
boverhof and coworkers found that  <dig> % of rat genes and  <dig> % of mouse genes that respond to tcdd show conserved responses  <cit> . having constructed a list of  <dig> conserved responses to tcdd , we asked if the low-level of conservation observed in the boverhof et al. study would be replicated in a larger fraction of the transcriptome . additionally, while we kept the mouse strain constant, we considered l-e rather than sprague-dawley rats: it has been established that different rat strains show large basal differences in their transcriptomes .

after surveying a large portion of the transcriptome we confirmed that only a fraction of tcdd-responses are conserved between mouse and rat . of the  <dig> genes that respond to tcdd in the mouse  <dig> % are altered in the same direction in the rat. of the  <dig> genes that respond to tcdd in the rat  <dig> % are altered in the same direction in the mouse. importantly these results are based on an analysis of only those  <dig>  orthologous genes whose mrna abundances were assayed in both species. these findings are independent of the p-value threshold selected .

given the weak correlation between changes in mrna abundance in the two species , we tested the possibility that the differences in gene-identities result from differences in statistical significance and thus represent artefacts of threshold selection. for example, genes that are tcdd-responsive in mouse might tend to show higher inter-animal variability in the rat, leading to the observed lack of overlap. we plotted the adjusted p-values for each gene on a log-scale . no positive correlation was observed, disproving the hypothesis of threshold selection bias and suggesting that differences are caused by other factors. indeed, a strongly negative correlation between p-values in the two species was calculated  indicating that genes that respond to tcdd in one species are less likely to respond in the other than predicted by chance alone. again, this finding is independent of the padjusted parameter selected 

functional analysis of tcdd-responsive genes
the above analyses identified large numbers of genes whose hepatic mrna levels are altered by exposure to tcdd in a species-dependent manner, far more than are in a species-independent manner. mice and rats exhibit mostly similar toxic outcomes to tcdd exposure, although they show some distinct morphological features in the liver . this could result from at least three mechanisms. first, aspects of hepatotoxicity common to both species may be mediated by the small "core" of species-independent responses. second, toxicity might not be mediated by any of the mrna changes in the liver. third, toxicity might be mediated by different genes in each species, but these genes may ultimately lead to dysregulation of a common set of pathways, thereby leading to phenotypic similarities.

to test this third possibility, we studied the functional enrichment of genes that respond to tcdd in mice-only, in rats-only, or in both species using gene ontology analysis  <cit> . we identified the go terms most significantly enriched in each group based on their false-discovery rate. selected conditions are shown in table  <dig> and the complete dataset is in additional file  <dig>  several go categories were strongly enriched in species-independent responders, including microsomal localization, electron transport, and unfolded protein response. one term, oxidoreductase activity, was enriched in all three groups. this indicates that a common core set of genes with oxidoreductase activity is dysregulated by tcdd in both species, with additional dysregulation of mouse- and rat-specific oxidoreductases. finally, several species-specific pathways were identified, including mouse-specific dysregulation of translation . overall only one functional group met our initial criteria of showing regulation in both species through different gene sets – lipid metabolic processes.

genes differentially expressed in each species were selected at padjusted <  <dig>  using linear-modeling analysis. the set of genes whose mrna levels were altered by tcdd in only mice, only rats, or in both species were separately subjected to gene ontology enrichment analysis to identify specific pathways or functions modulated. a selection of enriched go terms is shown. the numeric values are false-discovery rates estimated by  <dig>  permutations of the input data. only a subset of go categories is shown. bold text indicates those categories significant at a 10% false-discovery rate.

genomic localization of tcdd-responsive genes
having demonstrated large-scale differences between the rat and mouse transcriptional responses to tcdd and having shown that these differences lead to alterations in specific pathways, we next considered mechanism. one obvious mechanism for differences in mrna expression is changes in gene dosage. indeed many mrna expression studies, including those of untreated rat liver, have found localized domains or "islands" of differential expression . we assessed the genomic localization of species-specific and species-independent responses to tcdd in both species. no large regions or islands are apparent amongst the common , the rat-specific , or the mouse-specific genes  in either the rat  or the mouse  genomes.

transcriptional regulation of tcdd-responsive genes
another mechanism that might underlie differences in the transcriptional response to tcdd between mouse and rat is the differential activity of one or more regulatory genes. alterations in the activities of a small number of regulatory genes, such as transcription factors, could lead to the large number of mrna differences observed between species. one way to find evidence for differential transcription factor activities is to use transcription-factor binding-site  enrichment analysis  <cit> . we searched the promoter regions of rat-specific, mouse-specific and common-responders for enrichment using the jaspar library of tfbss  <cit> . these searches were performed using both the rat and mouse promoters in an effort to understand species-differences in promoter architecture.

sixty separate tfbs motifs were enriched in at least one of the six datasets searched . for example, the p <dig> binding-site is enriched in the mouse promoter regions of all tcdd-responsive genes, regardless of whether or not those genes responded in the rat. surprisingly neither the three ahre-i variants nor the ahre-ii motif exhibited enrichment in any of the six datasets. instead the anomalous cyp1b <dig> complex identified in mouse was found to be enriched in the promoters of the mouse orthologs of rat-specific genes  <cit> . visual inspection did not reveal significant similarity between the mouse and rat orthologs; indeed in some cases they showed divergent trends: species-independent genes were enriched for the nr2f <dig>  binding-site in mouse, but depleted for it in rat. only one motif, fos, was enriched in the species-independent genes in both rat and mouse but not in any of the other datasets.

to help visualize and rationalize this divergence we employed unsupervised machine-learning. we selected all motifs that were enriched or depleted in at least two of the six datasets and set the p-values to  <dig>  for all not-significant values. when the resulting matrix was clustered  a clear separation between the mouse and rat promoters was revealed. rather than clustering according to tcdd-responsiveness, the data clustered according to the species of origin. this strongly suggests that species-specific regulatory differences predominate, in agreement with the divergent transcriptional profiles observed.

while tfbs enrichment analyses can rationalize expression profiles, they are limited by the size and scope of the underlying tfbs library. because only a small fraction of transcription factors have been analyzed in sufficient detail to have a position-weight matrix generated, a large fraction of regulatory genes are necessarily omitted. to complement this approach we thus chose to use a second technique: pattern-discovery analyses.

pattern discovery algorithms search for recurrent motifs within sequences. to identify novel sequence motifs associated with species-dependent and species-independent responses to tcdd we employed the well-established motifsampler algorithm  <cit>  to identify novel motifs associated with each group of genes. this analysis identified a series of novel motifs putatively associated with the response to tcdd . two of these motifs, derived from the promoters of species-independent genes, are shown as sequence logos in figure 5b. neither of these motifs appears to match the affinities of any currently known transcription-factor.

comparison with previous study by boverhof et al
the minimal overlap in responses to tcdd between mouse and rat described here recapitulates and extends previous work  <cit> . to directly compare the specific genes detected in the two studies, we performed a gene-by-gene comparison. we first focused on the  <dig> genes identified by boverhof and coworkers as responding to tcdd in both species and mapped them to our dataset using mouse entrez gene ids . four of the  <dig> genes could not be mapped. we assessed the tcdd response of the remaining  <dig> genes in our dataset:  <dig> were tcdd responsive in both species,  <dig> were tcdd responsive in one species, and  <dig> were unresponsive. in total, 57%  of the genes previously identified by boverhof et al. responded to tcdd in our dataset in at least one species.

we next replicated this analysis by looking at the list of rat-specific  and mouse-specific  genes identified in the boverhof study. in each of the species-specific datasets we see greater overlap between the boverhof findings and those reported here for the same study. for example,  <dig> genes were identified as responding to tcdd in mice only in the boverhof study. of these,  <dig> responded in our mouse analysis but only  <dig> in our rat analysis. notably, more genes showed tcdd responsiveness in only one of the two studies than did in both studies.

reasoning that many differences between the two studies might reflect the different statistical methodologies and numbers of animals, we next compared the magnitude of tcdd responses for the  <dig> mapped genes that showed species-independent responses . the resulting plots are highly correlated for both mouse and rat, indicating that indeed the two array studies generated highly similar results.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the goal of this study was to compare and contrast the transcriptional response to tcdd in two closely-related rodent species, the rat and the mouse. because these are the two most commonly used model organisms in pharmacology and toxicology, large divergences in their response to particular compounds is of broad interest. previous work using cdna microarrays containing  <dig>  orthologous genes found that, while hundreds of genes responded to tcdd, only a small core of 10–20% was common to both species  <cit> . we sought to evaluate and extend these findings.

we exploited oligonucleotide arrays that contain  <dig>  ortholog pairs –  <dig> -fold more than previously studied. we used a single dose, chosen to represent approximately equivalent multiples of the individual species' ld <dig> values. we assessed expression after  <dig> hours of tcdd exposure. the selected dose should be sufficient to eventually induce all major overt toxicities of tcdd and the selected time-point should be early enough to allow us to focus on primary responses rather than on the secondary manifestations of toxicity. we further broadened the mouse/rat comparison by using the highly tcdd-sensitive l-e strain, whereas the boverhof study analyzed sprague-dawley rats.

we found that responses to tcdd are moderately correlated between the two species , suggesting a broad trend towards similar responses. further, a novel bi-species clustering approach shows in an unsupervised and unbiased way that the strongest signal within the dataset is the response to tcdd, not the difference between species . we also show that hundreds of genes respond to tcdd in each species , but only a small core of 10–20% was common to both – corroborating the findings of boverhof and coworkers .

this core set of species-independent tcdd-responsive genes contains many well-characterized genes, including cyp1a <dig>  cyp1a <dig>  cyp1b <dig>  nqo <dig>  and tiparp – all of which have been previously detected in high-throughput studies  <cit> . however, several species-independent genes have not previously been well-characterized for their response to tcdd but have functions that may be related to the clearance of xenobiotics. for example: indolethylamine n-methyltransferase is an enzyme that methylates indoles such as tryptamine, tagging them for degradation; cysteine conjugate-beta lyase metabolizes cysteine conjugates of alkanes and alkenes. gene ontology analysis shows that the species-independent genes are enriched for microsomal genes, genes involved in the unfolded protein response, and genes involved in er-nuclear signalling.

the  <dig> genes showing concordant responses to tcdd in rat and mouse represent prime candidates for explaining tcdd-induced hepatotoxicities. however, these toxicities might result in at least three other ways. first, toxicities may arise from events outside the liver and thus be independent of changes in hepatic mrna levels. indeed, it has been shown that hematopoietic cells contribute to the hepatic lesions caused by tcdd  <cit> . second, if toxicities arise from a cell-type present at a low frequency in the liver rather than from hepatocytes, relevant mrna changes may be below the threshold of detection of our platform. for example, the kupffer cells appear to play a central role in the hepatic response to many toxic and carcinogenic agents  <cit>  and the ito  cells are responsible for retinoid storage and metabolism in liver  <cit> , a target for tcdd action  <cit> . third, toxicities may arise by perturbation of common pathway through different genes in each species.

testing the first two hypotheses will require the use of tissue-specific transgenic animals and are thus beyond the scope of this study. to test the idea that toxicity results from the dysregulation of a pathway common to mouse and rat we used gene-ontology enrichment analysis. we searched for dysregulated functional groups in the lists of rat-specific and mouse-specific genes and found only one pathway dysregulated in both species – cellular lipid metabolism. because this minimal overlap could occur by chance alone, and with caveats regarding tissue-specificity and transcriptome-coverage, it appears likely that the genes mediating tcdd-induced toxicity are amongst those reported in table  <dig>  while these species-independent genes appear skewed towards up-regulation, it is not clear that highly up-regulated genes are mediators of hepatic toxicities. for example, cyp1a <dig> and cyp1a <dig> are both highly induced in the liver of tcdd-resistant han/wistar  rats  <cit> . cyp1a <dig> can modulate some of the hepatotoxic effects of tcdd, as shown by lack of hepatocyte hypertrophy and uroporphyria in cyp1a1-/- mice  <cit> , but induction of cyp1a enzymes is not, in itself, sufficient to cause hepatotoxicity.

it would be of interest to repeat our analysis using expression profiles collected  <dig> to  <dig> hours after tcdd exposure, when overt toxicities are manifest. at these later time-points it would no longer be possible to discern primary from secondary events, but instead there would be an increased ability to contrast the final toxic pathways perturbed in each species.

while about 15% of tcdd-responsive genes are species-independent and thus potentially mediate tcdd toxicities, the roles of the remaining 85% of genes are intriguing to consider. there are two key questions. first, does altered expression of these genes have functional consequences? second, what mechanisms mediate species-specific responses?

if the species-independent genes had no functional consequence we might expect them to be randomly distributed across different functional classes. instead, gene-ontology enrichment analysis  shows that they represent specific responses. in particular, the formation and function of ribonucleoprotein complexes involved in translation is significantly dysregulated in mice but not in rats. in our study of ahr-knockout mice we showed that this effect is ahr-dependent  <cit>  and suggested that it may mediate some tcdd-toxicities. because this effect is absent in the rat, this pathway may contribute to degenerative changes induced by tcdd that are more prominent in mouse liver relative to rat liver.

the vast majority of tcdd toxicities are common to both species, but some species-specific differences do exist. for example, multinucleated giant hepatocytes occur only in rats, while hydropic degeneration, fat accumulation, inflammatory cell infiltration as well as apoptosis and necrosis are more pronounced in mice  <cit> . we selected our tcdd dose to reflect approximately equal multiples of the ld <dig> values for each species to ensure that a similar ultimate phenotype was being considered. nevertheless it is possible that the type of hepatic injury is species-specific and that this leads to the observed differences in transcript profiles. several lines of evidence suggest against this possibility, including the evolutionary proximity of rat and mouse, the similar responses of known tcdd-responsive genes, and the inter-species similarity of the vast majority of morphological changes. further work will be needed to clarify between these two situations.

many different mechanisms can be proposed to explain the large species-specific responses observed, including copy-number variation, differences in transcription-factor binding affinities, and differential transcription-factor activities. we did not find evidence that copy-number variation plays a role , so we focused on the potential role of transcription-factors in species-specific responses.

it has been established that transcription-factor binding is poorly correlated with changes in mrna expression  <cit> . further, when the transcriptional regulatory networks were compared between human and mouse liver, they were found to differ dramatically  <cit> . to determine whether specific transcription-factors are associated with the species-specific responses we performed two separate analyses of transcription-factor binding-site motifs. first we used a library-based enrichment analysis  <cit>  with a database of  <dig> known motifs that we supplemented with  <dig> ahr-associated motifs  <cit> . because the majority of sequence-specific dna-binding proteins do not have known binding-site motifs, we complemented this analysis with an unsupervised analysis using the motifsampler pattern-discovery algorithm  <cit> .

our library-based analysis identified numerous motifs enriched in both species-dependent and species-independent manners, some clearly associated to the biology of dioxin-toxicity. for example, the enrichment of p <dig> motifs in mouse promoters suggests that a p53-dependent apoptotic response was initiated in mouse, but not in rat. apoptosis is a common sequela to tcdd exposure in mouse liver  <cit>  and, while it also occurs in rats, it appears less frequent  <cit> . one motif, nr2f <dig>  showed divergent enrichment between the promoters of mouse and rat that responded similarly to tcdd. the ahr has been shown to directly bind coup-tf <dig> in human cells  <cit> . when we consider the overall patterns of tfbs-enrichment in an unbiased manner using unsupervised machine-learning, however, we found that species-specificity was the dominant trend. this suggests that the transcriptional regulatory networks are sufficiently diverged in mouse and rat as to make non-phylogenetic motif analysis highly challenging  <cit> .

motifsampler is a variant of gibbs sampling that introduces a higher-order markov background model and incorporates a bayesian mechanism to estimate the missing value: the number of motifs occurring in each sequence  <cit> . motifsampler was applied here to six different promoter datasets to successfully identify novel motifs. biochemical analyses are required to demonstrate the functionality of these motifs, especially in the absence of an appropriate validation dataset, but the success of this analysis suggests that significant components of the ahr transcriptional network remain to be elucidated.

we directly compared our results to those of boverhof and coworkers at the gene- level . this is important because the two studies differed in animal handling, time-points, strain of rat used, gender and age of animals, array platforms employed, and statistical methodologies. despite all these differences spearman's correlations above  <dig>  were observed between the two studies for both mouse and rat – an outstanding concordance. however, despite this correlation it is notable that the majority of genes identified as tcdd-responsive were found in only one of the two studies. this provides a cautionary note to the use of toxicogenomics for high-throughput testing, and stands in contrast to the optimistic findings of the maqc study  <cit> .

thus we have shown that most tcdd-responsive genes are species-specific and that the small core of species-independent genes shares both common functions and common transcriptional-regulatory elements. taken together these data suggest that the vast majority of dioxin-responsive genes play no direct role in the toxic responses. rather, it may be that a small number of regulatory genes under direct ahr control lead to dramatic inter-species differences. it would be highly advantageous to further refine the list of genes associated with dioxin-toxicities by profiling the transcriptional response of additional strains of mouse and rat, or by exploiting additional rodent species.

this study has significant implications for the use of rodent models to understand mechanisms of pharmacological or toxicological compounds. if transcriptional responses have been extensively remodelled in rat and mouse since their last common ancestor then hepatic expression studies may yield contradictory and species-specific results. it may be necessary to test both species and focus on the subset of overlapping genes. an optimal study design might include several strains of mice and several strains of rat, thereby focusing the list of transcriptional responses to a small number that exhibit both intra- and inter-species homogeneity and are thus highly likely to be directly involved in the phenotypic effects of the compound under investigation.

