BACKGROUND
the protein coding sequences of humans and of most other mammals represent less than 2% of their genomes. the remaining 98% is made up of 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions of mrnas , introns , and intergenic regions   <cit> . these vast non-protein coding genomic areas, previously frequently referred to as "junk" dna, contain numerous functional signals of various origin and purpose. they include thousands of non-protein coding rnas  <cit> , numerous gene expression regulatory signals that surround each gene, chromatin folding structures which include nucleosome positioning sites and scaffold/matrix attached regions  <cit> . these functional dna regions are non-random in their genomic sequence. the non-randomness or inhomogeneity of base composition has been described at different levels of complexity and sequence length. starting on the short scale, inhomogeneity occurs in the non-random associations of neighboring bases with each other  <cit> , through the over and under-abundance of particular "words"   <cit>  or longer stretches of dna, also known as "pyknons"   <cit> , and up to large regions that cover hundreds of thousands of nucleotides  <cit> . compositional inhomogeneity is known to exist in all kinds of species from bacteria to human. however, the particular arrangement of such sequence patterns is often species-specific  <cit> .

it has been the focus of our research to elucidate the genomic sequence non-randomness that we call mid-range inhomogeneity or mri  <cit> . we define mri to be genomic regions from  <dig> bp to several thousand nucleotides with particular nucleotide enrichments. for large mammalian genomes, there is a high probability that a random sequence of length  <dig> nucleotides will be unique. thus, for examining mid-range genomic signals we do not look at particular "words" but only the overall compositional content of particular base that we refer to as x . we created a public internet resource, "genomic mri" to study the distribution of x-rich regions in any sequence of interest. it was demonstrated that x-rich mri regions are highly overrepresented in mammalian genomes for all kinds x-contexts. particular properties of mri have also been investigated previously by mrazek and kypr  <cit>  and also by nikolaou and almirantis  <cit> . this paper studies the effect of mutations on the evolution of mri regions in primates.

RESULTS
substitution and polymorphism inside mri regions
¿from the whole-genome human-chimp-macaque alignment we extracted all the aligned sequences with inhomogeneous nucleotide compositions that satisfy the criteria for mri  and also control regions with nucleotide compositions equal to the average values for the entire human genome. we used the default mri region length of  <dig> nucleotides for all computations. only snps located within these mri and control regions were studied. we particularly focused on the single nucleotide substitutions that maintain or erode mri features. for example, in gt-rich mri regions we counted the total number of novel polymorphisms that erode the feature, i.e. g or t → c or a substitutions, denoted as ngt→ca and also the total number of those that maintain the mri features, i.e. c or a → g or t substitutions, denoted as nca→gt. in addition, the entire set of recent human substitutions; that is, those nucleotides that differed in human but were the same in chimp and macaque, were processed for the mri and control regions and presented as "fixed substitutions". the substitution ratio, sx  for the numbers of substitutions that maintain and erode x-rich mri features was calculated for each substitution subtype  and presented in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  with respect to x-rich or poor mri regions, the x in figure  <dig> represents a two base combination such as gc, ag, gt, etc. while in figure 2x can be any single nucleotide, e.g., a, t, c, and g. if the sx-ratio is equal to  <dig> the x-rich region does not tend towards a change in its x-base composition. when sx >  <dig>  the substitutions reduce the x-richness of the examined regions, whereas when sx <  <dig>  substitution rates elevate the x-richness of the regions. figures  <dig> and  <dig> demonstrate clear linear trends for sx-ratios with respect to increasing fixation of substitutions within human populations.

for the cases of gt-, ac-, ag-, and tc-rich mri regions , all s-ratios for rare snps are close to  <dig>  . for major snps and fixed mutations the sgt and sac-ratios reach  <dig>   and sga and sct-ratios reach  <dig>  respectively. as for the corresponding control gt-, ac-, ag-, and tc-average regions  these lines are flat with all s-ratios equal to  <dig>  the latter result is highly expected because of the symmetry of  and  chromosomal strands for these particular base compositions. figure  <dig> also demonstrates that in gc-rich mri regions the sgc-ratio change has the highest slope from  <dig>  for rare snps to  <dig>  for fixed substitutions. in at-rich mri regions  the change of sat-ratio has the lowest slope starting from  <dig>   and ending at  <dig>  . the control regions with the average gc/at compositions  also demonstrate a clear change of s-ratios during substitution fixation. in the control gc-average regions, rare snps favor increasing at-richness  whereas fixed mutations demonstrate the opposite effect .

the data for the s-ratios for single nucleotides  are very similar to the trends seen in gc- and at-rich regions. as expected from  strand symmetry, sg-ratios are equal to sc-ratios and represent about a half of the gc trend. the minor differences between g- and c-rich regions are within the errors of measurement. in the same way the sa-ratios are seen to be the same as the st-ratios and they comprise approximately half of the effect seen for at-rich regions.

based on the observed sx-ratios and the current percentage of x bases in the genomic regions under investigation, we calculated the projected equilibrium composition representing the future x-composition toward which the examined substitution rates drive these regions. in other words, the equilibrium x-composition shows the future level of x-richness that would be approached if the sx-ratio as it is observed now were maintained indefinitely. the computed equilibria for each subgroup of substitutions are presented in table  <dig>  for instance, in the ga-rich regions , rare snps drive ga-richness of these mri regions down to an equilibrium of  <dig> %, while nearly fixed or fixed substitutions drive the ga-composition only to the  <dig> % level. for each type of x-rich mri, there is a trend toward minimizing the damage of mutations and preserving the mri feature as the fixation of the observed substitutions increases. the highest preservation effect is seen for gt- and ac-rich regions , where the equilibria for fixed substitutions reach about the same level of 70%. for the rest of the types of mri regions, their equilibria composition is a little below the currently observed base composition.

the calculated equilibria percentages  for x-bases in x-rich mri and control regions with average x-composition. projected equilibria are given based on the substitution rates of rare, minor, medium, and major snps as well as for the fixed substitution rates .

in order to estimate mutation rates for mri regions versus their respective control regions, we counted the occurrence rates for rare snps. the frequency ratio of rare snps in mri rich regions to those in the control regions was calculated. the smallest ratio observed was for a+c content . this means the frequency of rare snps within mri ac-rich regions is approximately half that of control regions. the highest occurrence ratio for rare snps was observed in g- and c-rich mri regions . thus, the occurrence rates of rare snps is slightly lower in mri regions than in the corresponding control regions with the exception of g- and c-rich mri regions. the entire dataset for the snps occurrences in mri and control regions is presented in additional file  <dig>  the prevalence of rare and minor snps over major snps was also observed, their proportion over every mri and control regions being  <dig> .

insertions and deletions inside mri regions
using the same computational approach as for substitutions, we analyzed human-chimp-macaque triple alignments for the characterization of indels  that occurred in the human genome during the last  <dig> million years after the divergence of h. sapiens and p. troglodytes species. we particularly investigated how indels change the nucleotide composition of mri regions and control regions with average nucleotide composition. the complete set of data representing short indels  and medium indels  is presented in additional file  <dig> . large indels with sizes over  <dig> bp were not examined since they are comparable with the sizes of mri regions and, thus, compromise proper characterization of mri. the summary data on the influence of both short and medium indels on the composition of mri and control regions are presented in the tables  <dig> and  <dig> . for each type of x-rich and x-control regions the total number of inserted and deleted x and nonx nucleotides have been computed: nins, nins, ndel, ndel. finally, the net change in x and nonx compositions due to indels have been calculated using the following formulas:  

the impact of indels on x-rich mri regions and on x-average regions, where x is for gc-, gt-, or ga-rich or poor. for each particular region we give the total length of examined regions in mega-bases, the percentage composition or content of x, the number of changes in x due to insertions and deletions  - ndel), and the net change in x composition due to both indels and substitutions.

tables  <dig> and  <dig> demonstrate that in the human genome there is a prevalence of deletions over insertions  for every type of nucleotide content studied and for every type of mri and control region with the exception of gc-indels in gc-rich mri regions. in the last case Δgc is positive and equal to  <dig> added nucleotides . for all other cases of x except x = gc, short and medium indels cause gradual contraction of genomic regions in humans. this means that there is no nucleotide composition equilibrium to which the indels drive the genome in the indefinite future and, therefore, these equilibria have not been calculated. table  <dig> shows that, for every x-rich region, indels result in the increasing the richness of corresponding mri regions . in all x-control regions the net x% change is several times less than in the corresponding x-rich and nonx-rich regions.

finally, we calculated the percentage of nucleotide composition changes in case of both substitutions and indels separately, that occurred in the human genome during last ten million years after the divergence of human and chimpanzee. these results are presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig> and serve to measure the relative importance of substitutions versus indels to the nucleotide composition of mri regions.

discussion
consistent with chargaff's second parity rule  <cit> , both the g or c base content of the human genome are equal to  <dig> %, while a or t comprise  <dig> % each. however, in thousands and thousands of genomic regions of various lengths, the composition of a, t, c, or g content  exist at extremes quite different from the aforementioned averages. de novo mutations constantly occur in populations and could dramatically change the base composition of a genomic region during the course of evolution. a good choice for a large-scale computational analysis of these novel mutations is in the examination of 'rare' single-nucleotide polymorphisms . rare snps are mutations that have recently occurred. however, even among rare snps there exists a minor subgroup of "older" mutations that have diminished their frequency to rare events. the relative size of this subgroup is in reverse proportion to the effective size of the population  <cit> , and hence, it represents only a minor fraction of the recent mutations for humans. here we show that rare snps in genomic regions with average nucleotide composition are enriched by g or c → t or a substitutions that drive the genomic composition of those regions to a level of 35% for g+c and 65% for a+t. on the other hand, examining the same regions for mutations that have substantially propagated into human populations  demonstrates that these fixed or nearly fixed substitutions are much less prone to g or c → t or a changes. instead, high frequency snps as well as fixed substitutions tend to drive genomic regions with average base composition to 45% g+c composition.

here we have focused particularly on the influence of mutations on the evolution of specific genomic regions with strongly inhomogeneous base compositions that are far from the average distribution of nucleotides . for all types of mri regions, we found that novel substitutions  tend to more strongly erode the compositional extremes  of the region. at the same time, these mutations undergo a strong fixation bias during their propagation into populations in such a way that fixed substitutions tend to preserve mri regions. for example, rare snps inside gc-rich mri regions drive the nucleotide composition of those regions to the 26% gc level. however, fixed substitutions in the same gc-rich mri regions drive gc composition only to 61%. the highest fixation was seen for gt- and ac-rich mri regions, which preserves the current gt- and ac-composition of 70%.

this trend of preserving nucleotide composition of mri regions with respect to the increasing fixation of substitutions could be explained by at least two different mechanisms. first, one could observe that there are some important functional roles for mri regions. for instance, gc-rich mri regions include well-known cg-islands, prominent regulators for gene expression  <cit> . thus, these regions should be under the constraint of purifying selection, preserving their important features. other mri regions may be under similar selective pressure due to association with functional genomic elements and/or, as yet unknown, sequence signals. second, fixation bias inside mri regions might be due to some non-symmetry in cellular molecular machinery involving dna repair, replication, and/or recombination processes. for example, the biased gene conversion -theory engages this particular scenario in order to explain the maintenance of cg-rich regions  <cit> .  thus far it is inconclusive as to which of these two scenarios, or a combination thereof, best fits the observed trends. for the case of gc-rich sequences, we conjecture that both scenarios could be taking place to some extent to preserve mri.

interestingly, the highest level of mri erosion for rare snps is observed in gc-rich mri regions. novel substitutions in these particular regions try to drive gc-content to the lowest level of 26% . we explain this phenomenon via uneven distribution of cpg dinucleotides, which are most abundant in gc-rich mri regions. it is well known that cpg dinucleotides are extreme hot spots for the c → t and g → a mutations, which cause cpg to be the most underrepresented dinucleotide in vertebrate genomes. therefore, cg-rich mri regions, which are known to have the highest concentration of cpg dinucleotides, should have the highest rate of de novo mutations in the direction c or g → t or a. human snps having c/t alleles in the cpg/tpg context with the orthologous chimp allele in the tpg context have an increased error rate of  <dig> % for ancestral misidentification  due to the probability of a coinciding chimp snp at the same locus  <cit> . however, since the strength of the mutational erosion in the gc-rich mri regions is so high, even an error rate of  <dig> % will not change the observed trend.

so far we have discussed only the effect of substitutions on the nucleotide composition of mid-range genomic regions. insertions and deletions are the other types of mutations that change genomic sequences and, therefore, should also be considered. in mammals, short and medium indels are several times less frequent than substitutions. currently, there is not enough data on human indel snps to perform the same analysis of their fixation process as we did for substitutions. for this reason we studied only fixed indels in humans . our examination demonstrated that indels weakly influence the nucleotide content of mri regions toward preserving their inhomogeneous composition, in the same manner as the fixation bias of fixed substitutions .

CONCLUSIONS
the fixation bias on both fixed substitutions and indels tend to protect mri regions from degradation of their compositional extremes amid the constant flow of random mutations, thus suggesting their contribution in the preservation of functional and structural complexities of the human genome. future research on these genomic elements as well as refinement of our approach should help determine the extent of maintenance of mri by natural selection.

