BACKGROUND
the ability to alter metabolic fluxes by modifying the expression of the cognate genes is an important tool for metabolic engineering. metabolic engineering by gene manipulation traditionally aimed at abolishing undesired metabolic activities, introducing new enzymatic activities, and/or generating many-fold overexpression of what was believed to be a rate determining step in a pathway. in some cases, these methods have been successful in redirecting the flux to a certain product but more often, the outcome has been disappointing because of the limited impact of the manipulations on the targeted result. this clearly illustrates the importance of obtaining a quantitative understanding of the factors that determine the flux through a pathway, e.g. by applying metabolic control analysis to define the best strategy for flux optimization. a comparatively straightforward approach to modify the flux through a pathway consists in the modulation of cellular enzymatic activities by changing the expression level of the corresponding genes. several promoter libraries have been constructed for this purpose  <cit> .

bacterial genes are differentially expressed during the cell cycle in response to a wide variety of signals that modulate promoter activity and in some cases it may be interesting, however, to express specific genes constitutively and at a specific level. to ensure the constant expression of a certain gene, the endogenous promoter can be replaced by a constitutive promoter with a desired strength. in this context, a synthetic promoter library is useful for the fine tuning of genes. to date, there are comparatively few data about the insertion procedure of artificial promoters directly in the chromosome  <cit> . the existing methods contain elements of randomness, in the sense that they create a collection of promoters for each gene of interest that needs to be screened for the appropriate expression. in a next step, the chromosomal promoter can be replaced by an artificial one specifically constructed for the targeted gene. therefore, a more direct, less time-consuming approach to modify promoter strength is desirable. the present method optimizes the insertion procedure of promoters selected from a previously characterized library. we describe an optimized procedure for the fine tuning of gene expression, using as proof of concept the ppc gene of escherichia coli . the advantage of this procedure over the state-of-the art procedures is the universal applicability of the created artificial promoter library in combination with a promoter strength predictive  model  <cit> , making it unnecessary to create a new promoter library for each targeted gene. hence, the proposed strategy is less time consuming and cheaper.

first, we compare several knock-in strategies of upstream untranslated regions containing a synthetic promoter with or without a synthetic canonic ribosome binding site  and with or without an n-terminal polyhistidine sequence . second, we apply the optimized procedure to knock-in synthetic promoters with different strength, selected using a previously developed promoter strength predictive  model. at the same time, this work constitutes a validation of the psp model  <cit> . third, we investigate the possible influence of the genetic background and scale up conditions on the expression. this is important to exclude the possibility that the expression of our proof of concept, ppc, is controlled by a regulator which can bind on an unknown transcription factor binding site located within the used artificial promoters or the flanking regions in the genome.

RESULTS
selection of synthetic promoters for the optimization of the knock-in procedure, using the psp model
the psp model was developed to quantitatively predict the strength of promoters on the basis of the nucleotide sequence  <cit> . a relative strength of  <dig>  was calculated with this model for the endogenous promoter of the ppc gene  in a scale from  <dig> to  <dig>  defined by a library of  <dig> synthetic promoters. out of the library, two stronger synthetic promoters, p <dig>  and p <dig> , were chosen for the knock-in experiments.

knock-in strategies to insert promoters
the ppcp was chosen to be rationally replaced. upstream of the ppc gene, there is a  <dig> nt leader region harboring two rbs sequences, a promoter region with - <dig> and - <dig> boxes  <cit> , and three repeated sequences  . the relevance to ppc expression of the repeated sequences is not known.

in a first attempt, a cassette containing the antibiotic resistance marker, the synthetic p <dig> promoter, a canonical rbs, a start codon and a polyhistidine sequence  substituted the start codon of the ppc gene . the obtained mutant was grown in triplicate at flask scale to compare gene expression at transcriptomic and enzymatic level to the wild-type , . the insertion of the artificial promoter resulted in a 2-fold reduction of expression of the ppc gene. therefore, a second strategy was designed to replace the sequence from position - <dig> nt to the start codon  by the p <dig> promoter with an artificial rbs and a start codon followed by a polyhistidine sequence  to eliminate the influence of a putative transcription factor binding site  <cit>  which is located upstream of the endogenous promoter on the artificial promoter. interestingly, an even stronger reduction in the mrna level  compared to the wt was observed . to exclude that the observed reduction of expression was due to the presence of the polyhistidine sequence, the latter approach was repeated by inserting the p <dig> promoter with its rbs but without the polyhistidine sequence . however, a similar reduction of expression was observed ). a possible explanation is that the synthetic leader region was not adequate to ensure mrna stability  <cit> . consequently, a third strategy was designed, respecting the natural rbs region, with introducing neither the polyhistidine sequence nor the synthetic rbs. the cassette with the p <dig> promoter replaced the sequence from - <dig> to - <dig> . this approach resulted in a successful 3- to 4-fold increase in expression of the ppc gene . a similar increase was observed at the enzymatic level  . these results are in agreement with what was predicted by the psp model.

verification of the promoter knock-in procedure and of the psp model
two synthetic promoters  were chosen on the basis of their relative strength to replace the natural ppc promoter. after optimizing the promoter knock-in procedure with the p <dig> promoter, the same approach was followed with the p <dig> promoter. the expression of the ppc gene in the wt and the mutant was measured as before. a  <dig> -fold increase of ppc expression was observed . as shown in figure  <dig>  there is a good correlation between the relative expression from the synthetic promoters at both transcriptomic and enzymatic activity levels and the predicted promoter strengths using the psp model.

next, the influence of the genetic background on the expression of ppc from the synthetic promoter was investigated. the p <dig> and p <dig> promoters were knocked-in in an e. coli mg <dig> mutant in which three genes coding for enzymes involved in the pyruvate oxidation pathway were knocked-out. the expression of the ppc gene in the mutant strains was measured relative to the wt strain at transcriptomic and enzymatic activity level . the expression of the ppc gene in the 3ko strain seems to be down regulated compared to the wt strain  despite the fact that no regulatory elements have yet been identified in the ppc operon. according to lesnik and coworkers   <cit> , this may be due to a putative transcription factor binding site that is located upstream of the ppc promoter. these results seem to indicate that the introduction of additional knock-outs  may create a novel phenotype of which the ppc expression is down regulated compared to the wt. hence, this new phenotype probably influences a regulator which binds to this putative transcription factor binding site. furthermore, these results confirm that the relative strength of both p <dig>  and p <dig>  promoters was maintained in both the wt and the 3ko strains, respectively. moreover, the results at enzymatic level had the same tendency .

next, the influence of growth parameters ) on the strength of the knocked-in synthetic promoters in both the wt and the 3ko strains was investigated using a bioreactor. again, a similar relative expression of the ppc gene was observed at both transcriptomic and enzymatic activity levels, showing that scaling up the culture conditions affect the strength of the synthetic promoters keeping the same tendency  .

discussion
several methods have been developed to engineer the cellular metabolism by modifying the expression level of genes coding for enzymatic steps that are considered either rate-limiting or diverting the metabolic flow towards by-products. one such approach is to modify the promoter of genes using a promoter library. the existing methods  <cit>  generally yield a collection of mutants which needs to be screened to select the mutant with the desired expression level since the expression cannot be predicted in advance. hence, in a recent review, santos and stephanopoulos   <cit>  stressed the need for a rational approach for the application of existing promoter libraries. in the present work, we developed a method based on the use of a previously constructed library of promoters  <cit>  in combination with a mathematical model  which can be applied for the fine tuning of gene expression, using the ppc gene  as model system. three methodological aspects were considered:  the optimization of the knock-in procedure;  the capability of the psp model to compare the strength of specific promoters in a collection with a native promoter;  the stability of the engineered expression level when genetic background  and growth conditions  are changed.

so far, little information is available about an efficient method for the insertion of artificial promoters at the chromosomal level. the multiple mutants obtained using existing libraries require extensive screening steps. alper and co-workers   <cit>  used their characterized library of promoters to modulate the expression at chromosomal level for fine tuning the expression of both phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and deoxy-xylulose-p. the strength of the artificial promoters was assayed with indirect methods . they concluded that the optimal gene expression levels are variable and dependent on the genetic background of the strain to achieve a specific phenotype. however, they did not collect any transcriptomic nor proteomic data. we are proposing a new method that allows to evaluate the strength of the inserted promoter compared to the endogenous promoter in advance. in addition, the obtained expression is independent of additional genetic modifications and scaling up conditions.

 optimization of the knock-in procedure. in order to maintain the expression of the chosen promoter it is imperative to conserve the leader region  of the gene of interest and to eliminate upstream regulatory elements  . simply inserting a synthetic promoter between the coding region and the natural promoter region  or substituting the endogenous promoter region by the same synthetic promoter fragment  results in a drastic decrease in expression . an n-terminal polyhistidine coding sequence, to allow an eventual quick purification of the protein of interest, was present in the two constructs. however, omitting this sequence in another construct did not improve expression. substituting the natural promoter region  <dig> nt upstream of the transcription start while retaining the ppc gene 5' untranslated region  resulted in a 3-fold increase of expression, at both transcriptomic and enzymatic activity levels . thus, a level of transcription corresponding to that predicted by the psp model was obtained and, importantly, the increase in mrna levels was translated into an increase in protein activity. incidentally, this indicates that there is no post-translational regulation of the ppc gene. it is known that the untranslated sequence at the 5' end of mrna, beyond its role in engaging ribosomes, is important for the stability of the transcript. changes in this sequence may therefore affect the expression of the downstream gene, which seems to have been the case here with constructions i and ii. this was also observed by solem and jensen in their gene expression modulation experiments  <cit> . it should be noted that in order to knock-in the artificial promoters successfully in front of the ppc gene, the repetitive sequences upstream of the endogenous promoter had to be eliminated as well. hence, the putative transcription factor binding site which was previously described by lesnik and coworkers   <cit>  was removed. as the purpose here is to obtain the stable constitutive expression of a cellular activity, the elimination of this  regulatory site is desirable.

 the expression levels obtained with the two synthetic promoters from our library  confirm the use of the psp model to choose promoters in function of the desired level of expression. indeed, the expression levels relative to wild-type were in quite good agreement with the predicted relative strengths.

 the engineered ppc expression was independent of the genetic background, insofar as the introduction of additional mutations affecting connected metabolic branches did not affect the expression from the two promoters. the relative strength of expression remained the same in a strain in which three genes  were knocked out. changing the growth conditions by scaling up from shake-flasks to  <dig>  l bioreactor conditions did not affect expression either. furthermore, our promoter knock-in procedure ensures constitutive expression.

in conclusion, a rational approach for the modulation of gene expression, using a library of promoters in combination with a mathematical model, is proposed. the developed promoter knock-in method ensures the stable expression of the targeted gene. in addition, the knock-in procedure is almost "seamless", leaving only an  <dig> nt insert with no selection markers such as antibiotic resistance genes in the genome. therefore, the method does not impose limitations on the further introduction of other synthetic promoters for the fine tuning of several other genes expression in the same e. coli strain.

we also applied this method to create a selection host for the detection of l-ribose isomerase expressing mutants of escherichia coli  <cit>  and to fine tune the expression of the membrane transport protein dcuc  <cit> . this indicates that the proposed procedure is also applicable for other genes.

CONCLUSIONS
state of the art methods for the utilization of existing promoter libraries prove to be suboptimal for the fine tuning of gene expression and therefore there is a need for a rational promoter knock-in method. in this study, we demonstrated the usefulness of an existing promoter strength predictive model  to compare in advance the relative strength of the promoters in the library with the native promoter so that the latter can be replaced with an appropriate one of the former. further, we developed an optimal strategy to knock-in promoters. existing methods are time consuming and expensive since they involve post-insertion screening steps. we present a novel method in which the strength of the inserted promoter relative to the natural one is known beforehand and in which the obtained expression is independent of genetic background. the method is therefore a valuable addition to the e. coli metabolic engineering toolbox.

