BACKGROUND
foodborne pathogens cause an estimated  <dig>  million human illnesses in the u.s. each year, resulting in nearly  <dig>  hospitalizations and over  <dig>  deaths  <cit> . salmonella enterica remains one of the most devastating of these foodborne pathogens with 11% of all food related deaths being attributed from exposure to this bacterium  <cit> . the genus salmonella comprises two species, s. enterica and s. bongori, both of which have been found in the food supply. six subspecies of s. enterica have been described  that can be found in a variety of mammalian and non-mammalian hosts including humans, cattle, birds, turtles, and snakes. most non-typhoidal salmonellosis cases in mammals, including humans, come from over  <dig> different salmonella group  i serovars. while several group i serovars such as s. typhimurium and s. enteritidis have been studied more widely, the genetic and phylogenetic diversity defining many of the important group i salmonellae remains poorly understood.

one of these serovars, salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar montevideo  is one of the top ten most common serovars associated with contaminated foods. this serovar was recently associated with a pistachio recall in  <dig>  and more recently, with contamination of certain pet treats http://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls/ucm <dig> htm. moreover, this serovar has been implicated in contamination events involving numerous meat and cheese products http://www.outbreakdatabase.com/site/search/?tag=s.+montevideo. more recently, a strain of s. montevideo was linked to more than  <dig> illnesses in  <dig> states after being found in red and black pepper used in the production of contaminated italian-style spiced meats . it is important to note that many of these highly clonal strains of s. montevideo often confound epidemiological investigations because pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  is unable to always distinguish outbreak-related strains from other genetically similar strains unassociated with the same outbreak. strains of this nature often retain common pfge patterns despite their sporadic or more historic origins.

the accurate subtyping and subsequent clustering of isolates of a bacterium associated with a foodborne outbreak event is essential for successful investigation and eventual traceback to a specific food or environmental source  <cit> . in this regard, pfge continues to deliver useful genetic typing information by facilitating public health investigations for nearly two decades. in certain cases, however, highly clonal strains, common among some group i salmonellae, confound epidemiological investigations because pfge provides limited genetic differentiation of these strains. that is this approach often lacks the resolution for differentiating highly clonal bacterial isolates. in response to such events, federal public health and food safety laboratories are exploring next-generation sequencing  to define complex outbreak scenarios. ngs refers to highly parallel robotic genomic sequencers, like roche  <dig> gs titanium technology, that are being used to accomplish the whole genome sequencing  of a bacterial pathogen.

ngs is contributing long anticipated solutions to what were once viewed as insurmountable challenges, in the genetic analysis of bacterial pathogens  <cit> . complete genome sequences from multiple bacterial strains can now be collected and analyzed in just a few days  <cit> , underscoring the future potential of this technology as a molecular epidemiological tool to assist in foodborne outbreak investigations. recent examples in the literature illustrate the ability of ngs to discern the high-resolution genetic relatedness and unrelatedness of otherwise indistinguishable isolates based on the microevolutionary genetic change that define clinical isolates, outbreak isolates found in foods, and their environmental counterparts  <cit> .

these novel applications of ngs are buttressed by a massive influx of new genomic data, producing new discoveries about the critical genes that define particular pathogens, and important genomic changes associated with pathogenicity, antibiotic resistance, and unique carbon source usage  <cit> . however, the race to sequence more bacterial pathogen genomes must be tempered by the realities and rigor of formal methods validation processes for tools deployed in epidemiological investigation http://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm <dig> htm. this validation process is not only required for regulatory action by federal and state laboratories whose duty it is to conduct these tests, but these general procedures must be applied if the technology is to meet scientific admissibility requirements in a legal setting. although still being developed, historical paradigms exist for the validation of sequence data. capillary electrophoresis  sequencing, for example, has been a standard technology since the early 1990s, and its accuracy has proven to be sufficient so that ce is now widely applied by a variety of federal agencies engaged in activities spanning forensic and molecular epidemiologic analyses  <cit> .

herein, we demonstrate the value of ngs in defining the diversity of salmonella montevideo using a representative set of environmental, laboratory, food, and clinical strains, some of which have been associated repeatedly with contamination events in several food sources  <cit> . here, our analyses using ngs data provided far greater resolving power than previously available from other techniques. this information was essential to reconstructing both the deep phyletic relationships of this serovar and terminal relationships among highly clonal s. montevideo isolates. moreover, the clonally derived outbreak cluster of s. montevideo were defined by a few single nucleotide polymorphisms  while more geographically or temporally removed isolates showed tens to thousands of snp differences. additionally, ngs technology revealed considerable genomic stability and high reproducibility for snp targets used in the clustering of closely related isolates within an important and emerging serovar of salmonella enterica.

RESULTS
ngs reveals substantial intra-serovar diversity within salmonella montevideo
in order to explore the evolutionary genetic diversity of salmonella montevideo, ngs analysis was performed on  <dig> strains of this serovar . this included assembling the raw reads to form contigs of overlapping sequence, annotating those contigs to determine which genes were present, and then determining homology among genes and aligning and concatenating those genetic elements for population and phylogenetic analyses. roche-titanium whole-genome shotgun sequencing technology  <cit>  provided 15-20× coverage for each genome reported, and downstream contig assembly and sequence alignment provided over  <dig> - <dig> mbp of assembled contigs for each isolate. additional data filtering yielded  <dig>  variable snp sites of which  <dig>  were identified as parsimony informative  and subjected to phylogenetic analysis on the fda bioinformatics, linux based computer cluster using likelihood and parsimony methods. the resultant evolutionary tree derived from the informative snp data yielded two important observations . first, s. montevideo formed a monophyletic group of strains phylogenetically distinct from other neighboring serovars including s. schwarzengrund, s. pomona, and s. javiana. second, s. montevideo strains partitioned into four disparate clades , several of which were defined by a mixture of both natural and laboratory isolates. clade iii, for example, comprised a clinical isolate associated with tomato  as well as a single strain  from the widely characterized subspecies i salmonella reference collection, sarb  <cit> .

entries include the fda sample number, a simplified tree label, locus tags as well as various identifiers from the genome bioprojects of these draft genomes. new accession and short read archive numbers are noted by an asterisk in the column entitled "tree label". all other accession numbers were published previously  <cit> .

pairwise snp variation between these four s. montevideo lineages is listed in table  <dig>  intra-serovar snp diversity was remarkable among the four diverged s. montevideo genome lineages ranging from  <dig>  snps  to  <dig>  snps . this latter distance was astonishing given that snp divergence between s. montevideo lineage i and s. pomona, a different group i serovar, falls well within this range . in addition to the substantial snp-based diversity noted among s. montevideo lineages, genome size also fluctuated widely within this serovar . that is, genome length ranged from less than  <dig>  million bp to about  <dig>  million bp, sorting largely along intra-serovar clade divisions revealed in the phylogenetic tree . most of the observed genome size differences appear to be due to the presence or absence of phage elements. the ca clinical isolate  <dig>  for example, is bigger than the outbreak cluster in general due to phage d <dig>  in addition, s. montevideo strain  <dig> appears to be enlarged due to insertion of a plasmid pra <dig>  while strain  <dig> retains an uncharacterized phage-like sequence and elements of the spi- <dig> pathogenicity island. conversely, two smaller s. montevideo genomes,  <dig> and  <dig>  appear to be missing the putative salmonella phage sequence relative to the outbreak cluster . akin to findings reported previously on the stress-induced acquisition and loss of phage elements in the salmonella genome  <cit> , these data signal an important role for insertions and deletions in the diversification of specific clones of s. montevideo, and, taken together with the above snp findings, point to a serovar of non-typhoidal salmonella comprised of several genomically diverged and phylogenetically distinct clones  <cit> .

distances were calculated using the concatenated alignment of  <dig>  informative snps that estimates the diversity between s. schwarzendgrund, s. javiana, s. pomona and the major clades of s. montevideo observed.

ngs phylogenetically differentiates a clonal lineage of salmonella montevideo
the importance of ngs in ascertaining high-resolution phylogenetic and molecular epidemiological histories of infectious outbreak clones of bacterial pathogens has recently been noted  <cit> . in the current study, ngs was applied for reconstructing the detailed evolutionary genetic structure of an individual clone of s. montevideo that is largely indistinguishable using pfge. specifically, ngs analysis was applied to a set of s. montevideo isolates either associated with or genetically homologous to a food contamination event of spiced italian-style meats in the u.s. in  <dig> and  <dig> http://www.cdc.gov/salmonella/montevideo/index.html. we reported previously on the success of ngs for distinguishing some of these isolates from other clonally related isolates unassociated with this spiced-meat s. montevideo outbreak  <cit> . herein, we combined the genomes of  <dig> highly homogeneous s. montevideos from food, environmental, and clinical sources from this spiced-meat outbreak with  <dig> newly sequenced  s. montevideo genomes derived from clinical-food matches associated with the same spiced-meat contamination event. as an important control, historical s. montevideos from within this clone were included that retained multiple identical pfge patterns to the spiced-meat outbreak strains and were isolated from a variety of foods unassociated with this outbreak such as pistachios, chicken, italian cheese, and several fishes from indo-china. it is important to note that all of the clinical isolates included here  were collected in association with the spiced-meat outbreak event.

results from the phylogenetic analysis provided several important findings relevant to the phylogenetic differentiation of clonal s. montevideo strains . first, in contrast to the serovar tree presented in figure  <dig>  snp diversity within this highly clonal sub-lineage of s. montevideo was markedly lower as expected, less than  <dig> informative snps defined the entire tree. however, the resultant likelihood tree partitioned this clone into six distinct groups of isolates that were separated from neighboring groups by less than  <dig> parsimony informative snps each. additionally, isolates associated previously with the spiced-meat outbreak clustered together in a group separate and distinct from groups of closely related s. montevideos unassociated with this contamination event . from a phylogenetic perspective, clades e and f appear to capture the scope of the outbreak. there are several reasons that support this partition. clinical isolates  associate closely with a drain strain from the facility forming clade e  and from contaminated spices collected at the facility along with a host of clinicals from several states  nearly all of which were indistinguishable from the food isolates . it is also noteworthy that clade f retained a subgroup of nc isolates that were separated from the other food and clinical spiced-meat strains by just a few snps. however, these isolates are clear monophyletic members of clade f, one of the two outbreak clades, and may have emerged from the base of this clade through microevolutionary change. whatever the final explanation, ngs analysis coupled with a comparative phylogenetic approach not only fully differentiated this clone of s. montevideo, but also provided high resolution genetic information that effectively delimited the scope of the outbreak event, affirming its potential as a powerful tool for supporting molecular epidemiologic investigation of clonal outbreaks of non-typhoidal salmonella  <cit> .

snp variation within the s. montevideo spiced-meat clone was nearly two logs lower than what was noted for total intra-serovar diversity. nevertheless, the signature snps that delineated these six subgroups  originated from various regions around the s. montevideo genome and included a variety of genes assigned to diverse cellular functions including metabolism, dna synthesis and repair, transport and uptake, virulence, and stress response. a list of  <dig> genes from which the snps that characterize s. montevideo clade iv were derived is provided in table  <dig>  a representative snp from each of these genes is also provided in the table along with the subgroup that it defines and its bp coordinates. thirty of these genes were annotated previously with assigned names and functions; however,  <dig> additional regions that provided signature snps are hypothetical and, as such, are cross-referenced by locus tags only. it is notable that a partial and select set of snps from  <dig> of these  <dig> genes are non-synonymous, and of the  <dig> snps in table  <dig> that cluster together two or more s. montevideo subgroups in figure  <dig>  all but three are protein- altering in nature. these data are intriguing given an ngs report documenting positive selection among a significant subset of core genes in adapted salmonella enterica serovars  <cit> .

variable genes are listed by their genbank abbreviated and full name  and by the blast locus hit to either a reference isolate lt <dig> or the drain swab isolate. a representative nucleotide change observed within each gene is listed as well as whether this caused an aa change and to which phylogenetic group it was associated with from figure  <dig> . these snps were the most useful for the spiced meat outbreak investigation and will be useful for both targeted resequencing efforts and for rapid subtyping methods for traceback of future s. montevideo investigation and diagnosis.

although the majority of isolates composing the spiced-meat s. montevideo clone generally exhibited a common genome length, one isolate from california  retained a noticeably larger genome than other members of this lineage . in addition to being separated from other s. montevideos associated with the spiced-meat contamination event by nine phylogenetically informative snps , comparative analysis revealed the presence of a  <dig> kb insertion with substantial homology to enterobacterial phage d <dig>  since phage d <dig> was incomplete in genbank , a mauve comparison to another homologous relative, phage p <dig> , was helpful in suggesting that this may represent a d6-like phage insertion into contig  <dig> in this particular s. montevideo genome. based on the known length of phage d <dig>  this particular insertion in s. montevideo strain  <dig> accounts for observed variation between this genome  and the other spiced-meat s. montevideo genomes reported here . moreover, this finding underscores the utility of whole-genome scanning technologies for placing the source of size polymorphisms between otherwise homogeneous strains of salmonella.

ngs reveals phylogenetic discordance of hyper-discriminatory pfge enzymes in an s. montevideo outbreak cluster
the extent of phylogenetically congruent clustering between ngs and other conventional subtyping technologies such as pfge, mlst, or mlva is largely unknown for most serovars of s. enterica. congruence is important in accessing the ability of subtyping methods to accurately assign genetic relatedness among closely related strains, such as those implicated in foodborne outbreak events  <cit> . previous studies from our laboratory and elsewhere have demonstrated enhanced discrimination and accuracy for pfge in assigning genetic relatedness of some salmonella and e. coli o157:h <dig> strains by concatenating up to six different restriction enzyme patterns into single cluster analyses  <cit> .

the availability of whole-genome sequences of salmonella, such as s. montevideo, enables a comparison between the conclusions of an epidemiological investigation and the linked clusters obtained from comparative genomics of the suspect isolates. one can also examine the patterns of linkage based on other genetic tools to the epidemiological evidence such as the discriminatory power of several non-conventional pfge enzymes in the highly homogeneous group of s. montevideos described above. after generating pfge patterns for the six enzymes reported previously as part of the published concatenated pfge protocol for non-typhoidal salmonella in a previous study of s. enteritidis and s. typhimurium  <cit> , we overlaid individual enzyme patterns onto the s. montevideo ngs tree presented in figure  <dig> and assessed congruence  in cluster assignments between the two methods. owing to the extreme genetic homogeneity among these strains, four of the six enzymes  revealed identical pfge patterns for all  <dig> of the s. montevideo isolates included in the whole-genome tree. moreover, the predominant paci pattern varied in only one isolate  from chinese perch. in contrast, however, noti, an enzyme reported previously as having a high discriminatory index for s. typhimurium and s. enteritidis  <cit> , yielded  <dig> distinct patterns among the  <dig> s. montevideos comprising this outbreak cluster. albeit, side-by-side comparison of noti pattern variants with ngs subgroups delineated in the clone tree revealed evidence for homoplasy  for this enzyme . that is, noti patterns fda.noti. <dig>  -. <dig>  and -. <dig> were represented by s. montevideo isolates from different subgroups in the tree suggesting that these patterns emerged independently in distinct places during the recent evolution of these isolates. as an example, pattern fda.noti. <dig> is represented twice in group a, once in group b and d, three times in group e, and four times in group f. thus, while the concatenation of multiple pfge enzyme data sets may permit a more accurate clustering of closely related salmonellae, these data sound a cautionary note when attempting to cluster outbreak strains based on any single pfge enzyme, including highly polymorphic ones such as noti.

biological, laboratory, and technical replicates of salmonella montevideo support reproducibility of ngs applications
as the power of ngs is realized in public health settings, deployment of the technology is expected to become more commonplace. thus, it is important to further evaluate the technology, addressing questions concerning expected variation between closely related strains, background variation, and snp variation that may arise during sub-culturing possibly obscuring an accurate molecular epidemiological analysis of isolates associated with contamination or outbreak events. that is, does variation arise in subsequent passages of an isolate and, if so, can phylogenetic analysis overcome the potentially misleading background noise associated with this level of sensitivity? we investigated this issue by sequencing to ~15× coverage  <dig> s. montevideo isolates derived from clinical-food matches associated with the  <dig> spiced-italian style meat contamination event, such that isolates were taken from the patient as well as the suspected corresponding food vehicle that sickened that particular patient. specifically, we included seven matching s. montevideo isolates from a single clinical/food source in iowa and five isolates from a single clinical/food source in connecticut. additionally, we sequenced a single s. montevideo food isolate  for separate passages  , separate colonies from the same passage  , and separate sequencing reactions from a single colony  . passages were conducted as follows: the initial sample was taken from frozen stock and plated on a tsa plate. once plated it was incubated overnight at  <dig> degrees c. this was followed by day  <dig> were sample was taken from the day  <dig> overnight plate to inoculated the day  <dig> tsa plate. this day  <dig> plate was incubated overnight at  <dig> degrees c. day  <dig> sample was taken from the day  <dig> overnight plate and inoculated a day  <dig> tsa plate which was then incubated overnight at  <dig> degrees c. day  <dig> sample was from the day  <dig> overnight plate to inoculated the day  <dig> tsa plate and incubated overnight at  <dig> degrees c. after each plate was grown overnight, growth was taken from that plate and grown up a broth culture for dna extraction of each of the genomic samples. also, all samples were not single colony isolates for any of these plates. all passages and samples are representative cultures from the full plate and not just single colony.

whole-genome sequencing yielded an alignment of approximately  <dig>  mbps for downstream analysis. a total of  <dig> variable snp sites were identified of which  <dig> were found to be parsimony informative among the validation isolates described above. however, once the data filter was applied to the remaining snps , only a single informative snp at position  <dig> , <dig> was found remaining which was stable in the original s. montevideo isolate  and all of its downstream genomes derived from subsequent passages, colonies, and dna samples of this one strain . we also searched for snps using the proprietary run mapping software from roche and found the snp corresponding to position  <dig> , <dig> in the wgs alignment .

details of the variation arising from resequencing are listed including the variable site location, a description of the variant, the nucleotide change and corrections during our rapid data analysis pipeline.

as expected, these laboratory-generated isolates were indistinguishable in a phylogenetic analysis with the single parsimony informative snp separating the 237_lunch_meat_ia_ <dig> s. montevideo isolate series from the other iowa matching clinical-food isolates . among the replicate genomes, only two sequences, genomes from s. montevideo isolate  <dig> from the second and third round passages, retained actual snp variation that emerged on the tree. that is, save for a single nucleotide difference present in the original  <dig> sample and two of the four downstream passages , none of the additional biological, laboratory, or technical replicate genomes yielded nucleotide differences after alignment and quality filtration. it is important to note that these few changes did not alter relatedness or inclusivity/exclusivity among the matching food/human isolates. rather, the only structural difference in the tree to arise from these three changes was in the form of branch length for the individual isolates affected. additionally, it is noteworthy that, in the larger outbreak clone tree, the connecticut and iowa matching isolates were both phylogenetically inseparable from their sister isolates, and collectively, both strain sets sorted squarely among the spiced-meat food, environmental, and clinical isolates associated with the same contamination event . these findings indicate that when ngs data are quality filtered and inspected carefully using inclusivity/exclusivity criteria, the resultant stable and informative snp data can be used effectively to phylogenetically partition closely related isolates of s. enterica . consistent with this find, a bolus of successful applications is now accruing  <cit> .

ngs provides discovery for development of novel mlva targets
aside from its emerging and direct role in highly homogeneous s. enterica outbreaks, it is important to recall the important function of ngs for augmenting conventional detection, identification, and subtyping methods development. currently, several rapidly evolving regions of the salmonella chromosome are under investigation for their utility for enhanced subtyping of highly homogeneous salmonella strains associated with foodborne outbreaks. specifically, select vntrs  in the genomes of salmonella and e. coli have been targeted to develop markers and probes for mlva , a rapid and sensitive subtyping method that fingerprints the genomes of closely related strains based on size polymorphism of vntr sequences  <cit> .

since mlva protocols are developed at the serovar level for salmonella, very few are available save for the most significant and widely studied salmonellae . here, using our ngs alignments only, we identified a polymorphic vntr region within s. montevideo that may serve in the development of a mlva protocol for this important foodborne serovar as well . the locus was identified within a cell division gene  and delineates the major s. montevideo lineages represented in our ngs serovar tree in figure  <dig>  moreover, this finding illustrates the importance of providing ngs data from multiple strains and multiple serovars in order to foster the identification of additional mlva loci to support rapid subtyping protocols for salmonella serovars of public health significance.

terminal names correspond to samples in table  <dig> 

discussion
here, we reported the use of ngs technology for describing the phylogenetic diversity of s. montevideo, a significant serovar of s. enterica involved in numerous outbreaks and product recalls http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dbmd/phlisdata/salmonella.htm# <dig>  moreover, we have applied informative substitutions from these genomes to further ascertain phylogenetic relatedness among a highly homogeneous s. montevideo clone, of which some strains were associated with a recent spiced-meat outbreak event in the u.s last year. in this instance, the investigatory utility of ngs became apparent as the unusual genetic homogeneity among both outbreak associated and non-associated s. montevideo strains could not be resolved unambiguously with more conventional genotyping approaches. comparative genomic molecular epidemiology produced hundreds of snp differences across distinct lineages of s. montevideo and even provided broad size differences among the most distantly diverged strains of this serovar. among the s. montevideos populating clade iv in the serovar tree, nearly all shared common pulsotypes for xbai and blni as well as for several additional enzymes including spei, sfii, and paci. ngs combined with phylogenetic analysis, however, was able to delineate the scope of contamination by differentiating those strains associated with the spiced-meat outbreak from strains epidemiologically unrelated to this event despite the remarkable genetic identity linking these two strain sets. given the extraordinary resolution that ngs provides--resolution best described as "nanotyping", it is not surprising that, when salmonella isolates with divergent pfge patterns are sequenced using ngs technology, the resultant alignments typically yield thousands of snp differences.

for s. montevideo, four disparate lineages of strains were observed . one lineage, in particular , was characterized by a single isolate from sunflower, and it remained unclear as to whether the long branch distinguishing this isolate was due to changes that accumulated more recently from laboratory passages or whether observed variation in this strain accrued in a natural setting. surprisingly, this sunflower isolate clustered with several s. montevideos recently isolated from pet treats and a pet treat-manufacturing environment underscoring the potential risk associated with this and the other discrete lineages of this serovar http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/newsroom/pressannouncements/ucm <dig> htm. that is, it appears that foodborne contamination events can emerge from any of these diverged s. montevideo lineages which are able to survive in foods and cause illness in humans. clinical isolates were found in each of the major and separate lineages of s. montevideo tested . moreover, such observations enforce the notion that in addition to these attributes, the risk to public health also stems from a particular salmonella lineage simply gaining the opportunity to contaminate the human or animal food supply, rather than any one s. montevideo lineage being more fit to persist in foods over any other.

separation, based on snp distances, among the four phyletic lineages of s. montevideo reported here rivaled distances observed between s. montevideo and other distinct salmonella subspecies i serovars including s. pomona, s. javiana, and s. schwarzengrund. such remarkable interclade divergences suggests that the four major lineages of s. montevideo diverged early in the evolution of this serovar, and each appears to have evolved largely independent of the others, an evolutionary pattern consistent with a hypothesis of unique host/niche adaptation for the separate lineages and sublineages that compose this serovar. this thesis is further supported by an examination of variable genes and snps that define various lineages of isolates within s. montevideo clade iv. that is,  <dig> of  <dig> select informative snps  defining subgroups within this clade were non-synonymous. additionally, 78% of the representative informative snps clustering together two or more s. montevideo subgroups were also found to be polymorphic. these data are reminiscent of a previous report by soyer et al.,  <cit>  which noted a potentially significant role for positive selection based on an unusual proportion of non-synonymous substitutions across the genomes of several host-adapted serovars including s. cholerasuis, s. typhimurium, and the agent of typhus, serovar s. typhi . taken together, these data signal s. montevideo as a potentially niche-adapted and evolutionarily diverse serovar among the subspecies i salmonellae, a conclusion additionally supported by an extraordinary ecological range and natural persistence in diverse environments .

the results from the genome validation study reported here also merit discussion. after collecting over  <dig> mbp of finished bacterial sequence for multiple downstream passages, colonies, and dna preparations of a single s. montevideo isolate, it was clear that ngs had provided sufficiently stable data to conclude that no single potential source of variability tested  was capable of altering phylogenetic conclusions uncovered during the comparative genomic investigation. that is, despite the detection of three substitutions among serially passaged genomes from a single s. montevideo source, no re-sequenced replicate conflicted with our phylogenetic conclusions here or for strains included in a previously published letter defining an s. montevideo spiced-meat outbreak cluster  <cit> . rather, it is clear that phylogenetic approaches are providing rational and highly reproducible analytical outcomes for high-resolution ngs data pipelines and appear to be sufficiently robust for reconstructing strain relatedness based on the hundreds and sometimes thousands of informative changes that amass from a single ngs experiment.

global deployment of ngs technology as a direct investigatory tool has already proven to be highly successful to the public health community. in addition to the ngs application described here for one non-typhoidal salmonella serovar, ngs has provided extraordinary insight into case studies involving:  traceback of tuberculosis infections in canada  <cit> ;  high-resolution evolutionary linkage of global clones of salmonella typhi  <cit> ; and  identification of the origins of the haitian cholera outbreak  <cit>  as a few examples. it is important to note, however, that ngs data can provide additional utility for development of other subtyping methods. the mlva locus presented here is one example of how ngs can serve as a genomic "compass" in seeking out vntr regions with sufficient rates of change to develop custom mlva assays for other important salmonella serovars beyond s. typhimurium and s. enteritidis. additionally, as shared ngs public health databases expand, many outbreak swarms will be defined by even more rapid and efficient re-sequencing protocols that target a subset of informative snps relative to the differentiation of a specific outbreak clone of pathogenic bacteria.

we would like to caution that the results reported here, while extremely encouraging, do not supplant the need for independent laboratory validations to establish sops for their particular platforms and chemistry and kits. such validations may include the adoption of standard practices that have worked so well with past genetic testing, including ce methods that can more easily target and validate variable sites identified by whole genome sequencing and downstream phylogenetic analyses. clearly, given the evolutionary rates governing nucleotide change among enteric bacteria combined with the risk of intrinsic polymerase error in the sequencing process itself, each step of the pathway, from isolate collection and template preparation to the sequencing reactions, could potentially spawn artifactual variability. a careful assessment of all of these sources of variation should provide more confidence for molecular epidemiological applications including the detection and scope of disease outbreak clusters.

CONCLUSIONS
these results underscore the power of ngs, when coupled with phylogenetic analysis, to illuminate the genetic and evolutionary diversity of important serovars of salmonella enterica along with the associated epidemiological pathways surrounding specific outbreak strains  <cit> . it appears that, at least in the case of salmonella, the natural variation observed between strains is both stable and sufficient to allow for high resolution traceback of food and clinical isolates. it will be interesting to see whether ample genomic diversity can drive similar outcomes in other problematic taxa and highly clonal salmonella serotypes. moreover, ngs will provide the phylogenetic context on which to interpret other facile subtyping approaches that focus on more rapidly evolving genetic markers such as mlva, rep-pcr, and crisprs  <cit>  and will provide a novel suite of snps that will be critical to partitioning common salmonella outbreak strains. in public health arenas, ngs strain "nanotyping" holds the potential to revolutionize the manner in which responses to outbreaks are managed. at a minimum, we see a future where ngs methods are brought to bare on the most difficult questions involving this enteric pathogen including direct application in foodborne outbreak cases in combination with other time-tested methods of epidemiologic investigation.

