BACKGROUND
cooperative behaviour is widespread among animals  <cit> . theoretical models include both costs to the donor and benefits for the receiver as important parameters for cooperative behaviour to evolve  <cit> . while costs to the donor may be outweighed by indirect fitness benefits due to genetic similarity or relatedness with the receiver  <cit> , cooperation between non-kin can evolve by mutualism or reciprocity  <cit> . similar to hamilton's rule explaining the evolution of cooperation by kin selection  <cit> , costs and benefits play a crucial role also in the evolution of reciprocal cooperation  <cit> . however, their importance for an animal's decision to cooperate is little understood  <cit> .

reciprocal cooperation  <cit>  among unrelated social partners has been described in a wide range of species, including mammals, birds and fish  <cit> . over the past  <dig> years the conditions have been hotly debated under which reciprocal cooperation might emerge  <cit> , however experimental tests of the effect of costs to the donor and benefits to the recipient on decisions to cooperate are scarce. to bridge this gap we manipulated both, the costs of the donor and potential benefit to the recipient in an iterated prisoner's dilemma game using unrelated female wild-type norway rats .

norway rats are known to live in social groups including both related and unrelated individuals. they recognise individuals by odour  <cit>  and can discriminate different levels of relatedness in social partners  <cit> . furthermore, they frequently show social behaviours such as allogrooming, joint aggression towards intruders, assemblage formation in winter and food storing  <cit> . in iterated prisoner's dilemma games, where two players can choose to either cooperate or to defect  <cit> , they were shown to help an experimental partner based on direct and generalized reciprocity  <cit> . both mechanisms can induce evolutionarily stable levels of cooperation  <cit> . in our experiments the focal test rats could produce food for a social partner present in an adjacent compartment by pulling a tray towards the cage . in the first experiment, social experience of the focal rats was manipulated by pairing them with cooperative or defective partners  that had either produced food for them  or not  in the identical but role-reversed situation . we manipulated the costs of the helpful act by varying the resistance of pulling food for the experimental partner between  <dig> and  <dig> newtons, which covered the range from a very easy operation to a difficult action they could just accomplish. the rats were trained to recognise visual signals associated with the different degrees of resistance to enable them to decide about giving help dependent on costs already before handling the apparatus.

in the second experiment we manipulated the levels of need of social partners  by food restriction applied over night to induce hunger. in this experiment, the focal rats were given either a helping experience by an unknown third rat just before the test phase  using the same experimental setup, or they were not given a social experience . we tested for potential effects of the condition  of experimental partners and predicted that if their need is important for the decision of focal rats to help, potential receivers in bad condition should elicit more help than potential receivers in good condition.

we found that rats provide more help to cooperative than to defective partners, and that the amount of help provided decreases more strongly with increasing costs when the experimental partner is a defector. furthermore, hungry rats received more help for food if they were light, whereas if the receiver was satiated, focal rats provided more help for heavy partners. both results meet the assumptions for costs and benefits being important parameters in the decision of rats to help an unrelated social partner.

RESULTS
effect of cost
in the first experiment the test rats pulled more often for a cooperator than for a defector . further, the number of pulls decreased with increasing resistance in both social contexts . the latency until the first pull increased with increasing resistance when helping a defector, but not when helping a cooperator . when given the opportunity to acquire food for themselves, the rats pulled more often  and with shorter time delays  than when pulling for a social partner.

effect of benefit
in the second experiment the hunger status of social partners together with their condition  influenced the number of pulls by the focal rat . when the receiver was hungry, focal rats pulled more often for light than for heavy partners. in contrast, when the receiver was satiated, focal rats pulled more often for heavy partners. when the focal rats had not been helped by a third rat before, they also pulled more often for heavy experimental partners than for light ones .

discussion
focal rats pulled more often after receiving help than after receiving none, confirming that they applied direct  and generalised  reciprocity  <cit> . apparently, the rats attempted to raise the probability of getting help back in the future by providing more help to cooperators than defectors. thereby they took the costs of the helpful act into account, as the number of pulls decreased with increasing resistance, and the latency until the first pull increased only when helping a defector, but not a cooperator. in a self-rewarding control situation the test rats pulled more often and with a shorter time delay for themselves than they did when helping a social partner, which shows that the pulling does not merely reflect a conditioned response. one might argue that instead of reflecting a strategic decision, the reduction of the pulling frequency with increasing resistance could reflect limited physiological ability. however, this does not explain why the latency to start pulling increased with increasing workload. obviously the costs of helping were assessed even before the rats experienced the burden, by using the visual cues they had been trained to relate to specific workloads . previous studies of reciprocity in rats using the same experimental setup revealed that the intrinsic pulling frequency  did not differ after experiencing a cooperator or a defector  <cit> . therefore, pulling in these experiments is clearly a social act and does not reflect copying, reinforcement or mere conditioning.

the results of our second experiment suggest that rats judge the relative need of their social partner and adjust their helping behaviour accordingly. focal rats provided more food to hungry receivers in bad body condition that would suffer from hunger more severely. two mechanisms might be responsible for the test rat's awareness of their experimental partner's need: 1) the donor may gain information about the hunger level through the signalling of need by the receiver. for example, rats may use ultrasound vocalisation as such signals are applied in a range of social and stressful contexts  <cit> . however, differences in activity and behaviour between hungry and satiated rats were not observed in our experiment. 2) the donor may judge the need of the recipient through inadvertent physical cues. for example, rats gain information about food preferences of group mates through odour cues from their breath  <cit> . they might also gain information about other, hitherto unknown traits from their experimental partner's body.

when the receiver was satiated, the focal rats pulled more often for heavy than for light partners, which was also the case when the focal rat had not received help before. this might suggest that unconditional help, in particular, is contingent on the relative status of a social partner, as in norway rats body mass correlates with dominance  <cit> . helping a dominant partner might reduce the probability of punishment for defection  <cit> . alternatively, helping dominant individuals preferentially might be more effective in improving the social reputation of the donor than providing help to a subordinate partner  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge, our study provides the first empirical evidence for strategic decisions of helpers contingent on the costs of donors and the potential benefit to receivers in a prisoner's dilemma situation, which supports the predictions of theoretical models of the evolution of cooperative behaviour. in a different experimental situation, capuchin monkeys  were found to be affected in their decision to invest toward collective goals by the relative effort that was demanded, i.e. the number of times a monkey had to hand a rock to an experimenter before getting a reward  <cit> . hence, as predicted by evolutionary theory animals do seem to take costs into account when deciding about cooperation. this is consistent with the observation that examples of reciprocal cooperation in natural or semi-natural conditions often involve seemingly inexpensive behaviours such as allogrooming  <cit> .

furthermore, our data indicate that potential benefits to the receiver can also influence the propensity of animals to cooperate, as was suggested by the interaction between effects of experiencing cooperation and the need  and body condition of the social partner. at the proximate level, generosity of similar type has been assumed to be 'gratifying' to the donor in non-human primates  <cit> , which might constitute a reward mechanism involved in the delivery of benefits to others. at the ultimate level, the probability to receive future help should be increased by preferably helping needy social partners for such discrimination mechanism to evolve. this can be accomplished in two possible ways, either if it raises the propensity of receivers  or eavesdroppers  to help the cooperator on future occasions, or if it increases the survival probability or condition of needy receivers, which in turn would raise the probability that these can exert help to the cooperator  or to anyone  in future interactions. as rats have been demonstrated to show both, direct and generalized reciprocity, both possibilities may apply  <cit> .

in our experiment the motivation of test rats apparently changed between different contexts: when helping a hungry social partner after receiving help from someone else, the need of the partner rat influenced the motivation of the donor to help, which might indicate empathy  <cit> . in contrast, when the rat had not been helped before, its cooperation seemed to be motivated by other functions, such as punishment avoidance or building reputation. factors that had been believed to be largely confined to human social behaviour may influence the behaviour of other social animals as well  <cit> , indicating that reciprocal cooperation in animals and humans should be viewed in an evolutionary framework.

