BACKGROUND
although the effects of conditioning stimuli – or adaptation – have been well documented in a number of sensory modalities , the mechanisms have not been completely elucidated. moreover, though there are an exhaustive number of studies that have explored multiple time courses of changes in cortical response at both the population and single neuron level, there have been relatively few studies that have examined the impact of selective block of different types of neurotransmission in the cerebral cortex on sensory perception. for example, although n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor  block in the nonhuman primate results in decreased overall mean firing rate, a contraction of receptive fields, a reduction in the variability of the cortical response, and a decreased spatial extent in the cortical response evoked by tactile stimulation  <cit> , little is known about the somatosensory perceptual correlates of nmdar block. one finding of interest in the nonhuman primate studies is that nmdar block results in a decrease in the change in responsiveness with repetitive stimulation  <cit> . in other words, whereas the majority of primary somatosensory cortical neurons show a significant decrease in overall mean firing rate evoked by repetitive vibrotactile stimulation, the application of nmdar block results in the majority of these same neurons exhibiting an absence of this change in overall mean firing rate. in this study, we sought to observe perceptual correlates of these changes in cortical activity by characterizing the impact of nmdar block on somatosensory adaptation.

recently we reported that a subject's ability to discriminate between the amplitudes of two simultaneously delivered vibrotactile stimuli was highly consistent in healthy adults such that they yield similar difference limen  values on this task  <cit> . additionally, a subject's discriminative capacity was degraded systematically when one of the stimulus sites was pre-exposed to an adapting stimulus, in a duration-dependent manner  <cit> . the extremely low variability of the effects of adaptation on subject performance during this amplitude discrimination task suggested that this protocol could be an extremely reliable measure for the reduction of perceived intensity caused by vibrotactile adaptation. the above-referenced method of single-site adaptation, in parallel with a method that determines the impact of dual-site adaptation , were both used to obtain observations from two subject groups. one group was administered placebo and the other group was administered dextromethorphan , a non-opioid over-the-counter selective nmdar antagonist. all subjects completed the amplitude discrimination tasks prior to and after ingestion of either placebo or dxm. the purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of nmdar block on the capacity of subjects to discriminate the amplitude of simultaneous dual-site flutter stimuli with and without pre-exposure to adapting stimulation, and the results suggest that nmdar-mediated neurotransmission plays a significant role in the perceptual adaptive response.

RESULTS
two separate 2afc tracking protocols  were used to obtain observations of the effects of dxm, an nmdar antagonist, on the impact of adaptation on subjects' capacities for discrimination between the amplitudes of two simultaneously delivered vibrotactile stimuli. in the first protocol, one of the two stimulus sites that received the vibrotactile stimuli was pre-exposed to an adapting stimulus, and the tracking protocol targeted determination of the reduction in perceived intensity at the adapted stimulus site . in the second protocol, both stimulus sites received adapting stimuli and subsequent test stimuli, but in this case, both test stimuli were identical and the difference between the adapting stimuli were tracked, based on subject response . the working hypothesis of this protocol was that if the perceived intensities were systematically changed by the adapting stimuli, then the difference in the two adapting stimuli at the two sites would result in the subsequent test stimuli being perceived as different, with the test site receiving the larger adapting stimulus having the weaker perceived intensity.

results from the single site adaptation protocol
at time t <dig>  dxm drug administration had a slight effect on amplitude discrimination – though not a significant one – as indicated by block  <dig> data . however, in the adaptation phase of the run  the data from the dxm group demonstrated a significantly reduced impact of adaptation compared to the control group as shown in block  <dig> . the average post-adaptation dl for the control group remained at a level that was over 200% above the values obtained in block  <dig>  yet the average post-adaptation dl for the dxm group was only approximately 67% above the block  <dig> values. thus, as a group, subjects that ingested dxm experienced less adaptation, and subsequently performed better at the post-adaptation amplitude discrimination task than did the control group.

two hours post ingestion , there was very little difference between the amplitude discrimination performance of the dxm and control group . in the post-adaptation amplitude discrimination task , the dxm group appeared to still be slightly outperforming the control subjects, although there were no significant differences observed between the two groups for this data set , as it appears that the drug was nearing the end of its effectiveness.

results from the dual site adaptation protocol
subject performance on the dual-site adaptation protocol is summarized in figure  <dig>  interpretation of these results is slightly different than in the above-described data set. in this case, the "standard" adapting stimulus amplitude is constant at  <dig> μm and a "test" adapting stimulus initially at  <dig> μm is increased or decreased, based on subject response to which test stimulus felt more intense. the dl was determined by the tracked difference between the "standard" adapting stimulus and "test" adapting stimulus at which the test stimuli felt identical. with the adaptation duration of  <dig> msec, subjects in both groups perceived a difference between the test stimuli at an adaptor dl of approximately  <dig> μm. when the adaptation duration was increased to  <dig> msec, the dl was reduced to approximately  <dig> μm. thus, at t <dig>  both groups showed significant improvement at amplitude discrimination  when the adapting stimulus duration was increased from  <dig> msec to  <dig> msec , and no difference in performance was observed between the groups for each of these two conditions .

the performance observed in the drug absent condition was significantly degraded  <dig> min after dxm ingestion  under both durations of adapting stimulation at . with dxm, subjects perceived a difference between the test stimuli at a difference in adapting amplitudes of approximately  <dig> μm with the  <dig> msec adapting stimulus duration  and approximately  <dig> μm with the  <dig> msec adapting stimulus duration . at t <dig>  or  <dig> minutes post-ingestion, these differences between the dxm and control groups appear to be decreasing, although they remain significantly different . the contrast between these measures, obtained with the dual site adaptation protocol and those obtained with the single site adaptation protocol, suggests that the results obtained with dual site adaptation may be more sensitive in detecting differences in the impact of the dxm on adaptation.

discussion
in the present study, we investigated the effects of dextromethorphan , an nmdar antagonist, on the ability of subjects to discriminate between the amplitude of two simultaneously delivered vibrotactile stimuli with/without pre-exposure to adaptation stimulation. the results show that the dxm drug administration had no effect on the subjects' performance on a standard amplitude discrimination task, but it significantly reduced the impact of adaptation on amplitude discrimination, and this reduction began to recover two hours after the ingestion of dxm.

under control conditions , the observed impairment in amplitude discrimination induced by adaptation is consistent with a previously published report, which demonstrated that a subject's ability to accurately discriminate differences in the amplitude of two simultaneously delivered vibrotactile stimuli was significantly degraded with prior exposure to an adapting stimulus at the test stimulus site  <cit> . tommerdahl and colleagues proposed that the effect of adaptation on amplitude discrimination capacity was due to an elevation of the detection threshold, and thus a reduction in the perceived intensity of a subsequent stimulus, induced by the adapting stimulus. this phenomenon has been characterized in a large body of psychophysical studies  <cit>  that reported that when the adapting stimulus is increased in duration or amplitude, the perceived intensity evoked by subsequent test stimuli is reduced. a number of neurophysiological studies have demonstrated that the effects of reduced intensity due to adapting stimulation are possibly attributable to a reduction in the responsivity of central neurons or in synaptic processes associated with the central neurons after prolonged or repetitive stimulation. more specifically, o'mara and colleagues  <cit>  found that extended exposure to a vibratory stimulus produced substantial reductions in the responsivity of neurons in the cuneate nucleus, but not in the peripheral afferents. lee and whitsel  <cit>  reported that repetitive brushing stimuli frequently lead individual si neurons and neuron groups to modify their response to the repetitive afferent drive. additionally, lee and whitsel  <cit>  found that the majority  of the si neurons sampled showed a decreased response to repetitive stimulation  of their receptive fields. in that report, it was proposed that the glutamate-mediated excitatory effects on nmdar are to a large extent responsible for the appreciable capacities of cortical neurons to modify their physiological properties with repetitive sensory experience.

it is important to note that the spatial and temporal patterns of responses in primary somatosensory cortex  to repetitive vibrotactile stimulation are largely dependent on the complex interplay of gaba-mediated inhibition  <cit>  and nmdar activation  <cit>  in addition to other neural processes  <cit> . the specific contribution of nmdars to the response evoked by non-noxious tactile stimulation has been described by relatively few studies. duncan et al systemically administered ketamine, a noncompetitive nmdar antagonist, in nonhuman primates and found that the responsivity, receptive field  size, and mean firing rate  of si neurons evoked by tactile stimulation were reduced in a dose- and time-dependent fashion  <cit> . similarly, whitsel et al  <cit>  examined cortical  neuron activity evoked by skin brushing stimulation and, using intravenous ketamine or phencyclidine  for nmdar block, found the si response to be nmdar dependent and that si neuron mean firing rate did not diminish with repetitive stimulation in the presence of nmdar block. based on their results, they proposed that in the presence of nmdar block, normal pericolumnar interactions within the cerebral cortical networks become disrupted and the predominant excitatory drive of each si neuron is conveyed by direct thalamocortical connections acting via ampa receptors. however, at the same time, the response to that direct drive becomes partially suppressed by the lateral inhibitions derived from the co-activated columns that surround it, which are mediated via nmdar on the local gabaergic interneurons. as a result, the systemic administration of an nmdar antagonist is expected to reduce lateral inhibition on the pyramidal neurons of the directly activated column, but allow a full expression of the direct thalamocortical excitatory drive during skin stimulation. observations obtained from 2dg, optical imaging and rf studies in the presence of nmdar block were also consistent with these findings  <cit> . to summarize, the time dependent changes often observed in si cortical response to repetitive stimulation were not observed with nmdar block. longer duration time dependent effects on tactile perception have also been demonstrated to be significantly impacted by nmdar block  <cit> .

similar observations in reduction of adaptation to vibrotactile stimulation have been observed in autism  <cit> . however, in those studies, it was concluded that this reduction in adaptation was due to compromised or below-normal gaba-mediated neurotransmission in subjects with autism, a finding consistent with a number of reports in the autism literature . both the reduction of the impact of adaptation on amplitude discrimination in the presence of dxm and a similar reduction observed in subjects with compromised gaba levels supports the model of dynamic cortical response to repetitive stimulation put forth by whitsel and colleagues  <cit>  and later expanded by kelly and folger  <cit> . one of the key elements of that model is that cortical responses in somatosensory cortex to repetitive stimulation are shaped by dynamic pericolumnar lateral interactions mediated by both gaba and nmdar neurotransmission.

in short, without nmdar mediated activity, the level of excitation required to evoke inhibitory responses becomes diminished, and the gaba-mediated activity required to diminish the cortical responses evoked by repetitive stimuli becomes weaker. thus, with nmdar block, although the overall cortical response is weaker, the change of the response caused by conditioning or adapting stimuli is significantly reduced. it should be noted that although dxm does have effects other than that of an nmdar antagonist, the known effects of dxm as an nmdar antagonist are consistent with the impact of nmdar block on centrally mediated neurotransmission. the observation of weakened adaptation response – to repetitive stimulation in populations whose gaba- or nmdar-mediated neurotransmission has been compromised – appears to strengthen the original proposal by whitsel and colleagues that the adaptive changes observed in sensory perception at short stimulus durations  are principally centrally mediated.

CONCLUSIONS
the results – that dxm blocks vibrotactile adaptation – is consistent with the suggestion that nmdar-mediated neurotransmission plays a significant role in the perceptual adaptive response. this finding is also consistent with neurophysiological findings that report observations of the effects of nmdar block on the si cortical response to repetitive vibrotactile stimulation.

