BACKGROUND
due to functional and biophysical constraints, different protein sites evolve at different rates of amino-acid substitution  <cit> . the most popular structural correlate of a site’s substitution rate is its relative solvent accessibility   <cit> . in a thorough assessment of many structural properties as predictors of site-specific rates of evolution, franzosa and xia showed that the only two with significant independent contributions are rsa and cn, the contact number, with rsa performing slightly better  <cit> . however, in a more recent study, yeh et al. compared rsa with two local packing density  measures, cn and the weighted contact number , and found that both lpd measures correlate better than rsa with evolutionary rates  <cit> . moreover, they found that once lpd is controlled for, the independent contribution of rsa is small. thus, lpd seems to be the main structural determinant of rate of evolution at site level. the purpose of the present work is to study possible mechanisms that connect lpd to evolutionary rates.

a possible link could be dynamical flexibility. a site’s flexibility, quantified by its mean squared fluctuation , is approximately proportional to 1/lpd  <cit> . a flexibility-based explanation assumes that a site’s rate of evolution increases with its dynamical flexibility. within this framework 1/lpd would be just a “proxy” of a site’s flexibility, which would be the actual determinant of its evolutionary rate. such interpretation would seem to be supported by empirical correlation studies of sequence variability vs. msf  <cit>  and variability vs. 1/lpd  <cit> , and by a recent study based on a different dynamical flexibility measure  <cit> . such a flexibility-based explanation not only makes some intuitive sense, but it is attractive because it is in line with the increasing acknowledgement of the role of dynamics for protein function  <cit> . therefore, we postulate as our null model an explicit empirical flexibility model according to which a site’s rate of evolution depends linearly on its msf.

the main drawback of the previous flexibility-based interpretations, and the empirical flexibility model we set up to make their underlying assumptions explicit, is that no mechanism is proposed. to this end, here we propose a mechanistic alternative model. we model mutations as random perturbations of the parameters of the protein’s potential energy landscape and natural selection as a function of the probability that a mutant adopts a specific active conformation. using basic statistical physics and certain simplifying assumptions, we derive that according to this model a site’s evolutionary rate will depend on the local stress introduced in the active structure by mutating it. therefore, we shall call it the stress model.

we will show that the stress model explains both the dependence of site-specific rates of evolution on packing density and on dynamical flexibility in terms of the local stress introduced by mutations on the protein’s active structure.

methods
elastic network models
let the conformation of an n-sites protein be represented by the column vector of the 3 n cartesian coordinates of its n c
α
 atoms: 
r
 = 
t
. 
r


i

 = 
t
 is the position vector of the ith c
α
. the vector joining sites i  and j is 
d

ij
 = 
r

j
 - 
r

i
 with length d
ij
 = 
d

ij
. we use 
r
 <dig> for the protein’s equilibrium conformation in which the ith site is at ri <dig> 

an elastic network model  represents the folded protein as a network of sites connected by springs. they have proved accurate and useful in a variety of applications  <cit> . the potential energy landscape is given by:

  vr=12∑i=1n-1∑j=i+1nkijdij-dij <dig> 

where dij <dig> and k
ij
 are, respectively, the equilibrium length and force constant of spring ij. as far as we know, all models proposed so far assume that dij0=dijr0=rj0-ri <dig>  i.e. that at the equilibrium conformation 
r
 <dig>  all springs are relaxed.

fluctuations and flexibility
no protein is frozen at its equilibrium conformation. at non-zero absolute temperature, the folded protein fluctuates around  
r
 <dig> sampling conformational space with equilibrium boltzmann’s probability density function:

  ρr=e-βvrzf 

where β=1kbt, with t the absolute temperature and k
b
 boltzmann’s constant. the denominator of eq.  is the partition function of the folded protein:

  zf=∫e-βvrdτ 

where ∫ … dτ stands for integration over the whole of conformational space.

the dynamical flexibility  of a site is ordinarily quantified using its mean square fluctuation:

  msfi≡ri-ri02=∫ri-ri02ρrdτ 

to calculate msf
i
 using eq. , the potential energy function eq.  is approximated using a second-order taylor expansion around its equilibrium conformation. first, the hessian matrix 
h
 of second derivatives of the potential eq.  with respect to the atoms’ cartesian coordinates is calculated. then, 
h
 is inverted to obtain the 3n × 3n variance-covariance matrix 
c
, which is composed of a 3 ×  <dig> 
c

ij
 block for each pair of sites. finally, a site’s msf is given by  <cit> :

  msfi=trcii 

an empirical flexibility model
several studies have investigated the correlation between site-specific rates of evolution or other sequence-variability measures and the corresponding flexibility. since such studies use pearson’s correlation coefficients as measure of association, the underlying assumption is that there is a linear relationship between rate of evolution and flexibility. to make such assumption explicit, here we postulate the following flexibility model:

  ωi˜flex=apflex+bpflexmsfi˜ 

where ωi˜ is the relative rate of substitution of the ith site. in general, for site-specific scalar properties we will use relative values obtained by z-score normalization. for any given site-specific property x
i
, we the z-score normalized values are xi˜=xi-xx2-x <dig>  where the averages are calculated over all sites of the same protein. the subscript p is used to note that a priori the coefficients may depend on the protein considered. we emphasize that the flexibility model is empirical: rather than derived from first principles, it is postulated, based on the intuitive notion that flexible sites should accommodate mutations more easily.

a mechanistic stress model
we introduce here a mechanistic model that includes explicitly the effects of mutations and natural selection. we consider mutations as random perturbations of the wild-type enm potential  <cit> . a random mutation at site i results in a mutant whose potential v
mut
 is obtained from eq.  by adding perturbations to the equilibrium length of each of its springs: dij0→dij0+δij. we further assume that the springs are independently perturbed and that perturbations are spring-independent, randomly drawn from a distribution with zero mean and constant variance α2:

  δij=0;δij2=α <dig>  

as we mentioned above, when the wild type is at its equilibrium conformation rwt <dig>  all springs are relaxed by construction. in contrast, when the mutant is at rwt <dig>  the mutated site’s springs will be stressed . for further reference, we define the mean local mutational stress  as follows:

  mlmsi≡vmutrwt0-vwtrwt0mut@i 

where 〈 … 〉
mut @ i
 stands for averaging over random mutations at the ith site.

to complete the model, we derive a simple selection function. first, we assume that there is a single specific active conformation 
r

active
. next, we acknowledge fluctuations and assume that the protein’s activity  is proportional to the concentration of the active conformation 
r

active
. finally, we assume that ractive=rwt <dig> and, accordingly, we model the acceptance probability of a mutant as:

  paccept≡cmutfρmutrwt0cwtfρwtrwt <dig> 

where cmutf and cwtf are the concentrations of folded protein for the mutant and wild type, respectively. from statistical mechanics, the folded-unfolded equilibrium constants for the wild-type and mutant proteins are, respectively, cwtfcwtu=zwtfzwtu and cmutfcmutu=zmutfzmutu. we further assume that the partition function and concentration of unfolded protein is the same for the mutant and wild type. therefore cmutfcwtf=zmutzwt. replacing this relationship and eq.  into eq.  we find:

  paccept=e-βvmutrwt0-vwtrwt <dig> 

finally, averaging over random mutations at site i and using eq.  we obtain the acceptance rate:

  ωi≡piacceptmut@i=e-βvmutrwt0-vwtrwt0mut@i≅1-βmlmsi 

where β may be thought of as representing not just temperature but also selection pressure, and we have assumed that βΔv <<  <dig>  to approximate the exponential to first order. to finish, we z-normalize the variables of eq.  to get the relative rates of evolution:

  ωi˜stress=apstress+bpstressmlmsi˜. 

this equation specifies the stress model.

relationship of flexibility and stress with packing density
the purpose of this work is to investigate why lpd correlates with rate of evolution at site level. the previous models relate rates of evolution with msf  and mlms . here we derive the relationship between these properties and lpd measures.

first, we relate flexibility and stress with the potential energy parameters of eq. . let us define:

  ki≡∑j≠ikij 

regarding flexibility, replacing eqs. , , and  into eq. , following  <cit> , and using eq. , it can be found that:

  msfi≅32βki 

regarding stress, from eqs. , , and , after some algebra, we get:

  mlmsi=12α2ki 

note that eq.  is an approximation while eq.  is an identity.

second, to relate the previous models to lpd we need to specify the enms spring constants. a variety of enms have been developed . here, we consider two models. first, the “parameter-free anisotropic network model”   <cit> , which uses:

  kij=1dij <dig> 

second, the “anisotropic network model”   <cit> , for which:

  kij=1dij0≤rcut0dij0>rcut 

where r
cut
 is typically between 10 Å and 18 Å.

from eqs. , , and  and z-normalizing we find:

  ki˜=lpdi˜ 

where for the pfanm, lpd is the weighted contact number  of  <cit> , and for the anm, it is the contact number : the number of sites closer than r
cut
. finally, from eqs.  and  it follows:

  msfi˜≅ki˜-1=lpdi˜- <dig> 

similarly, from eqs.  and  we get:

  mlmsi˜=ki˜=lpdi˜ 

note that while msf is approximately equal to 1/lpd, mlms is exactly equal to lpd .

calculation details
we used the dataset of  <dig> monomeric enzymes of yeh et al.  <cit> . the dataset includes proteins of diverse sizes, functional, and structural classes .

we used the evolutionary rates of  <cit> . they were inferred from multiple alignments of homologous sequences using rate4site, which builds the phylogenetic tree using a neighbour-joining algorithm and estimates rates with an empirical bayesian approach and the jtt model of sequence evolution  <cit> . to keep in mind that we are not dealing with the  “true rates”, but with rate4site-inferred rates, we use the notation ω˜ir4s.

from the pdb equilibrium structure of each protein we calculated the spring constants of pfanm  and anm , for which we used a cut-off distance of 13 Å  <cit> . given a protein and enm model, we calculated the hessian matrix, inverted it to obtain the variance-covariance matrix, and calculated the site-specific flexibility values msfi˜ using eq.  and z-normalizing. regarding stress, we obtained the relative site-specific values mlmsi˜ using eq.  and z-normalizing.

since we always use z-normalized relative values, for the sake of notational simplicity, we shall use ω
r4s
, msf, and mlms to refer to z-normalized values from now on.

we performed two analyses. in a protein-by-protein analysis, we performed linear fits of ω
r4s
 with either msf  or mlms  using the lm() function of the base package of r for each protein. in a global analysis we pooled together all sites of all proteins and performed similar global fits.

to assess the goodness-of-fit of a model to the data, we used the akaike information criterion aic = 2k - 2 ln l, where k is the number of parameters and l is the model’s likelihood given the data. when comparing models, the aic weight of evidence for each model is given by waic∝e‒12Δaic, where Δ = aic ‒ min  <cit> .

we also calculated pearson’s correlation coefficients between evolutionary rates and the independent variable that defines each model. when comparing two models, we calculated partial correlation coefficients of evolutionary rates with the independent variable of each model controlling that of the other.

RESULTS
we aim to elucidate whether a site’s rate of evolution depends on flexibility or mutational stress as measured by msf and mlms, respectively. to address this issue, for each site of each of the  <dig> proteins of a dataset of monomeric enzymes, we used the rate4site program to estimate its relative evolutionary rate ω
r4s
, we calculated its msf using both the pfanm model and the anm model using eq. , and we calculated its mlms for the pfanm and anm models using eq. . we also considered as a measure of flexibility the b-factors of the pdb files. as described in methods, all relative site-specific values were z-score normalized for each protein. all these values for the  <dig> sites of the  <dig> proteins can be found in additional file 2: table s <dig> 

stress vs. flexibility: protein-by-protein analysis
we started by performing a protein-by-protein comparison. for each protein, we fit the competing stress and flexibility models to the evolutionary rates ω
r4s
. results for each protein can be found in additional file 3: table s <dig> and additional file 4: table s <dig>  summary information is shown in table  <dig>  the total aic  is lower for the stress model than for the flexibility model for either enm potential. the mean aic weight of evidence is much larger for the stress model than for the flexibility model. moreover, mean aic weights are consistent with counting the number of proteins for which one model outperforms the other: for the pfanm case, the stress model is best for 206/ <dig> proteins and for the anm case for 209/ <dig> proteins. the  average pearson correlation is larger for mlms than for msf for both enms. moreover, for both enms, while the mean partial rate-stress correlations are large, the mean partial rate-flexibility correlations, controlling for stress, are very small. in other words, msf makes very little independent contribution to the explained variance of site-specific evolutionary rates.

y
x
aic
<w

>
n


prot

<r>
<pr>
note: potential is the enm potential, model is either the stress model or flexibility model, y is in all cases the site-specific rate of evolution inferred using rate4site, x is the independent variable of each model. aic is the akaike information criterion summed over all proteins. <w> is the average of the aic weight for each compared model . 
n


prot

 is the number of proteins for which each compared model  is the best one. <r> is average over proteins of pearson’s correlation coefficient between variables y and x. <pr> is the average partial correlation coefficient when controlling for the x variable of the contrasting model . all variables were z-score normalized for each protein before fitting.

we think that it is most meaningful to compare between mlms and msf calculated using the same potential energy landscape . however, the z-normalized msf values can also be obtained from the b-factors available from the pdb files. we compared the stress model, both pfanm-based and anm-based with a b-factor-based flexibility model and the conclusions are the same . in general b-factor based flexibility models are the worst . this is not surprising because b-factors usually depend very strongly on several factors including experimental conditions, method used to estimate them, crystal disorder, etc. .

to summarize, whether using the pfanm or the anm potentials, stress  predicts evolutionary rates better than dynamical flexibility  for almost all proteins of the dataset and the independent contribution of msf is very small once mlms is controlled for.

stress vs. flexibility: global analysis
to consider the total evidence in favour of each model we performed a global analysis. we obtained linear fits of the ω
r4s
 evolutionary rates to the stress  and flexibility  models for all  <dig> sites of the dataset pooled together. results are shown in table  <dig>  from aic it follows that the stress model is better than the flexibility model for either pfanm or anm. the Δ values  are so large that the total weight of evidence for the stress model, compared with the flexibility model, is w =  <dig> whether using pfanm or anm. the pearson correlation coefficient r follows the same trend. we note, that even though smaller, the correlation coefficients for rate vs. msf are significant, which agrees with previous findings  <cit> . however, partial correlations  show that once stress  is controlled for, the rate-msf correlation almost disappears: the sequence-flexibility correlation is indirect. similar results are obtained when using b-factors to estimate msf . in summary, the total evidence in support of the stress model is very strong.

y
x
aic
w
r
pr
note: results of global fits for all sites of the dataset. potential is the enm potential. model is either the stress model or flexibility model. y is in all cases the site-specific rate of evolution inferred using rate4site, x is the independent variable of each model. aic is the akaike information criterion, that quantifies the goodness of fit of a model . w is the aic weight of evidence for each compared model . r is pearson’s correlation coefficient between variables y and x. pr is the partial correlation coefficient when controlling for the x variable of the contrasting model . all variables were z-score normalized for each protein before fitting.

evolutionary rates vs. flexibility and stress
what does the dependence of evolutionary rates on flexibility and stress look like? figure  <dig> compares the inferred rates with the predictions of the stress and flexibility models. the models were globally fit as described in the previous section. clearly, the stress model fits the inferred rates nicely over almost the whole range, in evident contrast with the flexibility model, for both pfanm  and anm .

even though previous sequence-flexibility studies used pearson correlations, which, rigorously, make sense only for linear relationships, they already found nonlinear sequence-flexibility plots similar to those of figure  <dig>   <cit> . in spite of this, they either dismissed the nonlinear part  <cit> or interpreted it in terms of different selection regimes  <cit> . from figure  <dig>  it is clear that the nonlinearity follows naturally from the proposed stress model, suggesting that evolutionary rates depend nonlinearly on msf because they depend  linearly on mlms, and msf ≈ 1/mlms, which can be derived from eqs.  and .

to conclude this subsection, we must observe that inferred rates are larger than stress-based predictions for the slowest sites and smaller for the fastest. a reason could be that inference methods overestimate small rates and underestimate large ones  <cit> . however, close inspection of the rate vs. stress curves  indicates that despite the very good fit of the linear stress model, there still seems to be some remaining nonlinearity of the ω
r4s
 vs. mlms plots. a possible reason is the weak-selection approximation used to linearize the exponential in eq. , however, resolving this issue is beyond the scope of the present report.

pfanm vs. anm
to finish this section, we compare anm with pfanm. figure  <dig> shows that both pfanm and anm result in similar qualitative dependence of rate vs. flexibility  and rate vs. stress . however, the pfanm potential  results in better fits to the inferred rates than the anm potential . accordingly, the aic values  show that the pfanm-based stress model is better than the one based on anm. this is in agreement with the finding that wcn correlates better than cn with evolutionary rates  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we introduced a mechanistic stress model of protein sequence evolution. mutations are modelled as random perturbations of the protein’s potential energy landscape, represented using elastic network models. to model natural selection, we used basic statistical physics to derive the expected probability that a mutant samples a specific functional structure. from this, we deduced a linear relationship between a site’s mean evolutionary rate and the mean local mutational stress  of the functional conformation. we compared this model with an empirical flexibility model that postulates that a site’s evolutionary rate is linearly dependent on its flexibility . we compared both models and found strong support for the stress model. moreover, the independent contribution of flexibility is negligible once stress is controlled for.

the mlms is proportional to local packing density and, therefore, the stress model provides a mechanism for the connection between a site’s lpd and its evolutionary rate. regarding the sequence-flexibility relationship, previous empirical correlation studies had already found that the sequence-flexibility relationship is nonlinear and either dismissed the nonlinear parts or attempted an interpretation in terms of different selection regimes  <cit> . we found the nonlinearity follows naturally from the stress model: evolutionary rates depend nonlinearly on msf because they depend  linearly on mlms, and msf ≈ 1/mlms. to summarize, the stress model accounts for the observed site-dependency of evolutionary rates and its relationship with packing density and flexibility.

a note of caution is in order here. for the stress model mutational stress was not postulated to be the determinant factor a priori but, rather, it was derived from the assumptions of the model that are essentially two  there is a single active conformation and  mutants are flexible and therefore can sample the active conformation so that they are at least partly functional. therefore even though stress model was chosen to designate this mechanistic model, it should be kept in mind that it demonstrates the importance of protein flexibility.

it is worthwhile to mention some of the possible caveats and further developments of the stress model. first, we assume a single active conformation. in principle, it would be reasonable to assume that only changes of the active-site conformation should affect fitness. however, we note that if protein sites are strongly coupled, which is often the case, any conformational change will affect the active site conformation. for a strongly coupled elastic network forcing the active site to adopt a given conformation makes the rest of the protein move accordingly. therefore, assuming that the whole protein conformation must be in the “active conformation” for the protein to function is not necessarily an important limitation. however, for cases where the coupling is not very strong, if the active site is known, this could be easily tackled using a modified version of the selection function that integrates away all coordinates except for those of the active site .

second, in eq.  we performed a linear approximation of the exponential function. this is reasonable a priori only for weak selection, and a posteriori by the good fit of the resulting model to the data. we should note, however, this approximation can be easily removed, and the actual mean of the exponential can be calculated via simulation. further work is needed to explore this possibility.

third, we note that the z-normalized mlms values, on which the stress model is based, are identical to the z-normalized lpd measures wcn  and cn . for other potentials this need not be the case and it is for that reason that we chose to keep the notation mlms in the present tables and figures, to make them comparable with further research based on estimating mlms using different, perhaps better, potential energy functions.

to close, we note that the mutational part of the stress model accounts for observed patterns of evolutionary divergence of protein structure and dynamics  <cit> . regarding structural divergence, unselected random mutations reproduce very well the evolutionary conservation of a “structural core” and account for the observation that structures diverge mainly within the space spanned by a few low-energy collective normal modes  <cit> . regarding protein motions, unselected random mutations explain the higher conservation of the low-energy normal modes in terms of their mutational robustness  <cit> . in general, those studies could found no evidence of natural selection at the levels of structural or dynamical divergence. clearly, without natural selection, all sites would evolve at the same rate, which is not the case. the stress model proposed here accounts rather well for the variation of rates of evolution among sites. it would be interesting to study the effect of the selection function introduced here on structural and dynamical divergence and compare the observed patterns with those that result from unselected mutations. this could advance our understanding of the effect of selection at the levels of structure and dynamics. in general, we think the stress model provides a possible unifying framework to study evolutionary protein divergence at the levels of sequence, structure, and dynamics.

abbreviations
rsa: relative solvent accessibility; lpd: local packing density; wcn: weighted contact number; cn: contact number; enm: elastic network model; anm: anisotropic network model; pfanm: parameter-free anisotropic network model; msf: mean square fluctuation; mlms: mean local mutational stress; aic: akaike information criterion.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
je and jkh designed the study. je derived the stress model. tth and mlvm wrote the codes and performed the calculations and analysed data. je drafted the manuscript. all authors commented on and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: table s1
protein dataset. protein: pdb code; chain: protein chain; ec.class: enzyme comission class; scop class: structural class of domains according to the scop classification; domains: number of domains; year: year in which the structure was determined; resolution: resolution of the x-ray experiment; sites: number of sites of the protein chain; number.of.sequences: number of sequences of the multiple sequence alignment used for site-specific rate inferences.

click here for file

 additional file 2: table s2
site-specific rates, flexibility, and stress measures. pdb: pdb identifier of the protein; chain: protein chain; site: protein site; zwr4s: z-normalized site-specific rate of evolution inferred using rate4site; zbfactor: z-normalized b-factor; zmsf_pfanm: z-normalized mean square fluctuation  obtained with the pfanm model; zmlms_pfanm: z-normalized mean local mutational stress  obtained with the pfanm model; zmsf_anm: z-normalized msf for the anm model; zmlms_anm: z-normalized mlms for the anm model.

click here for file

 additional file 3: table s <dig> 
protein by protein goodness-of-fit measures. pdb: pdb identifier of the protein; chain: protein chain; aic.zmlms_pfanm: akaike information criterion  of the pfanm-based stress model; aic.zmsf_pfanm: aic of the pfanm-based flexibility model; aic.zmlms_anm: aic for the anm-based stress model; aic.zmsf_anm: aic for the anm-based flexibility model: aic.zbfactor: aic for a b-factor based flexibility model; r.zmlms_pfanm: pearson correlation coefficient  of the pfanm-based stress model; r.zmsf_pfanm: r of the pfanm-based flexibility model; r.zmlms_anm: r for the anm-based stress model; r.zmsf_anm: r for the anm-based flexibility model; r.zbfactor: r for a b-factor-based flexibility model.

click here for file

 additional file 4: table s4
protein by protein comparison of pairs of models. pdb: pdb identifier of the protein; chain: protein chain; waic.m <dig> m <dig> is the akaike information criterion weight of evidence w of m <dig> in an m <dig> vs m <dig> comparison. pr.m <dig> m <dig> is the partial correlation of site-specific rates of evolution with the independent variable defining m <dig>  controlling that of m <dig>  models considers are: pfanm-based stress model ; pfanm-based flexibility model ; anm-based stress model ; anm-based flexibility model ; b-factor-based flexibility model .

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this research was supported in part by academic summit program of national science council with grant number nsc-102-2745-b-009- <dig> and the “center for bioinformatics research of aiming for the top university program” of the national chiao tung university and ministry of education, taiwan, r.o.c. je is a researcher of conicet.
