BACKGROUND
cyclic amp  and cyclic gmp  are major signaling molecules generated from atp or gtp by the action of adenylate cyclases or guanylate cyclases, respectively. cyclic amp is found in all organisms where it regulates enzyme activity and transcription factors although its role in plants is poorly documented possibly because camp levels in plants are considerably lower than in vertebrates and there is a lack of annotated adenylate cyclases  <cit> . in mammalian cells cgmp is a transitory molecule that directly regulates cyclic nucleotide gated ion channels, protein kinases and activates specific phosphodiesterases that degrade cgmp  <cit> . in mammalian systems the physiological roles of cgmp are well characterized in intestinal fluid and electrolyte homeostasis, phototransduction, and vascular smooth muscle where it mediates relaxation  <cit> . guanylate cyclases and cgmp are well represented in various invertebrates such as insects, nematodes and echindermata; and the amoeba dictyostelium also uses cgmp as a chemo-attractant  <cit> . the role of cgmp in bacteria, fungi and plants has been controversial  <cit> . however cgmp is now a relatively well characterized second messenger in higher plants  mediating a wide variety of physiological effects ranging from plant hormone dependent responses to induction of plant defense responses  <cit>  and novel guanylate cyclases have been partly characterized  <cit> . although a guanylate cyclase from the cyanobacteria has been crystallized  <cit>  it is only recently that a guanylate cyclase and cgmp system involved in bacterial encystment has been revealed in rhodospirillum centenum and by homology in other members of the α-proteabacteria such as rhizobium ngr <dig> <cit> . therefore cgmp appears to be a universal signaling molecule in eukaryotic cells and to have roles in at least some prokaryotes.

part of the controversy relating to cgmp being a second messenger in non-animal cells is due to its transitory nature and generally lower levels compared to camp. the most reliable method to detect cgmp is by mass spectrometry  <cit>  which is limited in its utility for time course measurements essential for detecting molecules transiently present in limited numbers of cells. various antibody based assays have been developed but these were tailored for animal cells and the early assays detected spurious components in non-animal cells  <cit> . newer elisa based kits are more specific for cgmp but tend to under report amounts of cgmp present in non-animal cells  <cit> . in plant cells where there is a large vacuole, it is feasible that local concentrations of cgmp are much higher than detected with either mass spectrometry or antibody based kits. to measure endogenous cgmp levels at a cellular level in real time in mammalian cells a fluorescent biosensor flincg was developed. flincg contains the regulatory domain of protein kinase g type i fused to the circular permuted enhanced green fluorescent protein  and has been used in transfected mammalian cells to detect intracellular changes in cgmp over native dynamic ranges  <cit> . constructs of flincg placed under the control of a plant promoter have been expressed in plant cells and detect endogenous changes in cgmp levels  <cit> . alternative protein cgmp biosensors have been constructed using cgmp binding domains in phosphodiesterases  and the blue fluorescent protein  that have been used in multiple parameter imaging with fret-based camp reporters in animal cells  <cit> . promoter reporter constructs containing the camp binding protein response element have been extensively used in mammalian systems to detect changes in camp that alter gene expression  <cit> . several luciferase based reporter systems augmented with camp binding protein response element are commercially available. significant cross-talk occurs between the camp and cgmp transcription regulatory pathways in mammalian cells  <cit>  and hence these reporter systems have also been used to detect changes in gene expression via cgmp in mammalian cells  <cit> . the complexities of the interaction between the cyclic nucleotide pathways has led to the development of a mammalian cgmp reporter system pathways using the camp response element and overexpressed protein kinase g but this system is unable to discriminate between camp and cgmp  <cit> . despite these advances in mammalian cells, a reporter assay for plant cells that detects gene expression induced by changes in intracellular levels of either cgmp or camp levels is lacking.

exogenous application of membrane permeable cgmp in plant cells has been shown to alter the transcriptome  <cit> . maathuis  <cit>  identified several genes that were up-regulated in root cells following exposure to membrane permeable cgmp. we selected three of these genes as being potentially suitable candidates to develop promoter:luciferase reporter constructs that result in the downstream induction of gene expression in plant cells following intracellular changes in cgmp levels. we show changes in expression of luciferase following treatment of plant cells with membrane permeable cyclic nucleotides with one of these constructs. since this candidate promoter contained a cgmp response element identified in mammalian cells and another that was associated with gibberellic acid , we augmented the promoter with these response elements and tested them in transiently transfected plant cells. in addition, we tested the effectiveness of the candidate promoters on bacterial cells where we observed that they reported changes in gene expression following treatments where cyclic nucleotides were applied exogenously or generated endogenously.

RESULTS
generation of cyclic nucleotide responsive promoter:luciferase plasmid constructs
we selected three arabidopsis thaliana genes previously shown by maathuis  <cit>  to be induced by membrane permeable cgmp  in root tissue. salt overly sensitive  <dig> , cation/h+exchanger  <dig>  and oligopeptide transporter x  all showed at least a two fold increase in expression that was verified by quantitative rt-pcr  <cit> . the a. thaliana optx gene has been annotated as a member of the plant oligopeptide transporter family ) and is predicted to be a membrane bound transporter of small peptides. promoter fragments of approximately 1000 bp of sos <dig>  chx <dig> and optx were amplified and cloned into the plant luciferase vector pluctrap <dig>  <cit>  to create psos3:luc, pchx21:luc and poptx:luc .

we determined that sos <dig>  chx <dig> and optx were all expressed in freshly isolated leaf mesophyll protoplasts  despite these genes being originally identified in root tissue  <cit> . analysis of arabidopsis microarray data through genevestigator  <cit>  also indicates that these genes are all expressed in leaf tissue. hence the machinery  that control their expression is likely to be present in leaf tissue as well as roots. we then tested the luciferase activity of each promoter in freshly prepared arabidopsis mesophyll protoplasts treated with membrane permeable 8-bromo cgmp at various concentrations . luciferase activity was quantified and standardized by protein content for each sample and results were expressed as percentage of luciferase activity where the untreated  is equal to 100%. there was no significant difference in luciferase activity for the sos <dig> or chx <dig> promoters at any cgmp concentration . however, the optx promoter showed a significant increase in luciferase activity with 8-bromo cgmp treatments at  <dig>  and 1 μm . the specificity of the promoter luciferase optx:luc construct was tested by treating protoplasts with a membrane permeable form of camp, n <dig> ’-o-dibutyryladenosine 3’:5’-cyclic monophosphate . dibutyryl camp and 8-bromo cgmp induced similar levels of luciferase activity in protoplasts transiently transfected with optx:luc  indicating that both cyclic nucleotides can up-regulate expression of the optx gene. whether this is because response elements in the promoter are not specific for cgmp in plants or additional camp response elements are present remains to be determined. it is possible that like mammalian cells  <cit>  there is considerable cross talk between the machinery controlling gene expression in plant cells in response to cyclic nucleotides. however, of the three promoters examined in this study, only the optx promoter contains both a mammalian cgmp and a putative ga response element .

nitric oxide has been shown to lead to increases in cytosolic cgmp levels in plants  <cit>  as well as animal systems  <cit> . to test whether the promoter luciferase construct optx:luc could be used to show physiological differences in cgmp levels within plant protoplasts we used the nitric oxide donor dea/nonoate at  <dig> nm which has been shown to induce increases in cytosolic cgmp in plants  <cit> . the plant hormone gibberellic acid  has also been shown to raise cgmp levels in plants and induce gene expression at concentrations such as 30 μm  <cit> . therefore we used a 30 μm ga treatment as well in the transiently transfected protoplast experiments. protoplasts transfected with optx:luc showed a significant increase in luciferase activity when compared to the untreated control for both the 30 μm ga and  <dig> nm dea/nonoate treatments .

augmentation of the cyclic nucleotide sensitive promoter optx
dna sequence analysis of the three promoters showed that only the optx promoter contained the mammalian cgmp response element  identified by hum et al.  <cit>  . to our knowledge this cgmp response element is the only element responding to changes in intracellular cgmp that has been characterized in animal cells or plant cells. to potentially enhance cgmp sensitivity of the optx promoter we used mutagenesis to incorporate an additional three mammalian cgmp response elements to make optxcgmpre:luc . arabidopsis protoplasts transfected with the optxcgmpre:luc showed no significant difference in luciferase activity for any of the cgmp concentrations tested when compared to the untreated control . this could be because the mammalian response element is ineffective in plants or alternatively it may be due to the positioning of the augmented response elements close to the transcription start site where cgmp activated dna binding proteins may not correctly modulate the transcriptional machinery as the cgmp response element is over 1000 bp upstream of npr1/gca in the mammalian system  <cit> .

a promoter analysis study identified a putative ga response element  which is found at a higher frequency in promoters of genes responsive to ga  <cit> . both the optx and chx <dig> promoters contained a ga response element sequence. the ga response element is located −194 bp upstream from atg in the optx promoter  and is found much further from the start of the gene in chx <dig> . since ga induces transient increases in cgmp that in turn directly alters expression of ga-induced genes in plants  <cit> , we used mutagenesis to incorporate five additional ga response elements into the optx promoter to make optxgare:luc . both the membrane permeable analogues of cgmp and camp increased luciferase activity to similar levels in protoplasts transfected with optxgare:luc  which limits using this construct to reporting gene induction by either cyclic nucleotide. importantly, ga treatment also significantly increased luciferase activity  supporting the premise that the response element is likely to be activated downstream of increases of cyclic nucleotides such as cgmp induced by ga . these findings demonstrate that the optx and optxgare promoter reporter systems can be used to report gene induction following increases in cyclic nucleotide levels thereby reporting on a complete pathway mediated through changes in cyclic nucleotide levels as distinct from reporting specific changes in levels of the cyclic nucleotides. when employed together with studies using flincg that reports on intracellular transient increases of cgmp  <cit> , the two systems will allow unraveling of conditions and levels of cyclic nucleotides necessary to lead to changes in gene transcription.

optx promoters report cyclic nucleotide induced gene activity in bacterial cells
to date, only members of the α-proteabacteria are known to naturally synthesize cgmp although other bacteria produce camp and the di-cyclic nucleotides c-di-amp and c-di-gmp  <cit> . therefore a system that detects cgmp in bacteria would be particularly useful to screen for novel and functional recombinant guanylate cyclases from other organisms. one of our goals is to develop an assay that we can use to detect novel recombinant guanylate cyclases expressed in bacteria. with this concept in mind, we tested the three optx constructs in the bl21-ai e. coli strain which we selected as a representative bacterium because it is suitable for high-level recombinant protein expression. the optx:luc, optxcgmpre:luc and optxgare:luc were transformed separately into the bl21-ai e. coli. at least four independently transformed colonies were grown and tested for each promoter/ treatment combination. we normalized each sample using the od <dig> reflecting cell number for the sample and expressed the luciferase activity as a percentage of the untreated control which was set at 100%. the promoter optx:luc showed no significant difference in luciferase activity from the untreated control for  <dig>  - 3 μm cgmp treatments . conversely, expression of both the augmented constructs was significantly induced by cyclic nucleotide treatments. the optxcgmpre:luc transformants showed a significant increase in luciferase activity when treated with  <dig>  μm, 1 μm and 3 μm 8-bromo cgmp but not  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μm 8-bromo cgmp . however, this increase in luciferase activity appears to be independent of the purine base as similar changes were seen with treatments containing dibutyryl camp . the optxgare:luc showed a significant increase in luciferase activity when compared to the untreated control when 8-bromo cgmp was between  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μm but not at  <dig>  μm or 1 μm . again similar increases were observed in response to dibutyryl camp in bl21-ai cells transformed with optxgare:luc . to date no known guanylate cyclases or cgmp signaling system has been identified in e. coli although highly characterized camp signal networks are present  <cit> . one possibility is that the native bacterial transcription factors recognize both purine cyclic nucleotides without discriminating between them although it needs to be shown that e. coli transcription factors can bind to response elements in plant promoters.

the results shown in figure  <dig> encouraged us to test if we could detect cgmp in bl21-ai cells expressing a novel guanylate cyclase. previous work using bl <dig> cells expressing the novel plant cytoplasmic guanylate cyclase gc <dig> indicated that cgmp is generated within bacteria during the period when protein expression is being induced  <cit> . we have demonstrated that the cytoplasmic domain of the plant phytosulfokine receptor  contains guanylate cyclase but not adenylate cyclase activity  <cit>  and chose this as the test protein. we co-transformed bacteria with the cytoplasmic domain of pskr <dig> and either optxcgmpre or optxgare to test if the expressed pskr <dig> generates cgmp that in turn induces downstream luciferase activity. at 3 hours following induction of pskr <dig> expression, the luciferase activity is increased relative to the un-induced control treatments indicating that this is indeed the case . the significant albeit small increase in cgmp levels in the induced compared to the un-induced control bacteria  correlates with the induction of luciferase activity. this is an exciting finding as it indicates that these bacterial reporter assays can be used as a preliminary functional screen for novel guanylate cyclase enzymes. the advantage of such a preliminary screen is that recombinant proteins containing guanylate cyclase activity are identified prior to time consuming full characterization studies as outlined in figure  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed promoter reporter systems based on the plant optx promoter that can be employed in bacteria and plant cells to report changes in gene expression reflecting alterations in endogenous cyclic nucleotide levels. the promoter is from the plant gene optx and augmentation of the promoter reporter with cgmp and ga response elements resulted in changes of efficacy in the different cell types. in plant cells the optx and gare augmented reporter do not discriminate between cgmp and camp but both respond to changes in intracellular cgmp levels and both can be readily used in transiently transfected protoplasts. augmentation of the optx promoter with either the ga or the separate cgmp response elements allowed detection of increased levels of cyclic nucleotides in bacteria. the augmented promoters can also be employed to detect the activity of novel recombinant guanylate cyclases in bacteria .

