BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions are central to protein function; they constitute the physical basis for formation of complexes and pathways that carry out virtually all major cellular processes. these interactions can be relatively permanent or "obligate"  or "transient" . both the distortion of protein interfaces in obligate complexes and aberrant recognition in transient complexes can lead to disease  <cit> .

with the increasing availability of high throughput experimental data, two related problems have come to the forefront of research on protein interactions: i) prediction of protein-protein interaction partners; and ii) prediction of protein binding sites or protein-protein interfaces . although most effort to date has focused on one or the other of these problems, it is possible to use information from predicted protein-protein interaction networks as input for interface prediction methods, and predicted interface residues can be used as input for interaction partner predictions, a concept explored in a recent study of yip et al.  <cit> . in the current study, we focus on the prediction of protein-protein interfaces, specifically, the use of sequence homology-based methods to predict which residues of a query protein participate in its physical interaction with a partner protein or proteins.

computational prediction of protein-protein interfaces
several different genetic, biochemical, and biophysical methods have been used to identify and characterize protein interfaces  <cit> . these experiments are very valuable and have contributed greatly to our knowledge of protein-protein interfaces. however, the high cost in time and resources required for these experiments call for reliable computational approaches to identify interface residues. in addition to providing important clues to biological function of novel proteins, computational predictions can reduce the searching space required for docking two polypeptides  <cit> .

to distinguish interface residues from non-interface surface residues, a wide range of sequence, physicochemical and structural features have been investigated  <cit> , and many in silico approaches to protein-protein interface prediction have been explored in the literature . protein-protein interface prediction algorithms can be classified into three categories:  sequence-based methods, which use only the primary amino acid sequence of the query protein as input  <cit> ;  structure-based methods, which make use of information derived from the structure of the query protein  <cit> ; and  methods that use both sequence and structure derived information in making predictions  <cit> .

several sequence-based protein-protein interface prediction methods have been explored in the literature  <cit> . most, if not all, of these methods, extract for each residue in the query protein, a fixed length window that includes the target residue and a fixed number of its sequence neighbours. each residue is classified as an interface residue or a non-interface residue based on features of the amino acids in the corresponding window. various methods differ both in the specific machine learning algorithms or statistical methods employed and in terms of the specific features of the amino acids used. commonly used features include the identity of the amino acids in the window  <cit> , the amino acid composition of interfaces  <cit> , the physicochemical properties of the amino acids  <cit> , and the degree of conservation of the amino acids   <cit> . some studies report substantial improvements in interface residue prediction when predicted structural properties, e.g., solvent surface accessibility and secondary structure of the residues are utilized  <cit> .

a number of structure-based methods  <cit>  or hybrid methods that combine both sequence and structure-derived information  <cit>  have been proposed for predicting protein interfaces. the performance of the best-performing sequence-based methods is generally lower than that of structure-based methods . a possible explanation for the difference in the performance of sequence-based and structure-based protein interface residue predictors is that the latter can trivially eliminate non-surface residues from the set of candidate interface residues and potentially exploit a rich set of features derived from the 3d structures.

the use of structure-based methods, however, is limited to proteins for which the structure of the query protein is available, and the number of solved structures significantly lags behind the number of protein sequences  <cit> . even when the structure of a query protein is available, the application of structure-based prediction methods is complicated by conformational changes that take place when some proteins bind to their partners. structure-based methods rely on structural features extracted from the structure in the unbound state or from a bound complex that has been separated into constituent proteins. it is unclear whether such structural features are indeed reliable predictors of interfaces for proteins that undergo significant conformational changes upon binding  <cit> . moreover, higher organisms have a large number of intrinsically disordered proteins/regions  that undergo induced folding only after binding to their partners  <cit> . such disordered regions - for which experimental structure information is, by definition, lacking - participate in many important cellular recognition events, and are believed to contribute to the ability of some hub proteins to interact with multiple partners in protein-protein interaction networks  <cit> . hence, there is an urgent need for sequence-based methods for reliable prediction of protein-protein interfaces.

analysis of interface residue conservation
the relationship between sequence conservation and various aspects of protein structure, interaction, expression, and function has been the focus of many studies over the past decades  <cit> , and sequence homology-based methods have been used for predicting both protein structure and protein function  <cit> . thus, it is natural to ask whether protein-protein interface residues can be reliably identified using sequence homology-based methods. published studies disagree on whether protein-protein interfaces are more conserved than the rest of the protein sequences. grishin and phillips  <cit> , after examining five enzyme families, concluded that the degree of conservation of interfaces is same as that of protein sequences as a whole. the studies by caffrey et al.  <cit>  as well as reddy and kaznessis  <cit> , found that the interacting surface-patches are not significantly more conserved than other surface-patches. caffrey et al.  <cit> , based on their study of  <dig> protein-protein interacting chains, found that interface residues are slightly more conserved than the rest of the protein surface residues. reddy and kaznessis  <cit> , based on their study of  <dig> hetero transient and non-transient complexes, found that the fraction of highly conserved interface residues is greater than that of highly conserved non-interface surface residues. they suggested that the number of conserved residue positions is more predictive of protein-protein binding sites than the average conservation index of residues in the target patch. choi et al.  <cit>  analyzed  <dig>  protein interfaces based on a conservation score that measures the position-specific evolutionary rate estimated using a phylogenetic tree  <cit> , and concluded that protein interface residues are more conserved than non-interface surface residues.

despite the disagreement regarding whether interface residues are conserved or not, several researchers have used conservation of residues to predict protein-protein interfaces with varying degrees of success. for example, the evolutionary trace  method  <cit>  and its variants  <cit>  calculate conservation score for each residue using a phylogenetic tree built from a multiple sequence alignment. residues with conservation scores above a certain threshold are mapped onto the 3d structure of the protein to identify putative binding sites. carl et al.  <cit>  used a dataset of sixteen transient protein chains to explore the feasibility of predicting protein-protein binding sites based on their membership in structurally conserved surface patches . bordner and abagyan  <cit>  and wang et al.  <cit>  calculated evolution rate for each amino acid of protein sequences using phylogenetic trees, and used evolution rate as an attribute along with other physicochemical and sequential attributes to train a svm classifier for interface residue prediction. panchenko et al.  <cit>  predicted functional sites of proteins using spatial averages of sequence conservation scores. shoemaker et al.  <cit>  have recently developed a web server for predicting protein binding sites by inspecting homologous proteins with similar structures. based on a statistical analysis of target-template sequence alignments on a benchmark dataset of  <dig> two-chain complexes, kundrotas and vakser  <cit>  have shown that it is possible to obtain high quality alignment of interface residues even when the overall alignment quality is rather poor. specifically, they concluded that in approximately 50% of the complexes considered, the overall accuracy of the modelled interfaces was good enough for guiding docking.

overview of the paper
against this background, we study a class of sequence homology-based methods for protein-protein interface prediction. we introduce a novel measure of interface conservation that captures the degree to which interface residues in each protein are conserved among its sequence homologs. first, we describe the results of our analysis of the interface conservation among homologous sequences using several large non-redundant datasets of protein-protein interfaces extracted from the protein data bank   <cit> , including datasets that allow us to compare "obligate" versus "transient" interfaces. to explore the extent to which interface conservation can be exploited in the prediction of interface residues, we systematically examined the relationship between interface conservation and six sequence-based variables. in one set of experiments, we examined binding interfaces in homologous proteins without specifying a specific interaction partner . the results of this analysis indicated that interfaces in obligate complexes are, in general, more highly conserved than those in transient complexes. in a complementary set of experiments, we examined interfaces in complexes between specific pairs of proteins . in contrast to the results for nps-interfaces, by focusing on the interface of each query protein with a specific binding partner, we discovered a high degree of sequence conservation in transient ps-interfaces. this analysis revealed that transient interfaces tend to be highly partner-specific.

second, based on the results of protein interface conservation analysis we propose homppi, a class of sequence homology-based approaches to protein interface prediction. we present two variants of homppi:  nps-homppi , which can be used to predict interface residues of a query protein in the absence of knowledge of the interaction partner; and  ps-homppi , which can be used to predict the interface residues of a query protein with a specific target protein. the performance of both homppi methods was evaluated on several benchmark datasets, including a large non-redundant set of transient complexes. due to the increasing importance of intrinsically disordered proteins in understanding molecular recognition mechanics and in rational drug design and discovery  <cit> , we also tested nps-homppi on two datasets of intrinsically disordered proteins.

finally, we compare the performance of homppi with that of other web-based servers for interface residue prediction, using several performance measures that assess the reliability of correctly predicting, on average, interface and non-interface residues in a given protein. we discuss the relative advantages and limitations of homology-based methods for interface residue prediction.

RESULTS
to define conditions under which it should be possible to infer protein-protein interface  residues using conservation of interfaces in homologous proteins and/or complexes, we systematically examined the relationship between interface residue conservation and sequence similarity . our analyses are based on the following datasets: nr <dig> , oblig <dig> and trans <dig> , and nr_pdbaa_s2c  .

conservation of ppis in non-partner specific  interfaces
first, we examined the conservation of ppi residues in the absence of knowledge of interaction partners. for this study, we analyzed interfaces in putative homologs  of each protein in a large non-redundant dataset, nr <dig>  after removing chains with interfaces containing fewer than  <dig> amino acids, we were left with  <dig> chains. for each of the  <dig> remaining proteins, we extracted homologs from the nr_pdbaa_s2c database using blastp  <cit>  with expectation value  ≤  <dig> from the resulting set of homologs, we eliminated those that were nearly identical to the query sequence . to ensure that the interface residues of the homologs could be reliably determined, we retained only those homologs that were part of complexes with resolution  <dig>  Å or better. for each query-homolog pair in sequence alignments generated by blastp, we used the interface residues of the homolog to predict the interface residues of the query protein. we calculated the correlation coefficient  between the predicted and actual interface residues of the query protein, and refer to this value as the interface conservation  score, i.e., the degree of conservation of interface residues between the query protein and its homologs .

we examined the dependence of the interface conservation score on six ncbi blast alignment statistics: expectation value , identity score, positive score, local alignment length  and two alignment length fractions  and . the eval is a statistic that estimates the number of hits expected by chance when searching database of a particular size; the lower the eval value, the more significant the score. the identity score is a measure of the degree of sequence identity between two amino acid sequences. the positive score returned by blastp is the number of positive-scoring matches in an alignment. it takes into account observed substitutions that preserve the physicochemical properties of the original residue. the lal is the length of the local alignment; alignment length fractions are lal normalized by the length of the query or the length of the identified homologous sequence. we represent each query-homolog pair as a six dimensional vector defined by these six variables.

principal components analysis of nps-interface conservation space
as a first exploratory step, pca  was applied to visualize the relationships between the interface conservation  scores and the six blast alignment statistics. pca, which is a dimensionality reduction technique, is typically used to represent dimensions that explain maximum variability and provide a simple and parsimonious description of the covariance structure  <cit> .

the pca analysis allows us to identify highly correlated explanatory variables. in figure  <dig>  the axes of the original  <dig> dimensional space are represented as blue vectors with red circles at their tips in the 2-dimensional space defined by pc <dig> and pc <dig>  highly correlated vectors  have small angles between them. this type of analysis reveals, for example, that the two alignment length fractions are highly correlated with each other, as are the positive score and identity score. explanatory variables that are highly correlated with each other make similar contributions to the ic score.

blast eval is a strong indicator of nps-interface conservation
we studied the relationship of each individual variable with interface conservation. a scatter plot in which the ic score for each query-homolog pair is plotted against log is shown in figure  <dig>  one can see that log is a good indicator of protein interface conservation. when log > - <dig> the median values of ic scores cluster around  <dig> . in the region of log ≤- <dig>  the medians of ic scores increase as the log  decreases. when log < - <dig> the medians of ic scores tend to be greater than  <dig>  .

nps-interface conservation in twilight/safe zone is strongly positively correlated with log
a high blast positive score reflects nps-interface conservation
the relationship between ic scores and the positive scores of query-homolog alignments is shown in figure  <dig>  the median values of the ic scores begin to increase at a blast positive score of ~ 90%.

we also studied the relationship of ic score with the identity score, and the local alignment length fractions  and . as expected, the identity score results were similar to those for the positive score. the ic score was not as strongly linearly related to lal fraction as it was to the log . taken together, these results provide guidelines for choosing sequence similarity thresholds that reflect the degree of conservation in nps interfaces.

nps-interface conservation in transient versus obligate binding proteins
in light of reports that protein interfaces in transient complexes are not as conserved as those in obligate  complexes  <cit> , it is interesting to ask whether the query-homolog pairs with near-zero ic scores  tend to involve proteins that participate in transient interactions. to address this question, we further studied the differences in protein interface conservation among proteins that participate in transient versus obligate interactions.

to compare protein interfaces in transient and obligate complexes, we used the trans <dig> and oblig <dig> dataset obtained from  <cit> , which includes a total of  <dig> chains from transient and  <dig> chains from obligate complexes. we extracted the homologs of each chain from nr_pdbaa_s2c using blastp with eval ≤  <dig> query and homolog proteins with interfaces containing fewer than  <dig> amino acids were removed, as were homologs that were nearly identical to the query proteins. we extracted  <dig>  query-homolog pairs containing chains that participate in transient interactions and  <dig>  pairs containing chains that participate in obligate interactions.

in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , our analyses showed that ppis are conserved in both obligate and transient binding proteins. as before, we performed pca to examine the conservation of interfaces as a function of log, identity score, positive score, log, and alignment length fractions  and . the pca biplots in figure  <dig> show that data points corresponding to different ic scores  are partially segregated, indicating that the six alignment statistics can distinguish query-homolog pairs with highly conserved interface residues  from those in which interface residues are not conserved .

the results in figure  <dig> also reveal that interface residues in proteins from obligate complexes  are more conserved among their sequence homologs than those from transient complexes . figure  <dig> further illustrates differences in interface conservation in obligate  versus transient complexes . the median values of ic scores plotted as a function of log  are more frequently above  <dig> for pairs that involve obligate binding proteins  than for those that involve transient binding proteins . regression analysis of these data confirms that log for the obligate dataset has a larger coefficient  than that for the transient dataset , which confirms that protein interfaces are more conserved in the obligate complexes than in transient complexes analyzed in this study.

also, comparison of figure 6e and 6f reveals that the positive score is a good indicator of interface conservation in the case of proteins from obligate complexes; however, this is not the case for proteins from transient complexes. for obligate binding proteins, when the positive score exceeds 45%, the medians of ic scores begin to show an increasing trend . in contrast, in the case of transient binding proteins, medians of ic scores do not begin to increase until the positive score approaches 70% .

it is important to emphasize that all of the interfaces analyzed above are what we refer to as "non partner-specific" . that is, the interface residues of a query protein represent the complete set of its interface residues with all of its partners. however, a given query protein can interact with different binding partners through different interfaces. a possible explanation for the low ic scores for nps-transient interfaces is that the union of all interface residues of a transient binding protein are not highly conserved across its homologs. this does not preclude the possibility that such interfaces are conserved in the context of partner-specific interactions. we investigate this possibility in the following section.

conservation of ppis in partner-specific  interfaces
to examine the conservation of partner-specific  interfaces in transient protein complexes, we again used the trans <dig> dataset of protein pairs that participate in transient interactions  <cit> . for each of the proteins in an interacting pair, we separately extracted the corresponding homologs, using blastp with expectation value eval≤ <dig> against the nr_pdbaa_s2c database. we removed homologs that are part of complexes with resolution worse than  <dig>  Å. if query proteins a and b form a complex a-b, and have homologs a' and b' that interact in a complex a'-b', we consider a'-b' as a homo-interolog of a-b. to ensure an accurate estimate of conservation, from the resulting set of homo-interologs, we eliminated those that were within the same pdb complex as the query proteins, and those that were nearly identical to the query pairs . for each protein chain in a query pair, we use the interface residues of its homolog in a homo-interolog to infer the ps interface residues of the query protein chain. thus, we use the interface residues of a' in the homo-interolog  of query pair a-b to infer the interfaces of a with b, based on the sequence alignment between a and a' obtained using blastp. we measure the similarity between a pair of interacting proteins a-b and its homo-interolog a'-b', in terms of the metrics for the quality of sequence alignment between a and a' and between b and b', using the six blast alignment statistics described above.

we used pca of  <dig>   <dig> candidate homo-interologs to explore the relationship between interface conservation  and the six alignment statistics computed from the predicted ps interfaces, e.g., of chain a when it interacts with b, using known interfaces of a' with b'. this analysis revealed that much of the observed variance in ic scores is explained by three factors:  the average log ;  the average positive score of the homo-interolog and  the alignment fractions fraca, fraca', fracb, and fracb' computed from the alignments of constituent chains  .

the results in figure  <dig> show that transient interfaces are highly conserved in homo-interologs. the trend of increasing median ic scores, as a function of decreasing logeval  or increasing positive score  or the combination of positive score and fraca × fraca' is clear . the trend of increasing ic scores as a function of fracb × fracb' is similar to that as a function of fraca × fraca' . in contrast, the, loglal, which is the average of alignment length between a and a', and between b and b', is not strongly correlated with interface conservation for ps-interfaces .

a comparison of the results for ps-interface conservation in transient complexes here  with those obtained for nps-interface conservation in transient complexes above , reveals that the conservation of transient interfaces can be detected easily when the binding partner sequence information is utilized. the seemingly weak conservation of interfaces in transient complexes shown in figure  <dig> is thus a consequence of the specificity of transient interfaces for different partners. therefore, we conclude that interfaces in transient complexes are both highly partner-specific and highly conserved, when their partner-specificity is taken into account.

homppi - homologous sequence-based protein-protein interface prediction
based on the results of our analysis of protein interface conservation described above, we developed homppi, a family of sequence homology-based algorithms for protein interface prediction. we implemented two variants of homppi:

 <dig>  nps-homppi - given a query protein sequence, nps-homppi searches the nr_pdbaa_s2c database to identify homologous proteins that are components of experimentally determined complexes with one or more other proteins. nps-homppi labels a residue of the query sequence as an "interface" residue if a majority of residues in a selected subset of homologs in alignment of the query sequence with its homologs are interface residues, and as "non-interface" residue otherwise. specifically, given a query protein, we first use nps-homppi to search for sequence homologs within the safe zone. if at least one homolog in the safe zone is found, nps-homppi uses the safe homolog to infer the interfaces of the query protein. otherwise, the process is repeated to search for homologs in the twilight zone or the dark zone. if no homologs of the query protein can be identified in any of the three zones, nps-homppi does not provide any predictions. the safe, twilight, and dark zone homologs of the query protein sequence to be used for interface prediction are identified by searching the nr_pdb_s2c database using blastp with thresholds based on the interface conservation analysis  .

 <dig>  ps-homppi - given the sequences of a query protein a and its putative binding partner b, ps-homppi searches the nr_pdbaa_s2c database to identify homologous complexes i.e., the homo-interologs of a-b. ps-homppi labels a residue of the query sequence as an "interface" residue  if a majority of the residues in the corresponding position in homologous complexes are interface residues, and as "non-interface" residues otherwise. ps-homppi uses homo-interologs in safe and twilight zones to make predictions. the ps-homppi prediction process is thus analogous to that for nps-homppi, using thresholds for "close homo-interologs" based on the results of interface conservation analysis of ps-interface conservation .

performance evaluation of homppi methods
we report several performance measures that provide estimates of the reliability of interface  residue predictions obtained using the homppi family of predictors. we compare the performance of homppi predictors with several state-of-the-art interface prediction methods on a benchmark dataset. we evaluate the effectiveness of homppi in predicting the interface residues of disordered proteins. finally, we compare the partner-specific and non-partner-specific versions of homppi.

we focus our discussion on results using several performance measures that assess the effectiveness of the methods in reliably predicting, on average, the interface and non-interface residues of any given protein . however, because several of the published studies report performance measures that assess the effectiveness of the methods in reliably assigning interface versus non-interface labels, on average, to any given protein residue, we also include results using "residue-based" performance measures in supplementary materials .

 nps-homppi performance on the benchmark <dig> dataset
among the  <dig> protein sequences in the benchmark <dig> dataset ,  <dig> sequences had at least one homolog that met the thresholds for the safe or twilight zones, based on zone boundaries determined using trans <dig> . we examined the performance of nps-homppi in predicting interface residues on each of the four different protein complex types in benchmark <dig>  as shown in table  <dig>  nps-homppi performed best on obligate homodimers, in terms of cc , sensitivity , specificity  and accuracy . performance on obligate heterodimers was comparable, although slightly lower. nps-homppi performance on transient interfaces was substantially lower than on obligate interfaces. for transient enzyme inhibitor complexes, the accuracy was  <dig> , with a cc of  <dig> ; for transient non enzyme-inhibitor complexes, the accuracy was  <dig> , with a cc of  <dig> . these results are consistent with the finding from our statistical analyses that nps-obligate interfaces are more conserved than nps-transient interfaces in their homologs.

a thresholds were chosen based on interface conservation analysis of proteins in trans <dig> 

b twilight zone is divided into two sub-zones: twilight zone  <dig> with stricter thresholds, and twilight zone  <dig> with looser thresholds.

prediction coverage reflects that predictions are made only on proteins for which homppi can identify safe/twilight zone homologs.

we also evaluated the prediction performance of nps-homppi using homologs with different degrees of sequence homology. in table  <dig>  the prediction performance is shown separately for sets of test proteins for which homppi can identify at least one homolog in safe, twilight, or dark zones. as expected, safe zone homologs consistently gave the most reliable prediction performance for all four types of complexes . both obligate and transient interfaces were predicted with moderate to high reliability  even using only distant homologs from the twilight or dark zones.

 comparison of nps-homppi with other ppi prediction servers
direct comparison of nps-homppi with other methods described in the literature is complicated by the limited availability of implementations of the underlying methods , and differences in the choice of training and evaluation datasets, evaluation procedures and evaluation measures  <cit> . hence, we limit our comparisons of homppi with five state-of-the-art methods available as web-based servers: promate  <cit> , cons-ppisp  <cit> , meta-ppisp  <cit> , pier  <cit>  and psiver <cit> . all of these methods except psiver take advantage of both sequence and experimentally determined protein structure of the query proteins. they have been reported to be among the best performing methods currently available for predicting ppis . psiver is one of the most recently published methods for interface residue prediction that only uses protein sequence-derived information. although direct comparisons of the data representation and the algorithms used by psiver with those used by other sequence-based interface residue predictors are currently not available, psiver has been reported to outperform two other sequence-based servers: isis  <cit>  and the sequence-based variant  of sppider  <cit> .

promate samples the protein surface using circular patches around a set of anchoring dots and estimates the probability that each surface dot belongs to an interface, based on the distribution of various physicochemical properties within interface and non-interface patches. cons-ppisp is a consensus method that combines six neural networks trained on six datasets. meta-ppisp is a consensus method that combines the output from cons-ppisp, promate, and pinup  <cit> . pier relies on partial least squares  regression of surface patch properties of the query protein. psiver uses pssm profiles and predicted solvent accessibility as input features, and uses a naïve bayes classifier with parameters obtained using kernel density estimation. because nps-homppi does not take structural information into account, to compare its performance with the structure-based servers, we mapped the interfaces predicted by each server onto the full sequence of each query protein in order to evaluate prediction performance on the entire protein sequence.

we compared the performance of nps-homppi with all five ppi servers on a subset of the benchmark <dig> dataset  <cit> , specifically,  <dig> out of  <dig> proteins for which nps-homppi was able to identify homologs in the safe or twilight zones. the sensitivity-specificity plots  are shown in figure  <dig>  each data point corresponds to a different classification threshold value. the prediction score of nps-homppi is simply the normalized vote  from  <dig>  homologs. thus, nps-homppi produces a limited number of distinct prediction scores.

for the two transient complex types, enzyme-inhibitors  and transient non-enzyme-inhibitors, transient , nps-homppi consistently outperforms promate, pier, meta-ppisp, cons-ppisp, and psiver except for sensitivity values lower than  <dig>  . on both obligate heterodimers  and homodimers , nps-homppi outperforms all five servers across the full range of sensitivity and specificity values for which it can generate homology-based predictions. it should be noted that structure-based methods predict which surface residues are interface residues. in contrast, sequence-based methods have the more challenging task of identifying interface residues from the set of all residues. in other words, structure-based methods can trivially eliminate all non-surface residues from the set of candidate interface residues. viewed in this light, the observed predictive performance of nps-homppi, a purely sequence-based method, suggests that it is possible to make reliable non-partner-specific interface residue predictions using only the sequences of a protein by taking advantage of the conservation of interfaces in the context of non-partner-specific interactions.

 performance of nps-homppi on intrinsically disordered proteins
intrinsically disordered proteins  and proteins containing intrinsically disordered regions  are attractive targets for drug discovery  <cit> . the lack of defined tertiary structure in idps/idrs poses a major challenge to structure-based interface prediction methods. hence, we compared the performance of nps-homppi with anchor  <cit> , a recently published method for the prediction of binding regions in disordered proteins. for this comparison, we used two non-redundant disordered protein datasets, s <dig> and s <dig>  recently collected by meszaros et al.  <cit> . some of the test proteins are based on data from nmr structures. in order to compare nps-homppi with anchor on the largest possible number of cases available to us, we extracted interface residues from these nmr cases; however, we used only sequence homologs with interface residues determined from x-ray structures to make predictions.

at present, nps-homppi has relatively high prediction coverage for long disordered proteins , but lower coverage for short disordered proteins . this is in part due to that fact that many disordered proteins available in the pdb have only nmr structures, which were excluded from the current study. incorporation of data from nmr structures in the future can be expected to increase the coverage of nps-homppi for disordered proteins.

 performance of nps-homppi versus ps-homppi
our analysis of the conservation of ps-transient interfaces described earlier suggests that many interfaces in transient protein complexes are highly partner-specific. thus, we implemented a variant of homppi, designated ps-homppi, to evaluate the possibility that prediction of interface residues, especially in transient complexes, can be improved by using sequence information about specific binding partners, when available.

we first evaluated the performance of ps-homppi on a transient complex dataset, trans <dig> . ps-homppi found at least one homo-interolog that meets the safe or twilight similarity thresholds for 60%  proteins in the trans <dig> dataset. overall, ps-homppi had an average cc of  <dig> , sensitivity of  <dig> , specificity of  <dig>  and accuracy of  <dig> .

to investigate whether the partner information is, in fact, helpful in predicting interfaces we directly compared the performance of ps-homppi with nps-homppi on the trans <dig> dataset. in trans <dig>  there were  <dig> out of  <dig> chains that for which predictions could be generated by both nps-homppi  and ps-homppi  from the safe or twilight zones .

the results shown in figure  <dig> indicate that, at least for transient interfaces in the trans <dig> dataset, ps-homppi outperforms nps-homppi. although the average values over proteins  for cc, sensitivity and specificity are similar, the median values  for ps predictions  are much higher than that for nps predictions . also, the observed variance  of ps predictions  is much smaller than that of nps predictions . these results suggest that the reliability of interface residue predictions can be improved by exploiting the knowledge of the binding partner of a query protein.

discussion
protein interface conservation across structure space
the study of protein interface conservation among proteins with similar structures has received considerable attention in recent years. by analyzing the structural similarity of representative protein-protein interfaces in dimeric proteins, gao and skolnick  <cit>  showed that the vast majority of native interfaces have a close structural neighbor with similar backbone cα geometry and interface contact pattern.

in a related study, zhang et al.  <cit>  explored the conservation of interface residues among structural neighbors of a query protein . they showed that:  interfaces are indeed conserved among structural neighbors;  the degree of interface conservation is most significant among proteins that have a clear evolutionary relationship. they further showed that conservation of interface residues among structural neighbors can be successfully exploited to predict protein-protein interfaces based on protein structure information.

to investigate the extent to which conservation of interface residues can be used to improve the prediction of protein-protein interfaces based on protein sequence information, we systematically studied interface conservation across sequence space. our results demonstrate that protein interfaces from different binding types are conserved among proteins with homologous sequences. we further showed that the degree of conservation of interfaces is even greater when putative interaction partners are taken into account. the ic score, our measure of interface conservation, unlike those used in previous studies  <cit>  , makes direct use of experimentally determined interface residues to measure the degree of interface conservation. specifically, the ic score directly measures the extent to which the interface residues of sequence homologs of a query protein are predictive of the interface residues of a query protein. hence, the ic score provides the basis for setting the parameters of our sequence homology-based interface prediction methods.

distance functions for identifying putative homologs with conserved interfaces
because we do not know the ic score for a query sequence with unknown interface residues, we identified several statistics associated with the blastp alignment of a query sequence with its homologs that are correlated with the ic score. we found that interface residues of a query protein can be reliably predicted from the known interfaces of its homologs  when the homologs are selected taking into account measures of quality of sequence alignment, specifically ncbi blast sequence alignment statistics. the homppi methods presented here use simple linear combinations of blast sequence alignment statistics, determined using pca analysis of the relationship between the statistics and the ic score. it would be interesting to explore optimal, perhaps non-linear, combinations of parameters to maximize the desired performance criteria .

conservation of interfaces in obligate and transient complexes
our results are consistent with previous studies  <cit> , in that we found interface residues to be more highly conserved than non-interface residues, in both obligate and transient complexes. we also found that when information regarding the specific binding partner of a query protein is not taken into account in estimating the conservation score, interfaces in transient complexes appear to be less highly conserved than those in obligate complexes. our results further show that transient interfaces are highly partner-specific, and that the partner-specific interfaces in transient complexes are, in fact, highly conserved. interfaces of intrinsically disordered proteins that nevertheless form ordered complexes with globular proteins are also highly conserved .

interfaces of disordered proteins are highly conserved and non partner-specific
compared with its performance on transient binding proteins in the benchmark <dig> dataset, nps-homppi performs much better on interfaces of disordered proteins in the s <dig> and s <dig> datasets. this is consistent with the conclusion of meszaros et al.  <cit>  that interfaces of intrinsically disordered proteins are evolutionarily conserved. the high degree of conservation of interface  regions in idps also reflects the important biological functions in which many disordered proteins participate. it is believed that the flexibility of disordered binding regions may facilitate the binding of idps using the same set of binding residues to different binding partners   <cit> . our results suggest that this specialized disorder-to-order transition as a result of binding may be associated with a high degree of interface conservation.

the conservation of interfaces in idps may contribute to the generally successful application of interface residue predictors to interfaces in idps. several groups have developed methods for predicting disordered binding regions, including pondr vl-xt  <cit> , anchor  <cit> , and other examples reviewed in  <cit> , that have produced encouraging results. the success of these predictors suggests that at least some sequence features are likely to be conserved within binding regions of different idps.

the fact that disordered interfaces can be reliably inferred by nps-homppi indicates that disordered interfaces are non-partner-specific, which is consistent with findings that these proteins are able to bind a broad range of ligands through common binding regions  <cit> .

performance of homppi compared with published methods
our results show that whenever the interfaces of the close sequence homologs of a query protein are available, nps-homppi outperforms several state-of-the-art protein interface prediction servers , over a broad range of sensitivity and specificity values. in the case of transient complexes , nps-homppi consistently outperforms promate, pier, meta-ppisp, cons-ppisp, and psiver except for sensitivity values lower than  <dig> . on obligate dimers , nps-homppi significantly outperforms all five servers across the full range of sensitivity and specificity values for which it can generate homology-based predictions. these results strongly suggest that it is possible to reliably predict protein interface residues using only sequence information whenever the interface residues of sequence homologs of the query protein are known. each of the webbased ppi servers with which we compared our nps-homppi server, except psiver, take advantage of the structure of the query proteins to determine surface residues, and restrict the predicted interface residues to a subset of the surface residues. this trivially reduces the number of false positive interface residue predictions  which, in turn, yields a substantial increase in the specificity of interface predictions produced by structure-based servers. consequently, purely sequence-based protein interface prediction servers have a handicap relative to structure-based prediction servers. when viewed in this light, performance of nps-homppi relative to the state-of-the-art protein interface prediction methods is especially impressive.

the homppi methods for interface residue prediction do have an important limitation, however, in that they rely on the availability putative homologs for which experimentally-determined structures of bound complexes are available in the pdb. one may ask whether the coverage of the homppi family of protein-protein interface prediction methods is broad enough to be sufficiently useful in practice. we address this question below.

prediction coverage of homppi methods
the current coverage of homppi protein interface prediction methods can be assessed from our results as follows:

nps-homppi
• benchmark <dig> dataset: nps-homppi found at least one homolog that meets the similarity thresholds for safe or twilight zones for 73%  of the obligate binding chains . among these, 82%  were predicted with both sensitivity and specificity ≥ <dig> , simultaneously. similarly, at least one homolog was found for 62%  of transient binding chains  in this dataset. among these 55%  were predicted with both sensitivity and specificity ≥ <dig> .

• trans <dig> dataset: in the case of transient query proteins in the trans <dig> dataset, nps-homppi found at least one homolog that meets the similarity thresholds for safe or twilight zones for 75%  of chains. among these, 37%  were predicted with both sensitivity and specificity ≥ <dig> .

• disordered protein datasets s <dig> and s2: in the case of disordered proteins, nps-homppi found at least one homolog that meets the similarity thresholds for safe or twilight or dark zones for 50%  of interfaces of disordered proteins in s <dig>  the short disordered protein set, and 75%  of interfaces of disordered proteins in s <dig> 

ps-homppi
• trans <dig> dataset: ps-homppi found at least one homo-interolog that meets the safe or twilight similarity thresholds for 60%  proteins in the trans <dig> dataset. among these, 80%  where predicted with sensitivity and specificity ≥ <dig> , simultaneously.

based on these results, we estimate that, at present, the coverage of the homppi protein interface prediction methods is in the range of 60-70% of all query proteins. as the structural genomics projects currently underway generate increasing numbers of structures of protein-protein complexes  <cit> , we can expect corresponding increases in the coverage of homppi family of protein interface prediction methods. in the meantime, one can envision hybrid methods that combine homppi with one or more machine learning based methods that do not require the availability of putative homologs for which experimentally determined structures of bound complexes are available in the pdb.

parameters for homppi can be relaxed for obligate interactions
the current default parameters for homppi are intentionally rather stringently set based on the results of our statistical analysis of interface conservation using trans <dig>  which is a dataset of transient binding proteins. our analyses suggest that nps-homppi has wider safe and twilight zones for obligate binding proteins than for transient binding proteins. furthermore, even dark zone homologs yield interface predictions that are accurate enough to be useful in practice, with average specificity of  <dig>  and sensitivity of  <dig>  for hetero-obligate dimers, average specificity of  <dig>  and sensitivity of  <dig>  for homo-obligate dimers . therefore, for obligate interactions, if a query protein has little sequence similarity with proteins in the pdb, the thresholds of nps-homppi can be relaxed to allow identification of more distant homologs with potentially conserved interfaces that still provide reliable interface predictions.

prediction of binding partners vs. prediction of interface residues
protein interface  predictions and protein interaction  predictions answer closely related, but different questions. non partner-specific protein interface predictors are designed to identify the residues in a query protein that are likely to make contact with the residues of one or more unspecified interaction partner proteins. partner-specific protein interface predictors are designed to identify the residues in a query protein that are likely to make contact with residues of a putative interaction partner protein. in contrast, protein interaction predictors are designed to predict whether or not a given pair of proteins is likely to interact  <cit> . although our study does not directly address the latter question, it is possible to use ps-homppi predictions to determine whether or not two query proteins interact: given a pair of protein sequences, say a and b, we can first use ps-homppi to predict the interface residues of a with its putative partner b; and the interface residues of b with its putative partner a. if, in both cases, some number of interface residues are predicted, we can infer that proteins a and b are likely to interact with each other. conversely, it is possible to use information from predicted protein-protein interactions to refine interface predictions. yip et al.  <cit>  have proposed an approach to utilize residue level information to improve the accuracy of protein level predictions, and vice versa. they have shown that a two-level machine learning framework that allows information flow between the two levels through shared features yields predictions that are more accurate than those obtained independently at each of the levels.

using interface predictions to steer docking and to rank docked conformations
reliable partner-specific interface predictions can be used to restrict the search space for protein-protein docking by specifying the contacts that need to be preserved in the docked conformation. it is also possible to rank the conformations produced by docking, based on the degree of overlap between the interface of a query protein and its binding partner in the docked conformation with the interface generated by a partner-specific interface prediction method, e.g. ps-homppi. in related work <cit> , we have shown that ps-homppi provides reliable interface predictions on a large subset of a docking benchmark dataset, and is both fast and robust in the face of conformational changes induced by complex formation. the quality of the ranking of docked conformations by ps-homppi interface prediction is consistently superior to that produced using cluspro cluster-size-based and energy-based criteria for  <dig> out of  <dig> docking complexes for which ps-homppi produces interface predictions <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we studied a large number of sequence alignments between protein pairs with known interfaces to explore the conditions under which conservation of protein interface residues, as determined by the alignment of a query sequence against its homologs/homo-interologs, can be used to reliably predict protein-protein interfaces. based on the results of these analyses, we developed homppi, a simple sequence-based method for predicting interface residues based on the known interface residues in homologous sequences. homppi has two variants: nps-homppi  and ps-homppi .

our systematic evaluation of nps-homppi showed that, when close homologs can be identified, nps-homppi can reliably predict interface residues in both obligate and transient complexes, with a performance that rivals several state-of-the-art structure-based interface prediction servers. nps-homppi can also be used as a reliable tool for identifying disordered binding regions. in this regard, nps-homppi has an advantage over structure-based interface predictors, which cannot be used to predict binding sites in disordered regions of proteins because they do not form stable structures in their unbound state. in addition, the homppi family of interface prediction methods are fast enough for proteome-wide analyses.

many studies on in silico identification of protein interfaces have been published in the past decade. however, despite the fact that many proteins are very specific in their choice of binding partners, the majority of studies focus on only one side of the bound complex. in this study, we implemented a novel partner-specific protein interface prediction method, ps-homppi, which infers interface residues based on known interfaces in the homo-interologs, i.e., complexes formed by homologs of the query protein and its putative interaction partner. when homo-interologs can be identified, ps-homppi can reliably predict highly partner-specific transient interfaces.

although our focus in this study was on prediction of protein-protein interfaces, these methods could be useful in other settings, such as sequence-based prediction of protein-dna, protein-rna, and protein-ligand interfaces, and the prediction of b and t cell epitopes.

both nps-homppi and ps-homppi have been implemented in a server available at: http://homppi.cs.iastate.edu/.

