BACKGROUND
metabolomics has been defined as the quantitative measurement of the multi-parametric metabolic response of living systems to patho-physiological stimuli or genetic modification  <cit> . it encompasses the qualitative and quantitative measurement of metabolites interacting in a biological system; targeted and untargeted strategies for analysis of metabolites can be used. targeted studies focus on the analysis of a predefined list of metabolites, whereas the initial objective of untargeted metabolomics is to analyze as many non-predefined metabolites as possible at the raw signal level. with the latter approach, identification is only carried out on relevant signals  <cit> .

recently, there has been an exponential growth in the number of published papers concerning metabolomics of a wide variety of systems  <cit> . metabolomic approaches have been used for toxicological studies  <cit> . however, in most cases, biofluids or tissues from in vivo experiments have been analyzed  <cit> . few toxicological studies have been published that concern the profiling of intracellular metabolites using in vitro cell culture systems  <cit> 

owing to ethical concerns  and cost efficiency, there is a need to develop alternatives to conventional toxicity testing incorporating animals  <cit> . among these alternatives, in vitro systems are considered particularly promising  <cit> . much research has focused on the analysis of the effects of toxic compounds using in vitro systems and omics techniques  <cit> . however, transcriptomics and proteomics have predominantly been used to elucidate the toxic mechanisms of the studied compounds.

the goals of the present work were two-fold. first, to develop an untargeted in vitro cell system methodology with reproducible metabolomics; second, to evaluate toxicant-induced cell responses on metabolic levels with regards to published data concerning the toxicant, thereby substantiating the methodology. tcdd  was chosen as the model toxic compound as it has been widely studied in vivo and in vitro  <cit> , particularly in terms of its hepatotoxic, carcinogenic and immunotoxic effects. toxic effects of dioxins mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor  include the wasting syndrome  <cit> , the induction of oxidative damage  <cit> , hepatic injury and carcinogenesis  <cit> . tcdd has also been reported to have an anti-proliferative effect  <cit> .

tcdd is an agonist of ahr, a cytosolic ligand-activated transcription factor. upon activation, ahr dimerizes with arnt to form a heterodimer that binds to dna sequences called xenobiotic response elements . through such binding, ahr up-regulates the expression of several downstream genes including those encoding xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes such as phase i  and phase ii  biotransformation enzymes  <cit> .

in this study, the human hepatoma cell line hepg <dig> was chosen for experiments concerning in vitro exposure to tcdd as this compound is a well known liver toxicant. hepg <dig> cells have preserved the activities of several phase i and phase ii enzymes  <cit> . consequently, hepg <dig> cells have been widely used as a model for various omics studies concerning carcinogenicity and hepatotoxicity  <cit> . furthermore, this cell line has been exploited for studying the effects of tcdd on gene expression using transcriptomics  <cit> .

for the untargeted metabolomics approach used in this study, multiple complementary analytical techniques were applied to polar and apolar cell lysate fractions, i.e. nmr and gcms to the apolar fraction, and nmr and lcms to the polar fraction. data analysis was performed using state-of-the-art software  <cit>  for pre-processing and alignment of data sets in combination with multivariate statistical analysis and advanced identification technology.

particular emphasis was placed on the repeatability of experiments, reproducibility of metabolic changes, normalization and validation of the results by literature comparison.

RESULTS
the advantages and limitations of omics techniques applied to in vitro systems must be elucidated before in vitro omics-based alternatives to conventional toxicity studies are considered valid. the goal of the present study was to develop a reproducible untargeted metabolomics methodology for in vitro studies using the hepg <dig> human hepatocarcinoma cell line exposed to tcdd for  <dig> h.

cell extracts containing intracellular metabolites were separated into polar and apolar fractions and subjected to 1d 1h-nmr and lc-ms or 1d 1h-nmr and gc-ms, respectively. the majority of nmr and ms data obtained were complementary in terms of their information content. raw data were pre-processed and aligned using specific software enabling statistical analysis. subsequently, metabolites with significantly altered levels were identified using databases, literature and lc-nanomate-orbitrap analysis. in this study, a particular focus concerned the repeatability of experiments with hepg <dig> cells obtained from different passages, and reproducibility of biological replicates from the same passage, and normalization of experimental data prior to comparison. results were compared with data from previous studies concerning the effects of tcdd in non-metabolomics studies.

the first major problem addressed was the normalization of chemical profiles. in this study, typical changes in metabolite concentrations were between  <dig> and 100%. compounds such as tcdd can influence overall cell metabolism and cause a decrease in the rate of cell proliferation. therefore, the net effect of exposure can be an overall decrease of metabolites because there is less cell material. if this is not taken into account it will dominate the metabolomics results and metabolic effects may go undetected. furthermore, in order to identify statistically significant changes in metabolite concentrations in the order of  <dig> to 100%, it was essential to have multiple replicates.

preliminary studies in our laboratory have shown that the age of cell cultures  could influence the magnitude of the effect of the exposure on the cell metabolome. to address this issue, hepg <dig> cells obtained from different passage numbers were exposed to medium containing  <dig> nm tcdd or the vehicle, dmso, for a period of  <dig> h.

the apolar fraction
nmr analyses of the apolar fraction were performed using the same deuterated chloroform. therefore, the residual proton signal of chloroform was used as an initial absolute internal standard. this allowed the amount of lipids in solution to be estimated by calculating the ratio between the sum of the intensities of all spectral signals  = signals 1- <dig> in figure 1) and the intensity of the residual chcl <dig> signal . these ratios are presented in the bar graph of figure  <dig>  panel a. the ts/chcl <dig> ratio was significantly higher in dmso samples than in tcdd samples, indicating that the latter extracts contained less total lipid.

ts predominantly represented membrane constituents and triglycerides. membranes are thought to be relatively constant in terms of composition. since membrane constituents such as phospholipids  are easily detected in nmr-spectra, it was assumed that generic phospholipid signals  could be used as an internal measure for the amount of membrane and thus for the number of cells. no specific signals representing lyso-pl could be detected in the nmr spectrum, indicating that this species makes a negligible contribution to the total phospholipids. this was corroborated by other known membrane constituents including free cholesterol and polyunsaturated fatty acids, which had constant ratios to the phospholipids . normalization using a pl signal as an internal standard gave excellent results when the spectra were compared manually and when the pca results were considered. since a pl signal is an internal standard, it will reflect directly potential differences in biological replicate flasks and may reflect possible small differences in sample handling; therefore this normalization method is better than using an external standard such as a cell counting average obtained from additional cell culture flasks. a better normalization allows for the detection of smaller differences in concentrations of metabolites.

the ratio between the intensity of the pl signal  and chcl <dig> , presented in figure  <dig>  panel b, was used to normalize the data before multivariate analysis  was carried out. dmso control extracts contained more phospholipids, and therefore more cells, than tcdd extracts . the difference in the number of cells between tcdd-exposed and control samples was significant for passage numbers  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  for passage numbers 11b and  <dig>  the differences in cell numbers did not reach significance.

when scaling on pl signals , the signal corresponding to the bis-allylic protons of long chain polyunsaturated acyl groups  at  <dig>  ppm was not changed, indicating unaltered levels of long chain pufas upon tcdd treatment. furthermore, the signal relating to free cholesterol  was not altered. long chain pufas and free cholesterol are important components of membranes and it was expected that these components would correlate with membrane-related phospholipid signals.

representative 1h nmr spectra replicates of apolar extracts of hepg <dig> cells scaled on the pl signal are overlaid in figure  <dig>  and the assignment of the signals is given in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> demonstrates an excellent overlapping of biological replicates of controls and of treated cell extracts. the main differences observed between the treated and non-treated cell extracts were related to triglyceride signals.

numbers correspond to those in figure  <dig> 

aprotons assignment based on  <cit> 

nmr data were pre-processed and aligned using a program developed in-house  <cit> . the aligned fingerprint data were normalized using the pl/chcl <dig> ratio and exported in the form of spreadsheets for further multivariate analysis. figure 3a presents a pca plot  and demonstrates that the biological replicates of each sample were clustered . it is remarkable that the passage number had an important effect, reflecting the difference in the magnitude of the effect of tcdd.

an alternative method of mining these normalized data sets is to perform a pca after consecutively doing a 2log transformation, a regrouping towards treatment  and control , and an anova  . from the underlying peak loadings  responsible for the separation of samples in this pca, it is possible to create a list of resonance positions that contribute significantly to the observed separation between the apolar fractions of cells exposed to tcdd and controls. the expected decrease in triglyceride content, as observed in figure  <dig> , was the major difference between the treated and non-treated samples . this effect, clearly observed during visual inspection of the nmr spectra, differed significantly in the five experiments conducted. furthermore, the concentration of cholesterol ester was decreased  after tcdd treatment . the decreases in triglyceride and cholesterol ester content were accompanied by a decrease in the intensity of the signals related to unsaturated acyl groups  due to allylic, bis-allylic and olefinic protons, respectively .

the nmr data suggested that fatty acid composition changed as a result of tcdd exposure. therefore, a gc-ms analysis of the fatty acid composition was performed on the apolar fraction of the cells. consistent with the 1h nmr results, there was a difference in the apolar fractions of cells exposed to tcdd and dmso with regard to the lipid content. among the methyl esters of fatty acids that were identified, the arachidonic  and docosahexaenoic  pufas had the same profile within the samples. the nmr data demonstrated that long chain pufa content correlates highly with pl. therefore, samples were normalized on the basis of the sum of the aa and dha signals. this normalized dataset was subjected to mva . the pca plot obtained was similar to that obtained for 1h nmr.

in order to extract the most significant differences between the exposures, the samples were re-grouped with regard to the treatments and re-analyzed .

the selection of peaks underlying the largest differences  between the treatments were identified. table  <dig> presents these fatty acids and their fold change and indicates that the content of several fatty acids decreased due to tcdd treatment. however, there was a slight increase in the proportion of saturated fatty acids with  <dig>  and  <dig>  carbon atoms, and an increase in the proportion of an unidentified c18: <dig> isomer  . the decrease in several unsaturated groups observed in the gc-ms data  is in agreement with the nmr data.

*underscore letters indicate isomers .

individual passage number results are in additional file  <dig> .

the polar fraction
the 1h nmr spectra of polar fractions were normalized using the pl/chcl <dig> ratio described above  and presented in figure 2b. representative normalized 1h nmr spectra replicates of polar extracts from hepg <dig> cells were overlaid  and the assignment of the signals is presented in table  <dig>  the normalized pre-processed and aligned nmr data were subjected to multivariate analysis and the output  is presented in figure 6a. differences between the polar fraction of cells exposed to tcdd and those exposed to the control can clearly be observed following the x-axis of the pca. the y-axis represents the differences between the different passage numbers. to identify effects due to tcdd treatment, an anova   with regard to the treatment was performed, followed by pca . from the underlying peak loadings  responsible for the separation of samples in the pca, it is possible to create a list of resonance positions that contribute significantly to the observed pca separation.

numbers correspond with those in figure  <dig> 

aprotons assignment based on commercial standards, human metabolome database  <cit>  and on ref  <cit> 

bs: singlet; d: doublet; dd: doublet/doublet; m: multiplet; ov: different overlapping signals

conly observed signals are shown

the normalized nmr data indicated that the levels of several polar intracellular metabolites decreased due to exposure to tcdd . however, the intensities of signals relating to taurine , citrate , reduced glutathione, gsh  and oxidized glutathione, gssg  increased. the gsh/gssg ratio increased by 18% due to tcdd exposure.

the fold changes are given as the ratio of the average content in tcdd and in dmso. individual passage number results are in additional file  <dig> .

*tentatively identified

the same extracts were analyzed by lc-ms in order to obtain more detailed information concerning the differences in polar metabolite levels due to treatment. the lc-ms data were pre-processed and aligned using metalign, the program developed in-house  <cit> . the aligned fingerprint data, in the form of generated spreadsheets, were normalized using the pl/chcl <dig> ratio and subjected to 2log transformation and anova with p <  <dig>  followed by pca . the separation between samples was dominated by passage number rather than by treatment. in order to determine the effect of tcdd on the polar fraction of the cells, the samples of this dataset were re-grouped with regard to treatment, and an anova  followed by a pca was performed after 2log transformation . from the peak loadings  responsible for the separation of samples in this pca, it is possible to create a list of masses that contributed significantly to the observed pca separation. this list of masses was screened for molecular ions that showed at least a  <dig>  fold change due to the treatment. table  <dig> lists the metabolites and their fold change, as determined on the basis of fragmentation data from lc-nanomate-orbitrap experiments. table  <dig> presents the exact experimental masses of these metabolites, together with their obtained fragments. a few metabolites remained unidentified.

1experimental value obtained in our measurements

2tentatively assigned formula and/or identification

there were significant increases in citric acid  and in gssg  and gsh  contents in tcdd treated samples, in general agreement with the 1h nmr data. however, the gsh/gssg ratio as determined from lc-ms data was reduced, in contrast to the nmr data. generally, nmr data are more quantitative and reliable; furthermore, the lc-ms data were acquired at a later date than the nmr data. in a follow-up nmr study on the stability of the sample, it was observed that the intensity of the gsh signal decreased over time during storage whereas the intensity of the gssg signal increased . no other metabolic changes were observed.

this reaction is known to be dependent on ph . therefore storage conditions such as ph are important. nmr samples were measured directly after adding phosphate buffer to the freshly made extracts. in this study the uplc-tof/ms samples were stored at -20°c without the phosphate buffer and therefore under more acidic conditions . the maximum storage time before uplc-tof/ms measurement was  <dig> months. under these storage conditions still some conversion to of gsh to gssg was present as deduced from our experiments.

discussion
the main aim of this study was to demonstrate the feasibility of using metabolomics on intracellular compounds of in vitro cell systems such as hepg <dig> cells, as an alternative approach to studying the effects of toxicants. we have demonstrated that reproducible results can be obtained and that differences between controls from different experiments can be subjected to statistical analysis, but that caution is required with regard to repeatability of experiments; generally, the same effects are observed in different experiments but their magnitudes can differ. however, there is a consistent effect  on metabolic profiles using an untargeted approach. the changes in metabolite concentrations are minimal and can vary because of the effect of the treatment on cell numbers. therefore, normalization , as described above, is crucial; so is having enough biological replicates to ensure the accuracy of the data. without normalization or sufficient biological replicates, several of the metabolic changes may not have been detected. in apparent contradiction to the normalization using pl, it has been reported that tcdd induces the expression of the phospholipase a2α  gene in mouse hepatoma hepa-1c1c <dig>  <cit> . however, in this hepg <dig> study, degradation of pl was not evident with regard to total pl. furthermore, a parallel study using transcriptomics did not provide evidence of an effect of tcdd on pla2α gene expression in hepg <dig> cells; this supports the present findings for hepg <dig> cells and supports the validity of the chosen normalization method.

to substantiate the usefulness of the untargeted metabolomics methodology, the observed changes in metabolite levels were interpreted in the light of published data concerning the effect of tcdd. ultimately, this was the validation of the procedures and protocols developed in this study. in general, a decrease or increase of an intracellular metabolite concentration is not necessarily an indicator of flux. actual metabolite levels depend on how biochemical pathways/processes are regulated, how metabolites in pathways interact and how fast and in which directions reactions occur . cells tend to balance their metabolism after perturbation in order to maintain homeostasis. therefore, it is likely that only changes in the main pools of substrates in the cell are measured when it is exposed to a toxicant. inhibition/activation of a pathway may lead to increased or decreased levels of relevant pools of compounds. however, it is often difficult to determine whether inhibition or activation is relevant by observing metabolite concentrations at one time point. as discussed in more detail below, tcdd is known to have an effect on the proliferative capacity, metabolism and antioxidant status of the cell.

effect on cell proliferation
membrane constituents such as pl  and free cholesterol are present at lower levels in extracts obtained after treatment with tcdd because there are fewer cells in the culture, and are indicative of decreased proliferation during exposure; the anti-proliferative effect of tcdd has been described previously  <cit> . the lower levels of nucleotides in treated extracts indicate a change in metabolites known to be involved in dna synthesis .

spermidine and n1-acetylspermidine were also found in lower levels after tcdd treatment. polyamines have important functions in cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis, and they are essential for hepatic growth and regeneration  <cit> . polyamines can be synthesized in liver from agmatine   <cit> , but ornithine decarboxylase  is the main enzyme responsible for polyamine biosynthesis. odc is involved in the conversion of ornithine into putrescine, the precursor of other polyamines  <cit> . their catabolism, on the other hand, is regulated by the enzymatic action of the polyamines spermidine/spermine n1-acetyltransferase  and diamine oxidase  <cit> .

odc is induced during conditions where there is enhanced gene activation and tissue growth. it has been reported that odc induction is inhibited by tcdd  <cit> .

therefore, it is possible that induction of polyamine synthesis in cultured hepg <dig> cells was inhibited by tcdd, resulting in the low content of spermidine.

effect on metabolism
changes in metabolic profiles due to tcdd treatment of hepg <dig> cells indicates major changes in the general metabolism of these cells, which involves fatty acids, amino acids and nucleotides. this is reminiscent of wasting syndrome  <cit> .

the decreases in triglycerides, cholesterol ester and unsaturated fatty acids observed in the 1h nmr analysis of the apolar fraction, together with the decreases in several fatty acids observed in the gc-ms data, indicate that under the conditions used in this study, tcdd affected lipid metabolism.

several in vivo studies  <cit>  have demonstrated that tcdd reduces the activity of enzymes involved in the synthesis of de novo fatty acids  and in cholesterol biosynthesis  or the expression of genes encoding these enzymes  <cit> . this effect, which was also observed in experiments using mouse embryo fibroblasts  <cit> , supports the results presented here. in studies carried out in vivo  <cit>  and in vitro  <cit> , it has been reported that the effect of tcdd on the gene expression of enzymes involved in the de novo synthesis of fatty acids is mediated by ahr.

using gc-ms analysis it is possible to determine the nature of the fatty acids that are most affected by exposure to tcdd . the levels of the majority of fatty acids decreased upon treatment. however, the contents of heptadecanoic  and octadecanoic, i.e. stearic , acids were increased after exposure. the increased percentage of saturated and the decreased percentage of mono-unsaturated fatty acids could be due to the decreased expression of stearoyl-coa-desaturase , as demonstrated in mouse embryo fibroblasts after tcdd exposure  <cit> . scd <dig> is the rate limiting enzyme in the biosynthesis of mono-unsaturated fatty acids and catalyzes the introduction of the cis double bond in the Δ <dig> position of acyl coa substrates  <cit> . therefore, inhibiting the expression of scd <dig> using tcdd would partially explain the increased ratio between saturated/monounsaturated fatty acids observed in this study.

pantothenic acid and amp are metabolites found in lower concentrations after exposure to tcdd . pantothenic acid and amp are two of the three precursors for coenzyme a  synthesis. in general, during fatty acid degradation and synthesis, coa transports fatty acids as acyl groups through repetitive degradative or synthetic cycles.

furthermore, decreases in the content of propionyl- and butyryl-carnitines were observed when cells were exposed to tcdd. these short chain acyl-carnitines are metabolic products of the reaction of acyl coa and carnitine, which is mediated by transferases in the mitochondria  <cit> . formation of butyryl- and propionyl-carnitines is favored when butyryl and propionyl-coa accumulate in the mitochondria owing to an increased acyl-coa/coa ratio. in the case of propionyl-coa, an increase in the catabolism of amino acids such as valine, isoleucine and - indirectly - threonine and methionine also favors its formation  <cit> . changes in these carnitine derivatives indicate that mitochondrial activity and transport across mitochondrial membranes is affected by coa modulation and/or beta-oxidation of fatty acids.

the level of citrate increased, whereas the level of lactate decreased, after exposure. citrate is a feedback inhibitor for glycolysis at the level of phosphofructokinase. lactate is a product of the conversion of pyruvate by lactate dehydrogenase. these two metabolite changes can indicate that glycolytic activity is lower because of an influx of acetyl-coa, for instance due to fatty acid beta-oxidation. this is in agreement with the breakdown of triglycerides and degradation of fatty acids, and changed activity in mitochondria .

together, these metabolic effects are reminiscent of a wasting syndrome in which fatty acid metabolism and energy metabolism  are affected, and the amino acid and nucleic acid pools are reduced. these latter effects could contribute to the observed decrease in cell proliferation. however, it is not clear from the data whether beta-oxidation increased or if fatty acids were transported out of the cell. in adipose tissue, tcdd mobilizes fatty acids towards the plasma  <cit> . an increase in amino acids circulating in plasma owing to tcdd exposure has previously been reported  <cit> . therefore, the data could imply a shut-down of the cells followed by the export of several metabolites.

several in vivo studies demonstrate an accumulation of lipids in the liver  <cit> , although the effects of tcdd vary depending on the dose, exposure-time or test animal used  <cit> . an increase in liver lipid content is in contrast to the results found in this research. however, in the published studies, a loss in body fat is demonstrated, as is an increase in the serum lipid content  <cit> . the increased serum lipid content could increase uptake and accumulation of extrahepatic lipids in liver  <cit> . this would explain the occurrence of a fatty liver in vivo, and the differences in terms of lipid content between in vivo and in vitro studies.

effect on antioxidant status
nmr and lc-ms spectra demonstrated an increase in reduced  and oxidized  glutathione content in samples treated with tcdd . however, it has been reported that gsh content decreases after exposure to tcdd  <cit> . furthermore, from the 1h nmr data, it was observed that the gsh/gssg ratio increased ca. 20% with tcdd exposure. this ratio, considered a parameter for measuring the oxidative status of a cell, has been reported to decrease in several in vivo studies as a consequence of exposure to tcdd  <cit> . however, data are variable and some authors have reported an increase in the gsh/gssg ratio after mice were treated with tcdd  <cit> .

gsh acts as a nucleophilic "scavenger" of numerous compounds and their metabolites via enzymatic and chemical mechanisms  and as a substrate in the glutathione peroxidase -mediated reduction of lipid hydroperoxides and of h2o <dig> to water  <cit> . as a consequence of this reaction, gsh is oxidized to gssg, which is in turn recycled back to gsh via glutathione reductase . therefore, any effect on the activity of gpx, gr or both could affect the ratio between gsh and gssg. several in vivo  <cit>  and in vitro  <cit>  studies have described the inhibition of gpx activity in liver due to tcdd treatment. inhibition of the activity of this enzyme could theoretically lead to an increase in the content of gsh and in the gsh/gssg ratio, as observed herein. however, it has been reported that the activity of gpx in liver mitochondria of mice exposed to tcdd is increased  <cit> , but increased activity of gr in liver mitochondria was also evident, possibly explaining the increased gsh/gssg ratio following dioxin treatment. some studies have demonstrated that tcdd increases the activity of gr in liver cells  <cit> , whereas other authors describe the opposite effect  <cit> .

in relation to the synthesis of gsh, boverhof and co-authors  <cit>  demonstrated up-regulated expression of the genes for enzymes involved in the synthesis of gsh  after rats and mice were exposed to tcdd. increased synthesis of gsh could explain the results. boverhof and co-authors  <cit>  described a down-regulation of the genes associated with the metabolism of glutamate and glycine, which are building blocks of gsh. they suggested that this down-regulation could be an adaptation of the cell to conserve these amino acids for increased glutathione synthesis.

other effects associated with tcdd treatment
creatine is decreased in cells as a result of tcdd treatment . in relation to this, boverhof and co-authors  <cit>  found that genes expressing guanidinoacetate n-methyltransferase , one of the key enzymes in the biosynthesis of creatine, are down-regulated in liver after tcdd administration to rats. it has been reported that gamt deficiency is associated with a reduction in body weight owing to reduced body fat mass  <cit> , which could be related to the aforementioned in vivo effects of tcdd exposure.

the content of taurine, a non-protein sulfur-containing β-amino acid, is increased after the exposure of cells to tcdd. taurine plays an important role in several biological processes including anti-oxidation, detoxification, membrane stabilization and maintenance of osmolarity  <cit> . moreover, it has been demonstrated that there is a relationship between taurine and lipid metabolism  <cit> . taurine lowers hepatic triglyceride concentration, reduces the synthesis of cellular cholesterol ester and elevates hepatic free fatty acids. these effects are in agreement with the results of the present study for hepg <dig> cells exposed to tcdd. tcdd down-regulates cysteine dioxygenase   <cit> , the first enzyme in the conversion of cysteine to taurine. this seems to conflict with the observation of higher taurine levels after exposure to tcdd, but since the regulation of taurine concentration is unknown, perhaps the increased concentration of taurine after exposing cells to tcdd is related to other mechanisms.

an increased signal  tentatively assigned to uridine diphosphate-n-acetylgalactosamine  and/or uridine diphosphate-n-acetylglucosamine  was observed after tcdd exposure .

udp-nacgal and udp-nacglu are n-acetylhexosamines involved in several biosynthetic reactions including o-glycosylation of proteins on serine and threonine residues. o-linked glycosylation involves the transfer of the n-acetylhexosamine group from the udp-acetylhexosamine, which is catalyzed by glycosyltransferases  <cit> .

lower activity of these enzymes could theoretically produce an increase in the levels of udp-n-acetylhexosamines. in agreement with this, decreased expression of galnt <dig>  the gene encoding the udp-n-acetylgalactosamine transferase, was observed by kim and co-authors  <cit>  after hepg <dig> cells were exposed to tcdd.

changes in the intracellular levels of udp-n-acetylhexosamines, as observed in this study after exposure to tcdd, may indicate that protein o-glycosylation is affected. altered expression levels of glycosylated protein have been described after tcdd exposure in vitro  <cit> .

we have no explanation for the decrease in concentration of n-acetyl aspartate. this metabolite is normally expressed at high concentrations in the brain and has been implicated as an osmolyte  <cit>  with the potential to bind to calcium ions or metal ions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrates that untargeted profiling of the polar and apolar extracts of in vitro cultured hepg <dig> cells using various analytical techniques is a feasible approach to studying the effect of a toxicant, tcdd, on the cell metabolome. in the metabolomics methodology used, sample protocols and handling were minimized to enhance reproducibility. the results are compatible with previously well-documented effects of tcdd, in vitro and in vivo. this serves to validate the metabolomics results produced in this study. this combination of cell culture and metabolomics technology  can contribute to reducing the number of animals required for toxicity studies.

this study is an example of how complementary analytical techniques  can be used on the same samples and provide complementary data. the untargeted nature of the experiments aids in finding differences in profiles, which are then subjected to identification approaches. as discussed, normalization and sufficient biological replicates  are essential for reliability  in detecting relatively small differences in analyte concentrations.

maintaining homeostasis could be the driving force in cells responsible for keeping concentration differences small. the effects are predominantly centered on storage pools of metabolites.

