BACKGROUND
human mirnas regulate gene expression post-transcriptionally by degrading target mrnas and/or blocking their translation  <cit> . as a consequence, mrna expression changes are expected to be inversely correlated  with changes in levels of their targeting mirnas. although this expectation has been validated in studies of individual mirnas and specific mrna targets, the expected inverse relationship is often not observed in global transcriptome level studies  <cit> . while these unexpected findings may, in some instances, be attributed to inaccuracies in mirna target prediction algorithms  <cit> , recent evidence suggests that many of the unexpected regulatory effects may be the result of feed-back or feed-forward loops and/or other system level complexities  <cit> .

RESULTS
to systematically address the relationship between mirnas and their regulated mrna targets in the same cellular context, we employed microarray gene expression profiling to compare differences in expression levels of mrnas and mirnas in ovarian surface epithelial cells  vs. serous papillary ovarian cancer epithelial cells  isolated from patient tissues  by laser capture microdissection. gene expression profiling identified  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes  between ose and cepi . of these,  <dig>  were upregulated and  <dig>  downregulated in cepi. mirna expression profiling identified  <dig> significantly differentially expressed mirnas between ose and cepi. all of these mirnas were upregulated in cepi .

expression profiles for mirnas in ose and cepi samples were determined using the mirchip system . human probe sets with >65% present calls in either of the two groups  were selected for analysis. all reported microarray data are described in accordance with miame guidelines. the processed and raw data files for the samples used in this study have been deposited in the gene expression omnibus  as superseries gse <dig> 

employing three commonly used mirna target prediction algorithms , we identified putative mrna targets of these  <dig> mirnas to determine if differences in their levels of expression between the ose and cepi samples were ic, positively correlated  or unchanged . based on the established molecular mechanism of mirna regulation, levels of mirnas are expected to be ic with levels of their target mrnas. contrary to this expectation and consistent with previous findings  <cit> , we observed a consistently low percentage  of target mrnas displaying expression level changes ic with their regulating mirnas . since predictions from the most commonly employed mirsvr algorithm were representative of the results from all tested algorithms, mirsvr was employed in subsequent analyses.

predicted gene targets of mirnas were computed independently using three commonly used prediction algorithms: miranda-mirsvr  <cit> , targetscan  <cit>  and svmicro  <cit> . for each prediction algorithm, the frequency of target genes displaying changes in gene expression ic, pc or nc with changes in expression of their regulating mirnas are shown. the number of predicted target genes falling into each class is presented in parentheses.

the transcriptional override model  postulates that downregulation of target genes induced by elevated levels of regulating mirnas may be masked  or overridden  by increases in expression mediated by the downregulation of repressor genes that are themselves targets of upregulated mirnas . the possibility of such feed-forward loops was prompted by the fact that several of the predicted mrna targets of the  <dig> overexpressed mirnas encode documented repressors of gene expression . mirna-mediated downregulation of these repressor genes would be expected to result in the derepression of their respective target genes and a consequent increase in levels of expression. if these derepressed gene targets were also the targets of upregulated mirnas, the expected downregulation of these genes by the mirnas  could be masked  or overridden . for example , one of the predicted targets of ten of the  <dig> mirnas upregulated in cancer is the well-documented repressor gene znf <dig> <cit> . consistent with the fact that znf <dig> is targeted by upregulated mirnas, its expression in cepi is significantly reduced. an experimentally validated target of znf <dig> is vegfa <cit> . despite the fact that vegfa is itself directly targeted by  <dig> upregulated mirnas , its level of expression is significantly increased  in cepi. these results are consistent with the hypothesis that znf24-mediated derepression is overriding the expected downregulatory effects of the upregulated mirnas on vegfa expression.

although many of the genes falling within the nc category could be the result of partial transcriptional override, they might also simply be the result of no or slight mirna regulatory effects. since we cannot experimentally distinguish between these two possibilities, we will operationally only consider pc differences in expression as being inconsistent with the expected ic differences.

to further evaluate tom, we identified  <dig> genes that are 1) targets of one-or more of the  <dig> upregulated mirnas, 2) significantly downregulated in our cancer samples and 3) previously characterized as transcriptional repressors  <cit>  . the targets of ten  of these  <dig> genes have been previously identified in the transcription factor binding site database   <cit> . this resulted in  <dig> genes  predicted to be directly targeted by both the ten downregulated repressors and one-or-more of the  <dig> upregulated mirnas. from the perspective of mirna regulation, all  <dig> of these target genes are expected to be downregulated while from the perspective of the downregulated repressor genes all the targets are expected to be upregulated. the observed reality lies somewhere between these two expectations . tom predicts that the response of any particular target gene will be determined by the relative strengths of these two opposing regulatory controls.

the number of mirnas targeting individual human genes  is known to vary from zero to over  <dig> with an estimated average of  <dig>  mirna targets per gene  <cit> . thus, the relative strength of the regulatory effect of mirnas on target genes might be expected to be a function of the number of mirnas targeting individual genes. to explore this possibility, we grouped the  <dig> predicted gene targets of the  <dig> upregulated mirnas and the  <dig> downregulated repressors into  <dig> groups based upon the number of upregulated mirnas predicted to target each gene . a sixth group was comprised of targets of the ten repressor genes  but not predicted targets of any of the  <dig> mirnas. for each group, we computed the percentage of target genes that were upregulated . in addition, for each group we divided the target genes into those predicted to be regulated by a single repressor vs. those predicted to be regulated by multiple repressors .

the results demonstrate that as the number of upregulated mirnas targeting individual genes increases, the percentage of target genes displaying the unexpected pc change in expression decreases. these results are consistent with tom and indicate that as the relative strength of the mirna regulatory effect increases, the impact of the opposing derepression effect mediated by the downregulated repressor genes is diminished. however, the fact that ~20% of genes targeted by even large numbers  of upregulated mirnas continue to display the unexpected pc indicates that, in some cases, the magnitude of derepression is sufficient to completely override mirna regulation. the results presented in figure 3b suggest that genes targeted by multiple repressors tend to be associated with a higher percentage of pc genes than those targeted by a single repressor. the effect, however, is not as consistent as observed with increasing numbers of regulating mirna likely due to the relatively low number of repressor genes in this dataset and the fact that not all repressor genes can be expected to exert the same magnitude of regulatory control.

we were next interested to see if the model’s ability to account for trends observed using the limited dataset described above might also extend more globally. we divided all differentially expressed genes including those that are predicted gene targets of the  <dig> upregulated mirnas  and those that are not , into  <dig> groups based on the number of mirnas targeting each gene. the results  demonstrate a clear inverse relationship between the number of mirnas targeting genes and the percentage of these genes displaying the unexpected pc. again, however, we found that ~20% of genes targeted by even large numbers  of upregulated mirnas continue to display the unexpected pc consistent with the hypothesis that the magnitude of repressor gene mediated derepression is, in some instances, sufficient to completely override mirna regulation.

testing the model’s ability to globally predict the relative influence of mirna and repressor gene regulatory controls on target gene expression is problematic for two reasons: first, a compendium of all human repressor genes and their regulatory targets is currently unavailable; second, many regulatory proteins can function as repressors or activators depending on cellular context and protein complex association  <cit> . one approach taken by systems biologists to model regulatory relationships in complex cellular contexts is to use highly correlated changes in expression patterns among genes as evidence of direct and/or indirect interactions  <cit> . in our case, we examined variation in gene expression patterns across our ose samples to identify genes displaying consistent inverse correlations  in expression with changes in expression of the  <dig> repressor genes previously characterized as significantly downregulated in cepi and regulatory targets of one-or-more of the  <dig> mirnas . genes displaying an inversely correlated pattern of co-expression  were operationally classified as targets of these repressor genes. genes not displaying this pattern of expression  were classified as non-targets of the designated repressor genes. having established these classes, it became possible to distinguish between regulatory interactions fulfilling the triangular relationship of tom from those that do not.

the results presented in figure 4b again indicate that as the number of upregulated mirnas targeting genes increases, the percentage of the unexpected pc decreases significantly . consistent with the results presented in figure  <dig>  the overlap of mirna targets and downregulated genes is highly significant. . likewise, the overlap of repressor targets and upregulated genes is also highly significant . collectively, the results indicate that the derepression of target genes mediated by high  numbers of downregulated repressors is sufficient to nearly or completely override the regulatory controls of even large numbers  of upregulated mirnas.

discussion
recent studies have clearly established mirnas as early indicators of disease  <cit>  and as a potential new class of therapeutic agents  <cit> . full appreciation of the biological significance of modulations in levels of mirnas, as well as, the future rational employment of mirnas as therapeutic agents will require an understanding of both the direct and indirect molecular consequences of changes in the levels of mirnas on cell function. while the direct gene  targets of individual mirnas can be computationally predicted and experimentally validated with varying degrees of accuracy  <cit> , reliable predictions of the indirect molecular effects of changes in mirna levels has remained a major challenge in molecular systems biology  <cit> .

in this paper, we present a regulatory network model  that explains a significant component of the unexpected low frequency of ic changes in expression levels between mrnas and their regulating mirnas. the model postulates that the expected downregulation of target genes induced by elevated levels of regulating mirnas may be masked or “overridden” by increases in transcriptional initiation mediated by the downregulation of repressor genes that are themselves targets of the same regulating mirnas . depending upon the strength of the transcriptional override , tom predicts that increases in mirna levels may display no effect  or be positively correlated  with changes in levels of their targeted mrnas.

it is widely recognized that the operation of regulatory effects mediated by mirnas in vivo is a complex and interactive process and a number of explanatory models have been previously offered  <cit> . in this paper, we propose an additional model  that focuses on the feedback interactions that exist between mirnas, regulatory  genes and their mutual gene targets. while we have evaluated tom within the context of its ability to account for global patterns of changes in gene expression, the model also provides a framework for predicting interactions between specific mirnas and target genes . further testing in other cancers  will be needed to evaluate the robustness of tom. nevertheless, our initial findings in ovarian cancer indicate that interactions between mirnas and repressor genes may well play a significant role in effecting the unexpected regulatory responses of targeted genes to modulations in levels of their regulatory mirnas.

CONCLUSIONS
it is now widely acknowledged that the complexity of molecular interactions taking place on the cellular level can significantly obscure the expected consequences of molecular processes characterized in vitro  <cit> . our findings indicate that the direct and indirect regulatory effects of changes in mirna expression levels in vivo are interactive and complex but amenable to systems level modeling. we have shown that tom can account for a major component of the unexpected consequences of changes in mirna expression levels on their target mrnas. although the model has been developed and evaluated within the context of ovarian cancer, we believe it may be applicable in other biological contexts as well including of potential future use in the rational design of mirna-based strategies for the treatment of cancer and other diseases.

