BACKGROUND
the notion of genes as components of a genome has been recently challenged with the advent of metagenomics, where the phylogenetic origin of entire gene pools is not necessarily known  <cit> . particular environments and biological symbioses establish crucial constraints on the nature of genes that can be associated with the species communities under investigation  <cit> . such constraints can be used to infer the number and types of species that contribute to these gene pools. in computational terms, the goal is to detect unambiguous and unique intra-genomic signals that can be used as signatures for the association of gene collections assigned to species groups.

several approaches have been proposed to detect genomic signatures on the basis of nucleotide composition  <cit> . these approaches enable, to a varying degree of accuracy, the species classification of genes according to their compositional signatures, and their association with phylogenetic or environmental factors  <cit> . more recently, these methods have been applied to environmental sequencing samples, in order to detect the origins of these sequence fragments  <cit> .

whereas the aforementioned methods focus on the detection of structural constraints of genes, another family of methods appears to be ideally suitable for this endeavor, using the detection of gene distribution patterns across taxa  <cit> . these evolutionary signatures can be captured by phylogenetic profiles, the binary representation of the taxonomic distribution of genes  across genome  <cit> . phylogenetic profiles thus represent the evolutionary history of genes and genomes, constrained by functional properties in particular environments, and can be used to understand both the structural and evolutionary properties of a genome at the gene level. in the case of metagenomics, desirable properties of such an approach include the detection of genes with common co-inheritance patterns, histories, and thus origins. given that the major factors shaping gene content are gene loss, gene genesis and horizontal gene transfer,  <cit>  it would also be desirable to trace unique intra-genomic signals with respect to those factors.

here, we describe the rank-blast classification approach for tracing an intra-genomic signal. the rank-blast classification is an elaborate interpretation and data manipulation procedure to capture sequence similarity relationships from blast searches  <cit> . blast searchs report the degree of sequence divergence between query and reference proteins. in cases where the taxonomic origin of a query protein is not known, the extent of its divergence from the reference proteins  can serve to delineate the genomic classification of the input proteins. the general concept behind the approach  is to use the ranking order of species in which blast detects homologues, in order to construct a profile common and unique to taxonomically-related genes. several factors make the rank-blast approach appropriate for delineating intra-genomic signal while reducing the noise caused by the differences in the histories of genes within a genome. first, rather than using the actual level of similarity, comparing the relative order of species in a vector reduces the effect of the differences in substitution rates between proteins, where some proteins are known to evolve at a faster rate than others . second, limiting the comparison to the set of species common to the two vectors compared eliminates discrepancies derived from a species-specific gene loss in a given sample . whereas gene loss and differences in the rate of evolution are not expected to eliminate the intra-genomic signal, recent events of gene genesis and lateral gene transfer are expected to degrade the similarity signal of the corresponding genes. such genes will carry an anomalous inheritance signal and are of special interest since they may represent recent adaptations in the genome of a species  <cit> .

in this work, we present the rank-blast classification procedure, estimate the strength and accuracy of the classification using a synthetic dataset, and discuss its biological relevance. first, we describe the choice of the optimal parameters for detecting an intra-genomic signal while allowing inter-genomic separation. second, we describe the clusters formed and classify them with respect to taxonomically-expected inheritance signal or an anomalous inheritance signal. third, we identify and characterize a group of proteins carrying an anomalous inheritance signal, in order to better understand the biological significance of the ranked phylogenetic profiles.

RESULTS
clustering proteins into genomic-groups according to their rank-blast profile
the first stage in tracing the intra-genomic signal is to assess how similar are the rank-blast profiles of proteins with varying degrees of taxonomical relatedness. two main considerations guided the choice of the species tested. first, species have to represent several phylogenetic proximities. second, comparing a large number of protein-pair combinations is an exhaustive computational process and it is thus effective towards the study of species with a small number of proteins. the low sequence and function redundancy which is characteristically observed in small-size proteomes  <cit>  is an additional advantage of these species in terms of improving the efficiency of the practice. the use of larger genomes, comprising many duplicated proteins, is expected to yield redundant profiles, unnecessarily increasing the complexity of the computational process.

in accordance with the above considerations, we have chosen to perform this analysis for the proteome of mycoplasma genitalium - the smallest cellular species that has been sequenced  <cit>  - and four additional species with small genomes at varying degrees of phylogenetic relatedness to m. genitalium: an organism from the same family; one from the same phylum; another one from the same super-kingdom; and one from a different super-kingdom. from each category  we selected the fully sequenced species with the smallest number of proteins. the full list of species is given in table  <dig> 

† the taxonomic classification is according to . the common path between each and m. genitalium is shown in bold.

‡ the evaluated divergence distance aims to provide a quantitative assessment of the taxonomic distance. the values are derived from the scores of the pair-wise alignments between the 16s rna from each species and the 16s rna from m. genitalium . the same divergence order was obtained when distance matrix was retrieved from greengenes - a 16s rna gene database  <cit>  .

for each protein coming from the set of selected species, we have constructed its rank-blast profile  - i.e., a vector containing the order of species in which the protein recognizes homologues. for all possible protein-pair combinations, we estimated the similarity of their rank-blast profile by calculating the kendall tau rank correlation coefficient - a measure for the degree of correspondence between two rankings . the distributions of the correlations found in intra- and inter-genomic pair combinations are compared in figure 2a. as expected, intra-genomic combinations result in a higher mean similarity score than the inter-genomic correlation. however, the intra- and inter-genomic distributions have a significant overlap in their distribution ranges, where the highest relative enrichment of intra-genomic combinations  and the fraction of inter-genomic pairs is less than one order of magnitude . therefore, the correlation between the rank-blast profiles of two proteins is by itself insufficient in order to predict whether those proteins are encoded by the same genome.

one way of maximizing the information obtained from the rank-blast profile is, instead of using the direct correlation measured between two proteins, to compare the pairwise similarities in the correlation profiles of proteins. the rationale behind this approach is that in cases where a small number of common observations  results in a high correlation which does not necessarily reflect the full set of observations of each protein in the pair, the differences in their correlation profile will mask out the inter-genomic signal. in cases where we miss an intra-genomic signal due to lack, or a small number, of common observations , the similarity in their correlation profile will reveal the intra-genomic signal. to evaluate whether two correlation profiles exhibit a significant similarity, we calculated the hypergeometric probability  <cit>  . the correlation matrix is thus transformed into a probability matrix .

the distributions of the hypergeometric probability values found in intra- and inter-genomic pair combinations are compared in figure 2b. for p values smaller than  <dig> × 10- <dig>  the ratio between the fraction of intra-genomic pairs and inter-genomic pairs ranges between  <dig>  to  <dig>  - much higher than the ratio observed between the intra- and inter-values of the pure correlation .

the distribution of the hypergeometric probability values therefore better stratifies the intra-genomic and inter-genomic calls and allows rediscovering the intra-genomic relations. a network was formed by linking all protein-pairs which scored a p value lower than  <dig> × 10- <dig>  nodes in the network represent proteins and edges represent all links lower than the set threshold. this network is composed of  <dig> protein-components which constitute 71% of proteins from the selected  <dig> species in the synthetic dataset . using the mcl algorithm, the protein members of the network were clustered into  <dig> groups of varying size, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> components . since almost all clusters  are highly dominated by a single species , these are referred to as 'genomic groups'. attempts to reduce the number of groups, either by reducing the granularity or by using alternative clustering approaches, resulted in non species-specific clusters . the  <dig> largest clusters, with more than  <dig> protein-components, are illustrated in figure  <dig>  in all these genomic groups, one dominant species corresponds to at least 80% of the cluster components, and more than a half of the clusters are entirely species-specific.

‡ in brackets: the percentage out the total number of proteins in the species , as shown in table  <dig> 

† genomic groups are clusters with at least  <dig> members. their size and content is described in figure  <dig>  in brackets: the percentage out the number of proteins classified into a cluster.

the efficiency of the clustering procedure in re-constructing genomic groups varies between the different species . the highest fraction of proteins classified into a large cluster is observed in mycoplasma genitalium, where 92% of its protein members are classified into two genomic groups. the lowest fraction is observed in nanoarchaeum equitans, where only 15% of the proteins are classified into  <dig> genomic clusters. it is evident that the underlying dataset of both target and database proteins plays a significant role in providing the necessary contrast for the detection of species-specific genomic groups. using different parameters for ranking, cut-offs for the p value of the hypergeometric distribution, and inflation values for the clustering procedure has resulted in a similar pattern of clusters, as discussed above .

overall, using the rank-blast procedure  we have succeeded in correctly clustering 64% of the proteins in the analysis into consistent, species-specific genomic groups . in comparison, only  <dig> out of the  <dig> proteins  had recognized a blast best-hit partner within the same genus indicating that the rank-blast procedure is more sensitive than a simple blast search . the protein neq <dig>  from the archaeal species nanoarchaeum equitans provides an example for a protein with a distant best-hit partner  which is classified by the rank-blast procedure into a corresponding genomic group : although its best-hit partner is a bacterial protein, the following hits of neq <dig> are proteins from the archaeal superkingdom and hence the rank-blast approach, taking into account all hits rather than only the best-hit partner, classifies this protein together with other nanoarchaeum equitans' proteins. a few examples exist for proteins with a best-hit partner from a closely-related species which are classified into a non-corresponding genomic group. the mycoplasma genitalium protein mg <dig>  for example recognizes a best-hit partner from mycoplasma pneumoniae - another member of the mycoplasma genus - yet it is classified into a genomic group dominated by streptococcus pyogenes proteins . notably, although its best-hit partner is another mycoplasma protein, its following hits are to proteins from clostridia species . however, overall, the genomic groups are highly specific with 97% of the proteins classified into corresponding genomic groups . the correspondence between the order of species in the rank-blast profile and their taxonomic proximity to the relevant species is further discussed in the following paragraphs.

the main genomic groups carry a signal which reflects the vertical evolution of the corresponding species
the primary goal of the rank-blast classification procedure is to capture a signal reflecting the inheritance pattern of the target genes. therefore, genomic clusters were characterized in order to examine whether such a signal is carried by the clusters as a whole. since we retrieved more than a single genomic cluster for each species, we first aimed to characterize the main genomic group of each species, i.e., a cluster where the co-inheritance pattern of its member proteins matches the known phylogeny of the organism.

as a first step, we investigated the cluster distribution of the highly conserved rpob protein . several features of rpob including its universal presence in prokaryotes, its housekeeping function and its linear-inheritance constitute rpob an ideal marker  <cit> . the rpob protein is found in all four bacterial species analyzed here, and with the exception of buchnera aphidicola rpob protein, it is classified into the largest genomic group of all species . for each of the clusters containing the rpob protein, we have verified that its rank-blast vector corresponds to his taxonomic affiliation. for each of the three clusters, we constructed its rank-blast profile by calculating the mean position in the cluster of each of the  <dig> database species. in figure  <dig>  the rank-blast vectors are represented as barcodes, colored according to taxonomic relatedness. the rank-blast profiles of the clusters are compared to the profiles of conserved ribosomal proteins from each cluster . the comparison indicates that the clusters as a whole exhibit almost the same linear pattern of evolution as the conserved proteins. the barcodes confirm that the profiles of these clusters carry a phylogenetic signal, where species on the vector are ordered according to their phylogenetic proximity. therefore these clusters are termed here 'main' clusters being both the largest genomic group in the corresponding species, and the carriers of a signal for a linear pattern of evolution.

this phylogenetic signal together with the classification of the conserved proteins into different genomic groups indicate that rank-blast profiles are indeed suitable for taxonomic stratification of genes, unlike other sequence-similarity based classification approaches such as phylogenetic profiles that are optimally designed to capture a functional signal  <cit> . a functional analysis of the main clusters further supports the strength of the approach in delineating a taxonomic, rather than functional, signal. the classification of proteins from the main clusters into functional categories is shown in additional file  <dig>  where many of the proteins are classified into highly-conserved categories such as transcription and ribosomal structure. the remarkable similarity observed between the patterns of functional distribution of proteins from mycoplasma genitalium  and proteins from ureaplasma parvum  - both members of the mycoplasmataceae family - indicate that the rank-blast approach succeeds in correctly grouping proteins according to taxonomic origin and not according to functional similarity, even for orthologous proteins from closely related related species.

secondary genomic groups carry a signal for non-vertical evolution
for each species, we obtained more than a single genomic group . whereas the inheritance pattern of the proteins in the main clusters corresponds to the species phylogeny, in secondary clusters we expect to detect different patterns, possibly patterns that correspond to events of non-vertical evolution of genes. for the purpose of identifying such patterns, we searched for clusters where we can define a ranking order which is common to the protein members of the cluster and is different from the ranking-order in the main cluster.

to identify secondary clusters with a coherent rank-blast profile, the mean ranking order of a species in a cluster was plotted against its number of appearances in the cluster . in additional file  <dig>  the two-dimensional representation of the cluster's rank-blast profile is shown for the four genomic-groups from streptococcus pyogenes. unlike the correlation observed between mean and number of appearances in the main cluster, inconsistent patterns are observed for the secondary clusters. in these clusters, many of the individual proteins differ in their rank-blast profiles from the rank-blast profile of the main cluster, though in most cases the differences are protein-specific rather than characteristic of a cluster. in order to estimate the coherence of the profile of each cluster, we compared the mean intra- and inter-cluster correlation in order to assess our ability to define a cluster-specific profile . as described earlier for the main cluster, for each cluster the cluster-profile was initially constructed by calculating the mean position of each of the  <dig> database species in the cluster. since many of the highly-ranked species in the secondary clusters appear only in a limited number of species  a reduced profile was also constructed which includes only widely-agreeable data points .

intra-cluster combinations are shown in bold.

† each cell shows the mean correlation for all possible protein-pair combination between the protein-members of the row-cluster and the protein-members of the column-cluster. diagonal values show the intra-cluster correlation.

†† each cell shows the mean correlation between cluster-profile of the row-cluster and all members of the column-cluster.

ℑ reduced cluster profile is composed solely of data points defined as highly-agreeable. agreeability was calculated for each data point  in a cluster as the inverse coefficient of variation weighted by the fraction of appearances of a species in a cluster:

agr = /

where mean is the mean position of a species in a cluster; app is the number of appearances of a species in a cluster; sd is the standard deviation calculated for the species; and mmb is number of proteins in a cluster.

data points for which agr >  <dig>  are considered highly agreeable.

‡ the inter-cluster correlation is significantly lower than the intra-cluster correlation observed for the row-cluster. significance is defined as p value <  <dig>  in the wilcoxon rank sum test .

from these results, it is observed that for secondary cluster  <dig> one can clearly define a cluster-profile which is common to the members of the cluster and is different from the profile of the main cluster . more specifically, the profiles of proteins from cluster  <dig> are significantly better correlated with the cluster-profile of cluster  <dig> than with the cluster-profile of cluster  <dig>  and vice versa. we therefore focused on cluster  <dig> as a case study for comparing the profile of a secondary cluster to the profile of the main cluster while aiming to delineate the biological significance of this difference. the comparison of the cluster-profiles of cluster  <dig> and cluster  <dig> delineates a shift in the ranking order of bacillales species and lactobacillales species . whereas a higher rank of lactobacillales species is expected from the taxonomic affiliation of streptococcus pyogenes, and as observed for proteins from cluster  <dig>  proteins from cluster  <dig> exhibit a higher similarity to bacillales species. the ranking order of more distant species is consistent with the pattern observed in the main cluster , which is expected according to the phylogenetic classification of the species .

individual examples for proteins from cluster  <dig> include a group of neighbouring protein-encoding genes that are involved in the uptake and utilization of maltosaccharide, a crucial process for the successful infection of s. pyogenes  <cit> . members of this group exhibit not only increased sequence similarity within bacillales species, but also similar genomic organization. the proteins are listed in figure 5b according to the genomic order of their encoding genes. whereas in other streptococcus species malx, malc and mald are adjacent proteins and members of the malxcd operon  <cit> , in s. pyogenes amya and amyb are located between malc and malx. interestingly, similar organization of orthologous proteins is also observed in bacillales species such as geobacillus kaustophilus . another member of cluster  <dig> , a putative transcription regulator of proteins involved in maltose/maltodextrin uptake  <cit> , is located upstream of these genes. overall, the six proteins from cluster  <dig> together with additional proteins from cluster  <dig> form a genomic sequence of  <dig> proteins involved in maltose/maltodextrin uptake, metabolism and regulation. the rank-blast profile of these proteins is shown in figure 5b. the proteins from cluster  <dig> demonstrate the expected phylogenetic order where they exhibit higher similarity to other lactobacillales proteins, and present the same genomic organization reported in streptococcus species  <cit> . the proteins from cluster  <dig> exhibit higher similarity to bacillales, as well as a similar organization on the genome and correlated expression  <cit> . this similarity to bacillales species  suggests a common event of horizontal gene transfer  of the maltose related genes in cluster  <dig>  <cit> , and a recent modification in the maltodextrin metabolism in s. pyogenes. considering the role of maltodextrin acquisition in infecting host tissues  <cit> , this modification is likely to have an adaptive advantage. the classification of all proteins from cluster  <dig> as well as other secondary clusters into functional categories is shown at additional file  <dig> 

the rank-blast profile carries a genomic signature beyond the best-hit
cluster  <dig> provides a compelling example of the ability of the rank-blast approach to group together genes with a common, non-vertical inheritance pattern. since alternative approaches for delineating events of non-vertical evolution include the analysis of a typical sequence signature and the taxonomic identity of the blast best-hit  <cit> , we have analyzed the distribution of best-hit partner and signature-based hgt events in the different genomic-groups, predicted for s. pyogenes . the distribution of predicted hgt events in the main genomic group, secondary genomic groups and a group of proteins which were not classified to any genomic group  indicates that no clear overlap can be specified between the signature-based predictions of non-vertical inheritance and the groups formed using the rank-blast procedure. this observation is not surprising, considering the low overlap between different methods for hgt predictions  <cit> . similarly, the distribution of the blast best-hit partner in the different genomic groups reveals that despite different tendencies of the groups, the identity of the best-hit partner cannot justify the classification of proteins into clusters by itself. the best-hit distribution of s. pyogenes proteins is detailed at figure  <dig>  overall, 27% of the proteins classified into a genomic group have a best-hit partner outside the streptococcus genus. as shown at table  <dig>  for some of the proteins in the main cluster, we detected a best-hit partner in a species that is not a member of the same genus, the same class, the same phylum, or even the same super-kingdom. vice versa, for many of the proteins that were not classified to any genomic group, we detect a streptococcus best-hit partner. examples for a protein in the main cluster with a best-hit partner that belongs to a different phylum , and for a protein with a streptococcus best-hit partner that was not classified into any genomic group are shown in figure  <dig>  although the protein from the main cluster  identifies homologues in a limited number of non-firmicutes and non-bacilli species, the ranking order of more distant species captures the same pattern as observed for more conserved proteins in the main cluster. in contrast, although the unclassified protein  captures the conservative ranking order of the highly-related species , the similarity of the profile is lost in more distant species. these examples, together with the distribution pattern in table  <dig> indicate that the rank-blast profile captures a signal which is more informative than the best-hit partner. the ability of the approach to represent a more distant taxonomic signal is of special importance for the classification of sequences from metagenomic samples, which are in many cases only distantly related to sequences in the curated databases.

in brackets: predictions for hgt events based on sequence-signature, retrieved from two public data sources: right -  <cit> ; left -  <cit> .

 <dig> other than s. pyogenes; 2other than streptococcus;  <dig> other than bacilli; 4other than bacteria;

† since some proteins recognize homologues only in strains of s. pyogenes, the number of proteins in cluster might be higher than the sum of the four columns on the right.

discussion
here, we describe a novel approach for the assignment of protein sequences into genomic groups, using a simulation on a synthetic dataset composed of an assortment of proteins lacking taxonomic classification, originally retrieved from five species belonging to different taxonomic classes, orders and domains. the necessity of developing strategies towards taxonomic classification is relatively recent and arose as a result of the growing number of metagenomic projects. the annotation of sequences from metagenomic samples can be viewed as a two-dimensional task, i.e., whereas the annotation of species-specific genomes primarily concerns functional assignments, the annotation of metagenomic samples needs to provide taxonomic assignments as well.

early annotation approaches before the sequencing of complete genomes used the best-hit of a sequence similarity search to infer function. the accumulation of a growing number of fully sequenced genomes has led to a shift of focus from gene-centric approaches to genomic-centric approaches. one such prominent genomic-centric approach is the phylogenetic profiles method, which analyses the distribution pattern of genes across genomes in order to retrieve a functional signal. analogously, whereas basic approaches for taxonomic prediction rely on the identity of the best-hit  <cit> , the rank-blast approach described here aims to maximize the information from a blast search in order to delineate a strong and consistent, species-specific phylogenetic signal. our analysis indicates that the use of the rank-blast approach indeed allows an accurate taxonomic classification in cases where blast search by itself is not equally sensitive: whereas the rank-blast procedure allows the taxonomic classification at the species level of 64% of the proteins analyzed in this study, only 56% of the proteins had recognized a blast best-hit partner within the same genus. in s. pyogenes for example, 27% of the proteins classified into a genomic group have a best-hit partner outside the streptococcus genus and even outside the class, the phylum, and super-kingdom , indicating that the rank-blast procedure can outperform the basic blast search in assigning species into genomic groups.

due to the complexity of the data analyzed, the retrieval of a taxonomic or functional signal from the results of a sequence similarity search is not trivial. since first suggested in  <dig>  <cit> , the use of phylogenetic profiles had been extensively modified and optimized  <cit> . similarly, the retrieval of phylogenetic signal is not a straightforward exercise and it requires the consideration of a large number of parameters, where several approaches can possibly be accounted for in each step of the procedure  <cit> . as part of the development of the rank-blast classification procedure, we have tested many alternatives in order to optimize the procedure, and examined their implications on the efficiency of clustering the data into genomic groups. several approaches were tested for the following key steps: the construction of the vector describing the ranking-order of species; scoring the level of similarity between vectors; clustering the data; and the choice of query and database species. in order to emphasize the variety of options that need to be explored in each step, in the following paragraph we provide a brief description of some of the possibilities tested along these key steps. the construction of the vector best describing the ranking order of species was performed both according to bit-score  <cit>  and e-value estimates for the blast search. several possibilities for binning the data in different resolutions of the estimates were tested. sequence similarity detection was based exclusively on blast. for the comparison of vectors we used several methods of correlation comparison, including kendall's tau correlation, spearman's correlation and pearson correlation, and examined the intra-/inter-genomic stratification under the use of both the correlation estimates and p values. other than correlation-based methods, we have also estimated the similarity of the ranking-order using decision-trees and bi-clustering approaches . for clustering of the data, we tested the results using k-means and a range of machine learning algorithms. the analysis was performed for five different species which represent varying taxonomic relationships between themselves, and with respect to the database species. it is likely that the differences observed in the clustering efficiency of the different genomes are related to the differences in phylogenetic resolution of the database. although it is beyond the scope of the current work, studying the effect of the database  is a future avenue of research.

as part of accuracy considerations, the sensitivity  and specificity  of the classification procedure were tested under different parameters. since it is now widely accepted that a genome represents a dynamic collection of genes, whose composition may change across lineages, the clustering of all proteins of a species into a single genomic group was not a main consideration, assuming that different genes in the genome have followed different evolutionary paths. from the variety of approaches taken, the optimal procedure in terms of precision and recall yielded  <dig> genomic clusters, which almost uniquely represent a single species, and encompasses the large majority of the proteins in the analysis . the procedure enables the full separation between species within the same family . the different genomes were reconstructed with different efficiencies, where reconstruction of the original genomes is up to 92% . as expected, for all species we have retrieved more than a single group, where the variety of groups detected for each genome enable us to carefully view the signal detected by the rank-blast procedure. for most of the test genomes, we have identified a main cluster whose phylogeny corresponds to species phylogeny, therefore providing a reassurance that the rank-blast procedure enables us to capture an intra-genomic signal retrieved from a group of genes with a common, conserved inheritance pattern. genes classified to secondary groups do not necessarily follow this pattern and have possibly taken a different evolutionary path, which might be common to all members of the group .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results indicate that the rank-blast classification procedure is indeed suitable for capturing an intra-genomic signal, which to a large extent allows the reconstruction of meaningful, species-specific genomic groups. in some cases the procedure also allows the stratification of the genes into groups reflecting their individual histories. the example of the mutual bacillales origin of the genes involved in the maltodextrin metabolism demonstrates that common origins can be associated with common functions. we therefore propose that this novel approach provides the basis for revealing the association between groups of genes, contributing an interesting, fresh perspective of the complex genotype-phenotype relationship. the rank-blast procedure can therefore not only delineate a phylogenetic-signal, but can also detect genes that exhibit specific patterns of evolutionary change that diverge from the whole-genome profile.

in the study of metagenomic data, the rank-blast procedure has a role in both obtaining taxonomic assignments and characterizing the conservation level of different functional groups. firstly, the procedure can be used for the reconstruction of species-specific genomic groups. the ability of the procedure to capture a taxonomic signal which is beyond the blast best-hit is of special importance for the appropriate phylogenetic-localization of genes which belong to distantly related species with respect to the collection of species with fully sequenced-genomes. secondly, as different environments exhibit a typical functional fingerprint  <cit> , it will be interesting to examine whether 'signal-less' proteins form a functional group characteristic of a given environment. we are currently applying the rank-blast procedure for the study of metagenomic data.

