BACKGROUND
as powerful as routine histological methods continue to be, the demand for increasingly precise evaluations of the morphogenetic processes initiating and elaborating embryonic form has motivated applications of new technologies to the problem of imaging embryos in 3d at high spatial resolution. various versions of "episcopic" techniques  <cit> , including episcopic fluorescence image capturing  <cit>  and high resolution episcopic microscopy  <cit> , generate 3d images recording details approaching histological resolutions-permitting visualization of molecular expression patterns and the distribution of cell types-embedded in the larger and natural context of an individual specimen's gross anatomical form. their success in large part derives from successively sectioning and digitally photographing block faces containing histologically prepared specimens, a process obviating laborious external marker congruence-based methods  <cit> , in addition to avoiding significant sectioning and mounting distortion artifacts inherent with traditional glass slide-mounting. optical projection tomography  <cit>  produces similar data non-destructively, though is limited to optically clear specimens. both sorts of high resolution 3d visualizations are currently employed as tools in research settings: for example, see  <cit>  for use of an episcopic approach toward detailed phenotypic assessment of heart development in mutant mice, and  <cit>  for an analysis coupling optical projection tomography to traditional methods of gene expression analysis in the developing chick limb bud.

other non-destructive methods such as micro-mri  <cit>  and μct  <cit>  have been adapted for the 3d visualization of embryonic morphology. though these methods lack the ability to readily capture concomitant molecular expression data, they possess a strong potential for high-throughput experimental designs focused on gross anatomical form  <cit> . as such, μct can play a prominent role in quantitative studies of organismal growth and development.

there are several technical hurdles to realizing this vision of integrating morphometric and molecular data in the study of embryonic development. fixation is a necessary measure in order to check natural degradative processes . the particular choice of fixative often depends on which particular histological feature a researcher wishes to demonstrate, though at the expense of fixation-induced alterations and artifacts, which are often quite significant  <cit> . since the intent of μct scanning embryos is, in part, to quantify morphological variation, including morphometric shape variation , a quantitative analysis of fixation-induced deformations is required to guide the choice of fixation method and to interpret the morphometric results of such studies. after initial fixation, additional measures in preparation for μct scanning potentially serve as additional sources of gross morphological distortions. if fixation- and scanning-induced deformations are systematic, there is a potential to statistically adjust for them, enabling more refined quantification of the morphological variation of interest. if the magnitudes and directions of distortions are known, it may also be possible to compare samples processed with different methods.

since accurate quantification of 3d shape variation in unfixed embryos is not possible with current methods , we used two dimensional  geometric morphometrics to characterize the patterns of size and shape variability in the embryonic head prior to fixation, post-fixation, and after μct scanning. the latter set of measurements served as a proxy for the effects of scanning, plus any additional effect of re-immersing specimens in an aqueous environment . direct 2d assessment of μct-generated, 3d volumetric images was not performed. our analysis is limited to a comparison of commonly used fixatives, bouin's solution and two different mixtures of formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde: 4% formaldehyde + 1% glutaraldehyde, and 4% formaldehyde + 5% glutaraldehyde. for a review of multiple fixation methods including methods to improve contrast of embryonic  tissues useful for μct-scanning embryos, see  <cit> .

RESULTS
scan qualities
typical μct renderings are represented by the embryos depicted in figure 2a-c. the combination of aldehyde fixation and cysto conray® yields images  with a surface quality comparable to embryos fixed with bouin's solution . bouin's-fixed embryos appear have a rougher surface texture compared to those fixed with either glutaraldehyde mixture . the identically scaled images of bouin's fixed embryos appeared generally smaller compared to those fixed with glutaraldehyde mixtures, but a comparison of μct images only cannot indicate the relative roles of fixation-induced tissue shrinkage or swelling.

repeatability of landmarks
analysis of variance of the repeated trials of  <dig> embryos revealed that measurement error accounts for  <dig> % of the total shape variation  in a fairly homogenous sample. as shown in figure  <dig>  the differences between repeated trials of individuals are very small compared to the differences among individuals.

shape analysis of unstandardized shape data
pca results for the raw procrustes transformed data by fixation method and treatment steps are shown in figure 4a. wireframe distortions along pc <dig> and pc <dig> indicate the presence of coherent, systematic variation within the raw dataset. regressions of shape on craniofacial  size show variable effects of treatments within experimental groups . the positive slopes of the regression lines for each of the three experimental groups demonstrate an ontogenetic component of variation in which shape change scales with size, a result not unexpected. interestingly, unlike in either glutaraldehyde experimental group, there is within the bouin's experimental group a conspicuous shift in y-intercept values between regression lines representing scaling effects associated with harvesting and with fixation and μct scanning. this possibly indicates that in addition to any naturally occurring allometric variation, bouin's fixation dramatically adds an additional source of variation. since slopes representing the effects of fixation and post-scanning are shifted leftward, substantial craniofacial shrinkage associated with fixation is likely occurring. the trends within either glutaraldehyde experimental group, though expected, are not as apparent.

effects on craniofacial size
bouin's fixation group
a cursory visual examination of 3d μct renderings indicated that bouin's fixation was associated with a relatively smaller craniofacial size in comparison to embryos fixed in either glutaraldehyde mixture. centroid size analysis showed that initial overnight fixation with 4% formaldehyde followed by  <dig>  hours of secondary fixation in bouin's solution reduced average centroid size to  <dig> % of the average centroid size prior to fixation . the effect of μct scanning and re-immersion into pbs for photography did little to further alter average centroid size. average centroid size after scanning was measured to be  <dig> % of average value measured pre-fixation. average centroid size changed little between fixation and scanning, indicating that embryo shrinkage occurs mostly if not entirely during fixation as opposed to during μct scanning.

1% glutaraldehyde fixation group
overnight fixation in 4% formaldehyde + 1% glutaraldehyde reduced this group's average centroid size to  <dig> % of the initial measurement . average centroid size changes little between fixation and scanning. the net effect of μct and re-immersion in pbs for photography was to reduce the average centroid size to  <dig> % the original value.

5% glutaraldehyde fixation group
overnight fixation in 4% formaldehyde + 5% glutaraldehyde reduced average centroid size to  <dig> % of its original value measured prior to fixation . average centroid size was reduced after μct scanning and pbs re-immersion to  <dig> % of the value measured after fixation. compared to average centroid size pre-fixation, final average centroid size was reduced to  <dig> % of initial measure.

effects on craniofacial shape: analysis of standardized dataset
alterations in craniofacial shape are associated with fixation and μct scanning, as we detected substantial changes in standardized landmark configuration values between treatments within each fixation group . within the bouin's experimental group, the most substantial shift in procrustes distance was associated with fixation , whereas deviations in procrustes distances more steadily accumulated during sample processing within both glutaraldehyde experimental groups .

upgma cluster analysis  was applied to a matrix of tail-somite-standardized procrustes distances and further standardized to the average landmark configuration of harvested embryos . the second standardization step removes between individual shape variation, leaving only treatment-induced, or "artifact" variation in the dataset. the distances separating fixation and post-scan treatments with in the bouin's and 5% glutaraldehyde experimental groups were comparatively small in the face of the distances separating treatments within the 1% glutaraldehyde group. the 5% glutaraldehyde experimental group demonstrated the least amount of treatment induced shape distortion.

procrustes distances below diagonal, p-values above. significant distances after bonferroni adjustment in bold . the three fixation groups  are designated 1%, 5% and b, respectively. sequential treatment steps of embryo harvesting, fixation, and post-scanning are designated f, ps, and h, respectively.

mahalanobis distances below diagonal, p-values above. non-significant distances in bold.

discussion
generally speaking, the particular choice of fixative depends on which particular histological feature a researcher wishes to demonstrate  <cit> . in the field of developmental biology, it is often the localization or activity level of a chemical factor synthesized within a particular differentiating cell type that is of interest. however, any gross morphological alterations induced by fixation are usually not of primary concern. our goal was to measure the artifactual changes to craniofacial size and shape induced by fixation and μct scanning.

when comparing μct scans of bouin's-fixed embryos to those fixed with either glutaraldehyde solution, the latter appeared larger and with smoother ectodermal surface texture. formaldehyde-based fixatives  are known to cause either increases or decreases in tissue turgidity, sometimes causing swelling, while other times inducing shrinkage  <cit> . despite the fact that the rendered μct images represented in figure  <dig> are to scale, they do not themselves support any precise explanation for the differences in size and texture associated with each fixative.

comparisons of bouin's solution and glutaraldehyde fixation
in order to distinguish between scenarios of bouin's solution-induced shrinkage versus glutaraldehyde-induced tumescence, initial craniofacial conditions were quantified and tracked through the course of our μct scanning protocol. the most dramatic change in average centroid size was associated with using bouin's solution secondary to 4% formaldehyde, decreasing average craniofacial centroid size by  <dig> % . subsequent μct scanning induced practically no further decreases in average craniofacial size. this pattern contrasts with our results using glutaraldehyde solutions . overall head size shrinkage was more limited in extent, reducing average centroid sizes in the end by  <dig> % and  <dig> % when using the 1%  and 5%  glutaraldehyde mixtures, respectively. therefore, it appeared that each of the fixation procedures induced some degree of tissue shrinkage. a simple interpretation of the results is that our use of bouin's solution initially dehydrated and shrunk the embryos to a greater extent prior to scanning, whereas aldehyde fixation was sufficient to maintain craniofacial size close to but just under original  centroid size values post-fixation and post-scanning, despite alterations to tissue composition and structure. this interpretation is consistent with our initial analysis of unstandardized data. regressing procrustes distance values against centroid sizes of individuals at each processing step within experimental groups  shows that bouin's has a more discernable effect on the scaling relationship.

to better understand how these observed shape distortions compare across experimental groups and processing steps, we tabulated a matrix of tail-somite stage-standardized procrustes distances, further standardized to the mean landmark configuration for all unfixed, freshly harvested embryos . upgma cluster analysis was applied to the matrix, yielding a phenogram  wherein the proximity of the terminal branches to the harvest mean represents the relative severity of artifactual noise experienced by each experimental group during the processing steps of fixation and scanning. according to the upgma analysis, embryos fixed with 4% formaldehyde + 5% glutaraldehyde experienced the least amount of craniofacial shape distortion. any subsequent shape distortions associated with scanning, which are implied by figure 6c, were apparently not enough to overcome the nesting of fixed with post-scanned embryos of the 5% glutaraldehyde experimental group. this was not the case for fixed and post-scanned embryos of the 1% glutaraldehyde group. while embryos fixed with 1% glutaraldehyde solutions nested just basal to fixed and post-scanned conditions of the 5% glutaraldehyde group, post-scanned embryos of the 1% glutaraldehyde fixation group are the most deviated in terms of treatment induced variation of any treatment step between or within groups. embryos fixed with 4% formaldehyde and bouin's solution nest together with the same embryos once μct scanned. similar to the 5% glutaraldehyde experimental group, any further changes in procrustes distances associated with scanning implied by figure 6a were not enough to overcome the similarities in standardized landmark configurations despite treatment induced shape deformations.

taken together, the data suggest the following scenario. when using bouin's solution to fix embryos preparatory to μct scanning, distortions in overall shape are coupled to embryo shrinkage mainly during fixation. the degree of specimen dehydration and the rigidity that this confers embryos are adequate to stabilize the embryos during the time they are exposed directly to the air, while inside the μct scanning device. fixation with 4% formaldehyde + 1% glutaraldehyde induces a similar level of artifactual shape distortion as with 4% formaldehyde + 5% glutaraldehyde fixation and subsequent scanning, but did not appear to confer a similar level of shape stability. the large level of distortion in this case cannot be attributed to further degrees of specimen shrinkage during scanning and air exposure, since average centroid size was not very affected between fixation and post-scanning . this would imply that the source of distortion was perhaps physical deformation owing not to further dehydration, but rather to subtle gravitational collapse prior to taking the final photographs in lateral aspect .

CONCLUSIONS
fixation and μct scanning impart tissue distortions measurable in terms of organismal size and morphometric shape. in particular, bouin's fixation, following primary fixation in 4% formaldehyde, induces a much greater degree of specimen shrinkage and shape distortion than fixation with 4% formaldehyde + 5% glutaraldehyde. in both cases, the shape variability is fairly stable throughout the process of data acquisition. fixation with 4% formaldehyde + 1% glutaraldehyde, though adequate to resist changes in overall size, does not provide sufficient protection from randomly occurring shape distortions associated with scanning. this downfall may be mitigated if μct scanning was performed while the specimen is immersed in a fluid environment rather than air. this option would require that the supporting liquid have a substantially lower radiodensity than the specimen   <cit> . however, this would entail substantial dehydration of the embryo and attending distortions in terms of tissue size and morphometric shape.

coupling 3d morphological analyses with histological datasets is viewed as a crucial source of information with much potential to enrich understanding of morphogenetic mechanisms underlying organ growth and development  <cit> . for example, our research group is exploring methods to combine the analysis of regional variation in cell proliferation rates and micro-ct based morphometric data  <cit> . such analyses possess the potential to reveal the relationship between cell proliferation data and morphometric variation within samples and can be used to compare this relationship among genotypes or groups that differ in characteristics of interest. we are employing multiple approaches in the attempt to visualize the 3d distribution of proliferating cells within craniofacial primordia . these approaches involve the development of computer-based methods for morphing multiple individuals to a mean shape, superimposing histological and computed microtomography data, averaging multiple individuals for such datasets to construct genotype or other group means, and the development of statistical methods to compare the distribution of immunohistochemical markers or regions of gene expression among groups  <cit> . our goal of uniting μct volumetric data pertaining to embryonic craniofacial size and shape with molecular expression data at histological resolutions will help us to understand how variation in basic morphogenetic processes shape and organize variation at the gross anatomical level. the ability to correlate morphological and molecular data at the individual embryo level will offer a new toolkit to elucidate the relationships between genotypic and phenotypic variation in the contexts of developmental and evolutionary biology as well as in clinical settings.

