BACKGROUND
plague  is among the most feared of diseases  <cit> . as a zoonotic disease, environmental factors shape plague epidemiology through effects on the main rodent hosts, the flea vectors, the bacterium itself and secondary hosts  and alternative vectors . on short time scales, plague activity in the established foci is mainly determined by the abundance of rodent hosts and vectors, but bacterial evolution can be rapid and respond to changes in host availability and susceptibility as well as transmission rate and even seasonality  <cit> .

despite being a far less prolific killer than ever-present diseases such as malaria, plague is believed to have caused at least two pandemics with major demographic impact. the first pandemic known to western history, 'the justinian plague', severely reduced the mediterranean european population between  <dig> and  <dig> ad, decimating the capital constantinople in 541- <dig> and dashing the last attempt to reunite the roman empire  <cit> . but from  <dig> at the latest, plague was seemingly absent in europe for over half a millennium until the 'black death', which most likely spread out from central asia  and reduced the european population by about 40-60% after  <dig> ad  <cit> . as in justinian's time, it seemed to persist locally in europe over the next few centuries before again fading away, first from rural areas, but persisting in some places into the early 19th century  <cit> .

even when absent from most records, y. pestis was always present in its original habitats, and a so-called 'third pandemic' emerged from the yunnan province of china in the early  <dig> s. although not causing devastation on the scales of 'justinian's plague' or the 'black death', some strains of y. pestis have spread and persisted in rodent reservoirs from the western united states and india to africa   <cit> .

while the geographical origin of justinian's plague is unknown, the black death and third pandemic both probably emerged from the interior of central asia, where the plague bacterium seems likely to have evolved after diverging from its most recent extant relative, y. pseudotuberculosis, and is also still endemic in large areas  <cit> . between epidemics, human plague occurs almost exclusively as a result of contact with the wildlife reservoir, but human-to-human transmission  may allow an epidemic to flare up over much larger areas outside those of the natural host ranges  <cit> . primary human infections occur mostly through the bites of fleas that have fed on an infected animal  or from eating or processing an infected animal.

here we examine data from the pre-balkhash plague focus of southeastern kazakhstan , where the population densities of great gerbils , a major reservoir host species  <cit> , their fleas and the presence of plague were continuously monitored from 1949- <dig>  <cit> . the gerbil population densities vary considerably through multiannual fluctuations but are highly spatially correlated on large scales, at least up to the distances of more than  <dig> km covered by our field data. their spatial distribution appears to be limited by soils suitable for burrowing, while their temporal density fluctuations are mainly influenced by an interplay between density dependence , and variability in vegetation cover   <cit> . the main sylvatic  plague transmission vectors are fleas  <cit> , and increasing vector abundance is probably one of the reasons why moist, relatively warm spring conditions tend to increase the prevalence of plague in great gerbils  <cit> . great gerbils usually have few visible symptoms of plague infection, and only moderate increases in mortality  <cit> , and there seems to be a critical threshold of host population density necessary for plague to persist in an area  <cit> .

the region is fairly typical of central asia in having a highly continental, and mostly arid climate, with some moister and more productive areas near rivers and along the himalayan foothills. climatic variation may impact plague dynamics directly through host density fluctuations caused by variable food abundance and survival rates, through vector  population growth and survival, through temperature effects on the bacterium itself and, most important, through the interaction of several factors. for instance, increased humidity would tend to increase host population growth  and flea population growth  at the same time  <cit> .

thus, fluctuating weather conditions have been suggested to affect the dynamics of plague within its reservoirs and, through this, the number of human infections, while some little-known factors seem likely to limit the distribution of plague between large epidemics  <cit> . here we pursue the link between climate and plague by using a set of recently published palaeoclimatic reconstructions that are the longest and most thoroughly verified high-resolution records available for central asia: two accumulation series from the guliya ice core , signaling large-scale, low-frequency precipitation changes  <cit> ; a stalagmite record from wanxiang cave, china , providing information on the strength of the east asian monsoon and, conversely, the siberian winter monsoon  <cit> ; and a composite dendrochronological reconstruction from the tien shan and karakorum mountains  capturing summer temperature   <cit> . for details, see figure 1b, the methods section and the supporting information .

if the climate reconstructions capture variability relevant for the plague system, we should hypothesize that  the monitoring data will show evidence of climate forcing on sylvatic plague prevalence, and  this will be reflected in a further, independent data set on human cases of plague, collected by the kazakh health department from 1904- <dig>  most of these cases occurred prior to  <dig>  when plague monitoring and control began as part of soviet-wide efforts, and antibiotics and insecticides became increasingly available  <cit> . thus, a consistent and important climate forcing on sylvatic plague should be detectable in a statistical connection between climate and the independent human case data, allowing us to look for associations between climate fluctuations and human plague on scales much larger than previously considered, as well as connecting these associations with the long-term, large-scale behavior of the plague system.

RESULTS
we find that for the period 1982- <dig> , all climate indices have significantly nonzero average correlations with annual variations in primary production  over central and east asia . also, a significant relationship is found between annual variation in ndvi  and sylvatic plague abundance, p, in the same year  and also in the next year  . p is measured as the estimated annual product of gerbil density  and the proportion of gerbils with active y. pestis infection in the pre-balkhash 1949- <dig> . associations with plague  are also found for the same-year tree-ring temperature index t  and monsoon strength s , and for the glaciological accumulation series  with a time lag of  <dig> yr . moreover, it is largely the same ndvi pixels that correlate with the climate indices as with plague  . thus, ndvi, plague prevalence in gerbils and the palaeoclimatic indices seem consistently interrelated  for the available overlapping periods. as vegetation abundance is of direct importance as rodent food supply, and responds to moisture and temperature, which are also directly important for the fleas, bacteria and rodents, these associations suggests that the palaeoclimatic series reflect large-scale fluctuations in factors relevant for both the flea vectors and the rodent hosts of plague  <cit> . see methods and additional file  <dig> for further information.

we therefore turn to links between climate, sylvatic plague activity and the independent data on human plague cases , initially for the period 1949- <dig>  the climate series show cross correlations with p , and of these, the tree-ring series  provides the highest correlation with plague prevalence  as with ndvi, while the correlation with s is negative . low-frequency variations and delayed effects from climate are to be expected  <cit> . hence, the number of plausible measures of climate exceeds what can reliably be corrected for, with regard to effects of multiple testing, without reducing the p value for acceptance below what is possible to achieve when temporal autocorrelation needs to be taken into account. thus, instead of selecting one single "best" model, we fitted  <dig> variants of a statistical model with p as the response variable , incorporating different measures derived from all three climatic indices . each model's suitability for explaining observed sylvatic plague activity  from 1949- <dig> was measured by its generalized cross-validation  score  <cit> . a substantial proportion of the large-scale sylvatic plague activity from 1949- <dig> seems to be explicable through climatic factors, on average explaining 61% of the deviance, with the 5% models with lowest gcv explaining about 90%. this supports our first hypothesis. also, the gcv scores are approximately normally distributed around a modal value of  <dig>  however, a distinct "tail" of low gcv values strongly suggests that there exists a family of better-than-random models .

moreover, as the climate proxies extend back in time, we compute the correlation, d, between a model's predicted sylvatic plague activity and the observed human plague cases 1904- <dig>  that is, before the sylvatic plague monitoring started. there is a clear correlation between d and a model's adequacy for explaining sylvatic plague  . the n refers to the number of different ways of smoothing and lagging the climate data . it suggests that models that are better at accounting for sylvatic plague activity 1949- <dig> tend also to generate the better correlations between the sylvatic plague activity they predict and the human plague activity observed 1904- <dig>  taking the mean correlation with human plague  per incremental increase in gcv underlines this, showing a very high correlation between gcv and mean d  .

focusing on the  <dig> models with the lowest gcv , we find from the distribution of their d values that their predicted sylvatic plague activities consistently tend to correlate with human plague 1904- <dig> . the temporal mean of these  <dig> predictions forms our 'best estimate' of climate forcing  on sylvatic plague activity. it correlates closely with the number of human cases 1904- <dig> in the same  and in the following  year, and this is not sensitive to the exact number of model variants included in y , as the poor  sylvatic models cancel out, leaving the signal from the good  ones dominant. finally, taking temporal autocorrelations into account in a generalized additive mixed model , we find that the sylvatic plague index, y, is a significant predictor  for human plague cases from 1904- <dig>  as well as for the whole period from 1904- <dig> when taking the existence of the antiplague control program from  <dig> into account as a bivariate factor . as these human cases were recorded before the monitoring program started, they cannot have influenced the expectations or efforts of the people carrying out rodent monitoring. thus, all these analyses are strongly suggestive of a consistent causal link between climate, sylvatic plague and human plague, and hence are consistent with our second hypothesis, that climate fluctuations affect the plague reservoir in a way that is decisive for the number of primary human infections.

turning to much longer time scales, we first construct a binary vector, with  <dig> meaning no known large plague epidemic ad 450- <dig>  and  <dig> denoting suspected high plague activity leading up to a pandemic, namely the years 510- <dig> , 1300- <dig> , 1845- <dig>  and 1900- <dig> , the periods shaded in figure 3d. the models whose predictions correlate the most with human plague in kazakhstan 1904- <dig>  also tend to have the highest correlations with this crude series of historical plague .

prior to the 16th century, the ice-core accumulation series  has only decadal resolution, and the monsoon index  has frequent missing values, which need to be estimated from its own decadal autocorrelation structure and the correspondence with the decadal ice-core accumulation . however, while such model and sampling error from several sources introduces large uncertainties, especially in the earlier parts of the reconstructions, there is no reason to believe that any of them introduces systematic bias. hence, as a best estimate, the centennial scale picture emerging from the interplay between these climate factors is intriguing . despite the fact that the absence of tree-ring data deflates variability prior to ad  <dig>  it suggests that the first  pandemic started during a period of higher than median plague activity in wild rodents. plague activity then declined slowly to below median, before rising in several smaller peaks from the beginning of the 12th century lasting until the onset of what became the black death around ad  <dig>  afterwards, predicted plague activity declined to the lowest levels of the period and stayed well below the median until the time when plague again became evident in chinese records and as the third pandemic emerged sometime during the late 18th and mid 19th centuries. during this period, about  <dig>  million human plague cases were recorded over  <dig> provinces in china  <cit> . furthermore, a short-lived peak coincides with the unusually virulent outbreaks of primarily pneumonic plague in manchuria in 1910- <dig> and 1920- <dig>  <cit> .

discussion
the pre-balkhash gerbil data cover about 2% of kazakhstan. that the early 20th century human plague cases are nonetheless predicted so well on a larger  scale is probably partly related to the synoptic nature of the patterns involved. indeed, climatic fluctuations synchronize gerbil abundance over large areas, which may itself be crucial to the spread of plague  <cit> , as well as making the impact on humans greater simply by generating larger areas with high infection risk. moreover, the relative explanatory power of a purely climate-driven model, such as that derived here, is likely to increase with the spatial scale over which it is applied, as the endogenous dynamics in otherwise uncoupled populations would then cancel out, increasing the relative strength of the larger-scale climate signal in the mean density. human population density patterns  also suggest that a large proportion of cases should occur in the southeast part of the country, in the region of the study site.

the impact of sylvatic plague on humans may operate through several scales and mechanisms  <cit> . first, it is obvious that more infected rodents and fleas are likely, everything else being equal, to translate into a greater number of humans coming into contact with the bacterium. further, the more primary human infections there are, the more likely it is for an epidemic to start and for a particularly virulent mutant to establish in humans. however, everything may not be equal, as plague activity feeds back on itself through evolutionary processes. this may impact the resulting epidemiology when secondary hosts are infected and leads us to suspect that epidemics in naïve hosts could be more virulent when occurring after a prolonged period of high plague activity, even though  increased resistance in the primary hosts is also being selected for. this might suggest why the current pandemic is less virulent than those of centuries past.

no quantitative records of plague prior to  <dig> are available for the region. but the 11th to 14th century period of high plague activity predicted by our study site coincides with plague outbreaks in kaifeng and other parts of china from circa  <dig> to the  <dig> s  <cit>  and notably with an outbreak near lake issyk-kul  in 1338- <dig>  <cit> , the discovery of which suggested to archaeologists that the black death pandemic originated in this region  <cit> .

the associations between the climatic indexes, predicted plague and ndvi suggest that periods of high plague activity should have a degree of correlation with increased precipitation and thus productivity in water-limited grasslands, as also suggested by earlier studies in kazakhstan  <cit>  and the usa  <cit> . historical records reflecting the relative strength of the han chinese states versus neighboring pastoralist groups  <cit>  are consistent with periods of high productivity preceding the two major plague epidemics . resource scarcity is often assumed to be a primary driver of historical conflicts  <cit> , and poor grazing conditions during cold periods probably forced central asian nomads south. however, territorial expansions and  warfare depend not only on population size relative to its resources but also on the absolute size of the population from which armies can be recruited. we thus observe that the two main periods of border expansion, migration and warfare by central asian nomad pastoralists  <cit>  found in chinese records, and known in european history from the hun invasions of the 5th century and the mongol expansions of the 13th, are consistent with periods of high productivity in central asian grasslands having occurred prior to the great plague pandemics . also, mongol expansions  <cit>  might explain why plague appeared in kaifeng  but not in europe in the  <dig> s, whereas during the  <dig> s, after the mongol conquest of eastern europe, plague appeared both in china and europe  <cit> .

not much is known about the evolutionary rate of y. pestis virulence in its natural reservoirs. but on a theoretical basis, we may suspect that periods of high plague activity  select for more virulent types, and periods of low activity weed out strains killing the host too quickly  <cit> . thus, it might be noteworthy that the centennial scale minima and maxima  suggest essentially three periods of higher virulence having been selected for, and that these periods are consistent with the three large pandemic periods . moreover, depending on scale and the relative importance of virulence 'retreats'  versus 'booms' , the third pandemic started with a markedly lower expected virulence than the other two and would therefore perhaps not have spread so far out of its original habitat had it not been for human activities. interestingly, the largely pneumonic and virulent manchurian epidemics of 1910- <dig> and 1920- <dig>  <cit>  did appear during a short peak of high expected virulence.

there are some peaks that do not correspond to known plague events. these may point to weaknesses in the data or model or to unrecorded events , but it should also be noted that high plague activity in the reservoir is likely  to be a necessary but not sufficient condition for large human outbreaks: plague in humans cannot be sustained without plague activity in the reservoir, but we do not expect every peak in rodents to generate a human epidemic. moreover, there is no instantaneous link between europe  and the part of central asia with which our models are concerned. thus, mechanisms for long-distance transmission by human or nonhuman hosts are also necessary, and our model of course cannot account for the local dynamics of plague foci persisting in europe after the first waves of infection by some  virulent strain of y. pestis. however, as plague evidently has not been able to persist indefinitely in european hosts, it is notable that plague died off in rural europe under periods of decreasing predicted plague peaks and virulence in central asia, though several european cities continued to act as independent plague foci for a considerable time, possibly due to the urban rodent reservoirs  <cit> . thus, the apparent patterns are striking enough on several scales to suggest that the plague system has indeed been influenced by climate fluctuations over the past  <dig> years and that this has had consequences for human history.

even though the first, controversial isolates of y. pestis dna in european plague victims appear to have been satisfactorily replicated  <cit> , there is ongoing debate about whether y. pestis was a major cause of justinian's plague and the black death  <cit> . our findings suggest a consistent impact of climate on modern plague, are consistent with y. pestis being present in medieval plague victims  <cit> , and tentatively suggest that changes in host densities would select for fluctuations in pathogen virulence consistent with the historical trends. however, we must also caution that our climate-forcing models would arguably apply to other central asian zoonoses that could potentially have emerged and spread due to the same climate forcings.

looking towards the future, plague is still a concern because of its potentially disrupting effects on local health systems and on international trade, and because of the risk of epidemics that are difficult to control, especially in dense human settlements with poor public health provisions  <cit> . while y. pestis is currently not a major human pathogen, its status as a reemerging disease, combined with growing risks of antibiotic resistance  <cit>  and its potential use as a bioweapon  <cit> , makes plague a disease worth studying for its own sake. in addition, its reputation has motivated surveillance and research on scales that makes it a valuable model system for understanding zoonotic diseases in the past, present and future. the predicted regional climate changes are highly uncertain, but we note that increasing temperature  and monsoon  proxy evidences, and lower than average glacial accumulation, are related to higher plague estimates . in other words, our results suggest that when the gerbils' dry habitats experience higher than average rainfall and warm springs, large plague outbreaks in gerbils, and high plague risk in humans, tend to follow. during the past decades, glacial accumulation  has been increasing and monsoon strength  has been about average, but the tree-ring temperature index, which is statistically the most closely and positively related to plague dynamics, has shown a rising trend which is expected to continue  <cit> , and glacial accumulation may also fall as temperature rises  <cit> . hence, predicted continuation of global warming associated with an increase of the hydrological cycle may enhance the probability of human plague outbreaks in central asia, especially if socioeconomic instability undermines the efforts of plague prevention in less developed though highly populated regions.

however, much work remains to be done. the epidemiological dynamics of the nonhuman hosts and the arthropod vectors are incompletely known, as are the differences between bacterial strains. the most common vectors have been studied in detail, but the sylvatic patterns are sometimes puzzling, suggesting some unknown mode of long-range dispersal or an unrecognized mode of persistence in the environment. interactions with the habitat structure of the rodent host community may reflect some of the mechanisms through which climate, topography and vegetation  seem to form a barrier to plague occurrence, a barrier that seems to break down under some circumstances to allow the large-scale epidemics of history.

CONCLUSIONS
the importance of climatic fluctuations in shaping human history is generally recognized  <cit> , but such hypotheses are rarely evaluated statistically. here, we assess the correspondence between multiple chains of evidence suggesting that large-scale climate fluctuations have important influences on the epidemiology of a reemerging disease of historical importance.

we do not imagine that our findings represent final, conclusive evidence that the historical pandemics known as the plague of justinian and the black death were caused by the plague bacterium , let alone that climate fluctuations were instrumental in the origin of these pandemics. but we do argue that climate fluctuations have important effects on modern plague epidemiology and that these effects are strong enough to be visible as consistent and nonrandom relationships between palaeoclimatic  data, remote-sensed variability in plant cover , plague prevalence in an important wildlife host species , and human plague prevalence  in the half-century prior to commencement of consistent public health efforts in the region.

this, we believe, shows that large-scale climate fluctuations have had, and likely will have, important consequences for wildlife plague prevalence and human health in vulnerable areas. moreover, the correspondence between our climate-driven models of reservoir plague prevalence and historical trends in human plague occurrence are consistent with the view that large-scale plague epidemiology is linked to outbreak frequency and virulence in the core plague habitats of eurasia, and that these habitats are affected by climate fluctuations. such a view by no means suggests that human history is unimportant in explaining the great pandemics; on the contrary, for the climate forcings on central asian plague systems to have any effect on human populations as far away as china and europe, long-range transmission must be possible and the receiving populations must be susceptible. thus, our findings corroborate historical and archeological records suggesting that the black death at least originated somewhere in central asia and was transmitted  through human activity to more densely populated areas.

of more immediate concern may be that our findings also suggest that the partial discontinuation of plague surveillance following in the wake of the collapse of the ussr takes place at a time when current and near-future climate changes seem more likely to favor an increase than a decrease in plague activity.

