BACKGROUND
all cells are bounded by semi-permeable membranes that consist of lipid bilayers. eukaryotic cells also possess an elaborate endomembrane system whereas archaea and bacteria, some notable exceptions notwithstanding, lack endomembranes. the integrity of the membrane is essential for the survival of the cell because the membrane maintains gradients of energy, ions and nutrients between the cell and the environment. the membranes of all cells are spanned by diverse integral membrane proteins including energy-dependent transporters, antiporters and channels that are responsible for transport of specific ions or small molecules, and receptors involved in the recognition of various environmental cues. the great majority of integral membrane proteins are anchored in the membrane by hydrophobic transmembrane  helices. the number and orientation of the tm segments determines the topology of the protein in the membrane  <cit> . structural characterization of tm proteins is technically challenging and lags far behind the structural analysis of soluble proteins . conversely, however, computational prediction of tm helices from protein sequence is relatively straighforward, and several accurate and fast methods for this task have been developed. these methods have enabled detailed computational analyses of membrane proteomes once multiple complete genomes of diverse organisms have become available for comparative analysis  <cit> .

comparative genomics has delivered several simple yet powerful insights into the structural variety of tm proteins. the fraction of membrane proteins in cellular proteomes is remarkably constant, roughly 20–25 %, for a broad spectrum of organisms—from bacteria and archaea to complex eukaryotic organisms . in other words, the number of tm proteins scales linearly with the total number of genes  and thus fits together with metabolic enzymes in the framework of universal scaling laws of functional classes of genes . these findings conform to the model of genome evolution that postulates coupling between the evolutionary trajectories of different gene classes  <cit>  and more specifically imply that evolution of membranes is coupled with the evolution of metabolic networks.

in general, the number of membrane proteins encoded in a genome is inversely proportional to the number of tm helices they contain, with bitopic proteins  being most numerous, and large polytopic proteins  much more rare   <cit> . notable exceptions to this rule include the  <dig> tm and  <dig> tm proteins that are over-represented in many multi-cellular organisms, and  <dig> tm proteins that are extremely abundant in animals  <cit> . another general rule is that most tm proteins have both their n- and c-terminal ends facing inwards in the membrane —a topology that appears to be strongly preferred in nearly all organisms, with the major exception being the c. elegans  <dig> tm receptors that prefer a nout-cin topology  <cit> —although several instances of proteins with dynamic topologies  have been described  <cit> .

all of the general conclusions on the abundance, distribution, and structures of tm proteins pertain to cellular life forms. however, the most abundant biological entities on earth are viruses not cells  <cit> . in a sharp contrast to cells, virus particles are not bounded by closed membranes capable of supporting electrical and chemical gradients. nevertheless, membranes play important roles in viral reproduction including entrance into the host cells , replication that often occurs within membranous viral “factories” , and egress  <cit> . some of these interactions between viruses and membranes are facilitated by cellular tm proteins that are hijacked by viruses, but others are encoded in viral genomes. despite their importance, the current knowledge of the viral membrane proteome is scarse  <cit> . the carefully annotated swissprot database  <cit>  contains information about approximately  <dig> viral tm proteins, many of them with unknown function. of these, only a small number of distinct viral proteins have an appreciable coverage of their tm portions by experimentally determined structures. often, structural studies are instead performed at low resolution and reveal general trends, e.g. the conservation of secondary structure elements in different classes of holins  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, no systematic genome-level analysis of viral tm proteins has been performed so far.

athough the vast majority of the virosphere remains unexplored by sequencing efforts , the current sequence databases contain over a thousand complete genomes of bacteriophages and archaeal viruses, together encoding > <dig> proteins. notwithstanding the typical fast evolution of viral genomes, many of these proteins have detectable homologs in other viruses  <cit> . recently, the evolutionary conservation of protein-coding genes among bacterial and archaeal viruses has been captured in the collection of prokaryotic virus orthologous groups  that currently includes > <dig> gene families  <cit> . the pogs include orthologous genes from dna and rna viruses that infect bacteria or archaea, although nearly 90 % of the genomes and 97 % of the conserved proteins are from the large double-stranded dna  viruses, which mostly represent the tailed bacteriophages of the order caudovirales. this heavy bias towards the tailed bacteriophages appears to reflect the situation in nature because these viruses are indeed the most abundant genome-containing entities on earth  <cit> , outnumbering cells by about ten-to-one  <cit> .

here we describe the use of pogs combined with methods for tm prediction to generate a comprehensive genome-scale census of α-helical tm proteins encoded by dsdna viruses infecting bacteria and archaea, and compare the differences between this complement and that of their cellular hosts. we find that viruses show the expected dependence between the number of tm proteins and the total number of genes , but typically encode a much smaller fraction of tm proteins than bacteria and archaea and also show a much greater variance of that fraction. furthermore, viruses almost exclusively lack more complicated membrane topologies with more than  <dig> tm segments, with a few exceptions that appear to represent proteins recently acquired from their hosts. these findings imply that viruses do not follow the general scaling laws for functional classes of genes that appear to hold for all cellular organisms.

RESULTS
overall tm complement of dsdna prokaryotic viruses
focusing on the > <dig> genomes available for the extensively studied class of dsdna viruses that infect bacteria and archaea, pogs were constructed and tm predictions were made as described in the methods. these represent virus groups such as caudovirales , tectiviridae  and several other families of viruses infecting bacteria and archaea. . overall, a typical dsdna virus genome consists of ~80– <dig> proteins, although this number varies by  <dig> orders of magnitude from the tiny  <dig> -kbp leuconostoc phage l <dig> with only  <dig> proteins, up to the nearly 500-kbp genome of bacillus phage g with > <dig> proteins. like genome size, the proportion of proteins per genome that are conserved in pog gene families is highly variable, from none of the  <dig> proteins in leuconostoc phage l <dig> or other poorly characterized viruses, up to 100 % in several well-characterized staphylococcus and mycobacterium phages. on average, a typical genome contains 50– <dig> conserved proteins that make up ~60 % of its protein complement  <cit> .

these viral genomes typically encode few tm proteins, <10 % for most viruses . only about 15 % of the analyzed viral genomes encode >10 %  of tm proteins. these tm-rich viruses include the enterobacteria phage pr group of the family tectiviridae and several archaeal viruses of the families fuselloviridae, rudiviridae, plasmaviridae, globuloviridae, ampullaviridae and other groups . at the other end of the spectrum, the only virus not found to contain at least one tm region is the tiny mycoplasma phage p <dig> with only  <dig> proteins altogether. the proportion of tm proteins that are homologous between viruses  is roughly the same as for non-tm proteins .fig.  <dig> overall distributions of proteins in dsdna genomes of viruses infecting bacteria and archaea. a boxplot showing the overall ranges of the number of proteins in each genome overall, vs. tm proteins. b venn diagram showing the typical virus complement  of tm/non-tm proteins and proteins conserved/not conserved in pogs



the number of tm proteins encoded in viral genomes scales roughly linearly with the genome size although the relative deviation away from the linear trend line is much greater than in bacterial and archaeal genomes . the difference between the distribution of tm proteins among viruses compared to that among prokaryotes becomes more apparent when the fraction of tm proteins is plotted against the genome size . in agreement with previous observations, the fractions of tm proteins in bacteria and archaea do not depend on the genome size and vary within the range from  <dig> to 30 %, with most genomes encoding between  <dig> and 25 % membrane proteins; the few outliers with tm proportion >30 % are highly degraded intracellular parasites that encode only several hundred proteins . among viruses, the variation in the fraction of tm proteins is much greater, with the majority being <10 % and thus well separated from bacteria and archaea, but a minority encoding a large fraction of tm proteins, within the microbial range and higher . noticeably, the high tm content was found only in viruses with small and moderate  genome size, conceivably due to the large repertoires of non-tm proteins, such as regulators of host cell transcription, translation, and other metabolic activities, in viruses with larger genomes. presumably, the typically low but widely varying tm content among viruses has to do with the removal of the functional constraints that dictate the nearly constant proportion of tm proteins in cellular life forms.fig.  <dig> tm proteins and genome size. the plots of  number and  proportion of tm proteins vs. genome size



although tm proteins in viruses differ in several respects from those in cellular organisms, many characteristics remain similar. specifically, the amino acid distribution does not differ significantly , the “positive-inside” rule of tm topology is still observed, the characteristic length of tm segments is the same at roughly 20aa, and a very low proportion of signal peptides is found  <cit>  .

tm content and topology in viral and microbial proteins
the distributions of membrane proteins by the number of tm segments in representative sets of prokaryotic and viral genomes show striking, highly significant differences  whereas the archaeal and bacterial distributions are indistinguishable . although in both viruses and cellular organisms the most prevalent group includes single-tm proteins, bacteria and archaea have a heavy tail of multi-tm proteins, with second and third peaks at  <dig> tm and  <dig> tm, respectively. in a sharp contrast, proteins with  <dig> or more tm segments are extremely rare in viruses .fig.  <dig> tm topology. number and proportion of tm segments in  virus and  host genomes



moreover, those virus proteins that are predicted to contain > <dig> tm often have more homologs among bacteria than among other viruses , suggestive of a relatively recent horizontal transfer of the respective gene from bacteria . for example, several photosystem components found in cyanophages  <cit>  with 6– <dig> tm segments , have been recently borrowed from their cellular hosts. another example is nicotinamide mononucleotide transporter with  <dig> tm segments that is found in only  <dig> tailed bacteriophages infecting several bacterial genera but is widely represented in bacterial genomes. yet another class of functions includes o-antigen conversion proteins with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> segments that are found in many more bacteria than viruses. conversely, proteins with < <dig> tm segments typically include functions such as holins, virion components . a comprehensive analysis of the functions of viral tm proteins is hampered by the paucity of experimental data for the great majority of these proteins and the lack of functionally characterized homologs.

among the majority of virus tm protein topologies, roughly equal proportions of proteins were observed to be conserved vs. not conserved in pogs . an identical analysis was performed on prophages integrated into host chromosomes, with results qualitatively similar to their lytic counterparts: about 10 % of the prophage proteins contain at least one tm region, and a similar depletion of proteins with more than a single tm is observed .

another notable feature of the viral tm protein distribution is the obvious, highly significant difference between the viruses infecting bacteria vs. archaea  which is examined in greater detail below.

robustness of tm prediction
to ascertain that the difference in the number of tm observed in viruses vs. cellular organisms is a biological effect rather than a mere technical artifact, the analysis was repeated using the memsat <dig> program  for the  <dig> virus genomes with the highest prevalence of tm proteins. in this dataset, 81 % of the results were identical to those of the global analysis using phobius, and among the cases that were not, 91 % involved a difference of only a single tm segment, with the other 9 % involving only two segments. thus, both phobius and memsat <dig> confirm the overall lack of more complicated tm topologies in viruses.

as another assessment of the accuracy of tm prediction, we analyzed the consistency of predictions among proteins in the same pog . for 94 % of the pogs, the same prediction was obtained for all the proteins . when orthologs differed in their tm assignments, more than 50 % did so only by a single tm segment, whereas another 25 % differed by two tm. greater differences were observed for a small number of proteins noticed previously, in particular for viruses  <cit> . these differences mostly involve poorly alignable protein regions: for instance, in holins that are small hydrophobic proteins, different numbers of tm segments are sometimes predicted in different regions of the sequence, and it remains unclear which of these reflect articfacts and which are biologically relevant differences. despite these uncertainties, the overall excellent agreement of the tm prediction results among different proteins within the same pog provides confidence in the validity of the trends observed in this study.

to further assess the accuracy of the tm topology assignments and verify that the small number of tm segments in virus proteins is not a consequence of the small characteristic size of viral proteins, we analyzed the dependence of tm predictions on protein length. figure  <dig> shows that despite the typical difference in protein length—easily visible in the shift between the protein length distributions of viruses  and cells —this difference cannot be solely responsible for the dissimilarity in tm topologies. as the corresponding proportion plots in fig. 4c and d demonstrate, at the same length, cellular organisms display a greater fraction of polytopic proteins containing higher numbers of tm segments than viruses.fig.  <dig> protein length and tm segments. protein length distribution according to number of tm segments  in  virus and  cellular genomes, and proportion of proteins in each protein length bin for  virus and  cellular genomes. protein length values are in units of number of amino acids



tm protein complements in different types of viruses
to investigate the tm complements in different types of viruses, the characteristics of each virus are described in terms of three categories: the virus taxonomic family, the domain of the host , and whether the virion particle is directly associated with lipids  . with the sole exception of the archaeal virus family lipothrixviridae, all viruses with a lipid-associated virion encompass higher fractions of tm proteins than viruses with a lipid-less virion . among viruses with lipid-containing virions, the fraction of tm proteins range from 24 % at the low end in bacillus thuringiensis bacteriophage bam35c  to 41 % in two sulfolobus spindle-shaped viruses . the lipid-less viruses have a proportion of tm proteins that is typically less than 10 %, with only  <dig> viruses having >20 %, up to a maximum of 23 % in sulfolobus turreted icosahedral virus of rudiviridae. the tm proportion of globuloviridae  falls in the same range as other lipid-associated viruses, and that of bicaudaviridae  falls in the same range as other lipid-less viruses.fig.  <dig> virus types. for each virus family, the  proportion of tm proteins,  genome size, and  number of genomes is shown. virus families are also labelled by host domain and lipid/non-lipid association of the virion. the star represents the average value, with whiskers showing minimum and maximum , and boxplots shown for families containing at least  <dig> genomes



the data in fig.  <dig>  demonstrate that it is the presence of lipids in association with the virion, not genome size or host domain, that is most closely correlated with the proportion of tm proteins. for instance, ampullaviridae, fuselloviridae, rudiviridae and the archaeal siphoviridae viruses all share the characteristics of infecting an archaeal host and having a small genome size . however, the former two families form lipid-associated virions and have a high proportion of tm proteins, whereas the latter two have lipid-less virions and a correspondingly low proportion of tm proteins . the sharp distinction between viruses with lipid-containing and those with lipid-less virions is even more apparent in fig.  <dig> where, with the exception of lipothrixviridae, all viruses with lipid-associated virions—regardless of genome size and host range—show perfect separation from the viruses with lipid-less virions in terms of the proportion of tm proteins. the nonparametric mann-whitney-wilcoxon test confirms the independence of the lipid vs. non-lipid-associated populations with p <  <dig> , and there is a strong positive correlation between the proportion of tm proteins and lipid association , compared to the weaker correlation of the tm protein proportion with host domain  , and the weak negative correlation with genome size  .fig.  <dig> tm proportion and genome size, by virus category. proportion of tm proteins vs. genome size, colored according to host domain and virion lipid association. datapoints belonging to the virus family lipothrixviridae outlined in black



the viruses of the family lipothrixviridae are an exception to the simple rule under which the presence of lipids in virions dictates the content of tm proteins. both the number and the proportion of tm proteins in the lipothrixvirus genomes are much lower than those of the other families of archaeal lipid-asscoiated viruses, ampullaviridae and fuselloviridae. the viruses of the families lipothrixviridae and rudiviridae share several homologous proteins and similar genome architectures and have been included in the single order ligamenvirales  <cit> . thus, it appears possible that the lipid association of the lipothrixviridae virion is a relatively recent innovation that evolved after the divergence from the common ancestor with rudiviridae; alternatively, rudiviruses might have lost the membrane association. to explore these possibilities, we compared the genome organization between lipothrixviridae and rudiviridae. in agreement with previous reports, the definition of conserved genes based on shared pogs that was employed here indicate considerable conservation between the two virus families . notably, however, the tm proteins are not part of this common heritage. moreover, many of the genes encoding these largely uncharacterized proteins are not conserved even within their respective families lipothrixviridae or rudiviridae . thus, it appears likely that the lipid-association of lipothrixviridae virions is not a stable feature of this group, but rather is in evolutionary flux and is likely a recently acquired feature .fig.  <dig> genes shared in viruses of lipothrixviridae and rudiviridae. genes shared between acidianus rod-shaped virus  <dig> , sulfolobus islandicus rod-shaped virus  <dig> , sulfolobus islandicus filamentous virus , acidianus filamentous virus  <dig> , and acidianus filamentous virus  <dig> . genes shared by multiple genomes within both lipothrixviridae and rudiviridae are colored red; or orange if only present in a single genome of either family; genes found in multiple representitives of the  <dig> genomes of lipothrixviridae  colored yellow; or found in multiple representitives of the  <dig> genomes or rudiviridae  colored blue; genes shared only with viruses from other families colored black; while genes not conserved in pogs colored white. numbers above a gene represent the number of tm segments that it contains, with sequences containing a signal sequence designated by “s”, and colored in the same way as the genes



CONCLUSIONS
viral transmembrane proteins and their roles in virus reproduction and virus-host interaction are extremely poorly studied. the repertoires of tm proteins in viruses infecting prokaryotes radically differ from those in archaeal and bacterial cells. unlike cellular organisms in which tm proteins represent a nearly constant fraction in the range of  <dig> to 25 %, the variation in the fraction of tm proteins in viruses is much broader. the majority of viruses posses less than 10 % tm proteins but a substantial minority are tm-rich, with over 40 % tm proteins in some. furthermore, there is only weak scaling of the number of tm proteins with the genome size of viruses as opposed to the near perfect proportionality in bacteria and archaea. finally, viral membrane proteomes consist predominantly of proteins with a single tm, in contrast to the membrane proteomes of bacteria and archaea that are rich in tm proteins with multiple tm segments, in particular 6-tm and 12-tm proteins.

these dramatic differences between the membrane proteomes of viruses and cellular organisms seem to have a straightforward explanation in the completely different roles played by membranes in the reproduction of cells and viruses. in cellular life forms, the membranes perform a well-defined suite of essential functions that have to do with energy transformation, ion homeostasis, nutrient transport and signaling. this suite of essential, universal functions dictates the near constancy of the tm protein fraction in bacterial and archaeal genomes. moreover, the nearly identical distributions of membrane proteins by the number of tm segments in bacteria and archaea imply even more detailed, universal functional constraints. none of these functions are relevant in most viruses, and on the few occasions when such activities are performed by viral proteins, they are involved in virus-host interaction rather than the central process of virus reproduction. due to the lack of universal, essential membrane functions, viruses show a broad range in the fraction of tm proteins, with most viruses encoding only a few but some showing a greater proportion of tm protein than cellular life forms. a more general implication of these findings is that viruses do not typically obey the universal scaling laws for functional classes of genes that seem to apply in all cellular life forms .

viral tm proteins can be involved in two classes of functions: first, virion structure formation, and second, modification of membranes in the infected cell. clearly, the tm proteins can contribute to virion structure only in those viruses that possess some form of lipid membranes. the observation that all viruses with high tm content also contain lipids in their particles indicates that the involvement of tm proteins in virion morphogenesis is indeed substantial in these cases. most of the viral membrane proteins supporting virion structure have simple, single-tm architectures. a notable feature that became apparent in the course of this work is the higher prevalence of lipid-containing, tm-rich viruses in archaea compared to bacteria. whether the greater involvement of membranes in virion structure of archaeal viruses is an adaptation to extreme conditions or reflects other aspects of their lifestyle remains to be determined. the roles of viral tm proteins in host membrane modification are poorly understood but generally fit within the paradigm of virus-host interaction. a well-characterized case are the cyanophages that carry tm proteins of photosystems that boost nutrient production in the infected cyanobacteria  <cit> .

it is our hope that the present census of tm proteins in viruses of bacteria and archaea facilitates experimental characterization of the role of membranes in viral reproduction . a comparative genomic census of membrane proteins in the numerous and diverse viruses infecting eukaryotes will similarly help in revealing universal and host-specific aspects of virus evolution.

