BACKGROUND
clarification of the pattern and dynamics of nucleotide change in evolution is of fundamental importance for understanding evolutionary mechanisms. one major focus is the determination and evaluation of factors that affect the evolutionary rate at the molecular level. while molecular clock has been largely accepted as a null hypothesis of molecular evolution, many possible influencing factors have been proposed and investigated either in animals or in plants during these decades, including changes in population size, protein dispensability, efficiency of dna replication and repair systems, metabolic rate, speciation rate, and generation time  <cit> .

among these, life history traits are of particular interest. for example, generation time, referring to the time to reach sexual maturity, has long been suspected as a major factor that alters the molecular evolutionary rate among species. in animals, several empirical studies suggested that rodents have a higher evolutionary tempo than primates, indicating an inverse relationship between evolutionary rate and generation time  <cit> . in plants, on the other hand, the role of life history in molecular evolution is still under debate despite a number of studies supporting its importance  <cit> . whittle and johnston  <cit>  reported genetic comparisons of the nuclear 18s its <dig> and its <dig> regions between annual plants and perennial plants and found no evidence for the inverse relationship between evolutionary rate and life span. such a study raised a question against the general applicability of the generation time effect on molecular evolution of the plants. moreover, considerable variations in breeding system, population size, speciation rate and gene-specific selective constraints introduce further complications in addressing the connection between plants' evolutionary rate and their annual/perennial habits.

notably, one critical problem in previous studies is the limited dna sequence data from different species and particularly different gene loci sampled, due to historical and technological reasons. fortunately, the recent development of the dna sequencing technology lends the resources needed to further investigate this perplexing topic based on far more sequence data than ever before. for instance, an exemplary study carried by smith and donoghue recently detected the much higher rates of molecular change in annuals by sampling and sequencing multiple loci from many species representing the five major branches within flowering plants  <cit> .

herein, we present our study on this topic from a comparative genomic perspective. recently the whole genome sequences of many plants, ranging from moss to flowering plants including annuals and perennials, became available  <cit> . such genomic information from multiple species offers a great opportunity to explore the heterogeneity in evolutionary rate between annuals and perennials across a large set of gene loci at the whole genome level. in this study, we investigate a total of  <dig> kb-long genomic sequence including  <dig> nuclear housekeeping genes,  <dig> non-housekeeping gene families and  <dig> chloroplast genes in four model species of dicot plants . they include arabidopsis thaliana , medicago truncatula , vitis vinifera , and populus trichocarpa . a monocot species, oryza sativa , was used as an outgroup. a relative measure of the evolutionary rates of the orthologous genes between annuals and perennials enabled us to effectively disentangle the genome-wide effect of plant life history trait on the evolutionary rate from locus-specific effects of evolutionary forces such as protein dispensability or selective constraints. our results provide a strong support for the association between the annual/perennial life histories of plants and the rate of molecular evolution at the genomic level.

RESULTS
phylogenetic reconstruction
for phylogenetic reconstruction,  <dig> chloroplast genes were concatenated to form a  <dig>  bp-long sequence data set. for nuclear genes, a data set containing  <dig> housekeeping genes with a total length of  <dig>  bp was used . well-consistent branching order was observed in the phylogenetic trees based on both datasets, although the bootstrap support of the topology was only strong for nuclear genes . according to the phylogenetic trees, a. thaliana diverged first after the split of monocots and dicots, and the two perennial species, grape  and poplar , diverged most recently. long external branches for all five species imply that they are distantly related. in addition, the branch lengths were longer for a. thaliana and m. truncatula compared with v. vinifera and p. trichocarpa in both phylogenetic trees. thus, higher evolutionary rate in annuals than in perennials, in both nuclear genes and chloroplast genes, was supported in the studied species. detailed results for each type of genes are described in the following sections.

nuclear housekeeping genes
using the maximum likelihood  method, we found that  <dig> - <dig> % of the  <dig> nuclear housekeeping genes had higher nucleotide substitution rates  in annuals than in perennials in our annual-perennial pairwise comparisons . this pattern was consistent for nonsynonymous substitution rates  and synonymous substitution rates  as well, with the higher-rate proportions of  <dig> - <dig> %  and  <dig> - <dig> % . the predominant heterogeneity in evolutionary rate between annual and perennial plants was statistically supported by sign-test . paired t-test was then performed to take into account the degree of annual-perennial evolutionary rate shift across each locus and allow quantitative statistic analysis. again, the  <dig> cross-comparisons based on d, dn and ds showed significant annual-perennial heterogeneity in evolutionary rates .

the proportion of genes showing higher evolutionary rate in annuals than in perennials and the p-value of sign-test in three different measures of the evolutionary rate  are listed in the table.

the p-values of paired t-test in all  <dig> annual-perennial cross-comparisons suggest higher evolutionary rates in annuals than in perennials. the estimation of evolutionary rate is based on the ml method.

next, we plotted evolutionary rate in annuals against that in perennials . we also conducted regression analysis for d, dn and ds. majority of the plots were located below the diagonal line and the regression slope was consistently lower than unity , confirming the higher evolutionary rate in annuals than in perennials across multiple gene loci. another interesting finding lies in the correlation of evolutionary rates between annuals and perennials, which can be considered as a measure of relative rate consistency across multiple gene loci . for m. truncatula, clear correlation was detected consistently among d, dn and also ds. for a. thaliana, on the other hand, such correlation could be only found in dn, probably due to the saturation effect of synonymous substitution at some gene loci. saturation of nucleotide substitutions can bias the estimate of evolutionary rate when evolutionary rate is high and the lineages of comparison are distantly related. thus, the saturation effect explains the observation well, considering the early split of a. thaliana  and high nucleotide substitution rate at the synonymous sites . indeed, out of the  <dig> gene loci,  <dig>  showed ds > <dig> in the m. truncatula branch relative to those two perennials, whereas  <dig> genes  showed ds > <dig> in a. thaliana. although all the results above are based on the estimation of evolutionary rates using ml method, another  method based on an assumption of molecular clock also provided similar results .

the square of correlation coefficient  and the slope of regression line of evolutionary rate in annuals against that in perennials are listed in the table.

non-housekeeping gene families
housekeeping genes are often highly conserved. many non-housekeeping genes, on the other hand, often vary in size and functional constraint across different species. they also frequently experience duplication, recombination and diversifying selection, making their evolutionary histories much more complex than those of housekeeping genes  <cit> . so, it is tempting to ask whether such annual-perennial rate heterogeneity holds the same for non-housekeeping gene families. to examine this, we expanded our analysis to incorporate  <dig> non-housekeeping gene families with different sizes and diverse functions. a total of  <dig> orthologous gene clades were sampled from the  <dig> gene families according to our sampled criteria. eventually four data sets were built for further analysis on the gene families .

the results from this analysis were largely consistent with those from housekeeping genes above, in support of heterogeneity in annual-perennial evolutionary rates even in these gene families. both sign-test and paired t-test suggested significantly higher evolutionary rates in these  <dig> gene families . in the scatter plot for the evolutionary rates of annuals vs. perennials, regression lines clearly deviated from the diagonal line and inclined to the annual side . moreover, as we found in housekeeping genes, strong correlation between evolutionary rates in the annual-perennial comparisons was detected in dn, whereas d and ds showed weak or invisible correlation between a. thaliana and those two perennials in many cases .

chloroplast genes
previous studies indicated that nucleotide substitution rates vary greatly among nuclear, mitochondrial, and chloroplast genomes and that chloroplast genome evolve much more slowly than nuclear genome in plants  <cit> . consistent with these reports, our analysis based on  <dig> randomly sampled chloroplast genes showed a considerably lower evolutionary rate than that detected in nuclear housekeeping genes and gene families . therefore, for each annual-perennial comparison, the genetic divergence in chloroplast genomes tends to be much smaller than in nuclear genomes . thus, we expected that chloroplast genes provide a better resolution in order to better estimate the evolutionary rates in these distantly related species.

among the  <dig> chloroplast genes,  <dig> - <dig> % showed higher evolutionary rates in annuals than in perennials in our cross-comparisons . the sign-test and the paired t-test clearly showed heterogeneity in the rates of molecular evolution between annuals and perennials . moreover, the regression slopes in the scatter plots were smaller than unity  between annuals and perennials in all the  <dig> comparison pairs . for chloroplast genes, the correlation between annual-perennial evolutionary rates in a. thaliana appeared to be still detectable after synonymous substitutions were incorporated  . the overall range of ds in the  <dig> chloroplast genes calculated for a. thaliana was 0- <dig>  with an average of  <dig>  , suggesting a minimal saturation effect on the estimation of evolutionary rate in the chloroplast genes.

discussion
possible mechanisms for the higher evolutionary rate in annuals
in this study, we examined a large number of gene loci across both nuclear and chloroplast genomes in four model plants. these genes encode proteins with diverse functions in plants, including structural proteins, metabolic enzymes, and transcription factors. therefore, they represent genes with different functional constraints well, and they can be used as a proxy for inferring the situation across the whole plant genome. in nuclear genomes, our survey on  <dig> nuclear housekeeping genes and  <dig> gene families consistently revealed a generally higher evolutionary rate in annuals than in perennials. similar pattern was found in chloroplast genomes in this study, which is consistent with a previous study based on two chloroplast genes  <cit> . in addition, consistent results have been reported at several loci in mitochondrial genes, e.g. in atpa, coxi, and some non-coding regions  <cit> . altogether, the consistent results from various genomes suggest a globally faster evolutionary tempo at the molecular level for annuals than for perennials across both nuclear and organelle genomes.

following this line of reasoning, such a global pattern should be shaped by some organism-level factors which influence both nuclear and organelle genomes. generation-time might be one of such factors. assuming that mutations occur predominantly at cell division and that the spontaneous meiotic and mitotic mutation rate per cell cycle are the same for annual and perennial plants, the observed difference in evolutionary rate should depend on the frequency of cell division per unit time. since annual plants take a shorter time from germination to reach first flowering than perennials, they might on average experience more frequent cell divisions per unit time prior to reproduction. if this is true, a generally faster evolutionary tempo in annuals than in perennials, as observed in our results, is expected. meanwhile, our results suggest that the lifelong accumulated somatic mutations, mostly introduced by mitosis, have not offset the generation time effect on annual-perennial evolutionary rate difference, which is consistent with other studies  <cit> .

while generation-time might at least partly account for the evolutionary rate heterogeneity between annuals and perennials, there are other possibilities to generate the observed pattern. for example, the observed interspecific rate heterogeneity could also be attributed to the difference in their effective population size   <cit> . ne is an important factor that influences the balance among mutation, random genetic drift and natural selection. as predicted by the nearly neutral mutation model  <cit> , smaller ne leads to higher probability of fixation of mutations by random genetic drift, and hence higher evolutionary rate. in plants, there are strong association between outcrossing rate and the perenniality of the species  <cit> , and an annual species tend to be a selfing species and has generally lower ne compared with perennials  <cit> . and the observation of strongly negative selection for inbreeding in perennial plants further enforced the tendency of a genome-wide lower evolutionary rate in perennials than in their annual counterparts  <cit> .

different speciation rate may be also an alternative explanation. it has been shown that perennials appear to have slower speciation rates than annuals  <cit> . thus, the lower frequency of speciation events in perennials and fewer corresponding opportunities for bottleneck and adaptation events may result in lower evolutionary rates, especially at nonsynonymous sites, compared with annuals  <cit> . in addition, the slower metabolic rate and fewer recombination events per unit time in perennials might also result in the higher spontaneous mutation rate per unit time in annuals  <cit> . therefore, while the difference in evolutionary tempo between annuals and perennials seems to be quite pronounced, the biological mechanism behind this phenomenon is still unclear.

pronounced evolutionary rate correlation among species
another interesting finding was clearly linear correlations of evolutionary rates at the nonsynonymous sites. the square of correlation coefficient  ranges from  <dig> - <dig>  in nuclear genome and  <dig> - <dig>  in chloroplast genome. moreover, in contrast to the fast decay of correlation at synonymous sites, the strong correlation at nonsynonymous sites held quite well even between the highly diverged taxa. therefore, it seems that the relative evolutionary rate between two compared species was relatively constant across multiple gene loci in plant genomes, showing an analogous clock-behavior. this observation reminds us a classic concept of molecular clock, which claims an approximately constant evolutionary rate over time for any given protein or dna sequence in all lineages  <cit> . herein, the roughly constant relative rate of nonsynonymous substitutions among species at the genomic level might provide a robust measure to calibrate the lineage effect of the local molecular clock.

exception genes against the global trend of higher evolutionary rate in annuals
nine nuclear housekeeping genes and one chloroplast gene were identified due to their consistently higher rate of molecular evolution in perennials rather than in annuals in all four cross-comparisons, based on one or more estimators . among them, transketolase, prenylcysteine oxidase  <dig> and psac are the most noticeable, showing consistently higher rates of evolution in perennials among d, dn and ds. transketolase is an enzyme that participates in the transfer of ketol groups and catalyzes three reactions in the regenerative phase of the calvin cycle  <cit> . it also participates in non-oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway and rubisco shunt. prenylcysteine oxidase  <dig> is involved in the farnesyl diphosphate metabolic process, and plays an important role in detoxification and recycling of farnesylcysteine  <cit> . in plant chlorplast, psac is an important subunit of photosystem i  which provides the ligands for the terminal electron acceptors, fa and fb  <cit> . such pronounced disagreements with the global trend of faster evolution tempo in annuals together with the critical biological functions of these two genes hint the effect of selective force at least at the species-specific level. it will be interesting to test whether such exceptions hold the same in the annual-perennial comparisons of other species.

the limitations of this study
we acknowledge that the selected species in this study were not ideal by two reasons. firstly, their phylogenetic relationships were too distant to avoid the saturation effect . this was inevitable for the genomic survey due to the limited availability of genomic information at this moment, but comparisons between more closely related pairs of annual and perennial species would have provided a better resolution without suffering from the saturation effect. sibling species comparisons have been used in plant biology in different contexts  and proven to be fruitful. nevertheless, we believe that our conclusions on the heterogeneity of evolutionary rate between annuals and perennials are valid because the lack of resolution due to saturation effect generally makes the results conservative. secondly, our sample size  was restricted, and the comparisons were non-independent . this is also inevitable at this moment, and we should not over-generalize our conclusions to non-model species. since more and more genomic information is becoming available, future studies on new genomic data of additional close-related plants and deeper understanding of their life histories, including annuals and perennials, will soon provide further knowledge about the generality and the mechanism of heterogeneous evolutionary rate between these species.

CONCLUSIONS
four annual-perennial comparisons based on multiple gene loci and the combination of nuclear and chloroplast genomes consistently suggested higher evolutionary rates in annual plants. together with previous studies, we propose that the difference in evolutionary rate between annuals and perennials is a genome-wide phenomenon in plants, thereby shaped by some genome-wide factors associated with their annual/perennial life histories. besides, it is noteworthy that nucleotide substitution rate at nonsynonymous sites appears to correlate well among compared species in our study, implying a roughly constant relative rate of molecular evolution across different gene loci. finally, a few consistent exceptions of the global trends of faster evolution tempo in annuals were observed in all four cross-comparisons of our study, indicating noticeable effects of natural selection in these gene loci. while we acknowledge the methodological limitations of this study based on a small number of distantly-related model species, our results indicate that the genome-wide comparison is a promising approach to further understanding the mechanism determining the molecular evolutionary rate at the genomic level in plants.

