BACKGROUND
cre recombinase from bacteriophage p <dig> is commonly used to induce specific recombination of dna sequences between two loxp recognition sites  <cit> . the technique is well established for in vitro applications  <cit>  and it is increasingly used as a means to switch on/off genes in vivo to obtain conditional mutants in both cultured cells and model animals  <cit> .

the in vivo effectiveness depends on two parameters: a) the preservation of the enzyme activity and b) its efficient uptake into the host cells. cre recombinase is stable in the range 37-42°c and shows a low, but reproducible, permeability through cell membranes that can be strongly increased by the fusion to basic peptides like tat, derived from hiv-tat protein  <cit> . other peptides have been proposed as fusion partners and were compared for their effectiveness in inducing cre-dependent recombination in vivo  <cit> . interestingly, all of them seem to reduce the structural stability of cre recombinase  <cit> .

so far, no manufacturer provides such reagents and the research groups use their self-produced material that tends to vary significantly in terms of both yields and recombinase activity among different purified batches. we investigated the relationship existing between enzyme activity and its structural stability to identify the chemiophysical factors responsible for the loss of cre recombinase activity during the purification process. their contribution to protein misfolding was detected by a simple and fast spectrofluorimetric method that evaluates protein aggregation  <cit> . its reliability was validated by comparison with conventional analyses such as gel filtration and dynamic light scattering  and used to design an optimized purification protocol since tat-cre aggregation correlates with, and is predictive of, its recombinase activity.

RESULTS
purification parameters affecting tat-cre activity
the loss of enzymatic activity is usually correlated to the loss of native structure. misfolded proteins tend to aggregate and can either precipitate or form soluble complexes. the identification of soluble aggregates is feasible by means of biophysical techniques. among these, fluorimetric analysis  <cit>  has the advantage of being fast and simple, and we already showed that it correlates with size exclusion chromatography  <cit> . in contrast to folded proteins, protein aggregates are characterized by elevated light scattering at  <dig> nm and low emission at  <dig> nm. the ratio between the two values  can be used as an indicator of monodispersity, with high values indicating large aggregates and low values monodispersity.

we purified a his-tagged tat-cre construct expressed in bacteria at either 4°c or 20°c according to the protocol published by peitz et al.  <cit>  . in both cases the protein obtained after affinity purification was almost homogeneously pure. a significant amount of the tat-cre purified at 20°c precipitated during dialysis in pbs and 10% glycerol. insoluble aggregates were removed by centrifugation and the final yields of soluble tat-cre were  <dig> mg/l and  <dig> mg/l for purifications performed at 4°c and 20°c, respectively.

the recombinase activity was tested checking the decrease of β-catenin accumulation in endothelial cells. the protein accumulates in the extracellular matrix and its expression can be silenced by knocking out its dna sequence inserted between two loxp sites. the read out is easily revealed by immunofluorescence  and quantified by wb analysis using cell lysates .

soluble tat-cre purified at 4°c had an ai value of  <dig> , indicative of monodispersity, and was active. as shown in figure  <dig>  the amount of β-catenin in the cells, visualized by both if and wb, was strongly reduced after tat-cre treatment. in contrast, when the same enzyme was purified at 20°c, its ai value was  <dig> and no significant recombinase activity was detectable . the separation of the two tat-cre samples by gel filtration confirmed that the enzyme purified at 4°c was a monomer, while the sample purified at 20°c formed large aggregates , according to the estimations of the fluorimetric assay. therefore, the first conclusions were that tat-cre monodispersity is a suitable parameter to infer protein recombinase activity and that monodispersity evaluation by ai is a reliable method that can substitute the time consuming gel filtration chromatography.

next we measured the tm of the purified, active tat-cre. the relative high value  indicates that, although temperature control is a crucial factor to preserve tat-cre recombinase monodispersity and activity, the contribution of other process parameters may be crucial during the purification. we were also interested in simplifying the original purification protocol  and, consequently, decided to systematically measure the ai values at every single purification step to identify passages critical for preserving cre recombinase activity.

first, the possibility of substituting the batch affinity chromatography with an fplc-based alternative was evaluated. both qiagen and ge ready-made columns were tested and the results did not show significant differences in terms of ai values and recombinase activity when tat-cre was purified following the two protocols and using the different resins . however, the fplc option allowed for an automated and faster  purification. furthermore, protein could be more extensively washed and eluted in a smaller volume and thus at a higher concentration.

the initial success prompted us to evaluate, with the help of the ai analysis, further protocol simplifications. however, edta  addition in the buffer could not substitute the tartaric acid precipitation and the ai significantly increased when a desalting column was used for buffer exchange as an alternative to the time-consuming, two-step dialysis. both modifications resulted in purified tat-cre with very low enzymatic activity .

endotoxin removal
even though it was not possible to find reliable alternatives to some time-consuming steps, the results confirmed the direct correlation between ai-evaluated monodispersity and recombinase activity. therefore, ai analysis was used to optimize the endotoxin removal step and the composition of the storage buffers. proteins purified from bacteria are commonly contaminated with endotoxins and such molecules are incompatible with several experimental designs. we compared three methods for endotoxin removal from samples of purified tat-cre, one based on two-phase partition  <cit> , the second on ion-exchange chromatography, whilst in the third case a commercial affinity chromatography column has been used  <cit> . in the first instance, ai indicated a dramatic aggregation increase and the in vivo assay confirmed the loss of enzymatic activity. on the contrary, both chromatographic protocols prevented the protein aggregation, tat-cre remained fully active, and both the coagulation test and the induction of the endotoxin-marker genes mip <dig> and ik-ba in primary macrophages indicated a significant endotoxin concentration reduction in comparison to the untreated samples .

the addition of 50% glycerol was sufficient to preserve the tat-cre activity for at least  <dig> months, although the addition of  <dig> mm trehalose was useful to stabilize enzyme batches that underwent more thawing/freezing cycles.

in vitro effect of chemiophysical perturbations on tat-cre monodispersity and recombinase activity
next we analyzed in vitro what chemio-physical factors were relevant for tat-cre stability. protein aggregation was evaluated by both ai and dls, an analytical technique routinely used for measuring protein monodispersity/polydispersity  <cit> . the estimation of the protein aggregation complexity performed by ai and dls were always in good agreement .

enzyme monodispersity was analyzed by dynamic light scattering  and fluorimetric aggregation index . purified recombinant protein samples  were incubated  <dig> min at different temperatures in the presence of increasing nicl <dig> concentrations and of the chelators edta and tartaric acid . dls: the hydrodynamic radius  of the molecules in solution is expressed in nm; the ai is the ratio between the light scattering at  <dig> nm and the emission at  <dig> nm. experiments have been performed in triplicate.

the effect of increasing temperature, sonication, trehalose , nicl <dig> , and tartaric acid  on the enzyme monodispersity was analyzed by dynamic light scattering  and fluorimetric aggregation index  using purified recombinant protein samples . dls: the hydrodynamic radius  of the molecules in solution is expressed in nm; the ai is the ratio between the light scattering at  <dig> nm and the emission at  <dig> nm. experiments have been performed in triplicate.

metal ions may leak from resins used for affinity chromatography  <cit>  and induce protein oxidation and consequent misfolding. for such reason we have compared the suitability of different commercially available columns  and the direct effect of nicl <dig> on tat-cre monodispersity . traces of metal ions  were sufficient to induce the partial aggregation of the enzyme. edta was added to chelate free ions but, even at the highest concentrations compatible with affinity chromatography , it was able to mitigate only partially the destabilizing effect of metal ions. in contrast,  <dig> mm solution of tartaric acid completely prevented the ni ion-dependent tat-cre aggregation and was still compatible with affinity chromatography.

temperature increase above 4°c resulted in tat-cre aggregation during purification and an incubation step of  <dig> min at 30°c was sufficient to induce its aggregation during two-phase partition in the presence of the detergent . however, we found that the tm of the purified enzyme was 52°c and that it was insensitive to temperature in the range of 20°c-40°c . incubation at 20°c for  <dig> h or at 40°c for  <dig> min did not modify the protein monodispersity, suggesting that co-factors might be necessary for the tat-cre's structural destabilization. our data suggest that the presence of metal ions could catalyze a temperature-sensitive aggregation process that is inhibited by the addition of the tartaric acid .

also sonication seems to be a critical factor triggering the aggregation process, at both 4°c and 20°c . trehalose, a chemical additive used to stabilize protein structure  <cit> , could only partially limit the sonication-dependent aggregation process. in contrast, the addition of metal ions induced a synergistic effect on the process of tat-cre aggregation, whilst the scavenging activity of tartaric acid limited the tat-cre sonication-induced aggregation.

tat-cre cell-uptake and release from endosome
the in vivo enzymatic activity of cre recombinase relies on the efficiency of two processes, namely its uptake into the cells and its release into the cytoplasm.

different constructs have been proposed for promoting the cre recombinase uptake into the cells  <cit> . as an alternative to the tat-dependent uptake, a construct in which cre was fused to 6×his plus a nucleus leader signal  was designed and described as being even more efficient than tat-cre in vivo  <cit> . however, in our hands no active enzyme was recovered using the purification protocol described in the original paper. ai analyses indicated that hnc formed soluble aggregates. in contrast, when the same protocol optimized for purifying the tat-cre construct was used, 3- <dig> mg/l of monodispersed hnc recombinase were purified. monodispersed hnc and tat-cre were compared for their recombinase activity in vivo by using the β-catenin assay, but the hnc construct resulted by far less active of tat-cre .

polypeptides fused to tat sequence remain trapped in the endosomes after cell-uptake by macropinocytosis  <cit>  and several strategies have been proposed for inducing their leakage and protein accumulation into the cytoplasm. we confirmed that  <dig> mm chloroquine  <cit>  was effective in making tat-cre recombinase available inside the cells . however, chloroquine cytotoxicity  <cit>  prevents its use in sensitive cell lines. therefore, sucrose  <cit>  was used as an alternative, although it showed lower efficiency even in optimized conditions . performing confocal microscopy using antibodies against the early endosome antigen <dig>  and alexa488-labeled tat-cre , it was possible to confirm  <cit>  the rapid uptake  of the enzyme trapped into the endosome vesicles , and a substantial disappearance of tat-cre-filled vesicles in the presence of chloroquine treatment .

discussion
the cre recombinase-dependent inducible knock-out of specific genes sided by loxp sites is a methodology of constantly increasing interest  <cit> . although recently an increasing effort has been devoted to improve the activity control of the cre recombinase  <cit> , a simple and reliable methodology for optimizing the protein purification is always profitable due to the fact that a major technical drawback remains the unavailability of commercial enzyme produced under standard conditions and the consequent variable activity of the home-made batches.

we first discovered that the enzymatic activity loss correlated with protein aggregation and that the ai was a reliable analytical indicator for immediate estimation of the cre monodispersity after each single purification step. the ai is simple and fast to determine, showed a good agreement with other conventional analytical methods for protein aggregation such as gel filtration and dls and, what is more, gives a value that is useful to compare the efficiency of different tat-cre purification batches and their stability during storage. it became, therefore, straightforward to predict the recombinase enzymatic activity at any time without the need to wait for the morphological/physiological readout of the treated cells. furthermore, it became also possible to verify what purification steps and conservation conditions were deleterious for cre native structure and, consequently, for its activity. metal ions may be stripped out of the column  <cit>  and we showed that they have the major responsibility for the enzyme aggregation. as a consequence, their inadequate removal resulted in the activity loss. tartaric acid did not interfere with affinity purification even at concentrations of  <dig> mm and scavenged metal ions in an extremely more efficient way than edta, a conventional chelator used in buffers but tolerated at a maximal concentration of  <dig> mm in ion metal affinity chromatography. furthermore, mild sonication conditions  were adopted following the observation that such a treatment enhanced cre aggregation.

although the monodispersity of tat-cre purified from independent bacterial cultures could slightly vary, batches with ai values below  <dig>  had high and comparable activity, namely the β-catenin content in treated cells became almost undetectable by wb  <dig> h after recombinase addition.

once determined the optimal purification protocol and a reliable method for protein aggregation analysis, it became also feasible to compare the in vivo efficiency of different, but all monodispersed, cre recombinase constructs and to show that a combination of tat-cre and chloroquine treatment assured the best recombinase activity in vivo. preliminary results indicate that monodispersed tat-cre is suitable for in vitro recombination as well .

CONCLUSIONS
in order to be effective for in vivo treatment, cre recombinase must be enzymatically active and efficiently translocated into the nucleus. we first found out that aggregation prevented the protein activity and we identified the factors leading to protein aggregation followed by the optimization of the protocols for tat-cre purification and cell treatment. we expect that the described methodology based on the use of the ai will be generally suitable for setting purification protocols and improving their quality evaluation and reproducibility. for its simplicity, it should be particularly convenient for labs not equipped with specialized biophysical instrumentation.

