BACKGROUND
transgenic animals play a central part in biomedical research and biotechnology. the ability to genetically modify mice, either through random genomic integration by pronuclear injection or through targeted modification by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells, has transformed the field of mouse molecular genetics, making it now a relatively routine procedure to intervene genetically to study a biological process or address the function of a gene. such transgenic approaches have also been successfully applied to larger mammals for the production of livestock that synthesise human proteins or possess specific growth characteristics.

it is often advantageous to make transgenic animals that express multiple genes under the control of a single promoter. this allows the expression of different proteins in a co-ordinated manner while simplifying the genetics and reducing the cost, since multiple transgenic lines do not need to be bred together. currently, the favoured method for achieving this is to use an internal ribosomal entry site . the ires was first identified in the encephalomyocarditis virus, a member of the genus cardiovirus, which belong to the family of small rna viruses called picornaviridae  <cit> . the ires allows multiple proteins to be made from a single mrna transcript as ribosomes bind to the ires in a 5'-cap-independent manner and initiate translation. they can therefore be used to engineer multicistronic transgenes, in which several open reading frames are encoded on a single transcript, separated by ires sequences. ires sequences are also commonly used in gene targeting experiments in mice to express a foreign gene under the control of an endogenous promoter. in these cases, the 'knocked-in' foreign gene is preceded by an ires, allowing it to be produced as a separate protein, rather than as a fusion with the protein encoded by the endogenous gene. in addition to being used in transgenic mice, ires sequences are very widely used in tissue-culture cell transfections, as a means of ensuring cells express the transfected gene by using constructs in which the gene of interest is followed by an ires and a selectable drug resistance gene or fluorescent marker.

ires sequences, however, have several limitations: the expression of the downstream cistron is sensitive to its specific positioning after the ires and hence the ires can be unreliable; the downstream coding sequence is often translated at much lower levels than the upstream sequence; they are not small , adding to the size of the transgene; they do not provide equivalent levels of expression of the genes separated by ires elements. although efforts continue to be made to address the first of the above issues  <cit> , the other problems are harder to address.

recently, the use of the 2a peptide in multicistronic constructs has emerged as an attractive alternative to the ires. like the ires, the 2a peptide was identified among picornaviruses but in a different sub-group, the aphthoviruses, a typical example of which is the foot-and-mouth disease virus  <cit> . 2a-like sequences have since been found in other picornaviridae like the equine rhinitis a virus, as well as unrelated viruses such as the porcine teschovirus- <dig> and the insect thosea asigna virus   <cit> . in such viruses, multiple proteins are derived from a large polyprotein encoded by a single open reading frame. the 2a peptide mediates the co-translational cleavage of this polyprotein at a single site that forms the junction between the virus capsid and replication polyprotein domains.

the 2a sequences are relatively short peptides  containing the consensus motif asp-val/ile-glu-x-asn-pro-gly-pro. they were originally thought to mediate the autocatalytic proteolysis of the large polyprotein, but are now understood to act co-translationally, by preventing the formation of a normal peptide bond between the glycine and last proline, resulting in the ribosome skipping to the next codon  <cit> , and the nascent peptide cleaving between the gly and pro. after cleavage, the short 2a peptide remains fused to the c-terminus of the 'upstream' protein, while the proline is added to the n-terminus of the 'downstream' protein. it has recently been shown that translation termination release factors erf <dig> and erf <dig> play an important role in the function of the 2a peptide  <cit> . due to its mode of action, the 2a peptide is described as a 'cis-acting hydrolase element'   <cit> .

the 2a peptide was demonstrated to efficiently mediate the co-translational cleavage of artificial polypeptides by inserting it between the coding sequences of two reporter genes  <cit> . subsequently, it has been shown to function in cells from a wide variety of eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to plants to insects to mammals  <cit> . the 2a peptide was first shown to work in vivo in the rat brain, using recombinant adeno-associated viruses containing 2a dependent vectors  <cit> . more recently, a striking demonstration of its potential has been to use it to reconstitute the expression of the multisubunit t-cell receptor:cd <dig> complex in bone marrow-derived stem cells transduced with retroviral vectors carrying up to four cd <dig> genes separated by 2a sequences  <cit> . when transplanted back into cd3-deficient mice, these transduced stem cells gave rise to t cells, demonstrating 2a function. the 2a peptide was also shown to function in derivatives of the transduced stem cells  and to result in stoichiometric co-expression of multiple proteins  <cit> . the many advantages of the 2a peptide in biotechnology have been reviewed by de felipe and colleagues  <cit> .

although the 2a peptide has been shown to function in a wide variety of cell types and in specific tissues in vivo, it has to date not been demonstrated to function in a permanent transgenic mouse line after passage through the germ-line, to test for possible silencing of 2a-containing transgenes. moreover, it is not known if there might be possible toxic side-effects of the 2a peptide upon widespread continuous expression at various stages of development. therefore, we have made transgenic mouse lines that express a 2a-containing construct essentially ubiquitously throughout development and adulthood. we report that such mice appear normal and healthy, and that the 2a peptide functions in all tissues at all stages examined in such mice.

RESULTS
constructing a fluorescent reporter of 2a function
we designed a strategy to enable us to assess visually 2a function using fluorescent proteins localised to two distinct cellular compartments. we linked a membrane localised tdtomato gene  to a nuclear localised enhanced green fluorescent protein  gene  using the 2a sequence of the tav that has previously been used to efficiently mediate the cleavage of polyproteins  <cit> . tdtomato fluoresces red and egfp fluoresces green, allowing one to distinguish them unambiguously.

as a negative control, we made an identical fusion construct, but with two nucleotide changes that abolish 2a function  <cit> . these two versions of the construct were called tom-2a-gfp and tom-m2a-gfp, respectively .

we tested both constructs by expressing them in hela cells under the control of a cmv-ie promoter. in cells lipofected with tom-2a-gfp, egfp was detected exclusively in the nucleus while tdtomato was detected predominantly in the plasma membrane, and at lower levels within the cell, presumably in membrane organelles or the cytoplasm . in contrast, in cells lipofected with tom-m2a-gfp , egfp was detected in the plasma membrane and cytoplasm in addition to the nucleus . similarly, tdtomato was detected in both the plasma membrane and nucleus , demonstrating that the mutually exclusive localisation of tdtomato and egfp seen with the tom-2a-gfp construct is a reliable readout of 2a function.

in order to confirm that the tom-2a-gfp construct worked not only in cultured cells but also in endogenous vertebrate cells, we electroporated it into the neural tube of chick embryos, labelling delaminating neural crest cells. in confirmation of the results with the hela cells, egfp localised to the nucleus and tdtomato to the plasma membrane in electroporated cells, indicating that the 2a peptide functions in chick cells .

production of mice transgenic for tom-2a-gfp
having established that the tom-2a-gfp construct is a reliable indicator of 2a function, we made a transgene in which it is expressed under the control of the cag promoter. the cag promoter drives expression widely in the mouse  <cit> , allowing us to assess 2a function and possible deleterious effects in a wide range of tissue types and developmental stages. transgenic mice were made by pronuclear injection and two transgenic founders called cag-tag <dig> and cag-tag <dig> were obtained. both founders were bred to establish permanent lines.

the transgene is expressed in both lines and is inherited in a mendelian manner, suggesting that it does not cause embryonic or perinatal lethality. transgenic mice of both lines are indistinguishable from their non-transgenic littermates, suggesting that the widespread expression of the 2a peptide has no deleterious effects on the health of transgenic mice in either of these two independent lines. cag-tag <dig> shows an x-linked mode of inheritance, indicating the transgene integrated into the x chromosome. both lines were further characterised, as described below.

function of the 2a peptide in transgenic embryos
to assess 2a function after being inherited through the germ-line, we first looked in heterozygous embryos that were two generations removed from the original founder transgenic mouse. embryos from both transgenic lines showed widespread expression of the tom-2a-gfp, as expected from the cag promoter used . robust levels of fluorescence were detected in both living as well as fixed samples from both transgenic lines.

in both lines, at all pregastrulation stages, egfp is localised exclusively to the nucleus, while tdtomato is present predominantly in the plasma membrane . fluorescence is first detected at the two-cell stage when the transgene is inherited paternally. embryos that inherit the transgene maternally show fluorescence as zygotes, due to the inheritance of maternal rna .

interestingly, at the blastocyst stage, tdtomato is expressed widely in the cytoplasm of cells of the inner cell mass , even though in adjacent trophectoderm cells, it is seen mostly in the plasma membrane. this might reflect differences between trophectoderm and icm cells in the processing of myristoylated proteins. tdtomato is never detected in the nucleus and egfp never in the cytoplasm or plasma membrane, confirming that it is being cleaved from the h2b-gfp in both icm and trophectoderm cells.

mutually exclusive localisation of egfp and tdtomato to the nucleus and membrane was also observed in tissues derived from all three germ-layers at later embryonic stages, such as e <dig>  , e <dig>  and e <dig>  . in order to verify independently that the egfp was indeed localised to the nucleus, we stained tissue sections with the nuclear dye 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole , which confirmed the nuclear localisation of egfp . similarly, a phalloidin stain , verified the localisation of tdtomato to the plasma membrane . we, however, cannot exclude the possibility that extremely small amounts of un-cleaved protein, below the detection capability of our confocal microscope, are produced and incorrectly localised.

function of the 2a peptide in adult transgenic mice
we next assessed 2a function in various tissues from male adult heterozygous transgenic mice that were three generations removed from the original founder mouse. h2b-gfp and myr-tdtomato were localised to mutually exclusive cellular compartments in all the tissues examined: the brain, heart, lung, liver, kidney, ileum, colon and adrenal  for both transgenic lines. in cells of the cardiac muscle, intestine and kidney, tdtomato was found to localise to the plasma membrane. however, in cells of the lungs and liver, it was less distinctly localised to the plasma membrane , as previously observed with cells of the embryonic icm. again, tdtomato and egfp were never found to co-localise in the two independent transgenic lines, indicating efficient cleavage of the 2a peptide.

mosaic transgene expression in female cag-tag <dig> mice
the cag-tag <dig> transgene shows an x-linked mode of inheritance, indicating that the transgene integrated in the x chromosome. consistent with this, females of the cag-tag <dig> line show mosaic expression due to x inactivation , while males show uniform expression . both genders, however, show the correct subcellular localisation of tdtomato and egfp, demonstrating that the 2a peptide functions in both transgenic lines.

expression levels of the cag-tag transgene is constant across generations
in order to determine if there is any variability of expression levels of the cag-tag transgene across individuals or diminution of expression across generations, we quantified the fluorescence intensity of tdtomato as an estimate of its expression level. we compared expression in cardiac tissue from the cag-tag <dig> founder , f <dig>  f <dig> and f <dig> adult male mice . transgene expression levels were very similar in the f <dig>  f <dig> and f <dig> individuals, showing no statistically significant difference. this suggests the expression levels of the cag-tag <dig> transgene does not vary significantly across individuals, and more importantly, does not show a reduction with repeated passage through the germ-line.

the founder mouse showed a lower median expression level compared with his offspring. this is consistent with the founder being mosaic for the transgene, which is not uncommon in transgenic founders. it is also consistent with the observation that the cardiac tissue from the founder showed mosaic transgene expression . it is important to note that those regions of founder tissue that did express the transgene appear to have done so at levels comparable with that found in the offspring, as illustrated by the overlap of the upper quartile of fluorescence intensities observed in the founder, with that observed in his offspring .

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicated that the 2a peptide does not produce cytotoxic effects in transgenic mice that express it in all their cells throughout development and adulthood. they also indicate that the 2a peptide functions in transgenic mice after several generations of passage through the germ-line and transgenes encoding the 2a peptide do not show attenuation in expression levels across generations. our results also confirmed that the 2a peptide mediates co-translational 'cleavage' in a wide range of embryonic and adult tissues.

together, this establishes the 2a peptide as a viable and, being more reliable and easier to use, a superior alternative to the ires in mouse transgenesis. it fulfils all the functions ires sequences are currently used for: multicistronic expression in transgenic animals and cell culture, multicistronic expression using viral vectors in entire animals, expression of exogenous coding sequences inserted by targeted recombination into endogenous loci, etc. in addition, it also provides the advantage of reliable and stoichiometric levels of expression, making it particularly useful when the relative level of expression of two or more transgenic proteins is important.

finally, the transgenic mice reported here are useful in their own right for visualising cell membranes and nuclei in living and fixed tissue. owing to the widespread expression of the cag-tag transgene, the mice are likely to be of use in a broad range of disciplines. in conjunction with time-lapse microscopy, they represent a powerful tool for following various cellular parameters such as shape, volume, movement and division rates in cultured cells, organs or entire embryos. the fortuitous insertion of the transgene in the x chromosome in one of the transgenic lines makes that line particularly useful in monitoring x chromosome inactivation.

