BACKGROUND
many of the hopes for achieving clinical benefits of genomic medicine will hinge on the ability to develop an efficient specimen conduit from clinic to laboratory. quantitative gene expression studies have created unprecedented tissue collection and handling challenges. in particular, the rapid degeneration of rna, and possible perturbation of expression following excision place a high premium on prompt stabilization of tissue samples intended for expression analysis. this can be accomplished by sending a dedicated trained technologist outfitted with the necessary specialized equipment, such as liquid nitrogen, into the clinical environment. alternatively, clinicians can be enabled to process the specimens directly in the course of patient care and send them in some stable form by unrushed and routine means for centralized processing. the latter is greatly preferred when patients are physically dispersed, and becomes essential in a multi-institutional setting.

high throughput quantification of rna expression in solid tissues has become a commonplace modality for genome-wide discovery of mechanisms of disease. typically, groups of samples classified into comparison groups are used as a training set for expression pattern discovery, followed by validation in a fresh challenge set of annotated cases. the likelihood of success is highly dependent on the accuracy of classification within the training set, and ability to control random variables introduced during tissue processing and analytical measurement of rna abundance. efforts to standardize rna quantification include sharing of information regarding probe design and use  <cit> , or centralized design and production of analytical reagents and platforms by commercial entities using good manufacturing procedures .

flash freezing, either by immersion in liquid nitrogen or on dry ice, is the most common means of stabilizing tissue samples intended for rna analysis. local access to the necessary materials and expense of cold shipping and/or storage limit these collection capabilities in most clinical settings. an additional disadvantage of frozen storage is that homogenization of frozen tissue must be accomplished rapidly to avoid the rapid rna degeneration that occurs during thawing of a previously frozen sample.

room temperature immersion of fresh tissue samples in aqueous sulfate salt solutions  at controlled ph precipitates degenerative rnases  <cit>  and other solubilized proteins, thereby preserving the tissue with intact rna  <cit> . tissues preserved in this manner are compatible with most rna isolation protocols, and may be archivally stored for extended periods at -60°c. a commercial preparation of this preservative, rnalater , is increasingly being used by individual investigators and cooperative groups  <cit>  for collection of human tissues. there have been promising reports of microarray-based rna expression studies using rnalater-preserved tissues  <cit> . solid tissues stored for a week in rnalater at room temperature give comparable rna yields, and specific gene rna abundance as with frozen tissue <cit> . rna yields are not affected substantially by storage at room temperature compared to 4°c, for storage intervals up to  <dig> months  <cit> . rnalater preserved tissues and cell suspensions are suitable starting points for rna quantification by quantitative rt-pcr  <cit>  and expression microarray hybridization  <cit> . one shortcoming of the prior work is that the potential changes contributed by rnalater use have not been precisely measured relative to random processing effects.

we studied the effects of differences between storage conditions on gene expression as measured by expression array. duplicate uterine myometrial tissue samples from three women were processed under each of  <dig> fixed storage conditions – fresh, frozen,  <dig> hours rna-later and  <dig> hours rna-later. the  <dig> labeled crna samples  were hybridized to hg-u133a affymetrix microarrays. then, for each microarray a data matrix was generated of  <dig>  probe sets  by quantitative expression levels in each rna sample, and the effect of subject source, tissue processing, and replicates  determined by anova. subset analysis by gene functional class was then performed to determine if storage condition has a specific effect on particular groups of genes.

we found no systematic bias in measured quantitative level of gene expression by processing method, indicating that short term storage in rnalater is a valid alternative to traditional frozen storage.

RESULTS
of the  <dig>  genes,  <dig>  did not have absolutely null expression across all  <dig> samples. we fit the mixed model anova from their log values and recorded this f statistic. the permutation distribution was used to assess the significance of f statistics calculated for each gene in the dataset. in this approach all  <dig>  or  <dig> possible ways of permuting  <dig> pairs of replicate samples within each subject were considered. for each of these, the f statistics were computed for each gene. to control the overall error rate, the distributions of the maximum f statistics over the genes were used. that is, for each gene, the p-value is the proportion of permutations with the maximum f statistics over all genes greater or equal to the observed value for a particular gene. a test declaring as significant any genes with p <  <dig>  then guarantees that the chance of any false positives being selected is < 5%. similar analyses were performed replacing the distribution of the maximum f statistic with the distribution of the f statistics at the 95th percentile and then at the 90th percentile. after closer examination of the  <dig> genes in the 5% tail, we noted that most were exhibiting expression values below  <dig> for all  <dig> samples. in fact, within a storage condition,  <dig> out of  <dig> patients exhibited null expression while the third patient showed expression values other than null but less than  <dig> for at least one of their replicates. therefore, as an additional analysis, any expression values less than  <dig> were recoded as  <dig>  genes that showed expression levels of  <dig> across all  <dig> samples, and therefore lacked variability, were then removed from the analysis. this resulted in  <dig>  genes for which there was at least one sample with expression level greater than  <dig> across all  <dig> samples.

patient subjects provided the greatest sources of variation in the mixed model anova, with replicates and processing method the least . the magnitude of variation conferred by processing method  was similar to the variability seen within replicates. this is strong evidence that those individual expression profiles characteristic of the source tissue  are unlikely to be obscured by the small amount of variation introduced by the processing method chosen.

the distribution of anova test statistics on those  <dig>  genes where at least one sample of  <dig> had expression at a level exceeding  <dig> is compared in figure  <dig> to those seen in the randomly permuted dataset. in the actual dataset, the maximum observed f statistic was  <dig> ; the observed f statistic at the 95th percentile was  <dig> ; and the observed f statistic at the 90th percentile was  <dig> . corresponding p-values were  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the values of test statistics seen at the 95% level in a randomly permuted dataset  are greater than those of the observed dataset . this indicates that the model variation contributed by processing method is of the same magnitude as that seen randomly.

subset analysis of the test statistic according to gene functional class  showed that the frequency of "outlier" anova results within each functional class is overall no greater than expected by chance. test statistic distribution was compiled by functional annotation for those  <dig> genes which had at least one sample with detectable expression above a level of  <dig>  nine separate classification schemas containing a total of  <dig> functional classes were studied. probe sets were rank ordered by decreasing anova test statistic, and enrichment in the nominal p =  <dig>  tail  plotted by functional class  and schema  .

discussion
storage of fresh whole human tissues for up to  <dig> hours at room temperature in rnalater does not introduce quantitative bias into rna expression determinations with the affymetrix u133a array. several differing standards justify this conclusion. first, by construction of a test model  incorporating both random reproducibility estimates  and between-sample differences it has been possible to demonstrate that the magnitude of variation introduced by rnalater processing is equivalent to that seen within routine repeat specimens in a common processing group . second, the extent of result variation conferred by rnalater processing is not statistically significant when measured against the randomly permuted dataset . this is an important element in evaluation of large datasets in which small numbers of individual variables may randomly demonstrate extreme values of the test statistic. lastly, there is no evidence that specific functional subgroups of genes have aberrant behavior in this regard .

uterine myometrium was selected for these experiments because its components  are evenly intermingled throughout the myometrial compartment, lending itself to physical subdivision into equivalent aliquots. this would not be possible with more complex tissues in which differing cell types are distributed asymmetrically within the specimen. despite the equivalency of subdivided fractions that underwent varying storage treatments, it must be noted that this is a hormonally responsive tissue whose expression patterns would be expected to differ between individual women as a function of monthly changes in circulating sex hormones. we did not control for hormonal factors or indication for hysterectomy  but selected patients randomly. it comes as no surprise that expression differences between women, irrespective of processing method, emerged as the dominant source of inter-sample variation. this was anticipated in constructing the model, by assigning the subject source of specimens as a random variable which could be measured against the fixed processing effects. it is likely that if a larger number of women had been included in the study, the observed biologic variation attributable to subject would have been even greater. since our goal was to compare magnitude of variation contributed by subjects to that conferred by processing method, we achieved a balanced design by having comparable degrees of freedom for those two variables.

there are several critical procedural elements that must be highlighted for successful preservation of solid tissues in aqueous sulfate salt solutions such as rnalater. these reagents enter the tissue through passive diffusion, a process which follows simple physical principles. the distance between the tissue surface, which is exposed to preservative, and the innermost regions of the fragment should be minimized. we did this by cutting the tissues into  <dig> mm thick slices, thereby reducing the diffusion distance to  <dig> mm or less. clumping of multiple fragments into a mass that excludes preservative may obviate the benefits of fine division. this can be avoided either by gentle agitation or placement in a sufficiently large container that individual pieces are likely to disperse. results reported here are for tissues stored at room temperature . storage under cooler conditions  as recommend by the manufacturer of rnalater were not directly evaluated in this experiment because it was our intent to mimic storage interval and conditions commonly encountered when sending a specimen by express courier to a centralized processing facility. storage at temperatures substantially higher than 25°c, especially before the preservative has had an opportunity to penetrate the tissue, should be avoided.

CONCLUSIONS
split samples of fresh human tissue yield quantitatively similar rna expression profiles whether processed fresh, frozen, or following 24– <dig> hour storage in rnalater. formal statistical analysis shows patient source is the predominant source of variation between samples, with processing method contributing a random level of variation comparable to that seen in split duplicates . subset analysis by functional gene category did not identify a specific class of genes which responded differently by processing method.

use of nontoxic ambient environment tissue preservatives makes it practical to engage practicing clinicians directly in decentralized sample collection for high throughput expression analysis in a central location. tissue handling closely resembles that used by clinicians to prepare specimens for routine pathology analysis. upon receipt in a centralized facility, the samples can either be immediately homogenized or archived at -60°c.

