BACKGROUND
water deficit affects a broad range of plant functions, including growth, photosynthesis, metabolic pathways, and if severe enough, can cause tissue damage and death  <cit> . plants respond to dehydration stress through physiological adjustments presumably regulated by the expression of specific genes involved in the dehydration stress response  <cit> . pre-exposure to diverse types of stresses, including dehydration stress, may alter subsequent responses, suggesting a form of “stress memory”  <cit> . a. thaliana plants that have undergone one or more alternating cycles of dehydration stress treatments following periods of full watered recovery  retain a memory of an earlier dehydration stress as evidenced by the greater ability to retain leaf relative water content  than plants experiencing dehydration stress for the first time   <cit> . trained plants responded differently also at the transcription level as several aba-inducible genes displayed higher transcription rates and transcript levels during a subsequent exposure, a behavior consistent with transcriptional memory  <cit> . in a recent whole-genome transcriptome analysis of a. thaliana, we found an unexpected diversity of transcriptional memory patterns during repeated stress treatments  <cit> .

arabidopsis is a model system for plant biology research and for suggesting methodologies to impact processes of importance for agriculture  <cit> . to find out whether dehydration stress memory exists in angiosperm lineages other than arabidopsis, we conducted whole-genome transcriptome analysis of repetitively stressed maize  plants. identification of homologous genes that display the same memory-type responses would suggest evolutionarily conserved memory responses in two lineages that have diverged over  <dig> to 200 m years  <cit> . on the other hand, non-memory or divergent memory responses by homologous genes would illustrate diversification and specialization of dehydration stress responses and/or of the functions of these genes during their evolution.

the experimental repetitive-dehydration stress system involves exposing seedlings to successive cycles of air drying, overnight watered recovery, followed by a new exposure to dehydrating conditions  <cit> . this procedure has similarities to the daily oscillation in water potential that occurs in plants growing in soil with decreasing water availability during drought conditions  <cit> . here, we analyze the transcriptional behavior of genes involved in the dehydration stress response to assess the conserved and divergent dehydration stress memory responses of structurally related genes in maize and in arabidopsis, and compare potential cellular functions encoded by dehydration memory genes in the two species.

methods
plant growth and treatments
zea mays l.  seedlings were grown in soil in greenhouse with regular watering. two-week old seedlings were removed from soil and acclimated overnight in trays with their roots in water. the next morning the seedlings were exposed to air drying for 2 h at 22°c  followed by a period of full re-hydration recovery for 22 h at 22°c, as described earlier  <cit> . repeated dehydration stresses were performed following the same alternating cycles of exposure to air drying/overnight watered recovery. leaves from non-stressed watered  plants, from plants that have experienced a single stress exposure  and three stress exposures  were analyzed. seven to ten individual plants were used in each treatment point and two independent biological samples were used in the rna-seq analyses. the relative water content  was measured in leaves detached from plants and immediately weighed to determine their fw . the same leaves were submerged in deionized water for 24 h, blotted dry and weighed to determine their tw . dw  measurements were taken after the leaves were oven-dried  in brown paper bags for 24 h. the rwc value was calculated using the formula: rwc  = /) × 100%  <cit> .

rna extraction and rna-seq library construction
leaf tissues were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. total rna was extracted with trizol , treated with dnase i , and purified using qiagen rneasy. rna integrity was confirmed on a bioanalyzer  <dig> using a nano  <dig> labchip . complementary dna sequencing library was prepared from the total rna using the mrna-seq sample preparation kit . the resultant cdna libraries were size-fractionated on an agarose gel, 200 bp fragments excised, and amplified by 15 cycles of polymerase chain reaction. clusters were generated from the cdna sequencing library on the surface of a flow cell in the cluster station  by so-called bridge amplification. replicates for the watered, s <dig> and s <dig> sample libraries were each run on a single lane in a flow cell on an illumina gaiix at the genomics core facility at the university of nebraska-lincoln.

reverse transcription and real-time pcr
total rna isolation and reverse transcription with oligo  were performed as described previously  <cit> . the amounts of individual genes were measured with gene-specific primers by real-time pcr analysis with a icycler iq real-time pcr instrument  and sybr green mixture . the relative expression or amount of specific genes was quantitated with the 2-ΔΔct calculation  <cit> , according to the manufacturer’s software , where the reference gene was ubiquitin. primers used in real-time rt-pcr are in additional file  <dig> 

bioinformatics analysis
transcriptome sequencing of the watered, s <dig>  and s <dig> samples yielded a total of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  million reads, respectively, summed over the two biological replicates per sample . the read length for each sample’s first replicate is  <dig> bases, and for the second replicate is  <dig> bases. to determine the quality of the replicates we performed a least-square simple linear regression for each of the three samples. we calculated the r <dig> statistic  and slope , which provide measures of goodness-of-fit and correlation, respectively, using the regress function in matlab® . for use in all further analyses, the zea mays genome , gene models , and functional annotations were downloaded from the maizegdb  <cit> .

the bowtie  and tophat  packages were used with default parameters to map the rna sequence reads from watered, s <dig>  and s <dig> to the genome and to determine the expression quantity of known transcripts in each sample. the cuffdiff tool from the cufflinks package  was run with default parameters to calculate expression changes and associated q-values  for each gene, between the samples s <dig> and water, and s <dig> and s <dig> 

we further classify genes as being significantly differentially expressed when all three of the following conditions are met: q ≤  <dig> ; | log <dig> | ≥ 1; and the fpkm-normalized expression value of at least one sample out of the two needs to be larger than the 25th percentile. the output files of cuffdiff are further annotated  by adding gene functional descriptions from the b <dig> refgen_v <dig> annotations. since only  <dig> out of  <dig>  genes had annotations other than “hypothetical” or “putative” protein, we decided to use protein homologies with a well-studied model organism, namely arabidopsis thaliana, to infer gene descriptions and go classifications to each zea mays gene. arabidopsis proteins and gene ontology assignments were downloaded from the arabidopsis information resource . for each zea mays protein, we used blastp  with an e-value of 10- <dig> to get a list of hits against arabidopsis proteins; then we sort the hits based on ascending e-value, descending length, and descending percentage of identity . from that sorted list, we take all matches up to the point where the e-value is  <dig> times worse than the best hit . using such a range of e-values allows us to narrowly sample the arabidopsis proteins with the closest homologies. from these, we summarize a functional description using the top  <dig> longest common substrings from the tair <dig> descriptions, and to create for each go domain  a list of the top  <dig> occurring terms. we used the new inferred description if the zea mays annotation was absent, and we always assigned go terms via this methodology to the zea mays proteins.

all annotation thus obtained is merged into a master file containing all data for s <dig> versus water and s <dig> versus s <dig> gene expression profiles . from that master file we determined the  <dig> significant drought-responsive genes , and using that initial set we then looked at those with significantly different responses in s <dig> versus s <dig> . we assigned simple classifications to the types of response during the first stress   indicating transcript levels higher, or lower, than watered  levels. for the subsequent  stress the signs  indicate transcripts at levels higher, lower, or the same, as the levels in s <dig>  accordingly, response genes were combined into six classes: , , , , , and , the first four representing the memory categories, the latter two representing the non-memory classes . two additional classes  and  contain genes that did not change significantly expression in s <dig> compared to pre-stressed levels in w . these genes significantly changed transcription in s <dig> defining a different category of what appear as late responding genes. formally, memory genes are defined as genes that respond to s <dig> by altering transcription but display different transcriptional responses in subsequent stresses. as these late responding genes do not appear among the genes that respond to the first stress, we have not included them in our analyses here. for each different response class the genes were separated into groups based on  go terms .

the raw transcriptome sequence files for watered, s <dig>  and s <dig> have been uploaded, together with gene expression result files, to ncbi’s gene expression omnibus under sequence number gse <dig> 

RESULTS
dehydration stress responding memory and non-memory genes of zea mays
two-week-old maize seedlings were treated in the repetitive dehydration stress system developed in our laboratory for arabidopsis  <cit> . like arabidopsis plants, previously stressed maize plants exhibited a reduced rate of water-loss upon a second exposure to dry air . this behavior, consistent with dehydration stress memory, allowed us to address the question of whether maize genes display transcriptional memory in a subsequent dehydration stress.

genome-wide quantitative analysis of transcript levels of rna samples isolated from seedling leaves of non-stressed watered , after a first dehydration stress , and after the third exposure to dehydration stress   were analyzed. significantly different levels of transcripts in s <dig> compared to levels in w define the general dehydration stress response genes. within this response fraction, genes that display significantly different transcript levels in s <dig> compared to s <dig> define the memory category, while genes that produce transcripts in s <dig> at comparable levels as in s <dig> comprise the non-memory category.

a total of  <dig>  maize genes were identified . of these,  <dig>  genes represented the general dehydration response fraction:  <dig>  genes were upregulated and  <dig> were downregulated in s <dig> compared to levels in w . within the dehydration response fraction,  <dig> genes  provided different responses in s <dig> constituting the maize transcription memory category, while  <dig> genes produced similar transcript amounts upon each stress treatment representing maize ‘non-memory’ genes . distribution of the dehydration stress responses of maize genes in s <dig> and in s <dig> is illustrated in figure 2a.
z. mays 
and 
a. thaliana


memory-type responses by zea mays dehydration stress responding genes
comprehensive analyses of the transcriptome data revealed the existence of four distinct transcription patterns that were similar to the memory responses recognized earlier in a. thaliana . genes induced in s <dig> but superinduced in s <dig> are denoted as  memory genes ; genes with lower expression in s <dig> but producing transcripts at even lower levels in s <dig> represent the  memory type .the highest number of maize genes with significant differences in s3/s <dig> transcript levels displayed increased transcript levels in s <dig>  but decreased transcript levels in s <dig> relative to their s <dig> levels , figure 3c. a complementary transcription pattern, displayed by genes with lower transcript levels in s <dig> but producing significantly higher transcript levels in s <dig>  defines the  memory response category . the unique feature of the latter two categories is that these genes ‘revise’ their transcription during a second exposure returning to their pre-stressed levels of transcription. in contrast, non-memory genes produce similar levels of transcripts in s <dig> and s <dig>  , or reduced  in response to each treatment.the distribution of the maize memory genes according to their transcription patterns in s <dig>  clearly illustrate the clustering of the transcript levels of the revised response  and  memory genes closer to their pre-stressed  levels, while the  and  memory genes form clusters increasingly separated from the pre-stressed levels and from the levels in s <dig> 

about  <dig>  genes did not respond to the first stress, remaining at the initial pre-stressed levels but increased, or decreased, transcript levels during the subsequent  stress. these genes annotated as  and  classes  are not analyzed further in this study as we focus on memory genes, which, according to our definition, belong in the gene fraction responding to s <dig> 

functional distribution of zea mays memory genes
to establish potential functions encoded by the memory response genes, the maize sequences were searched against annotated gene models for a. thaliana. the functional distribution within the memory categories is evaluated according to the gene ontology  classification of the a. thaliana homologs. with the potential caveat that some genes might be annotated incorrectly in the go database, maize memory genes were analyzed for their associated with various membranes, transcription regulatory functions, as well as for involvement in other abiotic or hormonally regulated pathways.

membrane-associated functions
the largest functional category, displayed by the entire dehydration stress responding maize transcriptome  represents plasma and organelle membrane-associated proteins . the genes for membrane-associated functions constitute the largest fraction among the smallest  memory category .

membrane-associated
a
a)membrane-associated include plasma membrane , transmembrane , kinases/receptors/signal transduction, tm transport, porins, and wall/pm proteins

b)number of genes and percentages  per memory group and function are reported, with a comparison to the percentage of genes found in arabidopsis thaliana . only percentages equal or higher than  <dig>  are reported, and higher than 1% are rounded to the nearest integer. for the arabidopsis comparison, 0% means detected but smaller than  <dig> %, while nd denotes not detected. the specific transcription factor subcategories  show percentages based on the overall number of memory genes encoding transcription factors.

memory genes associated with the thylakoid membrane, however, are low  among all four memory categories, as well as among the non-memory genes repetitiously responding to each consecutive stress. it is noted that the highest numbers of genes encoding chloroplast and thylakoid membrane proteins respond to repeated dehydration stresses but not to the first stress .

despite their apparently even distribution, however, the membrane-associated proteins of each memory type cluster in distinct subgroups that differ by the nature of the metabolic processes they participate in, the specificity of the porin channels, the types of molecules transferred across membranes, and by the roles played in membrane protection, resistance against pathogens, disease and toxic metals . for example, 26% of the  memory genes encode membrane-associated dehydrins, metabolic enzymes for synthesis of protective molecules, i.e., osmolytes, and for transmembrane transport of amino acids, oligopeptides, and carbohydrates; 22% of  memory genes encode membrane-associated kinases, receptor kinases, and signal transducers responding to light, transmembrane transporters for inorganic phosphate and sucrose; 36% of the  memory genes encode membrane-associated kinases, components of ca2+- mediated signaling pathways and defense proteins, while 30% of the  memory genes encode water transport, k+ transport/uptake regulators, and a broad spectrum of proteins implicated in resistance to various metals, pathogens, and diseases .

dehydration stress memory genes shared with other abiotic-stress response pathways
common genes co-regulated by different abiotic stresses or plant hormonal stimuli represent overlapping points between these networks and are considered central in coordinating the transcriptional responses to environmental factors  <cit> . abscisic acid  is the key mediator of a large number of abiotic stress response systems  <cit> . about  <dig> maize ‘cross talk’ genes implicated in aba, salt, cold, temperature, light responses, were induced and ~ <dig> genes were repressed during the first stress . upon subsequent treatments, however, these s1-responding genes provided responses segregating into the six different transcriptional patterns. most of these genes continued to respond similarly to each stress, represented by ~ <dig>  and  <dig>  non-memory genes. among the memory cross talk genes, there were  <dig>  and  <dig>  response genes. however,  <dig> revised response genes  displayed responses in s <dig> as in w, virtually ‘cancelling’ the crosstalk with the other response pathways triggered in s <dig>  of note are the much lower numbers of cross talk genes that have decreased transcription during the first stress  compared to the number of cross talk genes that displayed increased transcript levels during a first stress  .

dehydration stress memory genes shared with hormonally regulated pathways
dehydration stress memory responsive genes overlap with genes regulated by hormone signaling pathways, although in much lower numbers than those shared with abiotic stress-responding genes . most of the shared genes induced in s <dig> were implicated in aba, ethylene, ja, and sa-responses, an observation consistent with synergistic interactions between these pathways under drought  <cit> . jasmonate , considered the most important signal in biotic stress responses and wounding, works both cooperatively and antagonistically with aba during dehydration stress  <cit> . our data identified  <dig> co-regulated genes that altered expression under the first dehydration stress:  <dig> shared genes increased and seven genes decreased transcription . upon a subsequent exposure, however, these shared genes provided diverse responses:  <dig>  and six  genes continued to produce similar transcript levels, ten produced transcripts at higher , one at lower  levels, and  <dig> genes did not respond. these latter common  memory dehydration/ja responding genes elevate transcription during the first encounter with the dehydration stress but upon a second exposure are transcribed as in their non-stressed state and, therefore, do not provide a transcriptional response to the subsequent dehydration stresses. similar segregation of the transcription patterns during repeated exposures to dehydration stress were observed also for genes shared with the other plant hormones .

memory genes encoding transcription factors  in zea mays
only a limited number of tf families are represented by dehydration stress memory genes in z. mays, with a strongly biased distribution among the four memory categories :  <dig> maize genes  encode tfs represented almost exclusively by  and  memory genes, while only nine tfs genes were downregulated during the response to the first stress . most tf families are represented by one to four genes from each memory class except the nac family tf genes, which stand out as a signature  memory tf family; genes from the ap2/erf  family, from the bhlh and wrky families are found exclusively among the  memory subgroup. interestingly,  memory nac family genes are shared with the aba, ethylene, ja, sa and abiotic stress responding, while  integrase-type ap2/erf family memory genes are shared predominantly with aba and ethylene, but not the ja and sa, pathways. the bhlh and wrky family members are implicated in responses to pathogens, metal ions, ja and sa .

comparing zea mays and arabidopsis thaliana dehydration stress responding genes
overall, a total of  <dig>  maize genes, of which  <dig>  genes  significantly altering transcription in s <dig> compared to w were identified by rna-seq transcriptome analyses . by comparison,  <dig>  genes among  <dig>  genes identified in a. thaliana  were involved in the first dehydration stress response . the data underscore a remarkable difference in the numbers of genes implicated in the responses to the first dehydration stress at the transcriptional level in the two species, which is also illustrated by the density of the clouds in figure 2a and figure 2b.

other species-specific differences in the transcriptional responses to the first stress were the numbers of z. mays genes induced in s <dig> outnumbering downregulated genes in a ratio 4: <dig>  while in a. thaliana the numbers are comparable . the paucity of downregulated maize gene in response to the first stress is illustrated in figure 2a. furthermore, although a smaller number of genes is implicated in the dehydration response in maize, the  <dig> genes displaying memory behavior constitute almost 40% of the entire z. mays fraction responding in s <dig>  while memory genes constitute ~30% of the dehydration response fraction of a. thaliana .

the memory genes of zea mays and arabidopsis thaliana
one of the main goals of this study was to find out whether transcriptional memory responses were conserved in the two species. structurally related genes that display the same transcriptional memory in the two species would suggest conservation of memory during the evolution of monocot and eudicot dehydration stress response systems. on the other hand, divergent transcriptional responses by genes encoding similar functions would suggest memory behavior reflecting species-specific responses to repeated exposures to dehydration stress.

a search with the  <dig> z. mays memory genes against the entire a. thaliana genome sequences identified  <dig>  homologous sequences , referred to from hereon, as arabidopsis homologs. the higher number of a. thaliana genes homologous to the z. mays memory genes reflects the fact that more than one family member gene satisfy the sequence similarity threshold .

almost half  of the a. thaliana homologs showed no change in transcript levels in s <dig> and, therefore, do not belong in the general dehydration stress response fraction; about half of the remaining a. thaliana homologs  respond to dehydration stress but lack memory, while  <dig> are dehydration stress memory genes in arabidopsis as well .

whether the homologs of the z. mays memory genes display similar types of memory responses in a. thaliana was investigated next. the z. mays genes from each memory category were compared with the responses of their respective homologs in arabidopsis . the results from the analysis indicated that the arabidopsis homologs of the maize memory genes displayed a wide spectrum of responses including conserved and non-conserved memory responses, but homologs that lack memory or were not involved in the first dehydration stress response were the largest categories .

the memory genes of z. mays that have homologs with the same memory-type behavior in a. thaliana occur in all four memory response types but differ in the numbers:  <dig> , eight , eight , and  <dig> revised response  maize memory genes have homologs that carry the same transcriptional memories in arabidopsis . in addition, homologous genes display memory responses that are of different transcription memory types in the two species . these genes, in addition to being conserved as dehydration stress responding genes in maize and arabidopsis, have conserved also their ability to provide memory responses to repeated stress. however, the different memory patterns displayed by the homologous genes suggest species-specific diversification of the responses to repeated stress occurring at the transcriptional level during their evolution.

functional distribution of z. mays and a. thaliana memory genes
assuming that structurally similar genes in the two species have similar cellular functions, we performed comparative analysis of the functional distribution within the memory categories based on the gene ontology  classification of the a. thaliana homologs. the numbers of maize genes and their percentages per memory group are reported in table  <dig>  the percentages per memory group and go function shown for a. thaliana genes are from  <cit> .

comparison of the cellular functions encoded by the memory genes in the two species revealed some remarkable differences. although the largest numbers of memory genes encode membrane-bound functions in both species, it is noted that z. mays proteins associated with chloroplast and thylakoid membrane functions are encoded by a very low number of  memory genes , in a stark contrast with the  <dig> a. thaliana  memory genes implicated in these functions . z. mays genes implicated in abiotic stress responses and in ribosome organization/protein synthesis, are also represented by much lower numbers of the  and  memory genes than in a. thaliana .

species-specific distributions of the dehydration stress/ja co-regulated genes among the  and  memory genes  and the memory genes encoding tfs in z. mays and a. thaliana are displayed as well. although similar percentage  of memory genes encode tfs, the tf family types and their distribution among the memory categories is species-specific. given the limited number of tf families represented by 1– <dig> genes per family in z. mays , the  memory genes encoding nac family tfs  and the  memory genes encoding integrase-type ap2/erf family, are standing out as exclusive features of the z. mays tf memory genes. only two  memory genes encoding tfs were identified in maize .

discussion
biological relevance of z. mays dehydration stress memory genes
the majority of the  <dig> genes of the transcription memory fraction in z. mays belong in gene families containing other members, which may display diverse memory or non-memory responses. for example, ten maize pp2c-class phosphatase genes are strongly induced in s <dig>  upon repeated treatments, however, three genes  elevate transcription further , two are not induced by the second treatment , and five  genes  repetitiously produce transcripts at s <dig> levels. as pp2c phosphatases are essential in the aba mediated signaling  <cit> , the transcriptional responses of individual pp2c genes under repeated exposures is likely to affect specifically and differently the behavior of the aba-signaling and other overlapping networks during multiple encounters with dehydration stress.

presumably, the behavior of dehydration memory genes allows plants to modulate their transcriptional responses during repeated stresses to improve survival. increased transcripts from  memory genes encoding protective functions  and diverse metabolic enzymes involved in detoxification, in the synthesis of osmolytes and membrane-protecting lipids are consistent with the general strategy employed by plants during stress  <cit> . in addition, maintenance/re-adjustment of cellular homeostasis and of the interactions between dehydration and other stress/hormone regulated pathways are considered critical for the survival  <cit> . it is logical to consider the biological relevance of  and  memory genes in this context, as suggested by the large numbers of metabolic functions encoded by revised response memory genes . after returning close to pre-stressed levels in s <dig>   and  memory genes implicated in various metabolic process may play roles in re-setting cellular metabolism, photosynthesis and energy balance to adjust to the new conditions.

membrane-associated genes regulating osmotic pressure, water balance, and wall modifications are important in plants’ stress responses and environmental adaptation  <cit> . genes encoding membrane-associated functions are encoded by all four memory categories in maize. importantly, the distribution by the nature of membrane function among the memory types is specific. thus, membrane-associated proteins with protective functions  or for the synthesis of osmolytes are encoded by  memory genes , membrane-associated kinases, receptor kinases, and signal transducers responding to light, transmembrane transporters for inorganic phosphate and sucrose are encoded by  and  memory genes, while  memory genes encode water transport, ion transport/uptake regulators, and proteins implicated in resistance to various metals, pathogens, and diseases .

we note also the  memory genes co-regulated with other abiotic stresses or hormonally regulated pathways. these transcriptional patterns revealed a much higher level of complexity of the interactions between these signaling pathways than displayed during a single dehydration stress. by altering transcription, shared memory genes are likely to affect the crosstalk during subsequent stresses. thus, shared  memory genes are producing more,  memory genes are producing fewer transcripts, while revised-response memory genes return transcripts closer to their initial  levels. consequently, the crosstalk between dehydration and other stress response/signaling pathways will be different under repeated dehydration stresses from the crosstalk occurring during the first encounter. the crosstalk will be different also from the crosstalk of shared non-memory ,  genes, which provide similar interactions during each stress . these modified responses may help the plant spare its resources when enduring repeated dehydration stress  <cit> .

functions encoded by conserved memory genes in z. mays and a. thaliana
homologous genes with conserved  and  memory behavior in the two species encode proteins with cell protective functions and proteins implicated in readjustment of the metabolism: in z. mays,  memory genes encode the dehydrin grmzm2g <dig>  related to rab <dig> and xero <dig> in a. thaliana; cytochromes grmzm5g <dig> and grmzm2g <dig>  involved in aba metabolism and signaling are related to cyp76c <dig> and cyp707a <dig>  respectively; enzymes for the biosynthesis of proline , for detoxification , and for tfs involved in regulation of various shared stress responding pathways . conserved  memory homologs are implicated in hormone-regulated pathways , encode tfs , and diverse metabolic functions . the function of  <dig> homologous  memory genes in arabidopsis is unknown.

the species-specific distributions of the memory genes encoding tfs in z. mays and a. thaliana are noted. although similar percentages  of memory genes encode tfs in the two species, about half of the maize tf memory genes encode nac family members, 30% encode integrase-type ap2/erf family members and 14% encode factors from the wrky family . the representation of these family members among the memory genes of a. thaliana is remarkably different . revealing the roles of the dehydration memory transcription factor genes in the memory behavior of dependent genes will be of paramount significance for understanding the molecular mechanisms regulating transcriptional memory. it is emphasized, however, that the memory behavior of a tf does not necessarily determine the memory behavior of all of its targets even when the tf binds directly to the gene’s promoter. for example, the memory pattern of the a. thaliana myc <dig> gene is responsible for the transcriptional memory behavior of only a specific subset of the myc2-dependent genes, while rd <dig>  a marker myc2-regulated gene  <cit> , displays in s <dig> a response different from the memory response of myc <dig>  <cit> . therefore, the transcriptional behavior of a tf cannot be used to explain, or predict, the transcriptional behavior under repeated stresses of its target genes. diverse and gene-specific mechanisms regulate transcription memory behavior of dehydration stress genes even for genes belonging in the same memory category  <cit> .

homologous proteins with similar protective/re-adjusting functions encoded by memory genes in one species may be encoded by genes that display non-conserved responses in the other. for example, in arabidopsis the lipid transfer proteins  and lea proteins  implicated in aba/abiotic stress responses has four gene homologs in the rci2a family, all of which show non-memory  responses in arabidopsis .

we suggest that structurally related homologous genes that display non-conserved memory responses indicate species-specific features reflecting divergence of the roles played by homologous proteins in the two species. thus, seven genes involved in ja-signaling  and ja-responding genes have conserved  memory responses in both maize and arabidopsis . however, the aoc  genes critical for the biosynthesis of ja display  memory responses only in arabidopsis; there are four aoc genes in maize, but only one provides a weak  non-memory response and three are not affected, suggesting a different crosstalk with the ja-pathway during dehydration stress in the two species.

evolution of the transcriptional memory
the highly sensitive rna-seq transcriptome analyses allowed identification of genes that function similarly in the two lineages as well as genes that function in species-specific ways. by modifying their transcriptional responses, the memory genes are likely to finely tune synthesis of protective cellular functions, to modify interactions with other signaling networks, and to re-adjust physiological processes under repeated cycles of dehydration stress. of particular note is that some homologs of the maize memory genes behave as memory genes in arabidopsis but display different transcriptional response patterns . thereby, although some evolutionarily conserved genes involved in dehydration stress response have been conserved as memory genes in the two species, they belong in different memory response categories. this may reflect specific tuning and adjusting of cellular functions employed by a c <dig> monocot and a c <dig> eudicot plant in response to repeated dehydration stresses.

the most dramatic differences between the maize and arabidopsis memory responses to multiple dehydration stresses are displayed by the  and  memory genes. thus, only eight  genes and eight  genes in maize have homologs with the same memory responses in arabidopsis . in a stark contrast with the large number of chloroplast and thylakoid membrane  memory genes in arabidopsis, only four chloroplast and two thylakoid membrane genes display  memory genes in maize and none of the conserved  or  memory genes between the two species encodes a chloroplast/thylakoid membrane-related function . together, these memory responses by the homologous genes of maize and arabidopsis suggest significant differences in photosynthetic and related metabolic functions employed by two species  when experiencing repeated dehydration stresses.

CONCLUSIONS
the most important result of this study is the evidence that a monocot and a dicot plant display dehydration stress memory and modify their transcriptional responses by similar transcriptional memory patterns. the rna-seq transcriptome analyses allowed identification of genes that function similarly in the two lineages, as well as genes that function in species-specific ways. the four memory transcription patterns indicate that the transcriptional behavior of dehydration stress responding genes under repeated stresses is more complicated than the behavior involved in a single dehydration stress, suggesting that dehydration stress memory is a complex phenotype resulting from coordinated responses of multiple signaling pathways. despite evidence of conservation between the two lineages in terms of the presence of dehydration stress-responding genes, species-specific differences in the transcriptional responses were found. first, the number of z. mays genes involved in the general  dehydration stress responses  is significantly lower than in arabidopsis . second, induced maize genes outnumber repressed in a ratio 4: <dig>  while in a. thaliana the numbers are comparable. third, the memory genes in maize constitute almost 40% of the overall dehydration responding fraction, while in arabidopsis the memory genes are about 30%, despite the much smaller number of maize genes implicated in the dehydration response than in arabidopsis. fourth, conserved homologous genes in the two species that display transcriptional memory but in different memory categories illustrate specific modifications of the memory responses during the evolution of the response systems under repeated dehydration stress occurrences. the results contribute to our current knowledge of how plants respond to multiple dehydration stresses and provide a reference platform for studies of the transcriptional responses to water deficit by monocot and eudicot plants.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions
lv, yd, and nl performed experiments. j-jr performed bioinformatics analyses. mf and za conceived the study and interpreted results. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
distribution of raw and mapped reads over samples and replicates.

click here for file

 additional file 2
primers used in the qrt-pcr experiments.

click here for file

 additional file 3
full list of 
z. mays 
genes identified on 
a. thaliana 
genes as models.

click here for file

 additional file 4
transcript abundances displayed by the memory genes from the four memory categories and for the induced and repressed non-memory genes of 
z. mays.


click here for file

 additional file 5
table of  and  response genes according to go function.

click here for file

 additional file 6
distribution of memory and non-memory genes according to selected go categories.

click here for file

 additional file 7

z. mays 
memory genes and their homologs in 
a. thaliana.


click here for file

 acknowledgements
the authors thank ms. stephanie canny  for figures 2a and b. partial support was provided by nsf award mcb- <dig> to z.a. and m.f., unl-life sciences competitive program to mf, za, j-jr and sr, and the nebraska research initiative  to j-jr.
