BACKGROUND
acoustic signalling in birds is a popular system in which to ask questions about the evolution of identity signalling systems and the costs and benefits of reliably communicating a sender's condition. these two different kinds of signals  require very different trait properties. signals of identity need to be relatively consistent over time within individuals to reliably indicate the senders identity . in contrast, condition signals, indicating short term changes in condition , need to be plastic within an individual to reliably reflect the different conditions of a sender . both types of signals have been studied separately in parent-offspring communication. however, these two signals occur simultaneously in begging calls of young birds and the question arises: how can one acoustic signal manifest the need for simultaneous high and low intra-individual variation? so far, no study has investigated both types of signals and their contribution to the acoustic variability in a parent-offspring communication system.

in many colonially breeding species, parents need to discriminate their mobile chicks from other conspecific young  <cit> . in most species, offspring still rely on parental care after a post-fledging phase and the accurate recognition of own offspring is important. although the crucial time period for parent-offspring recognition is relatively short , one expects selection for reliable recognition mechanism. in species in which misidentification is likely, failure of parents to recognize their offspring is prone to entail fitness costs for both, parents  and offspring . acoustic parent-offspring recognition has been shown in colonially breeding seabirds , with a special focus on penguins , and in fewer studies on songbirds . frequency modulation  has been found to be an important cue for acoustic individual recognition in birds. for example, king penguin  chicks recognize their parents by fm patterns in their call  <cit>  and zebra finches  facilitate mate recognition by using fm cues  <cit> . although these studies establish that fm is important for acoustic recognition, most likely a combination of different acoustic parameters is used by the receiver to recognise the signaller. by using multiple auditory components, individuals may increase the information content of the call, which is expected to facilitate recognition  <cit> .

many studies have also shown that begging calls incorporate information about a chick's energy requirements or body condition  in an effort to solicit food from parents or compete with siblings . these 'need' signals are highly dynamic  and exhibit large intra-individual gradual variation; such variation has been correlated to a chick's body condition or hunger level . an increase in begging intensity is often associated with an increase in call rate, call amplitude and begging bout length . compared to these characteristics of call delivery, the influence of hunger on acoustic parameters of individual calls has been studied in relatively few species .

consequently, in species where selection favours individual recognition, begging calls are likely to incorporate both identity cues and signals of need. therefore, begging calls represent an excellent system to investigate the expression pattern of static  <cit>  and dynamic traits  <cit>  within the same acoustic signal. in a field study with jackson's golden-backed weavers  we aim to identify how variation in begging calls simultaneously reflects changes in hunger and incorporates individual distinctiveness. this species is perfectly suited for studying the evolution of individual signatures in begging. it is a colony breeder with highly synchronized breeding at the start of the rainy season. this high synchronization leads to simultaneous fledging on a massive scale, in which parents must be able to locate their offspring in order to provide post-fledging parental care   <cit> .

in a first step, we experimentally manipulated hunger levels of nestlings close to fledging and predicted that this treatment would change acoustic parameters in relation to a nestling's hunger level. the time point is important because we predict individual signatures to be developed closely before fledging to enable parents to learn individual signatures while the nestling is still in the nest. following this, we analyzed the variance components in the begging calls to apportion the observed variance to differences between hunger levels and individuals. our prediction was that begging calls contain stable individual information over varying hunger levels to reliably indicate a nestling's identity and dynamic information about a chicks hunger. in a last step, we used multivariate methods  to demonstrate statistically if and how distinctiveness of individuals changes with hunger.

RESULTS
behavioural and acoustic response to food deprivation
food deprivation affected both begging posture  and call rate . call rate  was nearly twice as high in hungry chicks  compared to satiated chicks . neither the sex of the nestling nor its hatching order had an influence on posture or call rate . these results demonstrate that the experiment effectively altered the hunger state of chicks, a prerequisite for investigating the static and dynamic properties of call characteristics important in signalling need and individuality.

acoustic response to food deprivation was measured for both call parts separately . few call parameters showed clear static call properties, i.e. traits that did not change with hunger level . in the first call part mean frequency modulation and variance in amplitude modulation were not significantly affected by hunger . variance in entropy was not significantly affected by hunger in both call parts . additionally, in the second call part, mean frequency was not significantly affected by hunger .

the effect of the hunger treatment on acoustic parameters and their variance components according to the differences in time stages of the experimental treatment , identity , origin  and unexplained variance , separately calculated for both parts of the begging call. note that variance components for id of mean amplitude might be overestimated since the measure was not standardized across individuals.

a estimates for the effect of hunger are given in change per hour. number of df =  <dig> for all tests. we used  <dig> calls from  <dig> individuals and  <dig> nests for all tests. bold typing indicates results that remain significant after correction for multiple testing .

most acoustic call characteristics were affected by the hunger treatment. mean amplitude, mean entropy and mean pitch goodness increased in both call parts . calls became louder, harsher and the energy distribution became less harmonic. other call parameters were affected in only one part of the call. mean frequency and pitch decreased with hunger in the first call part, but were unaffected in the second part . amplitude modulation decreased and frequency modulation increased in the second part . the first 'whistle' part became slightly shorter, but the second 'trill-like' part became significantly longer . the duration of the second part is strongly correlated to the number of trill elements . an increase of duration in the second part of the call is therefore caused by adding more trill elements.

variance in calls in relation to hunger, individuality and nest
in the next step we estimated and compared variation due to the hunger treatment and variation due to individuality. call parameters important for individual recognition are predicted to be both largely independent of hunger level and highly individually distinct. mean frequency modulation fits these predictions by showing a very high individuality in both call parts and an independence from hunger level in the first part of the call . interestingly, most of the other  <dig> acoustic parameters also showed relatively higher percentages of variation due to individual differences compared to differences in hunger level . acoustic parameters could not be strictly divided into two categories  as predicted. all  <dig> parameters showed higher variance components for individual effects compared to hunger effects. the effect due to nest of origin  was highly variable for different acoustic parameters . of the  <dig> parameters from both call parts,  <dig> parameters showed variance components larger than 10% .

individuality in calls
complementary to the variance components for individuals, pic values gave a second estimate of acoustic individuality. values for pics over all hunger levels and variance components for individuals were related . six out of  <dig> acoustic parameters showed pic values higher than one when pic was calculated over all hunger states . the durations of call parts and mean frequency modulation showed pic values higher than one in both call parts. additionally, in the first call part mean frequency and mean entropy showed values above one. when calculated for a standardized hunger level ,  <dig> out of  <dig> acoustic parameters showed pic values higher than one and showed an overall higher individuality than pic values over all hunger levels .

we performed two different sets of dfas to test for acoustic differences between individuals, i.e. the probability with which a call can be assigned to an individual chick. the results of the first set of dfas showed that although hunger changes increased, individual chicks can be statistically discriminated with correct assignment rates well above a by-chance correct assignment rate of  <dig> %. dfas using pooled acoustic parameters of both call parts showed higher assignment probabilities  than dfas that only included call parameters of part  <dig>  or part  <dig> ,.

in a second set of dfas, we investigated whether individuality in calls increased with increasing hunger. individual calls are highly distinctive during all hunger states  and correct call assignment rates increased with increasing hunger . calls of hungry nestlings showed higher individuality compared to calls of satiated nestlings. again, dfas using pooled acoustic parameters of both call parts showed higher assignment probabilities than dfas on one part only.

discussion
overall, we experimentally showed that begging calls contain information about a nestling's hunger, and that begging calls remain statistically distinguishable  over changes in hunger states. few acoustic parameters did not change with hunger level and have the potential to act as static recognition cues. however, a strict categorization into static potential identity cues and dynamic, hunger-related components was not possible for most parameters. several dynamic traits that varied with hunger level likewise showed high individual variation and could therefore potentially function as individual recognition cues. here, we further develop a hypothesis about how individual recognition processes can incorporate dynamic hunger-related information, and the potential consequences for the correct assessment of a chick's hunger level.

call complexity
the structure of jackson's golden-backed weaver nestlings' calls is highly complex and can be classified into two distinct parts: a 'whistle-like' first part and a 'trill-like' second part. this two-parted structure emerges when nestlings are around  <dig> days of age and remains this complex until at least  <dig> days of age . a similar change in complexity of contact or begging calls close to fledging has been demonstrated in the chaffinch   <cit>  and in the bank swallow   <cit> . in these two species, the call increases in amplitude, becomes longer and starts showing a complex time-frequency pattern close to fledging. this increase in acoustic complexity prior to fledging is thought to facilitate recognition by allowing the parents to learn the individual signature before the nestling leaves the nest  <cit> . our results support this hypothesis. although dfas using differing numbers of variables are not directly comparable, the higher assignment rate of the dfas using acoustic parameters of both call parts demonstrates that a composite call, i.e. increased complexity within a signal, provides enhanced discrimination compared to each call part alone .

acoustic variability within and between individuals
most acoustic parameters in both call parts changed in response to an increase in a nestling's hunger state.  <dig> out of  <dig> parameters were strongly related to a nestling's hunger state. as predicted, amplitude increased with hunger . changes in amplitude, however, may partly be explained by decreased distances to the microphone caused by posture changes of the nestling. the second part of the call was extended by an increase in the number of trill elements. this result confirms findings on barn swallows   <cit>  and tree swallows   <cit> , showing that call duration conveys information about nestlings' hunger. these results indicate that acoustic parameters could be used by the parents to assess a nestling's need based on reliable changes with hunger. however, experimental evidence, i.e. playback experiments testing specific acoustic parameters, is necessary to test whether parents perceive and use hunger related variation as a signal of need.

compared to the number of call parameters that were affected by a nestling's hunger, only a few parameters remained unaffected and static over all hunger levels. as found for other species, frequency modulation contained high individual variation, especially in the first part of the call. in addition, frequency modulation was not influenced by changes in hunger . this suggests that frequency modulation might act as an important part of an individual signature system in jackson's golden-backed weavers. additionally, amplitude modulation and variance in entropy were largely unaffected by hunger in the first part of the call, while mean frequency and variance in entropy were unaffected by hunger in the second call part. however, individual recognition is most likely not based on one single component showing high individuality, but on a multitude of components and their complex interactions  <cit> . the integration of multiple components may translate into fitness benefits due to enhanced perception of signal information  or due to the possibility to perceive multiple, partly independent information . according to the variance components for individuality and the pic values, nestling calls show potential for individual recognition in several acoustic parameters. this can enable parents to learn their nestlings' individual signature close before fledging, allowing them to relocate their offspring after leaving the nest. however, individual recognition experiments on this species are still missing. the importance of call components for potential individual recognition processes remains unknown, and needs to be addressed in future playback experiments testing the receiver's perception of differences in specific call parameters.

acoustic individuality can also be shown when taking a multivariate approach. the dfas over all hunger levels demonstrate that even though begging calls change with hunger, individuals can still be statistically discriminated based on acoustic parameters. acoustic individuality is therefore maintained over changing hunger. the correct assignment rates of the dfas increased with hunger . this finding could be expected, given that individual recognition is more important in young in high state of need. alternatively, this finding might be due to motivational differences over the different hunger levels. very hungry, fully motivated nestlings might produce well-stereotyped calls at maximum physiological effort, resulting in an increased acoustic variance between individuals. in contrast satiated nestlings may differ in their motivation from call to call and therefore produce less stereotyped calls which show a larger overlap between individuals.

interestingly, most acoustic parameters showed a combination of high individuality and reliable hunger signalling. a strict categorization into static or dynamic parameters is therefore not valid. instead, candidate cues for individual recognition also incorporate dynamic, hunger-related variation, thereby potentially signalling the nestling's hunger to the parents. for example, the duration of part  <dig> of the call shows clear differences between individuals  and, simultaneously, the duration increases with hunger . these signal properties raise an interesting theoretical concept about a combination of identity and condition signalling. the absolute duration of part  <dig> is not a reliable indicator of a chick's hunger by itself. however, when duration of part  <dig> is perceived on a relative scale , the perceiver can obtain a highly accurate estimate of a chick's state of need. one option is that receivers may use a general 'rule of thumb' in which they compare among several begging characteristics or relate begging characteristics to begging posture in order to assess a chick's state of need. alternatively, receivers compare the signal with an 'individual-referenced' template of the acoustic spectrum of the sender, and thereby perceive more information about the sender's condition. in other words, by knowing the identity of the sender and being familiar with the sender's acoustic range, the receiver could improve perception of signals. while the acoustic range of the signaller may change with age, body condition or status, repeated interactions in parent-offspring communication may ensure that parents stay familiar with the acoustic spectrum of individual chicks.

perceiving more precise acoustic information about an individual through familiarity with its acoustic signal spectrum is presumably a common, though not yet well-investigated, phenomenon. to our knowledge, very few studies on non-human animals have investigated the effect of familiarity on perceiving individuals' acoustic signals. studies on vocalizations of great tits   <cit>  and western meadowlarks   <cit>  found that familiarity with the songs of an individual improves ranging estimates by the receiver. mcgregor and krebs  <cit>  demonstrated in great tits that territory holders react differently to degraded and not-degraded songs only when they are familiar with the opponent's song. they suggested that the receiver compares a familiar song to a learned template in order to estimate the degradation of the song, and therefore cannot judge the degradation of unfamiliar songs. a very similar ranging effect has been demonstrated in humans by the same authors  <cit> . further studies in humans suggest that being familiar with a specific voice increases the ability to recognize words that are overlaid with noise  <cit> . those examples indicate that perceiving certain information requires familiarity with the signal variability of an individual. these studies highlight that individual-referenced signalling could be a widely used communication component in social communication systems, which allow learning of acoustic signal templates through repeated interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we used a signaller's perspective to experimentally disentangle the fine-scaled variation in multi-component begging calls of jackson's golden-backed weaver chicks. however, to fully understand signalling systems one has to adopt a signaller's and a receiver's perspective. thus, playback experiments are clearly needed to demonstrate whether receivers assess signal value or single call components and if those signals are assessed on an absolute scale or referenced to the acoustic spectrum of a signaller.

