BACKGROUND
current studies indicate that the combinatorial control of transcription allows an extremely large number of regulatory decisions  through the cooperation of a small number of transcription factors   <cit> . determining cooperativity between tfs is essential to understand transcriptional regulation. however, in contrast to other well-characterized relationships between proteins, cooperativity in a broad sense does not have a unique description. it has been simply described as the regulation of the expression of a gene by two or more specific transcription factors  <cit> , often related to protein-protein interactions between the dna-binding elements  <cit> . in this line, cooperation between tfs has been restricted to the existence of dna-binding sites close in the same promoter regions of target genes  <cit> . however, other studies have suggested a basis for cooperativity in the role of cis-regulatory elements acting as analogue implementations of logic circuits, devoid of protein-protein contacts  <cit> . in addition, some works showed that cooperative tf pairs  do not act necessarily together, neither spatially nor temporally  <cit> . a model by cokus et al. assumed that all tfs binding the same promoter do cooperate with one another in some degree  <cit> . finally, transcriptional synergy  has also been considered as a form of cooperativity  <cit> .

we investigated the nature of four sets of ctfps  by means of the analysis of their roles in two distinct biological networks . our findings suggest that cooperativity is reflected in the structure of the protein interaction network  with shorter path lengths and larger topological overlaps  than expected by chance. this was true for all four sets of ctfps, implying a common denominator in the nature of all the predictions regardless of the prediction method used. also, members of ctfps seem to share common target genes but do not show other distinctive regulatory traits, neither in terms of inter-regulation nor in terms of their in-degree . since cooperativity seems to be responsible for many important transcriptional responses in the cell, we believe that the results presented here will help to better understand its nature and, consequently, will assist in providing a solid framework to develop better tools for its prediction.

features of the four methods under study. abbreviations: tf, transcription factor; pin, protein interaction network.

RESULTS
similarities and dependences between predictions
as no gold-standard exists for cooperative tf pairs, we compared the predictions of the four methods by means of their ability to predict the results of one another. we found that  <dig>  of the ctfps are predicted by more than one method and  <dig>  are predicted by more than two. the fact that only  <dig>  of the ctfps are predicted by all four methods suggests that divergent criteria in characterizing cooperativity accounts for a large part of the observed divergence in the results of the four methods. in order to calculate the pairwise dependences and the overlap between the four datasets, we used the mutual information coefficient and the jaccard coefficient, respectively  <cit> . results are shown in table  <dig>  the predictions of the four methods are not significantly correlated to one another in terms of mutual information, although their overlap in terms of their positive predictions is low yet significant. the low level of this overlap also reveals largely divergent criteria to assess cooperativity. indeed, as shown by the mutual information analysis, knowing the results of one method gives little information on the results expected in any other method. the different data sources used by each method might account for part of this observation. for example, the tf pair ylr131c  – ygl073w  does not co-occur in the location data from harbison et al.  <cit> , so it could not be predicted by method t, which relied in this information source. however, it was characterized as cooperative by method b, which relied on a different data source. also, the threshold values applied by each method affect the list of tf pairs accepted as cooperative. an additional explanation for the observed disagreements between results could be the criteria used to strengthen computational prediction of cooperativity by seeking support from experimental observations. experimental support in the four papers considered in this study had different forms, for instance:  tf pairs which are known to physically interact  – ylr182w , forming the sbf complex, or ydl056w  – ylr182w , forming the mbf complex);  tf pairs which belong to the same transcriptional complex  – yil131c , which belong to the sff complex despite the absence of recorded physical interaction between them);  tf pairs which bind the same dna sequence  – ydr146c , which implies some antagonistic interaction);  tf pairs with a regulatory  activity on each other,  – yhr084w );  tf pairs involved in the same biological process  – ynl216w , both involved in rrna processing, or ydr146c  – yir018w , putatively involved in drug metabolism  <cit> ). cooperativity between tf pairs without documented relation  has been occasionally accepted on the basis of cross-talk between different cellular processes, for instance the pair ydr259c  – ykl043w  might be controlling cell adhesion  <cit> . consequently, differences in predictions among the four methods might be the product of the application of different criteria to define cooperativity. furthermore, some tf pairs considered as false positives by one method are considered bona fide cooperative tf pairs in other, for instance ynl216w  – yir018w , considered as a potential false positive pair by method c  and accepted by method n as a part of the same cooperative module.

upper right side: dependence in terms of mutual information between pairs of methods . lower left side: overlap in terms of jaccard coefficient between pairs of methods . diagonal : number of ctfps predicted by each method.

when comparing the predictions of different methods, it is also worth mentioning that, although three of the methods derive their information mainly from cell-cycle-related expression analysis, predictions of method n  does not show neither a particularly lower dependence nor a lower similarity with the predictions of the other three methods. although there is a possibility that cooperativity is mainly confined to the control of the cell cycle, we cannot discard a bias towards characterizing cooperative tf pairs involved in the regulation of cell cycle due to  the extensive literature available on cell cycle regulation and  the comparison to other prediction methods which are cell-cycle-based.

cooperative tf pairs in the protein interaction network
previous observations suggest an underlying basis of protein-protein interaction for transcriptional cooperativity, either between both tfs or through a non-dna-binding protein, although other mechanisms not based on protein-protein interactions are possible  <cit> . if one assumes that ctfps tend to physically interact , the shortest path length between them  should be shorter than random expectation.

the ctfps predicted by the four literature methods were not found to be statistically different from one another in terms of their shortest path length in the pin , which implies some topological consistency across the whole prediction space. when compared to random expectation, the shortest path lengths between members of a ctfp were significantly lower than those produced by random pairing of tfs in all cases . this suggests a fast and efficient response through ctfps, because one member of the ctfp can readily influence the other. this was expected given the necessarily coordinated implication of both members of a cooperative pair in transcriptional control. however, the fraction of directly connected ctfps are only  <dig> %s in the case of method n,  <dig> % in the case of method b,  <dig> % in the case of method t, and  <dig> % in the case of method c. hence, it seems unlikely that direct physical interaction as a necessary mediator for cooperativity as it is currently defined, highlighting the importance of proteins mediating in this kind of interactions. interestingly, table  <dig> also implies that the fact that two tfs regulate a large number of common target genes  does not necessarily mean a closeness in the pin similar to that of ctfps. also, all methods predict ctfps that are significantly closer in the pin than co-functional tf pairs . this is noteworthy since three methods included in our analysis  are largely based in the analysis of the expression patterns of the tfs during the cell cycle, which is known to carry a functional signal  <cit> . also, it should be taken into account that it is not at all uncommon for tfs to regulate the transcription of other tfs  <cit> , which results in many of them having similar functional profiles according to our method of establishing co-functionality. our data, however, seems to suggest that cooperativity determined through the regulatory control of the same biological function does not necessarily imply a cooperative interaction between tfs. however, no significant difference was found for any of the four predicted sets of ctfps with respect to the set of tf pairs defined by the intersection of co-regulatory and co-functional tf pairs. in other words, tf pairs which are simultaneously co-regulatory and co-functional  show a consistently similar closeness in the pin  to that of the four sets of predicted ctfps, despite many of them not being defined as cooperative . we have to note, though, that the definition of protein function is inherently incomplete and flawed and, in our case, the function assigned to a tf also depends largely on the quality association between a tf and its target genes. similar observations were made in the case of the mean shortest path length among the members of a cooperative tf triads .

shortest path length between cooperative tf pairs in the pin. the distribution of shortest path lengths between ctfps predicted by each method was compared to the distributions in the other sets of tf pairs by means of a mann-whitney test. the p-value column is in bold type if the distribution of the parameter  for a given method is not significantly different to that of the corresponding set .

modularity  has been observed in many pins and has been related to a scale-free architecture of the network  <cit> . tfs in dense modules are expected to show higher topological overlap values  in a topological overlap matrix   <cit> . the ctfps predicted by the four methods under study were not different from one another in terms of their modularity , which was in all cases higher than expected by random chance . also, the modularity was significantly higher than that observed for co-functional tf pairs in all cases. it was significantly higher than that of co-regulatory tf pairs for the predictions of all methods but method b at p-value <  <dig>  . interestingly, however, the modularity was significantly smaller than that observed in tf pairs which were co-regulatory ∩ co-functional for the ctfps predicted by methods b and c . this adds to the previous observation that there are co-regulatory n co-functional tf pairs that are actually more clustered in the pin than ctfps . the analysis of the modularity among the members of a cooperative tf triad produced similar results . results using the noise-filtered version of the pin and results for ctfps predicted a different levels of confidence are provided as supplementary information .

modularity of cooperative tf pairs in the pin. modularity was measured as topological overlap . the distribution of modularity values for the ctfps predicted by method was compared to distributions in the other sets of tf pairs by means of a mann-whitney test. font styles are as in table  <dig> 

modules in the pin have been related to the function of their members  <cit> . we did not observe correlation between the modularity and the sets of functions regulated by tfs from the whole population of tfs . however, ctfps exhibited a noticeable correlation , suggesting a tendency for ctfps to form higher-order cooperative modules controlling the expression of genes with similar function.

cooperative tf pairs in the regulatory network
the analysis of different aspects of the architecture of the regulatory network can assist in investigating the regulatory association between ctfps and their target genes, as well as the inter-regulation of ctfps with other tfs. the regulatory network is a directed graph, which means that a given node  can be connected to other nodes through two types of edges:  incoming edges, which denote a regulatory control performed upon the expression of the protein and  outgoing edges, which denote a transcriptional regulatory control performed by the protein  upon its neighbors.

being the regulatory network a directed graph, the shortest path length between nodes a and b is measured as the shortest number of edges connecting either node a to node b or node b to node a. in the context of a regulatory network, this measure is similar to that called regulatory closeness  <cit> . intuitively, short regulatory path lengths between tfs imply a stronger influence by one tf on the expression of another. the four sets of ctfps predicted by the four methods under study were not found to be statistically different from one another in terms of their shortest path lengths in this network . furthermore, predicted ctfps did not exhibit path lengths significantly shorter than any of the models of tf pairs used for comparison, including the random pairing of tfs . the lengths of multi-component loop structures  involving ctfps were not significantly shorter than expected by random , which means that cooperativity does not favor small regulatory motifs as an inter-regulatory mechanism of transcription control. thus, these results suggest that cooperative tfs rarely interact via inter-regulation. additionally, we did not observe a correlation between the path length in the regulatory network and the co-expression of tf pairs , which is consistent with previous claims based on the analysis of mrna expression profiles under a large number of cellular conditions  <cit> . interestingly, the mean shortest path length of the cooperative tf triads was significantly shorter than that of the co-functional tf triads and the random tf triads . this leads to the idea that there is a mutual regulation between cooperative tfs at levels of cooperativity higher than cooperative pairs.

shortest path length between cooperative tf pairs in the regulatory network. the distribution of shortest path lengths between the ctfps predicted by each method was compared to distributions in the other sets of tf pairs by means of a mann-whitney test. font styles are as in table  <dig> 

aside from the inter-regulatory associations between tfs, a certain inner community structure has also been observed in the organization of the regulatory network, which can be used to uncover specific roles for ctfps  <cit> . a tom was used to measure the extent to which any two tfs shared regulatory partners. because of the directed nature of the regulatory network, two toms were generated: the in-tom  and the out-tom . the ctfps were not found to be statistically different from one another neither in their in-tom nor in their out-tom . as shown in table  <dig>  the in-degree modularity did not show significant differences with random expectation. this observation, together with the results of the analysis of the shortest path length in the same network, reveal that ctfps are not necessarily co-regulated . the same conclusion can be extracted from the observation of the modularity among members of a predicted cooperative tf triad . the analysis of the out-degree modularity, however, showed that the two members of a ctfp are likely to have a significantly larger number of common target genes than expected by chance . the out-degree modularity is not significantly larger than that of co-regulatory tf pairs. although this could be intuitively expected, it is noteworthy since the prediction of cooperativity by all four methods under study involved the analysis of the n target genes common to two tfs , which may only represent a small fraction of the total number of target genes of both tfs combined . method t explicitly selected tf pairs sharing a significantly large n. its independence-test criterion for assessing significance in this aspect was less strict than ours . we also observed in table  <dig> that the out-degree modularity was significantly larger for predicted ctfps with respect to co-functional tf pairs. this result indicates that both members of a ctfp co-regulate the expression of a group of target genes to a larger extent that a co-functional tf pair does. this is not trivial, since the methods studied did not explicitly seek tf pairs whose target genes  displayed similar function. instead, the set of n target genes common to both tfs in a ctfp may be involved in the same cellular process, but the set of target genes specific to each tf may contribute to a variety of other processes. the ctfps did not, however, show a larger modularity than tf pairs which were co-regulatory ∩ co-functional. taken together, these results show a consistently similar role for all four predictions of ctfps in the context of the regulatory network, which is only different from random expectation in the case of the out-degree modularity. analysis of the out-degree modularity for cooperative tf triads gave similar results, although in this case the modularity was also larger than that of tf triads with are co-regulatory n co-functional . results using ctfps predicted a different levels of confidence are supplied as supplementary information .

in-degree modularity of cooperative tf pairs in the regulatory network. the in-degree of a gene denotes the regulatory control performed upon the expression of that gene. modularity was measured as topological overlap . the distribution of modularity values for the ctfps predicted by each method was compared to distributions in the other sets of tf pairs by means of a mann-whitney test. font styles are as in table  <dig> 

out-degree modularity of cooperative tf pairs in the regulatory network. the out-degree of a gene denotes the regulatory control performed by that gene upon the expression of other genes. modularity was measured as topological overlap . the distribution of modularity values for the ctfps predicted by each method was compared to distributions in the other sets of tf pairs by means of a mann-whitney test. font styles are as in table  <dig> 

in-degree modularity and out-degree modularity were not correlated, neither in the general population of tfs nor in the case of ctfps . this result agrees with the previously-observed lack of correlation between path length and co-expression and can be partly explained by the role of non-transcriptional regulation of tfs. notwithstanding direct transcriptional regulation in the presence of promoter-bound tfs  <cit> , it is known that many tfs remain at a constitutively low level of expression  and their activity is modulated by phosphorylation, cofactors and other post-transcriptional mechanisms  <cit> . furthermore, different expression levels of a tf may have similar regulatory effects on its target genes. however, a slight positive correlation was found between the modularity in the pin and the out-tom for the general population of tfs . this correlation was clearly stronger if only ctfps were considered , which adds to the important role of physical interaction in cooperativity-influenced differential gene expression profiles.

this study highlights the topological commonalities between ctfps predicted by different methods. because of that, our observations can be also used to improve current  prediction methods by incorporating topological information. although not in the scope of this paper, we propose as additional information a simple example of how to integrate our results to score present predictions .

CONCLUSIONS
because prediction of cooperative tfs is critically important for understanding the operation of the regulatory network, our motivation for carrying out this study was to determine whether four different computational methods devised for prediction of ctfps do detect tf pairs which actually share some consistent features. this is important in the absence of a gold-standard which could be used to benchmark the performance of methods for prediction of transcriptional cooperativity.

the predictions made by the methods under study exhibited low overlap and dependence in their predictions when compared to each other. the pin-related topological features of the ctfps detected by the different methods did not vary significantly among them. however, the topological role of the ctfps in the pin suggested that cooperativity is indeed reflected in the network as having  a shorter path length and  a larger topological overlap than expected by mere chance. this implies a fast access from one member of a ctfp to the other and a tendency to share common interaction partners despite the fact that many ctfps are not known to directly interact. also, the topological parameters in the pin were not significantly distinct to that of tf pairs which are co-regulatory n co-functional, suggesting that, in topological terms, ctfps behave like those tf pairs despite the fact that many co-regulatory and co-functional tf pairs are not considered ctfps. from the perspective of the regulatory network, ctfps were not more inter-regulated than can be explained by chance alone. this observation is consistent across the predictions of all the four sets but one. with no exceptions, the regulatory distance between ctfps was similar to that of co-functional and co-regulatory tf pairs. finally, the analysis of the modularity of tf pairs in the regulatory network revealed a consistent lack of a shared regulation for ctfps, which might result in a role as integrators of varied inputs.

we can conclude from our observations that the predictions drawn from different rationales are consistent with respect to their topological features in networks of different nature such as the protein interaction network and the regulatory network. this suggests that the different predictions analyzed are complementary despite the unclear definition of transcriptional cooperativity. furthermore, our observations can be used for improving the present prediction methods for characterization of cooperative tfs and for devising new ones, an instrumental task towards unraveling the architecture of transcriptional networks.

