BACKGROUND
with the availability of complete genome sequences, the ability to probe multiple genes in a single experiment using dna microarrays provides an unprecedented tool for genomic research. accordingly, tens of thousands of microarray experiments have been conducted to monitor changes in gene expression, identify genome-wide protein binding sites, characterize genetic variability and more. overall, the microarray technology is of ever-increasing usefulness for multiple sorts of biological inquiries.

dna microarrays are composed of numerous probes that usually interrogate a complete genome. the different sequence-specific probes are arrayed on a single surface either by in-situ oligonucleotide synthesis, or by spotting gene-specific nucleic acid fragments organized in source plates. in the latter case, robotic printers containing several print-tips are used, which partition the microarray into discrete subarray blocks representing the different tips. subsequently, one or two labeled nucleic acid samples are hybridized to the microarray under optimally calibrated conditions and the slide is then scanned to quantify probe-specific intensity calls. the raw data obtained is usually subjected to several steps of quality control and normalization in order to remove possible biases originating in any of above steps .

the reliability of microarray results has been questioned due to inconsistencies in the reported data and in conclusions reached within and between different studies  <cit> . other studies claim for adequate microarray data reproducibility  <cit> . recently, the microarray quality control  consortium addressed the reliability of data obtained using microarrays, by directly comparing performance across multiple platforms, test sites and replicates  <cit> . concordance of qualitative gene detection calls were around 80–95% for intrasite replicates, 70–85% for intersite replicates, and 60–80% for different platforms. alternative technologies for quantitative gene expression, such as rt-pcr, seem to provide more reliable results  <cit> . in addition, many microarray studies do not match the maqc platform quality, experimentation expertise and relative high signal-to-noise ratios of the samples compared, and would thus generate data of yet poorer reliability. the specific technical sources underlying the suboptimal quality of the microarray technology are unclear; their identification could have a significant impact on genomic research.

here, we investigated a specific technical effect previously reported to influence microarray data. in certain microarrays, gene probes are printed on the microarray surface according to their chromosomal position or a simple transformation thereof. when coupled to spatial biases, i.e. uneven intensity measurements across the microarray surface, such non-random probe placement designs give rise to spurious correlations between genes at particular relative positions in the genome  <cit> . this was suggested as a possible factor in the reported co-expression of adjacent genes in yeast, originally discovered in a study of gene expression during the cell cycle  <cit> . it has been suggested that print-tip effects comprise a dominant source of spatial bias underling spurious periodicities in this case  <cit> . consistently, common normalization practices correct for print-tip effects  or ignore spatial biases altogether. another study showed that inadequate cleaning of print-tips causes "carry-over" during the printing process and contributes to the generation of spurious correlations between adjacent probes  <cit> . however, print-tip-related effects are irrelevant to in-situ printed microarrays, which nonetheless exhibit spurious chromosomal-position-dependent correlations. this indicates that additional or different sources of bias are responsible for spurious correlations observed in gene expression studies.

in order to assess the extent of the effect causing spurious correlations in yeast microarray studies, we applied an autocorrelation analysis on a database of over  <dig> individual microarray experiments. remarkably, we find that spurious periodicities dominate yeast microarray datasets. moreover, we demonstrate that they result from large and continuous spatial biases on the microarray surface, which are generated at the microarray hybridization step. the extent of such spatial biases, which are probably ubiquitous in microarray studies, has not been previously appreciated. we also show that autocorrelation can be used for the identification of aneuploidies in the strains used for expression studies, and that in certain cases, conclusions regarding segmental genetic changes can also arise spuriously.

RESULTS
autocorrelation analysis reveals spurious periodicities dependent on microarray design
spurious correlations between adjacent and periodically spaced genes were previously identified by gene-gene correlations across experimental datasets encompassing multiple microarrays  <cit> . this method, however, does not discriminate between individual microarray experiments with or without associated biases. to overcome this, we used the alternative approach of autocorrelation analysis  <cit> , in which correlations are determined between the complete gene set and matching sets shifted by gradually increasing distances along the genome. subsequently, the autocorrelation coefficients as a function of the distances for which they were determined  serve to identify recurrent relations between expression levels and genomic position. importantly, autocorrelation analysis is applied to different gene sets within individual experiments, rather than to the same genes across multiple experiments.

we tested the utility of the autocorrelation analysis on two cell cycle experiments  <cit>  reported to exhibit the microarray design-related effect  <cit> . as expected, we observed very strong autocorrelation signals . while autocorrelation values for gene distances of up to ~ <dig> were highest, secondary peaks in the autocorrelation profile were also very clear. consistent with previous observations  <cit> , the secondary peaks appeared with periodicities of  <dig> and  <dig> genes for the two different experiments.

to directly demonstrate that the different periodicities represent microarray designs rather than a true biological signal, we hybridized a single rna sample, taken from cells traversing the cell cycle, to two microarrays of different design. indeed, the two hybridization experiments yielded different periodicities, of  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively. furthermore, comparison of the autocorrelation patterns with the average gene probe distance on the microarrays as a function of the genes' distance on the chromosome revealed that the different autocorrelation periodicities could be attributed entirely to the different microarray designs . thus, the position-related correlations in gene expression are dependent on the microarray design rather than on the underlying biology. the non-random placement of gene probes on the microarrays is visually presented in figure  <dig> as the relation between chromosomal position and the corresponding distances between the probes. genes which are adjacent on the chromosome or separated by a certain distance, characteristic of each design, are also printed in proximity on the microarray. microarray probe placement design is manifested in the data obtained in microarray studies, and would especially be critical in studies addressing segmental genetic events or the relationship between gene position and expression.

presence of periodic autocorrelation patterns in multiple experiment sets
we next took advantage of the fact that autocorrelation analysis is applied to individual experiments in order to analyze in a more discrete manner three cell cycle datasets , as well as two additional datasets obtained with yet different microarray platforms. in each dataset, most experiments exhibited periodic autocorrelation, albeit with different magnitudes . moreover, the periods themselves varied between individual experiments within any specific dataset. thus, a stochastic element influences the observed periodicities, affecting each particular experiment differently in both quality and quantity. analysis of any complete dataset by gene-gene correlations would fail to show this and instead reveal only the averaged effect.

the fact that autocorrelation periodicities appear in diverse datasets prompted us to assess their extent over a wide range of microarray studies. we assembled a set of  <dig> yeast microarray experiments from different laboratories, platforms and experimental procedures . numerous periodic autocorrelation patterns were observed in these experiments . we quantified the extent of these periodicities by performing a second iteration of autocorrelation, which greatly enhances any periodic signals while having a minor effect on other signals, and by defining a strict significance criterion of over  <dig> signal points with autocorrelation r values greater than  <dig>  at gene distances of up to  <dig>  we found that  <dig> of  <dig>  experiments passed this significance criterion, which is associated with a p value smaller than 10- <dig>  we consider this percentage a lower bound for the fraction of experiments suffering from periodic autocorrelations. only one source of microarrays, those produced by rosetta inpharmatics, did not display such periodicities, presumably due to a random probe placement design . none of the  <dig> microarrays from this set passed our significance test for periodic autocorrelation. we conclude that the cause of spurious autocorrelations observed in the cell cycle studies dominates yeast microarray studies, and that this bias influences the final data to an extent that it can be observed as significant autocorrelation periodicities. such spurious correlations are not confined to yeast microarrays, as they were also reported to occur in c. elegans and human microarray experiments  <cit> .

widespread spatial biases in microarray experiments
to identify the technical source underlying the spurious autocorrelations we observed, we simulated different forms of biases introduced onto random gene expression data in the uhn yeast microarray design. we first considered biases in separate subarray blocks, which simulates print-tip-dependent biases. such biases have previously been suggested to underlie the spurious chromosomal-position-dependent correlations  <cit> , and they are generally regarded as an important potential source of bias in spotted microarrays. however, only weak autocorrelation signals with no periodic peaks were observed when up to eight dispersed subarray blocks deviated from the rest of the array . in contrast, circular shaped spatial biases larger than a subarray size order were associated with periodic autocorrelations. furthermore, the size and shape of the spatial bias determined both the autocorrelation amplitude and the period itself. thus, while horizontally-shaped biases resulted in a 48-gene period, a two-gene autocorrelation period was obtained in the uhn microarray design as a result of vertically-shaped biases. all the above conclusions can also be independently reached from direct examination of the probe placement information .

to determine the significance of the spatial biases in actual studies and the degree to which they may affect the data obtained, we considered a continuum of sizes and intensity magnitudes of horizontally-shaped biases in the uhn microarray design. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  spatial biases that cover more than 15% of the microarray surface and that correspond to ratio measurements that deviate from the mean of the rest of the microarray by at least two-fold are responsible for generating autocorrelation patterns similar to those observed in ~60% of real experiments. as two-fold changes in expression levels have usually been regarded as a cutoff for the assignment of genes as differentially expressed, the strength of these spatial biases has a significant influence on the data. in addition, their relatively large size indicates that a significant fraction of the data is influenced.

in order to determine the relative contribution of foreground and background signals to spatial biases, we visually inspected several representative microarrays. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  spatial hybridization patterns differ between the foreground and background signals, as well as between the different dyes, accounting for the biases in the final ratio data. moreover, the levels of the background signals are approximately 10–50-fold lower than the foreground. thus, the autocorrelation pattern we observe in the data stems from the foreground signals. consistently, omission of the background subtraction step did not affect the autocorrelation patterns, and neither could we prevent the appearance of autocorrelation periodicities by application of more sophisticated background subtraction methods .

the argument that large, print-tip independent spatial biases are the cause of spurious periodicities is also consistent with the stochastic, rather than systematic nature of the appearance of periodicities . it is also supported by the presence of spurious periodicities in affymetrix microarray experiments , which do not contain subarrays and in which no source plates or printing tips are used. these attributes are consistent with random hybridization inhomogeneities serving as the source of spatial biases. we note that the smd yeast microarray design is composed of only four subarray blocks, which complicated the distinction between a subarray effect and other biases and led to the previous attribution of print-tip effects to spurious correlations  <cit> . accordingly, print-tip normalization seems inappropriate for correction of spatial biases, and may instead introduce unwanted edge-effects. an additional contributing factor to spatial biases was suggested to be a "carry-over" caused by inappropriate cleaning of print-tips between probe printings  <cit> . however, this bias produces only  <dig> % noise for fully-hybridized probe spots and is at most a negligible factor relative to large spatial biases. our simulations, which were performed on a background of random data, demonstrate that large and continuous spatial biases could solely explain all of the observed spurious periodicities.

the occurrence of large spatial biases in microarray experiments from both yeast and other organisms was previously reported . however, the use of autocorrelation analysis on data obtained from microarrays printed in a non-random manner with respect to chromosomal position has enabled us to quantify the extent of such biases over multiple experiments. we accordingly demonstrate that spatial biases occur in a majority of microarray experiments. the prevalence of such biases is probably even higher than estimated by our autocorrelation analyses, which do not detect weak or small-sized spatial biases. importantly, the same extent of spatial biases could be expected to occur regardless of microarray design, although autocorrelation would not be useful for their identification in such cases. since we analyzed experiments from a variety of platforms, laboratories and procedures, we infer that spatial biases are a ubiquitous characteristic of microarray studies in general.

the above conclusions emphasize the need to apply a spatial bias correction step when analyzing microarray data. we tested several methods for spatial bias correction and found that virtually any method, including print-tip normalization and corrections of spatial gradients, effectively eliminate all periodic autocorrelation signals . however, none of these capture the actual nature of the spatial trends and can introduce additional biases and edge effects. instead, a method termed manor  has previously been presented  <cit> , which accounts for both local, abrupt spatial signal changes, as well as continuous intensity gradients. manor combines a spatial segmentation procedure with a two-dimensional loess regression and is optimized to preserve the true biological signal when correcting for spatial biases. it is publicly implemented in an r package . we consider manor the most suitable algorithm for the correction of spatial biases in microarray experiments in general. although originally implemented in spatial normalization of array-cgh data, our demonstration of widespread spatial biases in various sorts of microarray experimental procedures makes it relevant also to non-cgh experiments, for which it comparably removes autocorrelation periodicities .

identification of aneuploidy by autocorrelation
in addition to periodic autocorrelations, we observed many experiments with long tracts of continuously high autocorrelation , indicative of segments of multiple genes with similar data measurement levels. we suspected that aneuploidies or segmental copy number variations in the cells used for the experiments may be the reason for the presence of these patterns in the data. consistently, all previously confirmed aneuploid strains used in a study of gene expression in deletion mutants  <cit>  exhibited continuously strong autocorrelation tracts . strains with segmental duplications of  <dig> and  <dig> genes were also clearly identified by high autocorrelation tracts, proportional in gene distance to the length of the genetic alteration . a similar pattern was observed in many comparative genome hybridization  experiments , presumably representing the genetic alterations in the studied strains.

several of the long autocorrelation tracts we observed in our expression data assembly may represent additional cases of aneuploidies in the strains used for generating the data. however, others occur in experiments in which the control and experiment samples were taken from genetically-identical culture samples. we suspected that the autocorrelation patterns observed in these cases may be the result of another ramification of the effect of specific spatial biases coupled to microarray design. indeed, we found that narrow and long spatial biases in the smd microarray design can cause such an aneuploidy-like signal, which is nonetheless spurious in origin . thus, spatial biases can lead to false identification of genetic alterations in studies based on non-random microarray designs.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have demonstrated the utility of autocorrelation analysis for the efficient identification and filtering of spurious chromosomal-position-dependent correlations. in particular, we provide compelling evidence for the prevalence of large spatial biases in microarray studies, to an extent unappreciated thus far. our conclusions are based on data simulations, the stochastic nature of spurious autocorrelation patterns, and the existence of spurious correlations in spotted as well as affymetrix microarray experiments. although we have identified spatial biases by their manifestation in the form of periodic autocorrelation, which in itself depends on microarray design, their frequency of occurrence should be constant over many microarray platforms irrespective of design. our simulations suggest that spatial biases are commonly associated with signal changes of a factor of two or more over large portions of the data, which represents a significant extent of bias and a potent source of false data. spatial biases can accordingly explain the many cases of poor or suboptimal reproducibility in microarray studies. we suggest that normalization methods that correct for spatial biases, such as manor  <cit> , should be routinely applied when analyzing microarray data. re-analysis of existing data should also consider such spatial biases and their effect on the data. finally, future improvement of microarray data quality should concentrate on overcoming spatial biases, mainly by optimization of hybridization procedures.

