BACKGROUND
from microorganisms to animals and plants, cells adjust their metabolic operations to fulfill the demand of energy and biosynthetic precursors. in nature this is a challenging task because substrate availability is typically limited and often changing in its composition. to ensure viability on a broad palette of chemically heterogeneous substrates, cells have developed intertwined enzymatic networks that also confer robustness against genetic mutations. optimum redistribution of molecular fluxes in metabolism is achieved by multilevel regulation circuits. in recent years, experimental measurement of in vivo metabolic fluxes has attracted much attention. for example, in biotechnology metabolic fluxes are utilized to lead rational strain engineering, whereas systems biologists assess fluxes to unravel targets and mechanisms of metabolic regulation.

metabolic fluxes are often estimated using flux balance analysis   <cit> . in fba, fluxes are solved by fixing some objective for the metabolism of an organism, such as maximal growth. then, a corresponding optimization problem is solved by using the stoichiometry of the metabolic network as a constraint to the optimization. fba is a viable method for studying the metabolic capabilities of an organism, but as a method for estimating metabolic fluxes it has some weaknesses. first, selecting the correct objective for the metabolism is far from trivial  <cit> , especially when mutant strains or behaviour in exceptional environmental conditions is analyzed. second, there can be many biologically interesting flux distributions that give an optimal solution to the optimization problem of fba.

a more direct method for experimental determination of the metabolic fluxes is to feed an organism with 13c labelled substrate, observe the fate of 13c atoms in the cell at isotopomeric steady state with mass spectrometry  or nuclear magnetic resonance  measurements, and then infer the metabolic fluxes from the measurements. the rationale behind these 13c tracer experiment is that, often alternative pathways between metabolites in the network manipulate the carbon backbones of the metabolites differently, thus inducing different 13c labelling patterns to metabolites. then, constraints to fluxes complementary to the basic stoichiometric constraints can be derived by measuring the relative abundances of different labelling patterns in the metabolites.

the main difficulty in applying the procedure in practice is that current measurement techniques only can produce incomplete information about relative abundances of different 13c labelling patterns, the isotopomer distributions, of some metabolites, usually protein bound amino acids in the network, and no isotopomer information at all for many intermediate metabolites of interest  <cit> . this imposes a highly non-linear dependency between the measured isotopomer distributions of the metabolites and the metabolic fluxes, which is very challenging to solve both computationally and statistically.

currently, two main approaches for 13c metabolic flux analysis exist. in the global isotopomer balancing approach, the problem of estimating metabolic fluxes from the isotopomer measurements is formulated as a nonlinear optimization problem, where candidate flux distributions are iteratively generated until they fit well enough to the experimental 13c labelling patterns  <cit> . global isotopomer balancing is a versatile approach that can be applied with all network topologies, substrate labelling distributions and with all measurement techniques – also in short time scales where isotopomeric steady state is not reached  <cit> . however, due to the nonlinearity of the problem, it is hard to make sure that the optimization has converged to a global optimum and that this optimum is unique  <cit> . also, to apply the global isotopomer balancing approach successfully, one usually needs comprehensive information on the uptake and production rates of external metabolites, as well as about biomass composition of the cell. this information can be hard to obtain, especially in large-scale experiments where dozens to hundreds of mutants or different organisms are comparatively analyzed  <cit> .

a metabolic flux ratio approach   <cit>  for 13c metabolic flux analysis has traditionally relied more on the expertise of a domain specialist than advanced computational techniques. in metabolic flux ratio analysis, the aim is to write linear equations constraining the ratios of fluxes producing the same metabolite. the equations are manually derived by domain experts, by careful  inspection of metabolic networks. the motivation for the approach is that, in many cases, the knowledge about the flux ratios already offers enough information about the response of an organism to its environment.

the ratio of competing fluxes or pathways producing the same metabolite is easy to understand, and in many cases easier to estimate reliably than all the fluxes in the network – some interesting flux ratios might be obtainable from scarce measurement data or from the incomplete model of metabolic network that would not allow a reliable estimation of a complete flux distribution using global isotopomer balancing. flux ratios can also be obtained without knowing the uptake and production rates of external metabolites of the biomass composition. and, if enough non-redundant flux ratios are identified, it is possible to use this information to construct and solve an equation system for the full flux distribution of the metabolic network  <cit> .

as a downside, manually derived flux ratio equations depend heavily on the topology of a metabolic network, measurement capabilities and substrate labelling distributions. thus, each time a new organism or new mixture of substrates are introduced, flux ratio equations have to be verified and new ones possibly derived. to date, flux ratio equations are manually derived for central carbon metabolisms of three model organisms on glucose, s. cerevisiae  <cit> , b. subtilis  <cit>  and for escherichia coli  <cit> . recently, flux ratio equations of s. cerevisiae were modified for pichia pastoris grown on glycerol and on glycerol/methanol mixtures  <cit> . facilitating the process of deriving flux ratio equations for other organisms and other substrates clearly calls for automatic tools. also, many times the  assumptions made by the expert in the derivation and solution of flux ratio equations, are not reported in detail. thus, it is often nontrivial to verify the correctness of given flux ratio equations.

in this article we present a novel automatic framework for deriving flux ratios when the measurement data and the model of metabolic network are given as input. the framework is based on the graph algorithmic flow analysis of metabolite fragments in the metabolic network  <cit>  and on the interpretation and manipulation of both nmr and ms data with vector space techniques  <cit> . the goal of our work is to combine the good aspects of global isotopomer balancing and manual flux ratio analysis: like global isotopomer balancing, our framework is systematic and can be applied with all network topologies, substrates and substrate labelling distributions and with all current isotopomer measurement techniques. thus, laborious and error-prone manual inspection of metabolic network models and the tailoring of the equation systems constraining the fluxes separately for each experimental setting required in manual flux ratio techniques can be avoided. on the other hand, during the automated construction of flux ratios we resort to linear optimization techniques only, combined with graph algorithms of polynomial worst case time complexity. thus, our framework is computationally efficient and avoids problems with local and multiple optima frequently met in global isotopomer balancing. the trade-off of this philosophy is, however, the requirement of measuring isotopomer distributions of metabolites more rigorously to obtain full flux distribution. given insufficient measurements, our framework can solve the flux ratios only for some, but not necessary for all metabolites in the network. we expect that, especially as measuring isotopomers of intermediate metabolites becomes more routine, our framework will be an attractive method for 13c flux analysis.

RESULTS
in this section we demonstrate the applicability of the presented framework by empirical results. we show that our automatic and systematic framework is able to reproduce flux ratios previously determined by a manual analysis from nmr and gc-ms isotopomer measurements of protein bound amino acids of s. cerevisiae and b. subtilis on glucose. thus, we can conclude that the presented framework is powerful enough to provide interesting flux ratio information in the well studied experimental settings. furthermore, we show that the framework can be applied to study less known experimental conditions without any further effort by discovering the flux ratios that can be estimated when b. subtilis is grown on malate instead of glucose. the results of this analysis show that our framework can detect profound effects the change of external substrate can have to the flux ratio computations. the results indicate that our framework is a good tool to study flux ratios of microbes in different experimental conditions – a claim that will try to validate with more experiments in our further work.

we obtained nmr and gc-ms labelling data, where isotopomer distributions of protein bound amino acids of s. cerevisiae and b. subtilis grown on different conditions were measured. then, available flux ratios were computed with the presented framework. models of metabolic networks applied in the analysis can be found from the supplementary material of this article: additional files  <dig> and  <dig> contain the sbml model file and a visualization of the model of s. cerevisiae, while additional files  <dig> and  <dig> contain the same information for b. subtilis. in the models, some simplifications common to 13c metabolic flux analysis were applied by pooling metabolites whose isotopomer pools can be assumed to be fully mixed . pooling of metabolites was carried for  the three pentose-phosphates in ppp,  phopshotrioses between ga3p and pep in glycolysis, and  oxaloacetate and malate in the tca cycle. in these cases, pooling is justified by the existence of fast equilibrating, bidirectional reactions between the listed intermediates and the empirical evidence that their isotopic labeling is not distinguishable with the current analytical tools. cofactor metabolites were excluded from the model as cofactor specificities and activities are not accurately known for many reactions.

the bulk of the carbon mappings of reactions in the metabolic network were provided by arm project  <cit> . carbon mappings from amino acids to their precursors were conform to  <cit>  and  <cit> . before the analysis of the real measurement data, the correctness of the implementation of the framework was empirically verified by estimating flux ratios for junction metabolites in the metabolic network of s. cerevisiae from the artificial data generated by the 13c-flux software  <cit> .

nmr measurements from s. cerevisae on glucose
in the first experiment we analyzed nmr isotopomer measurement data from protein bound amino acids of s. cerevisiae that was grown on uniformly labelled glucose .

from the  <dig> measured amino acids we were able to estimate flux ratios for seven junction metabolites: oxaloacetate, pep, glycine and serine on cytosol and for oxaloacetate, acetyl-coa and pyruvate in mitochondria. furthermore, an upper bound for a ratio of ga3p molecules that have visited the transketolase reaction was obtained by manually simplifying the model to imitate the previously reported ways to manually compute the corresponding upper bound . 

the computed flux ratios were compared with the manually derived ratios  <cit> , when the assumptions made in the manual derivation of flux ratios were consistent with the model used. in all cases, automatically computed flux ratios agreed well with the manually derived ratios . differences between the estimations can be explained by numerical instabilities and by differences in computational procedures: in manually derived ratios the estimations are based on the breakage of a single bond in different routes leading to a metabolite while in our framework more isotopomer information is possible utilized in the estimation.

directly comparable flux ratios computed from the nmr data by the framework presented in this paper and by manual flux ratio analysis .

gc-ms measurements from b. subtilis on glucose
in the second experiment we analyzed gc-ms isotopomer measurement data from protein bound amino acids of bacillus subtilis that was grown on uniformly labelled glucose .

in comparison to eukaryotic s. cerevisiae, the metabolic network of prokaryotic b. subtilis lacks cellular compartments. thus, from the point of view of 13c metabolic flux analysis, there are fewer interesting junction metabolites in the central carbon metabolism of b. subtilis where the flux ratios can be estimated. from the gc-ms measurements of  <dig> amino acids we were able to compute flux ratios for four junction metabolites – oxaloacetate, pyruvate, pep and glycine – when -glucose was used as a carbon source. furthermore, an upper bound for a ratio of ga3p molecules that have visited transketolase reaction was obtained by manually simplifying the model of the metabolic network. excluding pyruvate, we were able to compute the same ratios with -glucose as a carbon source.

we compared the computed flux ratios to ones obtained with the software fiatflux  <cit>  that is based on the manually derived analytic equations for computing flux ratios. currently, manually derived flux ratio equations for -glucose as a carbon source exist only for pep and for the upper bound to the flux through oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. in general, the flux ratios computed with different methods from the same data and with the same assumptions about the topology of metabolic network were in good agreement .  again, differences between the flux ratios estimated by different methods can be explained by numerical instabilities and by differences in isotopomer information applied during the estimation. variation in the estimated flux ratios between repeated experiments  was negligible.

directly comparable flux ratios computed from the gc-ms data described by the framework presented in this paper  and by fiatflux software  <cit> . ul denotes uniform labelling of external glucose, 1cl external glucose labelled to the first carbon position.

in silico calculability analysis of b. subtilis on malate
one of the strengths of the presented framework is that it is able to automatically produce metabolic flux ratios also when other external labelled substrates than commonly used glucose are fed to organisms. to demonstrate this ability, we applied our framework to predict what flux information would be available, if we feed b. subtilis with malate.

we applied the in silico calculability analysis  to examine which flux ratios are calculable in the best case from gc-ms measurements of amino acids, when b. subtilis is grown on -labelled malate. interestingly, our fragment flow analysis revealed that – with the reaction reversibilites in the applied model – the isotopomer distributions of ga3p, pep and pyruvate depend only on the isotopomer distribution of the fragment containing the first three carbons of oxaloacetate, but not on the relative fluxes producing these metabolites. thus, isotopomer balances for ga3p, pep and pyruvate reduce to mass balances and the ratios of fluxes producing these metabolites cannot be estimated. this somewhat surprising phenomenon is due the fact that the rearrangements of carbon chains occurring in ppp pathway will affect only to the carbon fragments that will be recycled in the upper metabolism but not the carbon fragments that can flow back ga3p, pep and pyruvate from ppp .

preliminary experiments with gc-ms data from b. subtilis grown on -labelled malate agreed with the results of fragment flow analysis: constraints to the isotopomer distributions of fluxes entering to these metabolites were identical within the limits of measurement accuracy. on the other hand, our framework was able to estimate for example the tca-cycle activity also when b. subtilis is grown on malate, just as predicted by the calculability analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this article we introduce a systematic and analytic framework for 13c metabolic flux ratio analysis. at the heart of the framework lie the techniques for flow analysis of a metabolic network and for manipulating isotopomer measurements as linear subspaces. these techniques facilitate the efficient and analytic computation of the ratios between the fluxes producing the same junction metabolite. the framework can be seen as a generalization and formalization of existing analytic methods for computing metabolic flux ratios  <cit>  where equations constraining flux ratios are manually derived. like the recent methods to improve the speed of the simulation of isotopomer distributions in the global isotopomer balancing framework  <cit> , our framework relies on graph algorithms. however, both our goals and applied techniques are quite different from these approaches. in  <cit>  and  <cit>  connected components of isotopomer graphs are discovered to divide the simulation of isotopomer distributions to smaller subtasks. in our framework, flow analysis techniques are applied to discovered metabolite fragments with equivalent isotopomer distributions in every isotopomeric steady state.

our experiments with nmr and ms data show that the framework is able to provide relevant information about metabolic fluxes, even when only constraints to the isotopomer distributions of protein-bound amino acids are measured.

thanks to recent advancements in measurement technology improving the feasibility of mass isotopomer measurements of intermediate metabolites  <cit> , we expect that the full power of the framework will be harnessed in near future. measurements from intermediates will make it possible to use larger models of metabolic networks and estimate flux ratios more accurately, without simplifying assumptions about the topology of the metabolic network or directionality of the fluxes. however, these measurements will not be easy to conduct, because of the low abundances of intermediates in the cell. thus, systematic methods for experimental planning and data quality control are required. the presented framework provides powerful tools for these tasks. first, the framework facilitates time saving in silico calculability analysis.

second, the manipulation of isotopomer measurements as linear subspaces offers a natural way for comparing measurements from different metabolites that contain overlapping information to detect inconsistencies in the measurements: it is enough to compare propagated isotopomer information in the fragments that belong to the same equivalence class. third, as ms isotopomer measurement techniques have to be developed separately for different intermediate metabolites or metabolite classes, it will be very useful to select a small subset of intermediates that gives enough information about the interesting metabolic fluxes with least experimental effort. in future research, we want to tackle this problem by generalizing our earlier experimental planning method  <cit> , to all measurement data and to realistic measurement error models.

as the presented framework for 13c metabolic flux analysis only resorts to linear optimization techniques, it is not always able to provide as much information about the metabolic fluxes as the global isotopomer balancing frameworks utilizing more powerful, nonlinear optimization techniques  <cit> , that do not necessarily converge to the global optimum. on the other hand, some flux ratios might be computable from the scarce data or incomplete model of metabolic network that does not allow global isotopomer balancing. the differences in the practical performance of different approaches require further research. we see these alternative approaches as complementary ones. a very nice goal would be an integration of our work with global isotopomer balancing: our analytic flux ratios could speed up and direct the optimization process of global isotopomer balancing, that would then fill in the flux ratios possibly missed by our framework.

