BACKGROUND
neural stem and progenitor cells have been isolated from various regions of the adult mammalian brain, including the forebrain structures subventricular zone and olfactory bulb. in the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb, neural progenitor cells are exposed to changing microenvironmental surroundings  <cit> . it is not known whether this exposure is the cause for changes in the composition and function of the progenitor cells. thus we applied proteomic analysis as large-scale, high-throughput technology based on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometric peptide fingerprinting, which allows to investigate the expression levels of several hundred of proteins simultaneously . to address the question of regional stem/progenitor cell heterogeneities, we compared the cellular proteomes of neural progenitors isolated from both regions.

in a previous study, we found that differentiation results in changes of the proteome of neural stem cells from the hippocampus  <cit> . with respect to the present study, not only differentiation, but also migration, local microenvironmental factors or intrinsic genetic programs may influence the proteome of neural progenitor cells.

the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb are connected by the rostral migratory stream , a circumscribed pathway allowing neuronal precursors to migrate tangentially from the subventricular zone to the olfactory bulb in a typical chain-like manner  <cit> . migrating neural progenitors are guided by tubular formations of astrocytes from their origin, the lateral wall of the ventricles, until they reach the olfactory bulb, where they differentiate mainly into interneurons .

the guiding astrocytes in the rms, termed "type b cells", are expressing the glial marker glial fibrillary acidic protein   <cit> . in the current concept of neurogenesis, these cells contribute to the neural progenitor/neuroblast pool, whether directly, or via a transiently amplifying intermediate form  <cit> . doetsch et al.  <cit>  have shown that gfap-positive cells of the subventricular zone can give rise to neuronal precursors and finally to granular neurons, but the overall contribution of glial cells to adult neurogenesis is still an open question under discussion  <cit> .

the differentiation pathway from gfap-positive cells may be only one of several ways by which new neurons can be generated. an alternative pathway of neurogenesis starts from non-gfap-positive precursors. however, most neurons in the brain seem to be derived from radial glial cells . it is therefore of interest to know the fraction of gfap-positive cells in undifferentiated neuronal precursor cells and whether this fraction differs between the subventricular zone to the olfactory bulb.

in the present study, we addressed the question whether neurospheres from the subventricular zone differ in their protein expression pattern from neurospheres from the olfactory bulb. therefore, we compared the proteomic profiles of neural progenitor cells isolated from the subventricular zone to those of the olfactory bulb of the adult rat brain. additionally, we compared neurosphere cultures from both regions with regard to the fraction of gfap-positive cells and their morphology to obtain insight in possible functional differences.

RESULTS
proteomic differences between subventricular zone and olfactory bulb neural progenitors
comparing the progenitor cell proteome of the subventricular zone to that of the olfactory bulb in cultured neurospheres from the adult rat brain, we found major differences in the protein composition, both with respect to protein quantity and quality. we detected a mean ± sd of  <dig> ±  <dig> protein spots in gels from the subventricular zone  and  <dig> ±  <dig> in gels from the olfactory bulb  . of these, we did not consider  <dig> spots for further evaluation, since they were only present in less than 50% of the gels, with  <dig> spots remaining. applying student's t-test for independent groups, we found  <dig> differentially expressed spots , of which  <dig> protein spots showed lower protein concentrations , whereas  <dig> protein spots showed higher concentrations  in the olfactory bulb group compared to the subventricular zone group. we identified  <dig>  of the down-regulated, and  <dig>  of the up-regulated proteins  by mass spectrometry. a total of  <dig> spots were present solely in the subventricular zone, of which we could identify  <dig> protein spots  .

s = expression only in the subventricular zone neurospheres. as = proteins identified additionally in subventricular zone precursors, but no differential expression.

with regard to the two-dimensional gels, the protein expression pattern of neurospheres from the subventricular zone differs significantly from that of neurospheres from the olfactory bulb . in order to obtain more specific information on functional aspects, we assigned proteins to several functional categories, mainly cell cycle, differentiation, folding, metabolism, signaling, and transcription. the protein expression pattern from the olfactory bulb cells showed more differentially expressed proteins involved in differentiation and microenvironmental integration.

no differences in population growth, but in marker protein expression
to identify intrinsic differences between the two progenitor cell populations, we compared the growth characteristics in  <dig> consecutive passages of the neurospheres in both the subventricular zone and olfactory bulb cultures. we did not find differences in the average time for each passage, the number of cells at start and end of the passage, population doublings, population doubling times, and frequency of population doublings .

additionally, we characterized the two progenitor cell populations by their expression of immunocytochemical marker proteins. whereas we did not find differences for the expression of the neuronal progenitor cell marker nestin, and the mature neuronal markers tubulin-beta-iii , and glucose transporter glut <dig>  we saw differences in the early neuronal marker map2b and the astrocyte marker gfap . map2b expression was not detectable in the subventricular zone progenitors, but provided a strong signal in the olfactory bulb cells.

gfap-staining shows qualitative and quantitative differences
gfap expression was present in the majority of cells of the subventricular zone, but was only minimal in the olfactory bulb progenitors. using an automated slide and image analysis system for the expression analysis of gfap in the two populations, we found that about 94% of all progenitor cells from the subventricular zone expressed the astrocytic marker protein gfap, whereas less than 1% of cells in the olfactory bulb cultures expressed gfap .

in the two-dimensional gels, the normalized gfap spot volume, which was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  relative units  in the subventricular zone neurospheres, did not differ from the volume in the olfactory bulb group, which was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  relative units  .

additionally to the quantitative differences in gfap expression, we also found morphological differences between the two populations with respect to their site of origin. the gfap-positive cells in the olfactory bulb showed an increased branching index of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  compared to the subventricular zone gfap-positive cells with  <dig>  ±  <dig>  .

discussion
proteomics
in the present study, we demonstrate major differences between the protein composition of neural progenitor cells dissected from subventricular zone and olfactory bulb. several factors may contribute to these proteome differences:  distinct progenitor cell populations may exist in the subventricular zone and olfactory bulb;  the progenitor cell proteome may respond to microenvironmental cues;  cytokinesis may change the protein composition of neural progenitor cells on their way along the rms. we cannot exclude that that there is a spatiotemporal overlap or superposition of the three mechanisms, resulting in a dynamic alteration of the proteomes. therefore, the changes in the proteome may be explained by all three hypotheses.

growth characteristics
in the current study, we did not detect differences in population growth characteristics between subventricular zone and olfactory bulb neurospheres over a series of  <dig> passages, but we found differences in the expression of marker proteins. in case of increased differentiation in the olfactory bulb, lower proliferation kinetics could be expected. on the other hand, apoptosis is a second major factor influencing the number of viable cells in both cultures. thus the unchanged proliferation kinetics may reflect a balanced ratio between proliferation and apoptosis in the neurospheres. interestingly, neural stem/progenitor cells exhibit a long-term maintenance of their differentiation potential. for example, e <dig> progenitor cells from the rat striatum did not show differences in gene expression profiles or differentiation potential after  <dig> years in culture, compared to the original cells  <cit> .

gfap-positive subpopulations
in the present study, we found that gfap was expressed both in the neurospheres from the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb. whereas the majority of cells in the subventricular zone expressed gfap, only a small fraction of cells expressed gfap in the olfactory bulb cultures. vice versa, the expression of the neuronal marker map2b was stronger in the olfactory bulb cultures. gfap is generally considered as astrocytic marker  . doetsch et al.  <cit>  reported that gfap-positive cells in the subventricular zone can give rise to neurons after migrating to the olfactory bulb.

in the present study, we found differences in the quantity and quality of gfap-positive cells in the olfactory bulb compared to the subventricular zone. there could be two explanations for these findings: first, the gfap-positive cells in the olfactory bulb retain their immature potential and can give rise to brain cells. in this case, they still have to be considered stem/progenitor cells. second, cells expressing gfap in the olfactory bulb are astrocytes. then gfap is not only a marker for "precursors" but also a marker of the astrocytic fate in the progenitor cells. again, we cannot exclude a certain overlap between both explanations, although the gfap-positive cells showed an astrocytic phenotype which may be explained by spontaneous differentiation in vitro. this is supported by the morphological differences between the gfap-positive cells from the olfactory bulb compared to those from the subventricular zone , supporting the impression of a more differentiated state of the olfactory bulb cells, also with regard to the increase in map2b-positive cells in the olfactory bulb cells.

in other studies, a regional specificity, but not commitment of neural precursor cells was reported  <cit> . in these studies, the authors proposed that progenitor cells in the subventricular zone are composed of a mixture of cell types, which become "sorted" on their way entering the different migratory pathways, e. g. tangential migration towards the olfactory bulb, or radial migration towards the cortex. in the same context, fukuda et al.  <cit>  identified neural stem cells in the hippocampus by expression of the marker protein nestin. in their study, some of the nestin-positive cells expressed gfap additionally, whereas others did not. both subtypes did also differ in their electrophysiological properties.

recently, the hypothesis of regionally different neural progenitor populations was further supported by the study of merkle et al.  <cit> , who provided evidence of distinct progenitor populations already present in the subventricular zone. the data of the present study also imply that not all progenitor cell populations are endowed with similar differentiation potential and that this may result in altered functionality of the cells.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we identified differences on the translational level of neural progenitor cells from two regions of the adult rat brain. global protein expression profiles of subventricular zone and olfactory bulb precursors differ not only in the quantity of single proteins, but also in their quality: different protein species of some proteins are expressed between the two groups and some protein species are only expressed in on of the two groups. these data indicate that microenvironmental stimuli, such as growth factors, neurotransmitters, and cell surface molecules influence the proteome in a spatial and temporally restricted manner. major cellular events such as differentiation, interaction with the extracellular matrix, or cytokinesis may contribute to these changes, since mainly proteins of the cytoskeletal system including motor filaments are differentially expressed. to this end, the progenitor cells from the subventricular zone have to synthesize new cell surface molecules to communicate with neighboring cells and with the guiding astrocytes. in addition, they have to establish new receptors and intracellular signaling pathways to allow them to interact with the cells in their target area. these changes are mirrored by the changes in protein expression.

in the present study, we also report no differences in proliferation and growth characteristics between the subventricular zone and the olfactory bulb, indicating that the proliferative cells of both cultures retained their stem/progenitor potential. on the other hand, we found differences in gfap expression between the two populations. there are distinct morphological differences between the neurosphere cultures from olfactory bulb and subventricular zone, supporting the idea of at least two distinct progenitor cell populations in the brain, differing in their protein composition.

in conclusion, our data support the hypothesis of several progenitor cell subpopulations endowed with different sets of cellular proteins. it remains unknown whether environmental factors or inherent genetic programs are responsible for the proteome changes described in the present study.

