BACKGROUND
it is well documented that essentially all living systems spontaneously generate and emit very low levels of light . this ultra-weak bioluminescence is generally characterized by emission of photons  at an intensity less than 10- <dig> w.cm- <dig> . this is in contrast to the more widely known bioluminescence from animals that visibly glow, such as certain species of jellyfish, fireflies and beetles, which employ fluorescent proteins and/or luciferase enzymes to catalyse reactions that result in chemiluminescence. ultra-weak bioluminescence is generally considered to result from oxidative chemistry occurring within cells  <cit> , though in most cases, the source of observed emissions has not been identified. nevertheless, changes in emission levels in response to stress – particularly oxidative stress – have been observed in many systems, including bacteria  <cit> , plants  and animals  <cit> . for this reason, measurement of ultra-weak bioluminescence may be a useful non-invasive technique to monitor rapid perturbations to cellular activity and for early detection of diseased and damaged cells.

in plants, increases in spontaneous low-level luminescence have been observed in response to pathogen infection  <cit> , salt stress  <cit> , osmotic stress  <cit>  and mechanical damage or wounding  <cit> . it is suggested that luminescence is produced by singlet oxygen and excited carbonyl species generated as a result of lipid peroxidation reactions  <cit> . lipid peroxidation in wounded and pathogen-infected plant tissues is a common consequence of the generation of ros, which also act as signals to induce plant defence responses  <cit> .

quantitative measurements of such ultra-weak photon emissions are normally obtained using sensitive photomultiplier tubes as photon counting devices. however, more recently, 2-dimensional photomultiplier tubes and cooled charge-coupled device  cameras have also been employed as a means of imaging the spatial distribution of light emission from diseased and damaged plant tissues  <cit> . the clearest images were obtained by chen et al.,  <cit> , using a micro-channel plate coupled to a cooled ccd to image light captured through a lens. however, the acquisition time required for what is a relatively weak signal, was  <dig> hour, preventing a detailed temporal investigation of stress-induced bioluminescence.

here, we present a novel configuration of a cooled ccd that enables high sensitivity, high resolution 2-dimensional imaging with short integration times. we demonstrate the utility of the system to image and quantify delayed chlorophyll fluorescence and wound-induced luminescence from plant leaves.

RESULTS
construction of a luminescence imager
the experimental imaging set-up, shown in figure  <dig>  essentially consists of a glass sample stage coupled to a cooled ccd with fibre optics. this configuration enables maximal capture of light emitted from one side of a flat sample placed on the stage by avoiding the inevitable light dispersal associated with lens-based systems. the system is useful for imaging bioluminescence from flat samples such as plant leaves or cells grown transparent culture vessels or on solid supports such as microscope slides or membranes. by analysing the data captured from the ccd, it is possible to estimate the number of photons detected per unit area over a very wide dynamic range. we routinely measured emission levels in the region of  <dig> photons/sec/mm <dig> from wounded leaves . in addition to its high sensitivity, the imager is significantly less expensive than equipment based on photomultiplier tubes.

imaging delayed chlorophyll fluorescence
delayed chlorophyll fluorescence is a well known phenomenon that is the result of emission of photons from excited chlorophyll molecules following transfer of leaves to the dark. it is generally measured using devices such as photomultiplier tubes and in principle, can be detected by existing lens-based ccd imaging systems. we first tested the spatial and temporal resolution of our system by imaging delayed chlorophyll fluorescence from leaves of arabidopsis thaliana and tradescantia albiflora . the image of a leaf from a variegated t. albiflora plant clearly indicates a dependence on chlorophyll for the emission to occur, since white, non-pigmented regions of the leaf do not emit light . bright images could be obtained with relatively short exposure times of 1– <dig> minutes. delayed chlorophyll fluorescence rapidly subsided between  <dig> and  <dig> minutes after transfer to dark. the absolute level of delayed chlorophyll fluorescence in arabidopsis leaves varied greatly, generally appearing to be lower later in the day.

spatial and temporal resolution of ultra-weak luminescence in wounded leaves
delayed chlorophyll fluorescence produces relatively strong light emission compared to typical levels of ultra-weak bioluminescence. to test the sensitivity of our equipment, we wanted to try to image these lower level emissions. several previous reports had indicated that mechanical wounding increases ultra-weak luminescence from plant leaves, but studies on the temporal and spatial nature of this phenomenon are limited. we used a haemostat to inflict crushing wounds on arabidopsis leaves and imaged them over a time course by making successive 5-minute exposures. in many experiments, no wound-induced luminescence could be seen in the first  <dig> minutes after transfer to the imager, since it was masked by delayed chlorophyll fluorescence. after this initial period however, photon emission was much more intense around the wounded tissue. in other experiments, where delayed chlorophyll fluorescence was lower, signals could be seen even in the first exposure. results from such an experiment are shown in figure  <dig> and in an accompanying extended animation . in the first image, which includes an unwounded control leaf and two leaves each wounded twice across the lamina, striking wound-induced luminescence can be seen above a general background of delayed chlorophyll fluorescence . in the two subsequent  <dig> min exposures, chlorophyll fluorescence has subsided, whilst the wound-induced luminescence remains high . the serrated pattern of the haemostat surface is clearly reflected in the pattern of luminescence from the leaf, with areas of greater damage exhibiting maximal photon emission. in general, we observed that induced luminescence is strongest immediately after wounding and then gradually decays over a period of an hour or more.

origin of wound-induced luminescence
in order to understand more about the origin of the luminescence emitted by wounded leaves, we used coloured filters to investigate its spectral characteristics. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  a red filter , which transmits visible light of wavelengths greater than  <dig> nm, was effectively transparent with respect to the light emitted from wound sites, whereas blue and green filters , which absorb light in the region of  <dig> –  <dig> nm, caused a significant reduction in signal reaching the detector when placed between the wounded leaf and the sample stage. interestingly, a different blue filter , which transmits light above  <dig> nm, did not significantly affect luminescence . these results suggest that light emitted from wounded arabidopsis leaves has a wavelength between  <dig> and  <dig> nm, i.e. the red region of the visible spectrum. this is consistent with typical fluorescence from chlorophyll . to test whether chlorophyll might be the source of wound-induced photon emission, we used the carotenoid biosynthesis inhibitor, norflurazon, to generate photobleached leaves lacking chlorophyll  <cit> . compared with equivalent leaves from control plants, these white leaves failed to luminesce following wounding, except in remaining chlorophyll-containing areas . together, these results demonstrate that light emission from wounded leaves is chlorophyll-dependent. since luminescence occurs in the dark, and extends for times well beyond delayed chlorophyll fluorescence, we conclude that excitation energy produced by some wound-induced process is transferred to chlorophyll and emitted as light. one possible source of such energy might be products of oxidative damage, such as excited triplet carbonyls produced during lipid peroxidation  <cit> .

temperature-dependence of wound-induced luminescence
that delayed chlorophyll fluorescence exhibits temperature-dependence has been shown previously in several systems  <cit> . since we determined that chlorophyll is the major source of light emission from wounded leaves, we investigated whether wound-induced luminescence might also be affected by temperature. application of heat to the sample via a foil heater in the lid of the sample chamber significantly increased the intensity of luminescence over the tested temperature range. without applied heat, the temperature of the sample stage was approximately 7°c, when only low levels of luminescence could be detected. luminescence increased significantly upon activation of the heater, resulting in an increase in the temperature of the sample stage to something in the region of 20°c. this phenomenon is illustrated in figure  <dig>  and in an accompanying extended animation .

furthermore, we found that heating could activate luminescence in leaves wounded up to  <dig> hours before imaging. for example, figure  <dig> shows a series of images from an experiment in which leaves were wounded at different times before imaging. without heating, only the leaf wounded immediately before imaging showed detectable wound-induced luminescence, and this emission decayed to very low levels within  <dig> min. after  <dig> mins, heating was applied to the sample chamber, and within  <dig> minutes, wounds applied immediately,  <dig> mins and  <dig> hour before the start of imaging were clearly visible, with a faint emission also detectable from a wound applied to the leaf  <dig> hours before the start of imaging  was captured over  <dig> hours after wounding this particular leaf). this phenomenon is reminiscent of the light emission measured during thermoluminometry  <cit> . thermoluminescence is a chlorophyll-dependent light emission observed at high temperatures , which, like ultra-weak bioluminescence, is attributed to singlet oxygen and triplet carbonyls produced by lipid peroxidation during oxidative stress  <cit> . coupled with the results above, these data suggest that temperature increases the rate of decay of excited triplet carbonyls, and that the energy released is transferred to chlorophyll and emitted as light. there may also be an additional temperature-dependent component in the rate of emission of light from excited chlorophyll, as observed for delayed fluorescence  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the novel configuration of cooled ccd that we have used in this study to capture 2-dimensional images of plant leaves provides excellent temporal and spatial resolution of bioluminescence/chemiluminescence processes in biological materials, which are important markers of various forms of stress and disease. using this system, we are able to define the origin of wound-induced luminescence from plant leaves as chlorophyll, and suggest that this arises via the temperature-dependent release of energy from excited triplet carbonyls produced by oxidative stress.

