BACKGROUND
the genus azospirillum  encompasses free-living bacteria that can improve the growth of many economically important plants, mainly cereals . therefore, these microorganisms are considered as plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria . species of this genus are widely distributed in nature, living in soils of tropical, subtropical and temperate regions all over the world. several aspects of their physiology seem to be related to a plant stimulatory effect, notably their ability to synthesize phytohormones. although these microorganisms are able to fix atmospheric nitrogen, the exact contribution of this process to plant growth is still disputable  <cit> .

so far, fifteen species of the azospirillum genus have been described . however, most research efforts have been dedicated to the species azospirillum brasilense, neglecting the potential offered by the biological diversity of this genus.

the bacterium a. amazonense, the focus species of this study, was initially isolated from forage grasses grown in the amazon region. further studies revealed its broad ecological distribution, as it is also found in association with the roots of gramineous plants like rice, maize, sugarcane and sorghum  <cit> . this species is phylogenetically closer to azospirillum irakense and rhodospirillum centenum  than to a. brasilense. unlike the latter, a. amazonense can use sucrose as a sole carbon source and is better adapted to acid environments  <cit> .

in order to access the valuable information that genomic sequences can provide on the physiology of azospirilla, there have been independent efforts by research groups in sequencing their genomes. currently, the genomes of three members of the azospirillum-r. centenum group are available: azospirillum sp. b <dig>  <cit> , a. brasilense sp <dig>  <cit>  and r. centenum sw  <cit> . although many years have passed since the discovery of a. amazonense, there is scarce information about this species. nevertheless, a recent study under greenhouse conditions showed that especially a. amazonense y <dig>  contributed to the growth of rice plants by means of biological nitrogen fixation  <cit> , showing its potential for use as an agricultural inoculant. therefore, the objective of our study was to sequence the a. amazonense y <dig> genome and to analyze specific regions that could exert fundamental roles in its survival in the soil and in its ability to promote plant growth.

RESULTS
general features of the a. amazonense draft genome database
the a. amazonense y <dig> presents four replicons with the following estimated sizes:  <dig>  mbp,  <dig>  mbp,  <dig>  mbp and  <dig>  mbp  <cit>  the genomic g+c content of a. amazonense y <dig> is  <dig> %. the draft genome sequence consists of  <dig> . <dig> bp divided in  <dig> contigs. the average gene length is  <dig>  currently, there are  <dig> predicted cds, where  <dig> have sequence similarity to known genes,  <dig> are homologs to genes of unknown function and  <dig> are hypothetical genes exclusive to a. amazonense.

taxonomic features of a. amazonense
in this study, a phylogenetic tree was constructed using the 16s rdna sequences from microorganisms belonging to the orders rhodospirillales and rhizobiales . the resulting phylogenetic tree clearly shows a split between these orders. the outermost clade containing all the azospirillum species divides in two main subclades: one containing a. amazonense, a. irakense, rhodocista pekingensis and r. centenum, and another containing the other azospirillum species. this result is in agreement with previous studies, showing the close evolutionary relationship between a. amazonense and r. centenum  <cit> , and is also supported by the greater number of a. amazonense genes  with best blast hits  to r. centenum genes.

another relevant feature of the 16s rdna phylogenetic reconstruction is that r. centenum does not cluster with other rhodospirillum species, suggesting that the genus nomenclature of r. centenum is not appropriate, as has been pointed out by previous publications  <cit> .

carbon metabolism
azospirilla display versatile carbon metabolism in order to support their lives in the soil. a. amazonense is capable of growing on various disaccharides, hexoses and pentoses and a previous study suggested that a. amazonense is able to catabolize carbohydrates exclusively through the entner-doudoroff pathway   <cit> . the genes encoding the key enzymes of this pathway, 6-phosphogluconate dehydratase and 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-phosphogluconate aldolase  , were found in the a. amazonense genome and seem to be organized as an operon. this same study also suggested that the glycolysis pathway  was inoperative in a. amazonense, because no activity of 6-phosphofructokinase and fructose bisphosphate aldolase was detected in crude extracts  <cit> . however, predicted genes encoding those enzymes were found in the a. amazonense genome . therefore, although the genomic approach indicates that most probably a. amazonense is also able to consume carbohydrates via glycolysis, this catabolic feature should be experimentally re-tested.

as stated previously, one of the main differences between a. amazonense and a. brasilense is that a. amazonense is capable of consuming sucrose as the sole carbon source  <cit> . in the genome of a. amazonense, a predicted gene that codes for a putative α-glucosidase was identified . this enzyme converts sucrose to glucose and fructose, substrates that can be promptly consumed by catabolic pathways.

the a. amazonense genome also harbors homologs of the genes salb and sala of a. irakense . these genes encode β-glucosidases, enzymes implicated in the acquisition of glucose by means of the hydrolysis of aryl-β-glucosides, such as salicin  <cit> .

bacteria of the genus azospirillum produce high levels of poly-β-hydroxybutyrate , the energy and carbon storage source utilized under nutritional stress conditions  <cit> . the essential genes for phb biosynthesis are present in the a. amazonense genome: phba , phbb  and phbc  . furthermore, the phaz gene that encodes a phb depolymerase , the first enzyme of the phb degradation pathway, was also found in its genome.

one of the most surprising features of the a. amazonense genome is the presence of a gene cluster implicated in carbon fixation  . the main genes of this cluster are the genes cbbl and cbbs, and they encode, respectively, the large and small subunits of ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate carboxylase . this enzyme is responsible for the incorporation of carbon dioxide in a molecule of ribulose- <dig> -bisphosphate, generating two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate, which can subsequently be used in biosynthetic pathways. a phylogenetic analysis of the concatenated rubisco small and large subunits of a. amazonense revealed that they belong to the form ic of rubiscos . this type of enzyme is commonly found in α-proteobacteria and it is adapted to environments with medium to high co <dig> and the presence of o <dig>   <cit> . so far, there have been no reports showing that a. amazonense has autotrophic behavior. however, from the azospirillum group, at least r. centenum and a. lipoferum are known to be capable of growing autotrophically by means of rubisco  <cit> , unlike azospirillum sp. b <dig> and a. brasilense sp <dig>  which do not contain form i or ii of rubiscos  encoded in their genomes.

the rubisco phylogenetic reconstruction also indicated the close relationship of the a. amazonense enzyme with those from members of the family bradyrhizobiaceae  , namely rhodopseudomonas palustris and bradyrhizobium spp. in fact, the genetic organization of the carbon-fixation cluster of a. amazonense resembles that found in bradyrhizobium sp. btai <dig>  contrasting with the genetic organization of r. centenum. these incongruities, i.e. the genetic organization and phylogenetic relationship closer to bradyrhizobiaceae members than to r. centenum, suggests that horizontal gene transfer may be an important driving force in the evolution and dispersion of rubiscos in proteobacteria.

nitrogen metabolism
azospirillum species are able to utilize distinct nitrogen sources, including ammonia, nitrate, nitrite, dinitrogen and amino acids  <cit> . the a. amazonense species has several genes implicated in nitrogen metabolism, which encode transporters, enzymes and regulatory proteins .

ammonia is the central compound of nitrogen metabolism and the preferred nitrogen source of many microorganisms. in general, nitrogen sources other than ammonia are converted into it to be assimilated  <cit> . the a. amazonense genome contains genes that are implicated in this conversion of alternative nitrogen sources, like nitrate/nitrite, urea and dinitrogen . once available, ammonia can be incorporated into the metabolism by the glutamine synthetase /glutamine:oxoglutarate aminotransferase  pathway, the genes for which are also encoded in the a. amazonense genome .

overall, the conversion of nitrogen compounds to ammonia expends some energy and, therefore, the metabolic pathways implicated in this process are strictly regulated to minimize energy waste. the central regulators of nitrogen metabolism are the pii proteins  <cit> . three pii homolog genes  were found in the a. amazonense genome . the glnk gene and the glnb gene have ortholog counterparts in azospirillum sp. b <dig>  a. brasilense sp <dig> and r. centenum. the glnk gene is upstream of the aat gene  and the glnb is upstream of the glna gene   <cit> . the third gene, glnk <dig>  which is located downstream of the amtb gene, is absent in a. brasilense sp <dig>  azospirillum sp. b <dig> and r. centenum, although this genetic association is frequently found in diverse prokaryotes  <cit> .

the pii protein interactions with transporters, transcription factors and regulatory enzymes are well-established in the literature  and the potential interaction targets found in the a. amazonense genome will be briefly discussed. one putative target is the glnd gene that codes for an uridilyl-transferase, an enzyme that uridylylates the pii proteins under nitrogen-limiting conditions  <cit> . other potential targets found in the a. amazonense genome are two ammonium transporters, encoded by the amtb genes, which in the presence of high nitrogen levels are inhibited by pii proteins  <cit> . the adenylyltransferase enzyme  which regulates glutamine synthetase via covalent modifications  <cit>  could also interact with pii proteins  <cit> .

the analysis of the a. amazonense genome revealed the presence of the ntrbc and nifa systems , which are pii-regulated signal transduction systems responsible for the coordination of genes implicated in the scavenging of alternative nitrogen sources  <cit> . both ntrc and nifa rely on the presence of the sigma n factor  to activate the transcription of specific genes  <cit> , which is also present in the a. amazonense genome .

one of the main characteristics of the azospirillum species is that they are able to fix nitrogen, i.e. convert n <dig> to ammonia, by means of the nitrogenase enzyme complex. the main genes implicated in this process are known as nif genes, and they are highly conserved among nitrogen-fixing proteobacteria  <cit> .

a preliminary blast analysis showed that the a. amazonense nif genes exhibit high similarity with genes of some species of the order rhizobiales . since these observations were unexpected, the phylogenetic history of nifh was reconstructed utilizing sequences from species of the orders rhodospirillales and rhizobiales. the resulting nifh tree  was clearly incongruent to the 16s rdna tree : in the nifh tree, a. amazonense and a. irakense grouped with bradyrhizobium sp. btai <dig>  xanthobacter diazotrophicus and azorhizobium caulinodans, instead of grouping with other azospirillum species.

the genetic organization of the nif genes between the rhodospirillales and rhizobiales bacteria is somewhat homogeneous . as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  some features of the nif cluster of a. amazonense are exclusively similar to the homolog cluster of the species bradyrhizobium sp. btai <dig>  such as the presence of three conserved hypothetical genes that are indicated by the numbers  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  on the other hand, azospirillum sp. b <dig> and a. brasilense have the aerc gene between the nifhdk and nifenx operons and the drag and drat genes in the upstream region of the nifh gene, features not shared with the nif cluster of a. amazonense. the genes drag and drat code for a post-translational control system of the nitrogenase, which are not present in a. amazonense and r. centenum  <cit> .

the domain composition of the deduced nife and nifu proteins is also evidence that the nitrogenase complex of a. amazonense is more distantly related to azospirillum spp.  than to some rhizobiales species . the nife protein of a. amazonense  has a bacterioferritin-associated ferredoxin  binding domain , not present in the nife protein from a. brasilense sp <dig> and azospirillum sp. b <dig>  and r. palustris  . furthermore, its nifu protein is smaller than those of a. brasilense sp <dig>  azospirillum sp. b <dig> and r. palustris cga <dig> because it does not contain the bfd and an n-terminal nifu domain, which are present in the nifu protein of the latter species .

therefore, taken together, these results indicate that complex events occurred in the evolution of the nitrogenase system in these bacteria, for instance, horizontal gene transfers and/or gene duplication followed by differential gene loss, culminating in the current distribution of the nif genes among the members of these taxonomic orders.

nitrogen fixation is a very energy-demanding process and it is not surprising that the nitrogenase system is elaborately regulated. in all diazotrophic species of the proteobacteria examined so far, the transcriptional activator nifa and the sigma n alternative rna polymerase-associated factor are the master regulators of nitrogen fixation genes  <cit> . sequence motifs similar to the consensus region of sigma n and nifa binding sites are present upstream of the nifh gene, the homolog of "orf2"  of the orf2nifusvorf <dig> cluster from a. brasilense  <cit>  and the nifb gene .

energy production and conversion for nitrogen fixation
nitrogen fixation demands the systematic action of different genes. the fix genes are essential for this process, and they encompass different functional categories. these genes were found in the a. amazonense genome divided into three main clusters, namely fixabcx, fixlj-fixk and fixnoqp-fixghis.

the fixabcx genes from a. amazonense, responsible for electron transfer to nitrogenase, are located downstream of the nifw gene . as seen in figure  <dig>  this genetic cluster is highly conserved among the analyzed species, and it is tightly associated with the nif cluster. putative nifa and sigma n binding sites were found upstream of the operon fixabcx from a. amazonense , indicating that these transcription factors could be key elements for the expression of this operon. this evidence is corroborated by reports showing that the operon fixabcx is regulated by the nifa protein in a. brasilense and rhizobium spp.  <cit> .

the a. amazonense genome also possesses a gene cluster including fixlj and fixk. in symbiotic diazotrophs, the transcription of fix genes involves the oxygen-responsive fixlj two-component system. the fixl protein, in the absence of oxygen, autophosphorylates and transfers the phosphate group to fixj. finally, the phosphorylated fixj activates the expression of fixk, which activates the transcription of genes required for microaerobic growth  <cit> .

molecular nitrogen reduction requires high levels of energy under microaerobic conditions. the fixnoqp and fixghis genes encode membrane-bound cytochrome c oxidase and the redox process-coupled cation pump, respectively, which are intimately implicated in respiration under microaerobic conditions, supplying energy for nitrogen fixation  <cit> . these clusters were found in tandem in the a. amazonense genome , and they show identical organization in many diazotrophic α-proteobacteria, like r. centenum, a. brasilense sp <dig>  r. palustris and bradyrhizobium spp.

nitrogen fixation forms molecular hydrogen  as a byproduct. therefore, diazotrophic bacteria have several hydrogenase systems that are responsible for oxidizing molecular hydrogen to recover part of the energy expended during nitrogenase activity. genes encoding for an uptake nife hydrogenase  were identified in a. amazonense . furthermore, the accessory proteins required for maturation of the subunits  <cit> , encoded by the hup and hyp genes, are situated downstream of the genes encoding hupsl . this organization resembles that found in members of the order rhizobiales, where, in general, the hup and hyp genes are clustered , although their ordering is quite heterogeneous among the species. in contrast with this observation, comparisons with closely-related species showed that azospirillum sp. b <dig> and a. brasilense sp <dig> have their hup and hyp genes scattered across the genome. moreover, the bacteria r. centenum does not have the hydrogenase gene cluster.

an integrated model relating the components discussed in this section with nitrogen metabolism is depicted in figure  <dig>  taken into consideration the similarity of a. amazonense genes to those from other well-known bacterial systems.

phytohormone production
species of the azospirillum genus can positively influence plant growth and crop yield by the biosynthesis and secretion of indole-3-acetic acid   <cit> . however, although a. amazonense strains are able to synthesize iaa  <cit> , very little is known about the molecular mechanisms responsible for this process.

in a. brasilense, at least three pathways for iaa biosynthesis exist, two tryptophan-dependent pathways  and indole-3-pyruvate pathway ) and one tryptophan-independent pathway  <cit> . similarly, the genome of azospirillum sp. b <dig> contains genes responsible for the iam pathway  <cit> . however, the iaam, iaah and ipdc genes, related to the iam or ipya pathways, were not located in the a. amazonense genome. further analysis of the genome sequence of a. amazonense revealed a gene encoding a protein with about 70% similarity to nitrilases from plant species, like arabidopsis thaliana and zea mays, which catalyze the conversion of indole 3-acetonitrile to iaa  <cit> . future studies may verify if this gene is implicated in iaa biosynthesis in a. amazonense.

quorum sensing and biofilm formation
quorum sensing is an intercellular signaling process implicated in the regulation of several traits of bacteria, notably antibiotic biosynthesis and biofilm formation. the archetype for quorum sensing regulation is the luxir system, which involves an acyl-homoserine lactone  synthase  and an ahl-dependent transcriptional regulator   <cit> . the quorum sensing phenomenon of azospirillum species is strain-specific and seems to regulate functions linked to rhizosphere competence and adaptation to plant roots  <cit> .

the acyl-homoserine lactone  biosynthesis ability of forty azospirillum strains  was previously investigated, and only four a. lipoferum strains seemed of being capable of synthesizing these compounds  <cit> . however, the genome analysis of a. amazonense revealed the presence of genes encoding for luxi and luxr homologs proteins . therefore, these results indicate that a. amazonense y <dig> could synthesize ahls and respond to its presence in the environment. the genome of a. amazonense also presents a klebsiella pneumoniae ahlk homolog  <cit> , a predicted gene that codes for a putative homoserine lactonase  implicated in ahl degradation. since bacterial plant pathogens rely on quorum sensing mechanisms to infect plants  <cit> , a study of a. amazonense homoserine lactonase activity on the deleterious activities of these pathogens would be relevant.

extracellular polysaccharides are loosely bound to the cell surface and play an important role in bacterium-plant interactions through the firm and irreversible anchoring of cells to the plant roots  <cit> . in the a. amazonense genome, two genes, noej  and noel , which are related to extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis and biofilm formation, were also found  <cit> .

chemotaxis/motility
different species of azospirillum attach to and colonize plant root surfaces and these processes depend on chemotaxis. azospirilla exhibit chemotaxis towards sugars, amino acids, organic acids and root exudates  <cit> . this ability offers the bacteria the advantage of moving towards favorable nutrient conditions.

genes encoding for the central signal transduction pathway for chemotaxis  are present in nearly all motile bacteria. this signal transduction system is composed of the conserved cheawybr genes and a group of transmembrane chemoreceptors  that perceive environmental signals. homologs of the cheawybr and mcp genes were identified in the a. amazonense genome , and some che genes display similar organization to those found in the model organism escherichia coli  <cit> .

the a. amazonense che <dig> gene cluster  revealed a conserved organization with the major chemotaxis gene cluster from a. brasilense sp <dig>  which modulates cell length and clumping behavior  <cit> . apparently, this gene cluster also affects the production of exopolysaccharide and flocculation of a. brasilense. other che-like genes  are present in the a. amazonense genome, probably encoding parallel signal transduction pathways that could have distinct functions, similar to those found in r. centenum  <cit> .

it is also worth noting that genes encoding mcp domain proteins are spread throughout the a. amazonense genome. some of them were classified accordingly to their similarities to e. coli chemoreceptors. all five types of e. coli mcp receptors were found in the a. amazonense genome , and it is probable that some of them are related to cell motility by regulating the histidine kinase chea that phosphorylates a response regulator, which in turn controls the rotational direction of the flagellar motor  <cit> .

the flagellum is a key structure for the chemotactic response. in the a. amazonense genome,  <dig> flagellar genes were identified, and the majority of them are distributed among different gene clusters . the reduced flagellar gene number in a. amazonense compared to those of the closely-related a. brasilense  and r. centenum  species is in agreement with previous evidence indicating that a. amazonense synthesizes only the polar flagellum for swimming motility  <cit> .

homologs of the a. brasilense and r. centenum genes flifhn-mota-flbd-flhaf-flen  <cit>  are present in a. amazonense . the a. amazonense genome also contains other flagellar genes that display similar organization to those found in azospirillum spp. and r. centenum .

previous studies demonstrated that the transcription factor flbd is related to the biosynthesis of lateral flagella in a. brasilense and the polar flagella in r. centenum  <cit> . the presence of the flbd gene in the a. amazonense genome suggests that it could have a similar regulatory function as that found in r. centenum.

transport, antibiotics resistance and lantibiotic production
transport systems allow the uptake of nutrients and ions, excretion of end products of metabolism and communication between cells and the environment.

several components of the cationic efflux pump, the atp-binding cassette  transporter superfamily, the major facilitator superfamily  and the tonb-dependent transporters were identified in the a. amazonense genome.

tonb-dependent transport is a mechanism of active uptake across the outer membrane normally related to iron uptake, signal transduction and environmental perception  <cit> . a. amazonense has a high number of genes encoding tonb receptors  when compared with other diazotrophs such as azospirillum sp. b <dig>  and r. centenum sw . homology analyses suggest that a set of putative tonb receptors for specific substrates like ferrioxamine, cobalamin  and heme are present in this bacterium.

among the different families of transporters, only two occur ubiquitously in all kingdoms of life: the major facilitator superfamily  and the atp-binding cassette  superfamily, representing the largest and most distributed families of transmembrane proteins. mfs proteins are single polypeptide secondary carriers that utilize uniport, symport or antiport mechanisms to transport various small substrates  <cit> . the abc transporter proteins utilize energy from adenosine triphosphate  hydrolysis to carry out the uptake of essential nutrients and/or the extrusion of toxic substances  <cit> . in the a. amazonense genome, several genes encoding for putative mfs and abc transporters were identified, and they could be implicated in the transport of a wide range of putative substrates .

multidrug resistance  transporters increase drug excretion through an efflux pump, which expels a wide variety of toxic products from the cell, playing a central role in bacterial drug resistance. the mdr transporters belong to various transporter families  <cit> . in e. coli, the transport of diverse substrates out of the cell by the acrab-tolc efflux transporter can confer broad resistance to antibiotics  <cit> . the acra and acrb genes normally form an operon whose transcription is regulated by the acrr gene product, and are found in the a. amazonense genome.

putative drug resistance transporters of the qaca subfamily were found in the a. amazonense genome , which could confer resistance to monovalent and bivalent cationic lipophilic antiseptics and disinfectants such as quaternary ammonium compounds  <cit> .

further analysis revealed that, in addition to the mdr transporters, a set of genes whose products could be related to specific antimicrobial resistance are present in the a. amazonense genome. genes that code for penicillin, glyoxalase/bleomycin and tetracycline resistance are also present in the a. amazonense genome . these findings corroborate the experimental data that shows that a. amazonense is tolerant to tetracycline and resistant to penicillin  <cit> .

lantibiotics are peptide-derived antibacterial substances produced by some bacteria, and are characterized by the presence of unusual amino acids like lanthionines and dehydrated amino acids  <cit> . lantibiotic biosynthesis is frequently coregulated as part of a stress response when cells enter the late-log or stationary phase  <cit> . most lantibiotics exert their antibiotic effect by either forming pores in the target cell membrane or by inhibiting cell wall synthesis, and many lantibiotics are bactericidal against a variety of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . genes related to lantibiotic synthesis were found in a. amazonense genome .

the genes implicated in antibiotic resistance and in lantibiotic production are probably essential for successful establishment of this microorganism in the soil due to constant contact with niche competitors like fungi and other bacteria.

bacteriophytochrome
the a. amazonense genome also harbors a bacteriophytochrome gene . similarly, azospirillum sp. b <dig> has two genes that code for distinct types of bacteriophytochromes  <cit> , and bradyrhizobium sp. possesses three bacteriophytochrome genes  <cit> . in plants, phytochromes regulate the metabolic response to the light environment, but a variety of functions is found in other organisms  <cit> . the bacteriophytochromes in r. palustris regulate the biosynthesis of the photosynthetic apparatus  <cit> , while in deinococcus radiodurans and r. centenum, they regulate pigment biosynthesis  <cit> . subsequent studies must be carried out to understand the role of the bacteriophytochrome in a. amazonense physiology.

CONCLUSIONS
in order to thrive, bacteria must adapt readily to environmental shifts by means of a wide variety of genotypic and phenotypic accommodations  <cit> . the rhizosphere is a good example of a dynamic environment, where fluctuations in its biological and chemical activities demand an appropriate response from its inhabitants. the species a. amazonense is a free-living plant growth-promoting rhizobacterium that is found in association with plants of agricultural importance. in this study, we identified a series of a. amazonense genes that could be essential for adaptation to the competitive environment of the rhizosphere. its wide genetic repertoire confers a versatile metabolism , as well as different mechanisms of perceiving and exploring its surroundings. these characteristics could directly influence plant growth, for instance, by providing nitrogen and stimulatory compounds to plants. another important finding was the greater similarity of some genes, e.g. nitrogenase and rubisco genes, to genes of members of the order rhizobiales than to genes from other azospirillum species. this evidence illustrates the genetic plasticity of this species and indicates that evolutionary phenomena like horizontal gene transfer could be fundamental for adaptation to its environment.

the major impact of this work will be to guide subsequent studies for a better understanding of the potential of a. amazonense.

