BACKGROUND
somatic mutations in multicellular organisms can lead to genetically mosaic individuals  <cit> . these mutations occur in a somatic cell line and are due to dna sequence changes, chromosomal aberrations or epigenetic alterations of dna  <cit> . whereas the genetic changes are interesting, some somatic mutations are truly remarkable because of the striking phenotypic changes that result. examples include the different coloured flowers of japanese morning glory   <cit>  or the disease phenotype associated with cancer in humans  <cit> . furthermore, many of our horticultural industries are based on somatic mutations: nectarines are a genetic variant of the peach  and have co-occurred on a single tree since  <dig>  <cit> .

theoretical models predict that genetic mosaics should comprise just 5% of a clonal plant population and this rate should be much lower for animals  <cit> . this is supported by the data on worldwide cancer rates with approximately  <dig> % of the human population having a detected cancer  <cit> . therefore, genetic mosaics should be hard to identify, particularly if they are not associated with a phenotypic change or if the phenotypic change is cryptic . very few genetic mosaics have been described among non-clonal plants and those that have are in crop species, for example peach and nectarine  <cit> . striking mosaics have been detected in three eucalyptus species; e. radiata <cit> , e. melliodora <cit>  and e. sideroxylon <cit> , which all vary in foliar chemical composition. long lived forest trees, such as eucalyptus, can accumulate somatic mutations, which may be favourable under certain biotic or abiotic conditions. these mutations may then persist and can influence interactions with other organisms.

mosaic eucalyptus trees provide a unique opportunity to investigate specific biosynthetic pathways without the usual challenge of variation between individuals. the transcriptome is one of the best places to look for functional genetic differences because it represents expressed genes and varies with changing conditions  <cit> . the transcriptomes of different tissues of the same individual are qualitatively and quantitatively different  <cit> , as is the transcriptome of the same tissue from different individuals  in similar conditions  <cit> . despite this, comparative approaches have succeeded in measuring the response of gene expression to specific changes in the environment, such as drought or salinity stress  <cit> . comparative transcriptomics approaches can employ a variety of technologies to compare and contrast the transcriptomes of two samples, with the aim of identifying pathways or specific genes that differ with the variation in environment  <cit> . this experimental design has become increasingly popular with the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies, and is especially useful for non-model organisms as it does not require a reference genome  <cit> .

we use comparative transcriptomics to investigate differential gene expression, using gene set enrichment analysis , between leaves of two chemically different branches of a mosaic eucalyptus melliodora  tree. this tree was identified as a phenotypic mosaic in  <dig>  when edwards et al. reported differential defoliation by insect herbivores: insects defoliated most of the tree  but left one branch almost untouched   <cit> . padovan et al. reported consistent and discontinuous differences in three distinct groups of plant secondary metabolites ) between the leaves of the two chemotypes  <cit> , which have persisted since the first chemical profiling was done  <cit> . the chemical profiles of the resistant and susceptible chemotypes differ significantly in these three biosynthetically distinct classes of secondary metabolites, which supports the prediction of edwards et al. that the chemical patterns observed in the mosaic are due to a somatic mutation in meristematic tissue that was favoured during times of intense herbivory  <cit> .

here we analyse the transcriptomes of leaves collected from the two chemotypes of the e. melliodora mosaic to investigate the functional genetic differences involved in the contrasting susceptibility to herbivory. the specific aims of this study are to:

 <dig>  determine if genes of the terpene and fpc biosynthetic pathways are differentially expressed in leaves of susceptible and resistant branches

 <dig>  identify the differentially expressed genes and unique genes in the leaves from each branch

 <dig>  identify single nucleotide polymorphisms  that could be important in determining the susceptible and resistant phenotypes

RESULTS
sequencing results and transcriptome assembly
we used  <dig> technology to sequence the foliar transcriptome of the two chemotypes on the mosaic e. melliodora tree, which yielded  <dig>  <dig> reads . attempts to assemble these reads to the eucalyptus grandis genome sequence with either clc genomics workbench  or lastz  were unsatisfactory. thus we used the de novo assembly option in clc genomics workbench to assemble 88% of reads into  <dig>  <dig> contigs with an average length of 616 bp . our limited success in assembling the reads against the e. grandis genome is probably due to the long reads generated using  <dig> technology. the software  was optimised to map short reads against a genome and was unable to successfully map the longer reads generated using this method of sequencing.

 contains all reads from this library,  contains all reads over-represented in the resistant branch compared with the susceptible branch and  contains all reads over-represented in the susceptible branch compared with the resistant branch.

identifying the transcripts through blast and go classification
we used blast2go  <cit>  to identify the best blast hit and to determine the gene ontology  classification for each transcript. there were no blast hits for 30% of the contigs  and no annotation or go categories could be determined for 9% of the contigs .

we divided our data into three sets:  the reference set which contains all the transcripts sequenced from leaves of the two chemotypes,  all the transcripts over-represented in the leaves of the resistant branch compared with the leaves of the susceptible branch , and  all the transcripts over-represented in the leaves of the susceptible branch compared with the leaves of the resistant branch . datasets  and  were compiled from fold-change data generated using the expression analysis menu of clc genomics workbench with a minimum threshold of a  <dig>  fold difference in expression of the transcripts. for all three datasets most blast hits were from vitis vinifera followed by populus trichocarpa and arabidopsis thaliana, . although eucalyptus and populus are more related to each other than to vitis <cit>  and there are more genes from populus  than from vitis at ncbi  – gene database, national center for biotechnology information, u.s. national library of medicine), vitis still provided more blast hits than did populus. vitis is rich in secondary metabolites and supports the greatest diversity of terpene synthase genes after eucalyptus grandis <cit> , which may explain this result. an inherent limitation of this paper is the level of replication; there is no scope for independent replication experiments since the variation occurs within a single tree. whilst this is a limitation, the work we are doing with this tree contributes significantly to our understanding of the evolution of variation in plant secondary metabolites.

we used the three datasets to address our aims.

are terpene and fpc biosynthetic genes differentially expressed in leaves of the resistant and susceptible chemotypes?
the resistant and susceptible branches of the mosaic tree have a distinct foliar chemical profile with major differences in terpenes and fpcs  <cit> . leaves of the resistant chemotype have a higher concentration of monoterpenes and fpcs, while leaves of the susceptible chemotype have a higher concentration of sesquiterpenes   <cit> . therefore, we expected to find genes involved in the methyl erythritol pyrophosphate  pathway and fpc biosynthesis, as well as monoterpene synthases that are significantly up-regulated in the leaves of the resistant chemotype compared with those of the susceptible chemotype. in contrast, genes involved in the mevalonate  pathway and sesquiterpene synthases should be significantly up-regulated in the leaves of the susceptible chemotype compared with those of the resistant chemotype . we identified contigs that aligned to genes of interest and compared the relative expression levels in each library. as predicted, in the transcriptome of the resistant leaves there was an over-abundance of transcripts associated with the mep pathway, as well as an over-abundance of terpene synthases and fpc biosynthetic transcripts, but some individual transcripts were more abundant in the transcriptome of the susceptible leaves.

from each branch  we have reported the concentration and standard deviation across five branches  and number of compounds in the three biosynthetically distinct classes of defence chemicals: monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes and formylated phloroglucinol compounds .

we identified  <dig> different transcript sequences for putative terpene synthase transcripts, using the best blast hit, in the entire library of  <dig>  contigs: seven monoterpene synthases,  <dig> sesquiterpene synthases and three triterpene synthases. these transcripts are rare, which makes statistical analyses problematic. however, there are up to  <dig> putative terpene synthase transcripts that are differentially expressed between the two branches: two triterpene synthases, three monoterpene synthases and five sesquiterpene synthases. just two terpene synthase transcripts are more abundant in the leaves of the susceptible branch than in the resistant branch: a mono- and a sesquiterpene synthase. this is surprising given that susceptible leaves had a higher concentration of sesquiterpenes and a greater overall diversity of mono- and sesquiterpenes .

there are seven genes involved in the mep pathway, which provides the precursors for monoterpene synthesis  <cit> . we identified at least two contigs for six of the genes in the mep pathway. there are no contigs matching mcs, the fifth step in the pathway. four transcripts are more abundant in the transcriptome of the resistant leaves than the susceptible leaves . transcripts of these genes correlate strongly with monoterpene production in a closely related tree   <cit>  which is consistent with the higher concentration of monoterpenes in the leaves of the resistant chemotype than leaves of the susceptible chemotype .

there are four genes involved in the mva pathway, which provides the precursors for sesquiterpene synthesis  <cit>  and we identified contigs that align to the final two genes . all of these contigs were equally prevalent in the transcriptomes from the resistant and susceptible leaves. this is surprising since leaves of the susceptible chemotype contain higher concentrations of sesquiterpenes than those of the resistant chemotype, with the opposite pattern found for monoterpenes . several studies have shown that the precursors, ipp and dmapp, produced by the mep pathway can be transported across the plastidal membrane and used in sesquiterpene production  <cit> . this could explain the chemical patterns shown for this tree .

what other genes are differentially expressed between leaves of the resistant and susceptible chemotypes?
the two libraries from the resistant  and susceptible  chemotypes were mapped against the reference sequence of the combined libraries . gene expression in the same tissue taken from the same individual usually shows little or no difference between samples. for example the transcriptome of sperm cells taken from an arabidopsis thaliana plant share 97% identity  <cit> . even studies that compare individuals of the same chemotype tend to find few differences  <cit> : single gene null function mutants in arabidopsis showed little difference in global gene expression  <cit> . therefore, we were surprised to find a large proportion of genes differentially expressed between the two chemotypes. we found  <dig> transcripts  that were over-expressed at least 10-fold in the resistant branch, while  <dig> transcripts  were similarly over-expressed in the susceptible branch . this difference compares to the variation in gene expression found between functionally distinct tissues in the same organism  <cit> .

we further investigated specific transcripts that were differentially expressed in the transcriptomes of the two chemotypes. a  <dig>  fold threshold and a 10-fold threshold identified the same transcripts as being over and under-represented in the two chemotypes, suggesting that a major reorganisation of gene expression had occurred. the volcano plot  shows that many genes were significantly differentially expressed between leaves from the resistant and susceptible chemotypes. we used fold-change data, generated in clc genomics workbench, to compile lists of contigs over-expressed in leaves from the resistant and susceptible chemotype. there were many more genes over-expressed in leaves from the susceptible branch  compared with leaves from the resistant branch . we used fisher’s exact test to determine whether the go categories of expressed genes were significantly enriched in leaves from the two chemotypes. we used a fdr -corrected p-value of  <dig>  to determine significance of differential expression  and the standard p-value of significance to show overall patterns of differential gene expression .

type refers to the go category type: f = molecular function, p = biological processes and c = cellular component. fdr refers to the false discovery rate - corrected p-value. p-value refers to single test p-value. in the over/under column, + signifies over-represented categories and – signifies under-represented categories when compared to the reference data set .

type refers to the go category type: f = molecular function, p = biological processes and c = cellular component. fdr refers to the false discovery rate - corrected p-value and the thick horizontal line shows a significance level of  <dig>  fdr. p-value refers to single test p-value. in the over/under column, + signifies over-represented categories and – signifies under-represented categories when compared to the reference data set .

we observed an up-regulation of transcripts with trans-membrane transport and channel activity in the leaves of the resistant chemotype . transcripts with nucleotide binding, structural molecular activity and those associated with ribosomes and their complexes were down-regulated in these leaves . this suggests that metabolites are being transported across membranes  <cit>  and that there is less interaction between nucleic acids and regulators, modifiers and replication machinery resulting in a decrease in overall gene expression .

the genes up-regulated in the leaves of the susceptible chemotype, include those involved in the regulation of gene expression and metabolism, macromolecule modification and response to endogenous stimulus . these include genes with specific transferase, kinase, phosphatase and hydrolase activity . genes involved in translation and macromolecular biosynthesis were down-regulated in the leaves of the susceptible chemotype . this suggests there is a tightly controlled mechanism responding to stimuli that involves changes to gene expression and protein modification in leaves of the susceptible branch. this is expected due to the complexity of the sesquiterpene profile of the susceptible leaves: the oil from these leaves contains  <dig> sesquiterpenes, compared with seven sesquiterpenes in the foliar oil of the resistant chemotype. each of these compounds is associated with a gene which must be regulated  <cit> .

we found  <dig> contigs that are unique to the transcriptome of leaves of the susceptible chemotype and  <dig> contigs that are unique to the transcriptome of leaves of the resistant chemotype. the transcriptome of the resistant leaves contain more unique genes, excluding regulatory genes, than does that of the susceptible leaves and since these genes require control, there are also many more regulatory genes in the transcriptome of the resistant chemotype . the leaves of the resistant chemotype also contain a much higher concentration of fpcs than the leaves of the susceptible chemotype which is represented by the number of unique fpc biosynthesis genes in the transcriptome of the resistant chemotype . the number of unique terpene biosynthetic genes in the transcriptome of the resistant branch is somewhat surprising given that the leaves of the susceptible chemotype have twice the number of terpenes and the terpene concentration was much higher than the leaves of the resistant chemotype .

identifying single nucleotide polymorphisms  that could play a role in the two chemotypes
we found  <dig> putative single nucleotide polymorphisms  between the leaves of the resistant chemotype compared with the leaves of the susceptible chemotype . this is much smaller than the number of snps that differ between species: for example, the closely related e. globulus and e. nitens have  <dig> and  <dig> snps in genes of the secondary metabolism pathway  <cit>  respectively, a difference of  <dig> snps. the proportion of transitions and transversions in these  <dig> loci  matches the proportions for snps in the entire arabidopsis genome  <cit> , making it likely that these are true snps. different mutations occur at different frequencies and the observed frequencies  match the expectations . although the data set is small, it is nevertheless encouraging.

contig – position shows the contig number and the nucleotide position that is variable. in both the r allele and s allele columns, the variable nucleotides are written first followed by the number of reads at that position for each variant respectively. blast hit shows the best blast hit for each contig  and – represents contigs that had no best blast hit.

snps in two genes, identified by their best blast hit, could be involved in epigenetic regulation: methyl cpg binding domain  <dig> and histone deacetylase complex subunit sap <dig>  both of these transcripts are more abundant in leaves from the susceptible chemotype than the resistant chemotype and they are homozygous in leaves of the resistant branch, but heterozygous in leaves of the susceptible chemotype. this may be the result of differential allelic expression of certain genes in the resistant leaves compared with the susceptible leaves. in humans, mice and maize, differential allelic expression has been implicated in quantitative trait variation and gene regulation which may result in phenotypic variation  <cit> . these snps indicate a role for epigenetic regulation in the formation and maintenance of the mosaic eucalypt and that is an area for future research.

are these results representative of other phenotypic mosaics?
whilst there are only a few examples of phenotypic mosaicism in plants, and our focus has been on eucalyptus, we expect there are many more phenotypic mosaics in natural populations that are yet to be identified. in this report we have focussed on the differences in terpene biosynthetic genes and possible regulatory genes that could explain the chemical variation described  <cit>  and the patterns we have described are likely indicative of gene expression in other plants with similarly high terpene concentrations and variability. however, the idea that the two parts of a mosaic organism have very different gene expression patterns, particularly in those pathways involved in the phenotype, is likely to apply to all phenotypic mosaics.

CONCLUSIONS
long-lived modular organisms can accumulate somatic mutations over their lifetime enabling them to adjust to a changing environment. small changes to a ‘master switch’ can lead to large-scale changes to gene expression resulting in the same tissue on the same organism becoming functionally distinct. we found three lines of evidence for this in a mosaic eucalyptus melliodora tree that experiences differential herbivory as a result of chemical diversity:  <dig>  we found differential expression of terpene biosynthetic genes between the two chemotypes that could contribute to chemical variation within this plant.  <dig>  we identified many genes that are differentially expressed between the two chemotypes, including some unique genes in each branch. these genes are involved in a variety of processes within the plant and many could contribute to the regulation of secondary metabolism and thus contribute to the chemical variation between the two chemotypes.  <dig>  we identified  <dig> snps that are likely true snps and not artefacts of data collection and analysis. some of these snps occur in regulatory genes that could influence secondary metabolism and thus contribute to foliar terpene variation in this plant. whilst this research is inherently limited by sample size, the patterns we describe could be indicative of other plant genetic mosaics.

