BACKGROUND
over the last decade, neural stem cells have become a major focus of interest in the development of therapies for a range of central nervous system disorders. parkinson's disease has been perhaps the most directly pursued due to the focal and relatively well understood nature of the degeneration . however, other presently incurable conditions, such as huntington's and alzheimer's diseases, also represent potential targets for such therapies .

previous research has used a wide range of neural stem cells  from adult, fetal and embryonic origin, but mostly from rodent sources. in the case of human cells, the capacity to grow these cells while maintaining a stable phenotype across passages is limited. thus, the development of immortal cell lines to provide suitable cells in large enough numbers as and when required is an important aim. the cells of choice for this purpose are human neural stem cells , which have two defining properties: self-renewal and multipotentiality. this capacity of nscs to divide in culture and their ability to differentiate into multiple neuronal cell types makes them attractive as both a therapy for treating neurological disease and as powerful tools in the research laboratory.

whilst a variety of rodent stem cell lines have been differentiated and transplanted into various animal models  only a few earlier studies have used human embryonic or fetal stem cells and demonstrate truly functional differentiation into neurons. functional testing is essential as it has been shown that immunological characterisation of neuronal markers does not necessarily reflect functionality  <cit> . perhaps the most thorough study is that of piper et al. who demonstrated differentiation of fetal-derived nscs into neurons which they showed to have a variety of ligand and voltage-gated channels  <cit> . however, they were not fully functional as the density of voltage-dependent sodium channels was not sufficient to allow action potential generation. another study, using cultures of human fetal brain tissue, found similar results  <cit> . in serum free conditions embryonic stem cells were differentiated into tyrosine hydroxylase  containing cells which were demonstrated to release dopamine and have some of the electrical properties of neurons but again no action potentials were recorded. these cells were shown to survive in vivo in 6-hydroxydopamine lesioned rat brains  <cit> . glutamatergic and gabaergic neurons have also been differentiated from human fetal forebrain under defined conditions  <cit> . these researchers studies clearly demonstrated ligand-gated responses, although the ability to fire action potentials was not discussed. in contrast, perrier et al. directed embryonic stem cells to become dopaminergic neurons capable of firing action potentials using feeder layer co-cultures  <cit> . another successful method was developed by wu et al. in which pretreatment of fetal hnscs with a mixture of fibroblast growth factor, heparin and laminin, followed by several days of differentiation, produced cholinergic neurons which reliably fired action potentials  <cit> .

there have thus been very few reports of fully functional neurons derived from human embryonic or fetal derived stem cells. moreover a further limitation for using many fetal-derived hnscs has been their mortality when grown in culture  <cit> . for example, the cell viability in the study of piper et al. was limited at  <dig> passages before differentiation  <cit> . recently the life spans of human fetal-derived neural stem cells in culture have been enhanced by improvements in growth conditions  <cit> . however, immortalization using the myc transcription factor has proven highly effective at extending the normal life span of human nscs in vitro and maintaining a stable genotype and phenotype . long term cell expansion with associated karyotype stability is a feature of myc immortalization  <cit> . traditionally thought of as a proto-oncogene, it has been recently reported that myc may be a 'stemness' gene driving rapid proliferation yet maintain multipotentiality in stem cells  <cit> .

the aim of this study was thus to develop human neuronal stem cells which can be cultured, long-term, in a proliferative undifferentiated state so that they can be expanded as needed and then differentiated into appropriate neurons. while these cell lines themselves are purely for research and could not be used in human therapy, this study paves the way for development of therapeutic stem cell lines using similar technology. we hypothesized that, using immortalized stem cell lines, cells prevented from differentiation by the presence of growth factors would lack neuronal phenotype  <cit> , both when tested for morphological markers and electrophysiological criteria. in contrast, after removal of growth factors, differentiation would occur as expected. neurons would be detectable using morphological markers as shown previously in many preparations, but this would also be accompanied by electrophysiological maturation with the development of voltage-gated channels, allowing generation of action potentials. to this end we used two immortalized stem cell lines from two anatomically distinct brain regions: midbrain  and cortex , and developed a protocol to maximise differentiation of the midbrain-derived cell line into dopaminergic neurons as identified by immunocytochemical markers. both the cell lines used for this study were immortalized with the myc oncogene: rencell vm with v-myc while rencell cx was immortalized with c-myc. moreover, rencell vm originated from a bulk-derived culture and rencell cx from a clonal cell line.

RESULTS
phenotype and function of undifferentiated rencell vm and cx
rencell vm and cx were confirmed to carry the v-myc and c-myc transgene respectively by rt-pcr . g-banded karyotype analysis of the cell lines showed a normal human male diploid  karyotype on four independent occasions. tested on multiple passages  a normal karyotype was consistently observed, supporting the role of myc in generating karyotypically stable cell lines. under routine growth conditions both rencell vm and cx displayed an immature neural morphology : small polygonal cells with few processes that developed into a tight cobble-stone pattern when confluent. for practical reasons experiments reported here were carried out on cultures between passage  <dig> and  <dig>  rencell cx displayed a higher degree of migration within the culture dish with a more spiny-shaped morphology than rencell vm. both cell lines showed similar population doubling times of around  <dig> h in peak log-phase growth though the growth of the cx line was more linear . both undifferentiated cell lines expanded as islands of cells and show a positive signal for the neural stem cell marker nestin  <cit>  as shown by western blotting . this was confirmed by immunocytochemistry, with 100% of cells stained positively for nestin . both undifferentiated cell populations showed rare examples of spontaneously differentiated cells that were βiii-tubulin , gfap  or o1/gal c  positive .

whole cell patch clamp techniques were used to investigate the electrophysiological properties of the cells. current-voltage relationships were recorded in undifferentiated cells at 3– <dig> days after passage onto coverslips. for rencell vm, data were obtained from five cells from five different coverslips. resting membrane potential in these cells was - <dig> ±  <dig> mv and input resistance  <dig> ±  <dig> mΩ . rencell cx cells displayed similar properties with a resting membrane potential of - <dig> ±  <dig> mv and input resistance of  <dig> ±  <dig> mΩ, . under current clamp, only an ohmic change in membrane potential was seen in either cell line in response to stepping up current in  <dig> pa increments . similarly, under voltage clamp, no voltage-dependent changes in current were evoked over a range of holding potentials, - <dig> to + <dig> mv in either rencell vm or cx . indeed, both the peak and steady state current voltage relationships were linear throughout the voltage range tested , indicating the absence of voltage-activated conductances.

maturation of rencell vm and cx phenotype following differentiation
initially a standard monolayer differentiation  protocol in laminin coated wells was used with growth factors simply being omitted from the medium and differentiation continuing under the same culture conditions as had been used for growth of the undifferentiated cells . mitogen withdrawal is considered to be the simplest method to induce differentiation of neural stem cells  <cit>  and is therefore termed "standard differentiation" in our laboratory. under these conditions morphological and phenotypic changes in both cell lines were noted following initiation of differentiation. within  <dig> days both cell lines acquired clearly defined, rounded cell bodies with extensive neurite outgrowths . using immunocytochemistry following stdd, cells from all three neuronal lineages – neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes – were positively identified .

neural stem cells have the ability to grow as neurospheres  <cit> . we investigated the effect of selecting cells from neurospheres before plating onto laminin-coated wells and following the standard procedure. this was achieved by plating undifferentiated cells onto uncoated plastic to which the cell adhere weakly and migration does not occur. after leaving the cells untouched for 5– <dig> days in medium plus growth factors, many cells died but a proportion of the cells expanded into neurosphere-like structures approximately 100– <dig> μm in diameter. when such spheres were transferred to laminin-coated dishes and then kept in an undifferentiated state for a further 3– <dig> days before removal of growth factors, the cells from the sphere migrated onto the substrate during the growth phase and formed a confluent monolayer prior to initiation of differentiation.

clearly, when growth factors were removed  both rencell cx and vm cell lines differentiated and showed strong labeling for the neuronal marker βiii-tubulin . however, differences between the two stem cell lines became apparent at this stage of the pred protocol. cells from the rencell cx line spread across the dish behaving similarly to those under the standard protocol described above. in contrast, the cells from the rencell vm tended to bunch into dense patches. this could be prevented by adding camp and gdnf to the medium during the differentiation phase . subsequently this enriched medium was used for these studies for both cell lines. it seems likely that the lack of foci in the enriched medium may arise from an increase in cell motility, potentially enhanced by the addition of gdnf  <cit> , but this was not further studied.

development of dopaminergic phenotype in rencell vm neurons but not in rencell cx neurons
we were particularly interested in finding conditions in which these cell lines might differentiate into dopaminergic neurons. however, staining for the dopaminergic marker th was not observed in the differentiated rencell cx neurons . in contrast, after differentiation, strong th expression was shown in the rencell vm neurons both by western blot and immunocytochemical analysis . interestingly, the pre-aggregation differentiation  protocol  seemed to enhance the dopaminergic phenotype of the rencell vm line. although th staining alone does not provide conclusive evidence that these are indeed dopaminergic neurons, it is sufficient for the purpose of monitoring and optimization of the differentiation protocols.

electrophysiological characteristics of differentiated rencells using the pred protocol
in contrast to the undifferentiated cells described above, differentiated rencell vm consistently displayed active currents. recordings were made during the second week after differentiation. when current steps were injected at this stage, action potentials were elicited in 8/ <dig> cells tested . an additional 2/ <dig> cells tested after  <dig> days of differentiation also featured action potentials. while we did not concentrate on testing these later time points, this indicates that at least in some cases long-term survival of the neurons is possible. if tested earlier, at  <dig> days after differentiation, the occurrence of action potentials was less consistent  and, unlike at later stages, may have been dependent on plating density . rencell vm action potentials were consistently blocked in the presence of  <dig>  μm tetrodotoxin . in voltage clamp experiments the current responses to voltage steps activated a fast inward current, which was abolished in the presence of ttx . figure 6e and 6f show the average and steady state peak inward current evoked by stepping the command voltage from - <dig> to + <dig> mv in  <dig> mv increments . the fast inward current was activated at voltages positive to - <dig> mv and reversed at voltage positive to + <dig> mv. the fact that the current was abolished in the presence of  <dig>  μm ttx indicated that it was mediated by the activation of the type of na2+-channels which underlies the generation of action potentials. the average steady-state current-voltage relationship was also non-linear  suggesting that other voltage-gated channels were also activated.

other voltage-gated channels
while we have not studied other channels in detail, it is clear that some other voltage-gated channels are present. an important contributing conductance is probably the potassium conductance, ia. . current consistent with ia was present in all cells tested though we cannot discount a possible contribution from ca2+ channels or other channels differentially activated by the two protocols .

comparison between pred and stdd protocols
the pred protocol was used for the above experiments because of the observation that it enhanced the proportion of th-positive neurons among the differentiated rencell vm neurons. to investigate whether the pred protocol affected the development of action potentials, we also studied rencell vm using the original stdd protocol. stdd cultures were studied in the same time frame as for the pred rencell vm, 7– <dig> days after differentiation. in these conditions, cells displayed a resting membrane potential of - <dig> ±  <dig> mv and an input resistance of  <dig> ±  <dig> mΩ . however, only in 25% of cases  could na+ conductances be activated by stepping the voltage towards positive values. even for those cells with inward currents the na+ currents were on average considerably smaller and more varied than for the pred protocol . unlike for sodium currents, the amplitude and voltage dependency of ia in differentiated rencell vm was independent of the protocol used.

development of voltage-gated currents in rencell vm but not cx
having observed that, although not completely dependent on pred, the development of na+ currents was substantially enhanced by the pred compared to the stdd, we then checked both protocols in rencell cx. rencell cx cells studied over the second week after pred had a resting membrane potential of - <dig> ±  <dig> mv and an input resistance of  <dig> ±  <dig> mΩ . no action potentials or inward currents could be generated in any of the cells tested  in response to injection of current or voltage in steps of increasing positive amplitude . like rencell vm cells, rencell cx displayed a non-linear current-voltage relationship , suggesting the presence of voltage-activated conductances.

we have restricted our analysis of other voltage-gated channels to ia. we find that the presence of ia was independent of cell type or protocol being similar to that seen in rencell vm . the passive properties of rencell cx are compared to those of rencell vm under different conditions in figure 3c. overall, in contrast to the rencell vm neurons, the use of the pred protocol did not show any measurable effects on rencell cx neurons.

discussion
we have developed immortalized human fetal neural stem cell lines from the cortex  and from the ventral mesencephalon  regions of the brain and tested their differentiation potential and functional capacity under different culture conditions. these two brain areas were chosen as they are of particular interest as research models of cellular processes occurring during the development of degenerative diseases such as huntington's, alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases. our initial hypothesis that morphological differentiation of the stem cells into neurons would also be reflected in their electrophysiological characteristics was not supported by the data.

when comparing the two stem cell lines under the same culture conditions, undifferentiated rencell vm and cx displayed very similar phenotypes. both cell lines in the undifferentiated state were indistinguishable in their nestin expression, as well as their electrophysiological properties. moreover, on differentiation immunohistochemical characteristics were also similar in that both cell lines showed a similar level of neuronal development as judged from staining for βiii-tubulin though only the mesencephalic stem cells showed significant positive staining for th, a marker for dopaminergic neurons. however, despite the immunological evidence of neuronal development in both cell lines, functional evidence for neuronal differentiation – the ability to generate action potentials – was only observed in the rencell vm neurons. rencell cx cells cultured under identical conditions did not develop this physiological phenotype.

this aspect of neuronal function was particularly enhanced in rencell vm by allowing the cells to form neurospheres before plating and subsequent removal of growth factors to allow differentiation. interestingly, although the capacity to form neurospheres was also evident in the cortical stem cells, this predifferentiation step made no apparent difference to the subsequent differentiation of rencell cx cells.

it has previously been proposed that the differences seen between electrophysiology studies of nscs are due to variations in culture conditions  <cit> . rencell vm and cx were both maintained long-term in identical culture conditions and although the same differentiation and recording protocols were used, the two lines gave different functional outcomes. this suggests that the two cell lines are either intrinsically different or neuronal maturation is affected by differences in derivation of the cell lines. it is possible that similar outcomes may in the future be achieved by designing differentiation protocols specific for rencell cx to generate functional neurons. there are, however, significant differences and this may relate to how the cell lines were actually derived, either in terms of: 1) the brain area from which they are derived; 2) the derivation of rencell cx from a clonal cell line versus rencell vm from a bulk derived culture; or 3) the use of v-myc versus c-myc for immortalization of the lines.

it is unlikely that the area of the brain from which the cells are derived results in this difference as it is clear that stem cells must exist in fetal cortical tissue which can differentiate into fully functional neurons  <cit> . however, whether the cells are clonal or derived from bulk tissue may be a factor leading to the variability in the results observed between the two cell lines. the second difference seems a more likely source of the final outcomes observed. it is possible that the myc integration site within the genome of the clonal rencell cx line has disrupted a gene expression pattern required for functional neural differentiation. alternatively, in the case of development of the vm line from bulk tissue, a variety of neural stem cells with varying degrees of commitment remain in the culture while the cx cells derived from a single initial cell would only represent one subtype of stem cell. thus, contrary to the assumption that neural stem cells derived from fetal tissue are all equally multipotent, this may suggest that within any tissue, a variety of stem cells exists each with its own committed limits of differentiation. each type may be able to proliferate indefinitely and differentiate into immunologically identifiable neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. they would thus be defined as neural stem cells  <cit>  but the eventual potential or requirements for functional differentiation into specific cell types may vary within the population. neurosphere formation may select for a particular cell subtype which can compete best under these conditions which can subsequently differentiate into fully functional neurons, including dopaminergic neurons. the cx line, being derived from a single cell, would not have such variation and thus selecting neurospheres would make no difference as the cells would all be identical. interestingly, only one previous study has succeeded in differentiating similarly derived human fetal stem cells to become functional neurons which were confirmed to fire action potentials  <cit> . rather than being clonal, these cells were derived from cortical bulk tissue thus further supporting our suggestion that it is the subsequent preparation of the cells and not their origin which is important in the differences seen.

we cannot discount the possibility that these outcomes originate from the third difference listed above – the use of different proto-oncogenes for immortalization. rencell vm was immortalized using v-myc and rencell cx with c-myc proto-oncogenes. c-myc is described as the human homolog of avian v-myc  <cit> . although c-myc is larger in size, they are considered to be homologous because they contain the same transforming domains  <cit>  with the same subcellular localization to the nucleus  <cit> . v-myc may be a more potent immortalization agent than c-myc. this has been attributed to mutations in the v-myc gene which enhance the transformation ability of myc  <cit> ; however, the presence of v-myc polymorphisms has not been investigated in rencell vm. moreover, during differentiation of human nscs, myc transgene expression was shown to be down-regulated  <cit> . the presence of v-myc cannot, however, be the primary determining factor because cho et al. did not observe action potentials in v-myc derived human nscs  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that: 1) immunocytochemical characterization is not sufficient to identify the functional maturation of different cell types and 2) differences in culturing conditions might enhance the property of generating functional neurons, but the property itself seems to be intrinsic to a specific cell line which may arise from the method used to prepare the cell line. further studies are required to elucidate the determining factors for human fetal derived neural stem cells to be maturated into functional neurons.

