BACKGROUND
the tasmanian devil  has recently suffered a severe population decline due to the recently emerged devil facial tumour disease   <cit> . dftd is a rare form of cancer that is transmissible, with tumour cells acting directly as the infectious agent  <cit> . dftd is spread amongst devils when they bite each other during social interactions  <cit>  with the biter, rather than the bitten, being more likely to become infected  <cit> . the spread of dftd has been rapid and extensive, covering more than 85 % of the devils’ range since it was first observed in  <dig>  <cit> , with localised declines on the east coast of tasmania of 90 %  <cit> . initially it was suggested that extinction in the wild could occur within 25– <dig> years  <cit> , however disease has been present for almost 20 years on the east coast without any documented evidence of localised extinction . the tasmanian devil also suffers from low genetic diversity at both neutral and functional loci . the devil is listed as endangered due to the disease  <cit>  and a captive breeding program has been established to prevent extinction of the species. this insurance program has the aim of preserving 95 % of founding genetic diversity for a period of 50 years  <cit> .

captive breeding programs have often achieved limited success because in many cases the species of conservation concern already shows reduced genetic diversity and/or small population size. small population size can result in a founder effect, and potentially lead to loss of fitness via inbreeding depression  <cit> . genetic adaptation to captivity  <cit>  and further loss of genetic diversity in captive populations  <cit>  can occur, leading to decreased fitness upon reintroduction to the wild  <cit> . to avoid inbreeding depression and maintain adaptive potential in captivity, breeding interactions are managed to maximize retention of genetic diversity. traditionally this has been achieved through either pedigree management using studbooks or more recently using neutral markers such as microsatellites  <cit> . there is a move now to integrate studbook information and molecular data  <cit> , and early studies have highlighted issues of using studbook-based management alone, as ancestries are often incomplete, unknown or inaccurate .

some have questioned which types of markers are most informative to assess and manage diversity of threatened populations . allelic diversity is essential to the efficacy of multi-allelic markers such as microsatellites, especially at the level of individual discrimination. loss of alleles over time in small populations may decrease the utility of such markers in captive breeding programs when it is necessary to determine relatedness between individuals. another potential disadvantage of microsatellite markers is in their inability to make predictions of the functional consequences of loss of alleles over time in captivity  <cit> .

single nucleotide polymorphisms  occur throughout the genome. snps are typically biallelic, and unlike microsatellites with many alleles at each locus, the number of loci is a critical consideration when assessing the power of a marker set. between  <dig> and  <dig> snp loci are sufficient to detect moderate to low population structure, although more loci may be needed to detect subtle population differentiation  <cit> . for parentage and pedigree studies 60– <dig> snps are expected to provide sufficient resolution to construct accurate pedigrees, with likelihood-based estimates being more efficient than exclusion-based methods for pedigree construction  <cit> . for any given population, the number of individuals sampled and number of loci genotyped must be optimised to achieve appropriate statistical power to detect a given effect  <cit> . as snps are ubiquitous in the genome and inexpensive to assay, adding further snp loci to a marker set is relatively simple and can mitigate against the lack of allelic diversity common to small or inbred populations. snps are known to have a low genotyping error rate  <cit>  and allele calling is generally more consistent than for microsatellites. these features make snps practical for high-throughput genotyping and data sharing across laboratories and organisations  <cit> .

with the ever-decreasing costs of next-generation sequencing , large-scale sequencing projects in conservation programs are becoming increasingly feasible. sequencing of pcr amplicons has benefitted greatly from high-throughput next-generation sequencing technology and it is now possible to simultaneously sequence large numbers of samples at multiple loci  <cit> . in species with a reference genome, it is possible to distribute markers across the genome and target protein coding regions to gain true insights of genome-wide and genic diversity.

within the tasmanian devil insurance population, our research group has observed that microsatellite markers have often been unable to differentiate between closely related individuals  <cit> . we have now taken an amplicon-based approach to target snps dispersed across the devil genome. we have used these target snps to examine genetic diversity within the tasmanian devil insurance population and tested whether they provide more accurate discrimination of familial relationships than traditional microsatellite markers. the tasmanian devil genome has been published  <cit>  enabling us to target genes of interest in addition to regions with putatively neutral variation. sequencing functional regions of the genome enables us to not only assess genetic diversity and relatedness but also to make predictions about the potential functional consequences of allelic loss that may occur as a result of captive breeding.

RESULTS
snp discovery and pilot study
re-sequencing data from  <dig> whole genomes were added to  <dig> existing genome sequences  to form the ascertainment panel from which over six million snps were discovered. using whole genome alignment of these individuals we targeted  <dig> snps within  <dig> loci of interest for amplicon sequencing. these included  <dig> putatively neutral loci, two immune genes  and one behavioral gene . after amplifying and sequencing these loci in a trial run of  <dig> devils,  <dig> snps were excluded as they fell below the minor allele frequency  inclusion criterion . this inclusion criterion was chosen to account for errors arising from sequencing or alignment, or alleles occurring in such a low frequency as to be unsuitable for genotyping. one amplicon provided no sequencing data and an additional  <dig> snps were identified in the trial run devils across all amplicons. potential duplications in the immune markers led to the exclusion of these amplicons as duplications can lead to an over-estimate of heterozygosity. four amplicons were selected from the trial run for continued use in the genotyping assay. the original trial run also identified the need for a streamlined normalization and clean up step of pcr product prior to library preparation as there was a large difference in reads produced between samples likely due to amplification bias leading from differences in input dna . this led to the inclusion of the sequalprep  plate-based normalization kit into the protocol.

genotyping of insurance population
we have genotyped  <dig> tasmanian devils from the tasmanian devil insurance population  using  <dig> different amplicons across four illumina miseq runs. these  <dig> amplicons include four from the pilot study and an additional  <dig> amplicons . the average sequencing cover was close to 200-fold. over  <dig> snps were identified in total, although many of these were excluded from later analysis due to their sub-optimal maf. manual inspection of the excluded snps showed that the majority constituted errors in sequencing or alignment, or were rare  alleles that were unable to be confirmed with our data. the final genotypic dataset is derived from  <dig> amplicons covering  <dig> snps in regions of both putatively neutral  and functional  loci . these  <dig> amplicons include three that were discontinued after the first sequencing run of  <dig> individuals from the insurance population  but are reported here as they provided genotypic information for those devils in the first sequencing run.table  <dig> characteristics of all amplicons used in genotyping assay. detailed results for individual snps within all non-immune loci included in the final assay is provided in the additional file 1: tables s <dig> and s2

ccld5/6b
cx3cb
dig12b
dig24b
il17bb
il22f1b
tgfb1b
tlr3b
nb. amplicons are named according to nearest annotated gene: amplicons are not necessarily targeting the gene they are named for


achromosome as indicated by tasmanian devil reference genome v <dig>   <cit>  however recent work has identified that chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> were mis-identified  <cit> 


bindicates immune-targeted amplicon  <cit> 



one amplicon targeting putatively neutral loci  displayed a potential ascertainment bias whereby snps that were identified in the original ascertainment panel did not consistently amplify in all insurance population devils. this amplicon was therefore removed from further sequencing. two amplicons  failed to amplify sufficient snps to be informative  and so were also removed. all of the remaining amplicon loci, both neutral and functional , were included in the assessment of devils in runs  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

a comparison of four individuals who were repeated as positive controls gave an error rate of genotype calling  of 0 % when using neutral loci only and 7 % when immune genes were included. this error rate may indicate the presence of segmental duplication as many immune genes are known to be highly duplicated  <cit> . consequently a subset of snps with lower reliability were removed from the analysis.

diversity statistics
there were  <dig> devils from the insurance population that were found to be 100 % homozygous in each of the 30– <dig> snp loci that were successfully amplified in these animals . eight of these individuals were founders. two sets of siblings were also observed to be 100 % homozygous which confounded efforts to successfully assign parentage for these offspring. of the remaining genotyped insurance population devils,  <dig> had very low observed heterozygosity levels . the majority of the population displayed generally low individual heterozygosity, though there was a wide variance in the population .fig.  <dig> numbers of individuals within each range of heterozygosity level for  <dig> tasmanian devils within the insurance population. three devils excluded as <  <dig> snp loci successfully genotyped



the majority of snp loci located within putatively neutral amplicons were observed to segregate in hardy-weinberg equilibrium   . deviations from hwe are expected to be influenced by relatedness within the insurance population. it should be noted that some parent-offspring and full-sibling relationships are included in this dataset which violated the assumption of a homogeneous population and may have influenced estimates of heterozygosity and hwe. the numbers of observed haplotypes varied greatly across amplicons . it is possible that the high number of haplotypes observed for foxa <dig> was due to the inconsistent amplification of snps between individuals. as noted above, this amplicon was excluded from further sequencing. haplotype frequencies for the remaining neutral loci are reported in the online materials .

pedigree analysis
to demonstrate the utility of the snp assay we conducted an assessment of parentage assignment within the insurance population. of the  <dig> devils genotyped using snps,  <dig> were offspring for whom either the sire or dam  were unknown. there were an additional  <dig> offspring for whom parentage was known from studbook records and this parentage was confirmed using snp data. of the  <dig> offspring with unknown parentage we were able to assign parentage with confidence in  <dig> cases . of the remaining  <dig> offspring, it was not possible to assign parentage to  <dig> offspring because not all candidate parents were available to be genotyped. this meant that for these animals only predictions and/or exclusions were possible . predictions and exclusions were also made for the remaining  <dig> offspring although the definitive assignment of parentage was not possible in these cases. in two offspring, too few loci were successfully amplified to enable any assessment of parentage. the average percentage of missing genotypes across animals assessed for pedigrees was 44 % and average number of shared genotyped loci between offspring/dam/sire trios was  <dig>  there were  <dig> offspring with fewer than  <dig> shared snp loci amongst some trios due to a potential dam failing to amplify many snps. exclusions only were provided for these offspring. although snp amplification failure in  <dig> individuals  affected our ability to assign parentage in these cases, lack of diversity amongst candidates was the key issue in our inability to assign parents in the remaining offspring.table  <dig> pedigree results for all genotyped offspring

nb. number of loci differ as trios from breeding facility  <dig> were genotyped in the first sequencing run whereas trios from breeding facilities 2– <dig> were sequenced in runs  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> with a refined marker set. known dams are according to information provided from studbook management



there were eight offspring who were genotyped at both snps and microsatellites which allowed us to compare the relative efficacy of each method for parentage assignment. these eight offspring came from three separate breeding groups, all with a known dam and 4– <dig> potential sires. sire predictions were made for each offspring using both genotyping methods but some differences were evident. allelic diversity was low across the majority of the microsatellite markers and this limited discrimination among potential sires. for two of the eight offspring there were disagreements of predicted sire using the different genotyping methods . the higher trio lod scores for the snp data suggests more power to discriminate between a given male and any random males in the population, in the snp-based genotyping assay  <cit> . this is also evident in the greater confidence of trio delta scores achieved from the snp data relative to the microsatellite data . genotypes for all individuals included in the pedigree analysis are available in the online material .

discussion
in this study we have developed a novel method for the discovery and genotyping of snps for use in conservation applications. our method has successfully assessed genetic diversity in the tasmanian devil insurance population and has determined the parentage of  <dig> offspring for whom this was previously unknown. the assay has many benefits over other commonly used genotyping methods and is especially versatile in its applicability and scalability. in the current study we have used the assay to assess both population diversity and for parentage as this is a priority for providing breeding recommendations in the insurance program. there is further scope to use and expand on this dataset to examine the effects of captive breeding on functional loci.

the snp assay was used to successfully assign parentage for  <dig> of the  <dig> offspring for whom all candidate parents were genotyped. for the  <dig> remaining offspring, a combination of factors have influenced our ability to assign parentage. all of the successfully resolved pedigrees were genotyped in the first sequencing run  despite this run having higher missing genotype rates . the high missing genotype rate was likely due to poor sample quality because high quality and quantity dna is required for long-range pcr and ngs applications. samples which had undergone whole genome amplification prior to pcr using repli-g had varying levels of success in subsequent sequencing. this is most likely due to degradation and fragmentation of input dna and highlights the need for stringent protocols in the collection and storage of samples. these potentially degraded samples were still able to be accurately assigned parents because the pool of candidate parents was relatively small  and there was sufficient diversity amongst these candidates for differentiation. this highlights the fact that while sample quality can reduce genotyping success, lack of diversity amongst devils was the key impediment in discriminating amongst individuals. in addition, the first sequencing run exposed the need for shorter amplicon lengths to account for input sample quality that cannot always be guaranteed. dna deterioration impedes the amplification of long dna fragments. this problem was alleviated by a move to shorter amplicons and this is reflected in the greater genotyping success seen in samples sequenced across runs 2– <dig> .

in the larger free-range enclosures where the pool of potential sires and dams is greater the analysis increases in complexity. this is especially true in instances where full-siblings and half-siblings were amongst the pool of dams or sires , which can decrease the accuracy of parentage assignment  <cit> . differing management practices across institutions may also influence accuracy of pedigree assessment, as genetic diversity in the pool of candidate parents may vary, as do the numbers of individuals housed together. low genetic diversity in devils is expected to remain a contributing factor in our ability to accurately assign parents as heterozygosity is generally low  and many common haplotypes are shared amongst the insurance population . very low allelic diversity is evident at the microsatellite loci resulting in lower confidence of predictions made for parentage in comparison to snp loci due to decreased power in the marker set, as predicted for a likelihood approach to parentage assignment  <cit> .

our findings suggest that some ascertainment bias occurred during assay development, as 70 % of the individuals used for the original ascertainment panel were from the same wild population. this issue was easily overcome with subsequent sequencing and genotyping as the amplicon-based method allows for identification of additional snps which did not exist in the ascertainment panel. one of the key benefits of our approach is that it is robust to such biases in marker selection. as larger numbers of animals are sequenced, the assay can be adjusted to exclude those markers that are uninformative and ascertain new markers where needed.

heterozygosity varied widely among individuals . individual heterozygosity may be influenced by historical captive breeding as relatedness of individuals, particularly of the original founders, has not always been known and any breeding of related individuals would be expected to lead to a loss of heterozygosity. low heterozygosity levels in the population as a whole may indicate a founder effect or lack of diversity in the original founders. some individuals did display high heterozygosity, however as the assay has been optimized to capture diversity within the devil insurance population, this may also influence observed heterozygosity levels. there is the potential to use these diversity indices to aid species conservation programs by selecting the most heterozygous individuals for release into the wild or breeding individuals to maximize heterozygosity  <cit> . care must be taken to ensure that allelic diversity is also maintained when selecting individuals for breeding. more research is required to establish how individual heterozygosity may influence fitness and whether neutral or functional loci are the best proxies for this assessment. also, although we have used genomic information to spread our markers across the genome, more research is needed to determine to what degree the current assay reflects true genome-wide diversity. ongoing research by members of our group using whole genome re-sequencing of larger numbers of wild-caught devils will attempt to address this latter question.

the degree of relatedness among some of the founding devils of the insurance population is not certain and our inability to discriminate between some potential parents in the current study may reflect a lack of diversity in the population founding gene pool. future research will examine diversity in the original founders as inbreeding in the insurance population may be exacerbated by either low diversity in founding devils or potentially related founders breeding where their familial relationship was unknown  <cit> . low genetic diversity in the tasmanian devil generally may continue to confound efforts to assess devil genetic diversity and relatedness. one of the key advantages of our approach is that the genotyping assay is dynamic, allowing loci to be added over time as needed to increase power and target additional genomic regions of interest.

the genotyping assay we have developed can be adapted to study variation in any genomic region of interest in a species’ conservation program. adaptation to captivity can have detrimental effects on a species upon reintroduction to the wild  <cit> . specifically, behavioral adaptation to captivity is often a result of captive breeding scenarios, with selection for more placid behavior appearing to take place  <cit> . snps within a dopamine receptor  were included in the assay as this gene has been associated with aggression and boldness in a number of species . unfortunately few of the target snps within drd <dig> amplified preventing meaningful assessment of functional variation within this gene. further research is ongoing analyzing additional genes associated with behavior to determine whether any behavioral adaptation to captivity occurs within the tasmanian devil insurance population. maintenance of wild behaviors is paramount as reintroductions to the wild are already taking place and an animal’s ability to explore a novel environment is key to the success of re-introduction  <cit> . aggressive interactions also appear to play a part in transmission of dftd  <cit> . further functional genes involved in reproduction are being investigated for inclusion in the genotyping assay as these genes may also play an important role in captive breeding management and reintroductions to the wild.

CONCLUSIONS
snp-based genotyping provides an informative and reliable method of assessing genetic diversity within captive breeding programs where large numbers of individuals and relationships must be evaluated and data is to be shared across institutions. we have shown that a next-generation sequencing approach can be used to examine diversity and determine pedigrees in a captive breeding program. the snp-based genotyping assay we have developed provided more definitive parentage results than the microsatellite markers previously used to estimate relatedness in the tasmanian devil insurance population. many of the offspring genotyped were able to be accurately assigned parents though a high degree of relatedness amongst candidates and low diversity in the devil confounded efforts for many offspring and highlights the need for intensive management of genetic diversity in the insurance program. further pedigree determination is ongoing as more samples are collected and more offspring are produced within the insurance population.

the current assay includes a good representation of diversity at both neutral and functional loci across the genome. further markers are being developed to assess immune  <cit> , behavioral and reproductive variation; key traits to monitor in a captive breeding scenario. quantification of existing functional diversity within these genes will enable efforts to preserve diversity, improving the captive breeding program and subsequent reintroductions to the wild. reintroductions to a protected island offshore from tasmania have already taken place, with other isolated areas now coming on-line. this study provides a foundation to assess both the effectiveness of the captive breeding program, and explore how selection acts on key regions of the genome in both a zoo-based setting and in the wild.

