BACKGROUND
the role of coral-dinoflagellate symbioses in coral reef ecosystems
coral reefs are among the most biodiverse ecosystems on earth and play important roles in ocean biogeochemical cycles. in particular, scleractinian corals are keystone species in tropical marine environments where they create the substrate and three dimensional structure of the reef ecosystem, and also provide the majority of primary productivity within the reef. corals' reef-building capability arises from an endosymbiotic relationship with photosynthetic dinoflagellate symbionts . the symbionts typically live enclosed within membrane-bound "symbiosomes" in host cells of the gastroderm. corals derive photosynthate to fuel much of their metabolic requirements, while symbionts derive inorganic compounds from the host to fuel photosynthesis and symbiont growth  <cit> . the presence of a photosynthesizing symbiont profoundly influences rates of growth, reproduction, and caco <dig> deposition of scleractinian corals. while the photosynthetic nature of the symbionts restricts symbiont-bearing corals to the well-lit surface waters, it permits the partners to live in otherwise inhospitable nutrient-poor regions of the world's oceans, and sets the stage for the formation of reefs in shallow tropical water  <cit> .

coral reef ecosystems are currently under severe pressure from both local  and large-scale changes in the marine environment  <cit> . in particular anomalous temperature and/or high uv levels can prompt widespread coral "bleaching" events in which the symbiosis fails and symbionts are jettisoned from the host. to better respond to these threats, it is imperative that we better understand the initiation and regulation of the cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis. in this manuscript we report the development of new genomic tools that will facilitate these discoveries in two caribbean coral species, acropora palmata and montastraea faveolata.

establishment of the host-symbiont relationship
the vast majority of scleractinian corals are obligately symbiotic, making it surprising that few species exhibit maternal  transmission of symbionts to their offspring  <cit> . instead, most corals produce offspring that lack symbionts, and these offspring are faced with the task of acquiring symbionts from the environment. newly settled hard corals and gorgonians can acquire zooxanthellae within a week when maintained on the reef as well as when cultured in the laboratory  <cit> . in most cases so far examined, symbiotic cnidarians take up symbionts by phagocytosis, during which symbionts that enter the host's gastric cavity are internalized by phagocytic cells of the gastroderm  <cit> . occasionally, symbiodinium has also been observed in the ectoderm of larvae  <cit> , and in some coral species, symbdiodinium infects the new host during embryonic development, before gastrulation  <cit> .

the pattern of horizontal transmission presents an experimental system with which to study the development of the symbiosis at the molecular level since it is possible to collect large quantities of coral gametes that can be experimentally infected with symbionts after fertilization. this makes it possible to both control the timing and conditions under which coral larvae take up their first complement of symbionts, and to sample through different life history and symbiotic stages of corals.

coral comparative developmental genomics
corals are members of the phylum cnidaria, a basal metazoan group that includes jellyfish, sea anemones, and hydrozoans. relative to other metazoans, cnidarians are characterized by embryonic development of only two tissue layers , a lack of complex organ systems, and the development of fewer than a dozen cell types. est/genomic sequencing projects for the hydrozoan hydra magnipapillata, the sea anemone nematostella vectensis, and the indo-pacific scleractinian coral acropora millepora have revealed that cnidarians possess homologs for many developmental genes that control axial specification of the bilaterian body plan  <cit> . the recent publication of the whole genome of n. vectensis has revealed that a large portion of the gene repertoire is shared between cnidarians and vertebrates whereas substantial gene loss has occurred in the ecdysozoan model organisms   <cit> . given the genetic complexity of cnidarians, a comparative analysis of scleractinian and bilaterian genomes would greatly enhance our understanding of a diverse array of metazoan biological processes, for example symbiosis  <cit> , and calcification and biomineralization  <cit> .

onset of symbiosis
one of our primary goals is to investigate the transcriptome of the symbiotic relationship from both the host and symbiont perspectives. a large scale analysis is necessary as there are several biological processes that are likely to be invoked to establish a stable partnership. mechanisms of host-symbiont recognition likely involve interactions between molecules present on the surface of both the symbiont and host cells, for example carbohydrate-lectin interactions, as were recently described for the coral fungia scutaria  <cit> . concomitant with the phagocytic uptake of symbionts, the host will likely exhibit some flavor of innate immune response, and that response will likely be manipulated by the symbiont such that it remains viable within the host cell  <cit> . there is evidence that one mechanism by which symbiodinium manipulates host response is by interfering with maturation of the phagosome  <cit>  second, upon entry, it is likely that the underlying structural organization of the host cell/gastrodermal tissue must be modified significantly, as the symbiont occupies most of the volume of the host cell. this would likely include alterations in lipids and protein components of the cell, features that were implicated in the mature symbiosis in the sea anemone anthopleura elegantissima  <cit>  third, the presence of symbiodinium is correlated with rapid calcification of the coral skeleton, and therefore processes related to skeletonization  are likely to be induced or upregulated during the onset of symbiosis.

experimental approach
to gain a large-scale cellular and molecular perspective on the biology of coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis, we have developed a suite of cdna libraries that encompass significant stages in coral life history and symbiotic stages, including unfertilized eggs, two stages of embryonic development, cohorts of larvae that are either symbiotic or non-symbiotic, and adult coral. partial sequencing of these libraries has produced a rich set of unigenes, from which we can probe the underlying biology of the coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis via downstream genomic approaches .

we targeted two scleractinian corals, montastraea faveolata and acropora palmata , both are major reef builders in the caribbean. over the past few dacades, the caribbean has suffered massive declines in coral cover  <cit> , and in may  <dig> a. palmata was listed as a threatened species under the endangered species act  <cit> . both these coral species produce azooxanthellate eggs that can be fertilized and reared through the larval and post-metamorphic polyp stages to a stage that can be experimentally infected with selected strains of symbiodinium available in culture. we generated ests from the earliest stages of the symbiosis, as well as later host-symbiont combinations.

in light of the deteriorating condition of coral reefs worldwide and the severity of coral bleaching events, it is critical that we utilize a large-scale approach to studying the onset, regulation, and maturation of symbiosis in scleractinian corals so that we can better understand the underlying biological processes involved.

RESULTS
est assembly and annotation
we sampled  <dig> life history/symbiosis stages for each species to make stage-specific cdna libraries: spawned eggs , early-stage planula larvae , late-stage planula larvae that we either infected with symbionts  or left uninfected , and adult coral . we generated  <dig>  high quality ests for a. palmata, which assemble into  <dig>  unigenes, and  <dig>  high quality ests for m. faveolata, which assemble into  <dig>  unigenes . the ests are available through genbank  and the unigene consensus sequences are available through the marine genomics project website  <cit> .

1a. palmata  <dig> hr and m. faveolata  <dig> hr post fertilization

2a. palmata  <dig> days and m. faveolata  <dig> days post fertilization

only a small number of unigenes are found in more than one library  . we annotated the unigene set by assigning putative identities based on blastx hits to nr, swissprot and go databases . a significant portion of the library had no putative identities. of the unigenes with no blast hits, we searched for open reading frames encoding at least  <dig> amino acids beginning with an atg start codon. from  <dig>  unigenes in a. palmata, we found  <dig> orfs. from  <dig>  unigenes identified from m. faveolata, we identified  <dig> orfs. since secreted proteins are likely targets in setting the stage for the initial host-symbiont cell contact, we searched for potential secretory signals of these unigenes using signalp  <cit> . for a. palmata we identified  <dig> and  <dig> predicted signal peptides for m. faveolata we identified  <dig> and  <dig> predicted signal peptides based on  <dig> different methods , thus providing a starting set of genes of the "secretome" of the symbiosis.

a. palmata and m. faveolata transcriptomes
unigenes were categorized by biological processes using kaas . kegg assignment could be made for  <dig> unigenes  from a. palmata and  <dig>  unigenes from m. faveolata . large scale patterns of gene expression in the four major life-history stages that we sampled were compared using the dataset from acropora , for which there was a sufficiently extensive est dataset. statistical analysis of the go assignments for each unigene was performed using genemerge  <cit> . genes expressed in each developmental stages were compared to the total set of genes from a. palmata to assess over-or under-representation of specific go-defined categories in each developmental stage. for most developmental stages, there was no statistically significant difference, except for the library constructed from spawned eggs which showed significant over-representation of genes related to gene transcription, signal transduction, regulation of protein function, cell division and proliferation .

identification of candidate genes
we characterized the unigene datasets by identifying those genes that were either expressed exclusively when the host was in the symbiotic stages  or were expressed in all  <dig> sampled life history stages . five unigenes were expressed in all stages, while  <dig> unigenes are exclusively found in the symbiotic stages . seven of the  <dig> symbiosis-restricted unigenes could be assigned a putative identity based on blastx against nr, and these were biased in the category of dna-interacting proteins . one est-rich unigene  could not be assigned a putative identity.

* criteria for inclusion were that the unigenes must be expressed in both symbiotic life history stages and absent from all of the non-symbiotic stages.

using a candidate gene approach to identify potential host-symbiont cell-cell interaction proteins, we identified  <dig> potential pattern recognition receptors that are potentially involved in host-symbiont cell contact. for example, we identified a homolog of the horseshoe crab tachylectin- <dig>  a protein which functions in the recognition of pathogens by tachypleus tridentatus  <cit> .

in addition, we identified partial sequences for signaling genes known to play roles in host response to microbial infection, for example members of the mapk signaling pathway, nfkb signaling, and tir domain protein. all of these signaling pathways play major roles in host responses to microbial infections. these genes are summarized in table  <dig> 

evolution of ferritin
we compared some of the most highly expressed genes in the a. palmata dataset with an est dataset from acropora millepora. two different types of ferritins  were identified and that are highly expressed in both species. to differentiate the amino acids that are under positive selection, we identified homologues for both types of ferritin in the nematostella vectensis database and carried out a site-specific analysis. figure  <dig> illustrates alignments of the cnidarian ferritins to mouse ferritin, showing the amino acids predicted to be undergoing positive selection. the overall dn/ds value for the a. palmata and a. millepora est sequence is ω =  <dig>   for ferritin type i, and ω =  <dig>   for ferritin type ii. the dn/ds value for ferritin type i is unusually high and indicative of adaptive evolution. to differentiate the amino acids that are under positive selection, we identified homologues for both types of ferritin in the nematostella vectensis database and carried out a site-specific analysis .

for ferritin type i, both tests give highly significant likelihood ratio tests   when analyzed for sites of positive selection. seven sites are reported with a posterior probability of >  <dig>  of being in the positively selected class. the bayesian empirical bayes  procedure identified the same sites in models m2a/m1a and m8/m <dig> but the m8/m <dig> test shows slightly higher probability values. in addition, one site is only identified in m8/m <dig> but with a low posterior probability  =  <dig> ). for ferritin type ii the lrts are not significant. there is one site that is identified as positively selected in both tests but with a low probability  =  <dig> ).

five highly conserved residues have been identified in vertebrate h chain ferritins. these are tyr <dig>  tyr <dig>  tyr <dig> that make up the ferroxidase center and glu <dig> and his <dig> that are involved in polynuclear fe-complex formation . all of these residues but tyr <dig> are conserved in the coral ferritin type i molecules and type ii molecules. tyr <dig> is said to be specific for h ferritin in vertebrates  <cit> . in contrast, the n. vectensis ferritin type  <dig> sequence has this tyr <dig> residue. none of the seven positively selected sites with a posterior probability of >  <dig>  are in proximity of these domains.

novel genes restricted to scleractinian corals
to identify putative genes unique to scleractinian corals, we identified unigenes that were conserved between a. palmata and m. faveolata but that had no similarity to any sequences in nr, nor to the assembled genome of the sea anemone nematostella vectensis or the assembled est dataset from hydra magnipapillata. we identified  <dig> genes in a. palmata that had matches to  <dig> genes in m. faveolata, but had no similarity to any sequences in nr nor to other cnidarian sequences. amino acid alignments show that the majority of these predicted proteins are highly conserved . all but one of these unigenes contain ests from libraries prepared from non-symbiotic stages, strongly suggesting that these represent coral, and not symbiont, genes. the homologs ap:  <dig> and mf:  <dig>  however are both from libraries constructed from adult coral tissue, suggesting that, given that a small percentage of ests from symbiotic stage were identified as symbiont genes, there is a small possibility that these homologs are from symbiodinium.

discussion
partial sequencing of  <dig> cdna libraries for a. palmata and m. faveolata has produced a rich set of candidate genes  that can be used as a starting point for examining the ecology and evolution of these two species from a cellular and molecular perspective. toward these efforts, we have characterized: 1) the transcriptome across developmental stages, 2) unigenes that may play roles in symbiosis, and 3) candidate scleractinian-specific genes.

a. palmata and m. faveolata transcriptome
there were very few genes that appeared to be ubiquitously expressed throughout the life history of either coral species. the evidence for this is that the acropora est dataset generated only  <dig> unigenes that were expressed in all  <dig> life history stages, and the montastraea dataset produced none. in fact, the vast majority of unigene est clusters are comprised of ests from a single developmental stage. this may reflect the conservative parameters of our clustering methods , but also is likely a consequence of sampling bias resulting from small sample size . only the spawned egg stage shows significant differences in the go content in comparison to the overall est collection. the egg is poised to initiate development of the zygote, thus it is expected to express at high levels genes involved in the first stages of cleavage and development, for example genes involved in cell proliferation, mitosis, regulation of transcription, and signal transduction. all of these categories were identified by gene merge as being over-represented in the egg stage.

candidate genes for initiation and regulation of the symbiosis
we used two approaches for identifying genes that may play roles in establishing or regulating the symbiosis. first we identified genes that are present in both symbiotic stages  and absent in all non-symbiotic stages . genes identified by this approach include dna-binding proteins involved in regulating chromatin structure and transcription  that are potentially significant as regulators of gene expression during symbiosis. identification of a potential homolog of leucine carboxylase methyltransferase may indicate regulation of protein phosphatase 2a, which is involved in control of many cellular functions, including metabolism, cell cycle progression, stress response, and apoptosis  <cit> . although we can not rule out the possibility that some of the genes come from the symbiont, it is unlikely since all of the top blast hits were to animal genes, not plant or algal genes.

the cellular and molecular nature of the host response to microbial infections in cnidarians is an area of investigation that is rapidly being developed, and many of the well-studied components of the metazoan innate immune repertoire of pattern recognition and host response signaling pathways are present in cnidarians  <cit> . a small handful of players have been identified as playing roles in cnidarian-microbial interactions  <cit> . what is particularly interesting about studying innate immune response in corals is that a mutualistic infection of animals by eukaryotic microbes is known to occur only in a few marine invertebrate species, with corals being the poster child for this animal-microbe interaction. the ability to experimentally infect corals with their symbionts provides a study system both for characterizing the host response to microbial infection in basal metazoans, and for comparative studies of mutualistic vs. pathogenic infection in animals.

as a step forward, we report here the identification of genes containing protein domains that may play roles in mediating the initial host-symbiont contact, for example, lectin domains or other pattern recognition receptor domains that may be expressed on the host cell and interact with molecules on the symbiont cell surface. these included a diverse set of lectin domain, scavenger receptor domain, discoidin domain, ficolin, thrombospondin type  <dig> domain, leucine rich repeat domain proteins, and others. we also identified candidate homologs to genes in signaling pathways known to be involved in host response to microbial infection, including members of the mapk signaling pathway, nuclear factor nf-kappa-b p <dig> subunit, and tir domain signaling which functions as one of the major signaling pathways involved in response to microbial infection.

the identification of a homolog of the horseshoe crab protein tachylectin- <dig> is interesting, as this protein plays a significant role in the recognition of pathogens by the horseshoe crab, tachypleus tridentatus  <cit> . in the hydrozoan cnidarian hydractinia, the tachylectin homolog ctrn is structurally conserved, but is not upregulated after exposure to lps, suggesting that it does not function as an immune response protein  <cit> . in hydractinia, ctrn is expressed only in post-metamorphic stages, and in montastraea faveolata, the tachylectin homolog was identified as a cdna from the adult stages. the expression patterns of the m. faveolata tachylectin homolog throughout developmental and symbiosis should be examined to determine whether this gene appears to play a role in symbiosis.

sequence divergence in acropora
the divergence between caribbean and indo-pacific acropora species is thought to substantially pre-date the closure of the isthmus of panama  <cit> and may be as deep as the mid eocene   <cit> . the acropora/montastraea divergence is much deeper, as the respective coral families were distinct in the jurassic  <cit> , and these two species belong to two divergent scleractinian clades that date back to at least the triassic period  when corals appear to have originated  <cit> .

comparisons between the caribbean and indo-pacific corals are complicated by the fact that full-length sequences are available for relatively few clones. two of the largest est clusters in the a. millepora dataset encode proteins matching strongly to invertebrate ferritins , and this is also true of both the a. palmata and m. faveolata datasets, however, relationships between these are not simple. the acropora species each have orthologs of two distinct ferritin types, but the two m. faveolata est clusters both correspond to one of these acropora types. so as to avoid the complications of potentially comparing paralogs, the m. faveolata sequences were not subject to detailed comparative analysis.

one ferritin type  is encoded by >  <dig> ests in the acropora millepora dataset, and its ortholog in a. palmata is represented by  <dig> ests/ <dig> cdnas. the second ferritin type   is more conserved. type i is under positive selection but not type ii. type ii ferritin has  <dig> synonymous and  <dig> non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions between the two acropora species, whereas type i has  <dig> synonymous and  <dig> non-synonymous nucleotide changes.

it is intriguing that two different types of ferritins with different rates of evolution can be identified in a. palmata, a. millepora and n. vectensis. ferritins play a major role in iron homeostasis and the oxidative stress response <cit> , they are important in innate immunity, for example, during the acute phase in response to pathogenetic infection  <cit> . for all of these reasons, it will be particularly interesting to examine the evolution and functions of ferritin in cnidarian biology and symbiosis.

genes restricted to the scleractinia
the significance of candidate protein-coding genes that are clearly conserved between two divergent coral clades, yet absent from any other organism, is currently unknown. three of these genes are expressed at the same life history stage of both species, suggesting that these proteins may play significant roles in co-ordinate life history stages in different coral species. the fourth gene is expressed in the adult colony of both species. the fifth gene is an a. palmata gene with two homologs in m. faveolata. functional studies of these genes, and localization of the proteins will allow to further investigate the nature of scleractinian-specific genes . in particular, they can potentially provide insightful knowledge on aspects of their evolutionary successful strategies such as biomineralization and photosynthetic symbiotic abilities.

CONCLUSIONS
partial sequencing of  <dig> cdna libraries each for a. palmata and m. faveolata has produced a rich set of candidate genes  from which we have identified many potential candidate genes for symbiosis regulation, ferritin genes that appears to be undergoing adaptive evolution, and five genes that may be restricted to scleractinia. this est resource can be used as a resource for examining the processed involved in the life history and symbiosis history of these two species, as well as to further expand the dataset of cnidarian genes for comparative genomics and evolutionary studies.

