BACKGROUND
parkinson's disease  is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized at the cellular level by a destruction especially of neuromelanin -containing dopaminergic cells and a profound reduction in striatal dopamine. nm accumulates in the cytoplasm of dopaminergic neurons starting within the first 3- <dig> years after birth  <cit> . nm concentration increases with age and its optical density has been shown to increase until  <dig> years of life  <cit> . in patients with juvenile pd as well as with idiopathic and mptp-induced pd, nm also accumulates in the extracellular space of substantia nigra   <cit> .

exracellular nm does not behave passively. both protective and toxic effects have been reported . the protective role is most notably through its ability to trap free radicals and toxins  <cit> . toxic effects of nm are mainly due to nm highly-complexed with iron  <cit> . in vitro nm activates microglia by triggering nk-κb activation and the release of the proinflammatory cytokines tnf-α and il- <dig>  <cit> . when injected into the brains of rats, human nm triggers neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration  <cit> , suggesting a proinflammatory role for nm.

the primary etiological factor for pd is still unknown. several hypotheses have been proposed  <cit> . autoimmune processes in pd have been suggested previously  <cit> . autoantibodies directed at neuronal structures have been found in sera of pd patients  <cit> . in an interesting study brains of pd patients exhibited an igg binding on dopamine neurons, which was positively correlated with the number of hla positive microglia  <cit> . moreover, in the same study the low affinity activating igg receptor fcγriii was expressed on cells morphologically resembling lymphocytes. in a recent publication by double et al., sera from subjects with clinical pd were found to display significantly enhanced igg-levels specific for melanin derived from catecholamines, a structural component of nm  <cit> . moreover, complement binding to nm in brains from pd patients supports the idea of immunologic clearance of nm in pd  <cit> . these data suggest the possibility of a specific autoimmune response against nm in pd patients.

dendritic cells  are professional antigen-presenting cells able to initiate primary t-cell mediated immune responses  <cit> . in a so-called immature state their main function is the uptake and processing of antigens. once they become activated , dcs migrate into the draining lymph nodes  to present the antigen to naïve t- and b-cells  <cit> . if t- or b-cells specific for this antigen enter the ln, the cells become primed to exert their effector functions once they re-encounter the antigen in the peripheral tissue. in contrast, microglia are tissue-resident cells that are not able to migrate into lymphoid tissues to start an adaptive immune response. they are specialized to present antigens to already activated, infiltrating t-cells. hence, a de novo initiation of an adaptive immune response against an immunogen within the brain requires dc activation, whereas microglia activation is in this context a downstream event in order to direct the t- and b- cell response to the site where the antigen is located. dcs are spare in the healthy cns. however, they do accumulate in the cns parenchyma in neuroinflammation and cns autoimmune disease following monocyte invasion, from which they differentiate  <cit> .

in this study we hypothesize that extracellular nm may stimulate dc maturation and thereby promote nm-associated antigen presentation in an autoimmunogenic context. this would reflect the initiating step of an autoagressive activity against antigens from sn. therefore, we investigated whether nm can be recognized and taken up by dcs and subsequently explored the capability of nm to mature/activate these cells phenotypically and functionally for t cell activation. using synthetic dopamine melanin , we investigated the role of the domanine melanin "backbone" found in nm in dc activation.

RESULTS
dendritic cells phagocytose nm and dam
in order to assess whether dcs recognize nm as a potential antigen we coincubated dcs with nm and studied phagocytosis by differential interference contrast microscopy. nm was visible as small black granules of  <dig> - <dig> μm size . after  <dig> hours of co-incubation with dcs nm colocalized with dcs in the culture plate . a z-stack analysis revealed that nm granules were not just attached to the cell surface but were indeed internalized by dcs . similarly, dcs also phagocytosed dam .

dcs mature in response to nm
phagocytosis of nm resulted within  <dig> h in maturation of dcs measured by the upregulation of the cell surface molecules mhcii and cd <dig>  whereas only 13% of the dc population displayed a mature phenotype in the absence of additives in the culture medium, the amount of mature dcs increased to  <dig> % following contact with nm . dam triggered comparably lower dc activation  compared to nm  but still significantly elevated compared to medium alone . as a positive control, dcs were treated with lps , a strong activator of dcs. lps-activation in the experiments displayed in this manuscript should only be regarded qualitatively , as the amount of lps used in these experiments is in no relation whatsoever to the amount of nm or dam, except for the fact that it was titrated in order to provoke a response. we therefore did not apply statistical analysis comparing the magnitude of the lps response with other treatments.

nm generates a functional activation of dcs
following  <dig> h exposure to nm, dcs released significantly higher amounts of proinflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α and il- <dig> compared to cells treated with medium alone , demonstrating that nm-triggered dc maturation generated functional cells . no additional cytokine release compared to cells treated with medium-alone was detected in cells treated with dam.

in order to test whether nm-stimulated dcs can activate t cell proliferation , we performed a mixed lymphocyte reaction  in which t cells isolated from allogenic donor mice were cocultured with nm- or dam-treated dcs. as depicted in figure 4c, nm-treated dcs were able to trigger a proliferative t cell response . in contrast to the effects triggered by nm, no t cell proliferation could be detected following incubation with dam.

the experiments displayed in figure  <dig> not only demonstrate that nm-triggered dc activation generates completely functional dcs , but also narrows the number of nm-compounds that could actually be the trigger of it: as synthetic dam, which lacks many of the compounds found in nm  failed to triggered any cytokine or proliferative response at all, the dopamine melanine itself is probably not the stimulus for these events. however, the dopamine melanine "backbone" of nm could play an important role in efficient uptake of nm by dcs, as we observed that dam alone is being recognized and phagocytosed very efficiently by dcs .

nm preparations are free of endotoxin contamination
dcs are very sensitive towards lps . in order to exclude a potential endotoxin contamination of the dam and nm preparations used in our experiments, we tested the dam- and nm-suspensions for lps using a commercially available lal assay. no traces of lps were detected in the dam- and nm-suspensions used for our experiments . these results suggest that the dc-stimulating effects are intrinsic for nm and were not caused by a potential contamination with endotoxin.

discussion
our in vitro study shows that a) extracellular nm is being phagocytosed by dcs and b) nm triggers maturation and functional activation of these cells. if operative in vivo, this would inevitably cause a transport of extracellular nm from the brain into cervical lymph nodes, resulting in a presentation of nm to naïve t- and b-cells in a highly immunogenic context. this may eventually lead to the development of an autoimmune disease directed at nm-associated antigens. our study therefore offers a first evidence for a nm-driven autoimmune-based pathogenesis of pd with nm as the initial trigger of a dc-mediated autoantigen presentation.

although an autoimmune-based pathogenesis of pd that targets nm has yet to be conclusively demonstrated in vivo, a number of previous findings can now be put into a broader perspective: sera from subjects with clinical pd display enhanced igg-levels to catecholeamine-based melanins, the structural basis of the nm present in the pigmented neurons of the human sn  <cit> , indicating an immune response directed against nm itself. in line with this, opsonization of nm with c1q - a complement factor involved in the classical complement pathway that recognizes antigen-bound igg and igm - has been shown on the surface of extracellular nm in post-mortem brains of pd-patients  <cit> . alternatively , dc-phagocytosis of nm loaded with resident peptides or proteins  may initiate the presentation of formerly-unrecognized autoantigens to t- and b-cells in a "trojan horse way", triggering an adaptive autoimmune response directed at proteins primarily unrelated to nm. in this regard orr et al. found in post-mortem sections from pd patients - but not from age-matched controls - igg antibodies directed at pigmented dopamine neurons and auto-igg binding colocalized with immunostaining for lewy bodies  <cit> .

mature dcs loaded with autoantigens have been shown to be able to induce autoimmunity against the loaded antigen in mice  <cit> . although dcs seem to be rare in the healthy brain, myeloid-derived dcs infiltrate the brain during neuroinflammation  <cit>  so that dcs are likely to encounter extracellular nm also in vivo.

our data indicate that the dc-activating properties of nm are conferred by its peptide or lipid components . although the primary repertoire of endogenous lipids and peptides is unlikely to be able to activate dcs, oxidative modifications of endogenous molecules are being discussed to confer dc-maturating activity by an "altered-self" mechanism  <cit> . such dc-maturating activity has already been described for oxidized lipophosphatidylcholine  found in low-density lipoprotein , which potently triggers dc maturation and activation  <cit> . in a similar way, oxidized protein or lipid contents of nm could have triggered dc maturation in our assay system. in line with this, post-mortem studies with brains from pd patients revealed increased lipid-peroxidation in sn  <cit> .

our findings that nm activates dcs are in line with previous reports that nm can activate microglia both in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo when injected into the rat brain  <cit> . microglia and dcs are both myeloid antigen presenting cells that are closely related, albeit they fulfill completely different but also cooperative functions during an immune response. whereas activated dcs will leave the tissue and transport the antigen to the lymph nodes in order to initiate an adaptive immune response, activated microglia reside in the tissue and present the antigen to dc-primed infiltrating t cells in order to direct the immune response to the tissue in which the antigen was found. therefore, combining the results of the former study on microglia with our results opens a new autoimmune scenario: nm not only causes local inflammation  but may also trigger an adaptive immune response directed at nm itself via activation of dcs. our findings therefore add a potential third characteristic to nm in relation to pd: whereas nm has previously been discussed to be either neuroprotective or neurotoxic  our findings suggest that it might also be considered as an initial trigger for an adaptive autoimmune response.

CONCLUSIONS
our data suggest that extracellular nm may be the initial trigger for an adaptive autoimmune response relevant for pd via activation of dcs. whatever the antigen recognized in an autoimmune etiology of pd may be, our data now offers an explanation for the initial trigger of the autoimmune response against sn-antigens, i.e. the activation of dcs by a substance exclusively found in the affected areas, the nm.

