BACKGROUND
microtubules undergo striking reorganization during anaphase and telophase. during anaphase, antiparallel, interdigitating microtubules and many associated proteins become organized into discrete bundles in the spindle midzone  <cit> , the region between separated chromosomes. as the cell enters cytokinesis, these midzone microtubule bundles merge into a single compact, electron-dense structure called midbody. it is generally recognized that, at least for cultured animal cells, midzone microtubules play a major role in cytokinesis. for example, cleavage furrows, both normal and ectopic, are associated with similar microtubule bundles  <cit> , while regions physically blocked from midzone microtubules by micromanipulation are unable to undergo cytokinesis  <cit> . moreover, continuous interactions of midzone microtubules with the cell cortex are required for sustaining the cytokinesis of cultured animal cells  <cit> .

recent progress suggested that, in addition to cytokinesis, the spindle midzone might be involved in additional functions. for example, midzone and midbody microtubules are associated with many regulatory proteins apparently unrelated to cortical contraction, such as the dna replication initiator orc <dig>  <cit> , the inhibitor of apoptosis survivin  <cit> , and the tyrosine kinase binder nir <dig>  <cit> . in addition, mother centrioles were found to migrate to the midbody during telophase before returning to their interphase position, possibly activating some centrosomal components for cell cycle progression  <cit> . furthermore, treatment of dividing cells with dihydrocytochalasin b, an inhibitor of cytokinesis, caused not only the inhibition of cytokinesis but also g <dig> arrest after mitosis  <cit> , raising the possibility that ploidy, cortical contraction, and/or activation/deactivation of proteins during cytokinesis, may play a role in the regulation of the following cell cycle.

to address this possibility, we severed cells at anaphase or telophase by microsurgery, to bypass the normal mechanism of cytokinesis. the functional role of the spindle midzone or midbody in the following cell cycle was then tested by manipulating the position of the microsurgery or by applying pharmacological agents. using extended time-lapse microscopy, we found that anaphase midzone microtubules play an important role in the progression of the subsequent interphase. however, there was no evidence of the involvement of telophase midbody in cell cycle progression.

RESULTS
to investigate if anaphase spindle midzone affects interphase progression in daughter cells, we cut nrk52e cells at early anaphase, as soon as sister chromosomes have separated completely, with a fine glass fiber to form daughter cells with or without spindle midzone structures. staining of severed daughter cells with antibodies against aurora b , which is known to relocate from centromeres to the spindle midzone during early anaphase  <cit> , confirmed that the spindle midzone was removed from one of the daughter cells. however, both daughter cells showed typical interphase microtubules organization , and normal cellular and nuclear morphology , indicating that cells recovered fully from the microsurgery and exited mitosis successfully.

a total of eight manipulated cells were followed by extended time-lapse imaging through the following interphase. all the daughter cell with spindle midzone showed cytokinesis-like cortical contraction activities, while the daughter cell without spindle midzone showed no cortical contraction . the daughter cell with spindle midzone subsequently progressed with normal timing through the following interphase, entering mitosis at a time similar to that of adjacent control cells . however, in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases, the cell without midzone showed a duration of interphase more than twice that of the sister cell with spindle midzone . in the example shown in figure  <dig>  interphase lasted for  <dig> h, as compared to the normal  <dig> h for the sister cell with the spindle midzone. in two cases, cell cycle appeared to be arrested in interphase since no mitosis was observed over a period of  <dig> –  <dig> h.

#average time in minutes ± sem

*average of  <dig> experiments that showed at least a doubling in the length of interphase for the daughter without the midzone.

**in  <dig> cases, the daughter cell without spindle midzone failed to enter mitosis during the period of time-lapse recording. for these cells, the length of interphase was assumed to equal the length of observation. therefore, this average value represents an under-estimate.

***two unmanipulated cells near the manipulated cell were measured in each experiment as controls.

the inhibition of interphase progression was affected by the position of severing. when cells were severed near the equator to divide midzone structures between the two daughter cells, both cells showed cytokinesis-like cortical contractions and no effect on the progression of interphase. this observation was repeated with  <dig> cells. to test the possibility that the duration of interphase was affected by the size of the daughter cell, we took pairs of normally divided daughter cells and cut away a lateral region near the pole from one of the daughter cells. in all  <dig> cases, both daughter cells entered the subsequent mitosis with a timing similar to that of neighboring unmanipulated cells . together, these results indicate that the progression of interphase was affected directly or indirectly by the presence of the anaphase spindle midzone.

to test if cortical contraction is the primary determining factor of the rate of interphase progression, we treated cells with cytochalasin d at early anaphase for  <dig> min then severed them at various positions in the spindle midzone, at a time when midbody started to form and ingression started to appear in control cells. cytochalasin d was removed  <dig> min later to ensure that there was no lingering cytokinesis activity upon removal of the drug . in all  <dig> cases, both daughter cells entered the subsequent mitosis with a timing similar to that of neighboring cells, despite the complete inhibition of cortical contraction . in addition, unmanipulated, binucleated cells, which failed cytokinesis spontaneously, also entered subsequent mitosis with a similar timing. thus, the present observation is distinct from the "tetraploidy checkpoint", which was identified with dihydrocytochalasin b-treated ref <dig> cells  <cit> , but remained controversial with regard to its universal existence  <cit> .

#average time in minutes ± sem

##
statistics was calculated by grouping the daughter cells. therefore, the number of daughter cells analyzed was twice the number of experiments as indicated in the parentheses.

###two unmanipulated, dividing cells near the manipulated cell were followed in each experiment as controls.

we then asked if midzone microtubules, or proteins associated with the anaphase spindle midzone, are involved in interphase progression. treatment of cells with nocodazole for 6– <dig> min at early anaphase before severing, with or without additional incubation with the drug, caused a significant delay  in the progression of interphase for both daughter cells, as compared to neighboring cells . aurora b in these cells showed a complete dispersal from the midzone   <cit> , with a similar amount distributed in the two severed cells. these observations suggest the midzone microtubules may provide a scaffold for the activation/deactivation of some components to allow normal progression of the cell cycle. we suspect that the weaker effect compared to that caused by severing may be due to the known resistance of some midzone microtubules to nocodazole  <cit> . alternatively, a brief association of the components with the midzone microtubules before and during nocodazole treatment may be sufficient for partial activation/deactivation.

we also tested if telophase midbody is required for interphase progression. cells were severed at mid- or late cytokinesis to form daughter cells with and without the midbody . using cells expressing aurora b-gfp, which is known to associate with the midbody  <cit> , we confirmed that the midbody was completely segregated from one of the daughter cells . all nine manipulated pairs showed a normal progression of interphase indistinguishable from that of unmanipulated control cells, irrespective of the presence of the midbody . we conclude that the presence or absence of telophase midbody no longer affects the progression of subsequent interphase, despite the similarity of molecular components to those in the earlier spindle midzone. thus, most likely it is transient catalytic reactions in the anaphase midzone that are crucial for the progression of cell cycle.

some of major mitotic regulators are degraded by anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome  during anaphase  <cit> . degradation of the polo-like kinase  and aurora a by apc occurred while they were localized along midzone microtubules  <cit> , raising the possibility that interphase progression may require the degradation of some mitotic/cytokinetic proteins, which may then cause activation of downstream components crucial for cell cycle. in addition, some molecules associated with midzone microtubules may be directly involved in cell cycle events such as dna synthesis, as suggested by the chromosomal passenger protein-like dynamics of a dna replication initiating factor, orc <dig> during cell division  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that anaphase midzone not only play a role in the stimulation of cytokinesis in cultured cells, but also provide a scaffold for the activation/deactivation of factors essential for the progression of subsequent cell cycle.

