BACKGROUND
the perceptual quality of successive acoustic signals considerably varies depending on the inter-stimulus intervals . for example, when click signals are repetitively presented at isi ≥ ~ <dig> ms, individual signals are clearly heard as discrete events  <cit> ; at isi ≤ ~ <dig> ms, those are perceptually fused together  <cit> . this isi boundary, denominated as "temporal-order threshold," has long been considered as an important indicator of temporal resolving capacity of the auditory system . another example of isi-dependent perception is categorical perception of stop consonant-vowel syllables : if isi between the consonant release and voicing onset  is shorter than a critical value , the consonant is perceived as "voiced"; if isi exceeds this value, the consonant is perceived as "unvoiced" . in many languages including english, the vot boundary lies at 20– <dig> ms with some variance among place of articulation . monkeys  <cit> , chinchillas  <cit>  and birds  <cit>  all place the vot boundary at approximately the same value, indicating the categorical perception of cv syllables does not necessarily arise from a specific human speech mechanism but is based, at least partially, on general properties of the auditory system.

case studies of patients with stroke lesions restricted to the bilateral primary auditory cortex  reported that  their temporal-order threshold was elongated up to ~ <dig> ms  <cit>  and  they were severally impaired in the categorical perception of cv syllables  <cit> . these findings suggest that ai is critically involved in isi-dependent differential perception regardless of whether the signals are phonetic or non-phonetic .

the previous single unit study in un-anesthetized animals ai revealed that click trains produce qualitatively distinct response features depending on isi: at isi ≥ ~ <dig> ms, stimulus-locking responses dominate; at isi ≤ ~ <dig> ms, responses occur only at the onset of the train  <cit> . similar finding was obtained for ai responses to cv syllables: at isi  ≥ ~ <dig> ms, stimulus-locking responses take place to both the consonant and vowel; at isi  ≤ ~ <dig> ms, responses occur only to the consonant  <cit> . since these neurophysiological isi boundaries  match both the temporal-order threshold and vot boundary , it was suggested that the neural processes constraining ai stimulus-locking responses are also responsible for the perceptual boundaries of phonetic/non-phonetic acoustic signals  <cit> .

the present study, by employing a single unit recording technique in un-anesthetized cats, thoroughly analyses how ai neurons respond to click trains of variable isi. then, by modeling the observed responses, we extract general principles governing various isi-dependent behaviors of ai neurons especially stimulus-locking responses.

RESULTS
response features in the click-train paradigm
the results are based on  <dig> ai neurons that showed statistically significant excitatory responses to the click stimuli . we classified those neurons into  <dig> types depending on whether they had the capacity for stimulus-locking responses to click trains  or not .

as exemplified in figure 1a, the majority of synchronization type neurons  exhibited  <dig> qualitatively distinct response patterns  depending on isi. in region α , only the onset response was evident. in region β  spikes clearly time-locked to individual clicks: temporal modulation transfer function  exceeded the statistically significant level . hereafter, we call this response pattern "stimulus-locking responses." in region γ , spikes intermittently occurred without stimulus locking . the driven rate measured 50– <dig> ms after the onset of the train  exceeded the threshold for excitation . in region δ , the onset response was followed by an unresponsive period. since region β of this subset was bordered with regions α and γ, we regarded tmtf shape as "band-pass" . as exemplified in figure 1b, the remaining  <dig> synchronization neurons exhibited  <dig> response regions. since region β of this subset was bordered with only region γ, we regarded tmtf shape as "low-pass" . regardless of tmtf shape, the border between regions β and γ , in other words, the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses, lay at on average ~ <dig> ms . this value is in line with the previous single unit studies in un-anesthetized animals ai  <cit> .

see figure  <dig>  and methods for neuron classification and definition of the response variables. numbers within parentheses represent the reverse of isi.

the non-synchronization neurons comprised  <dig> subsets. one subset , as exemplified in figure 1c, exhibited  <dig> response regions  with low-pass rmtf . another subset , as exemplified in figure 1d, exhibited only region γ with high-pass rmtf . these subsets, especially the latter, have been scarcely uncounted under anesthetized conditions  <cit> . they were, however, excluded from the following analysis since the main interest here is to extract general principles governing stimulus-locking responses .

effects of the stimulus level
to examine effects of the stimulus level, we adhered to the click-train paradigm at various stimulus levels . we examined  <dig> synchronization neurons, firing activities of which could be isolated long enough for the detailed analysis. among them,  <dig> neurons exhibited responses at  <dig> db below the best spl while  <dig> neurons did at  <dig> db below the best spl.

accumulation effects: region β
it has been widely reported that repetitive stimulation exerts accumulation effects on auditory neurons especially those in the auditory cortex . we addressed whether and how such effects influenced the observed responses. in the present and the following section, we paid special attention to regions β and δ, where the causative relationship between a given stimulus and spikes can be clearly identified.

to address the durability of this response degeneration, we presented a single click  at  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig>  s after the termination of the click trains that were delivered at best isi . figure 4e illustrates the normalized #spikes  at each time point . the value was still smaller than unity  at  <dig>  s but became equivalent to unity at  <dig>  and  <dig>  s . this indicates that the response degeneration lasted  <dig> – <dig>  s after the termination of the trains.

the above features, both during and after the click trains, correspond to the phenomenon, so-called "frequency-dependent depression"  <cit> .

accumulation effects: region δ
at relatively long isis in region δ, spikes occasionally occurred after the onset responses . such activities potentially hinder temporal precision in measuring the duration of the onset responses. those activities were sufficiently suppressed at isis at or shorter than  <dig>  multiples of the γ-δ border in all synchronization type neurons examined. this relative isi value is uniformly adopted in the following analysis of region δ.

the onset response in region δ was typically followed by an unresponsive period . to estimate the recovery time course from this response degeneration, we presented a probe stimulus at  <dig> ,  <dig>  or  <dig>  s after the termination of the train . the normalized #spikes at each time point was illustrated as filled bars in figure 5f . for comparison, the data in figure 4e  was appended, which depicts the recovery time course after region β. the major findings are:  at  <dig>  s, the value was smaller after region δ than after region β ;  at  <dig>  s, the value after region δ was still below unity  while the value after region β got equivalent to unity. together, it appears that response degeneration is more profound and longer lasting after region δ than after region β. this fits well to the principle of "frequency-dependent depression": response degeneration grows larger and longer at higher stimulation rates  <cit> . it is, thus, plausible that the unresponsive period in region δ was caused by such intense "frequency-dependent depression" as to abolish firing activities for a while.

involvement of post-activation suppression in stimulus-locking responses
the neural processes of stimulus-locking responses  can be glimpsed if we pay special attention to the vector strength, the origin of the tmtf . the vector strength measures the degree of temporal confinement of spikes against stimuli. it reaches a maximum  when spikes occur in exactly the same period with reference to the individual stimuli, and spikes  are completely absent in the remaining period. on the other hand, it reaches a minimum  when spikes occur entirely independently of the stimuli. it is, thus, quite conceivable that the capacity for stimulus-locking responses arise from neural processes that temporally confine spikes. to examine this, we conducted the single-click paradigm in which the dynamics of neural activity after single click presentation was qualified with referring to the spontaneous firing rate . this analysis was performed on  <dig> neurons  that showed an appreciable amount of spontaneous firing rate for detecting suppression.

figures 6a–d show responses of  <dig> representative neurons . as exemplified in figure 6a, all non-synchronization neurons examined  showed only single excitatory period . in contrast, as exemplified in figure 6b–d, all synchronization neurons showed a "post-activation suppression": the 1st excitation was followed by the suppression, suggesting the critical role of post-activation suppression in stimulus-locking responses.

we sorted the synchronization neurons into  <dig> subsets based on the sequence of excitation and suppression . the smallest subset  showed "e-s sequence" : only the 1st excitation and 1st suppression were evident. the largest subset  showed "e-s-e sequence" : the 1st suppression was followed by a rebound excitation . this sequence has been often observed in ai  <cit>  and somatosensory cortex  <cit> . the remainder  showed "e-s-e-s sequence" : the 2nd excitation was followed by another suppressory period . this subset includes  <dig> neurons in which the 1st and 2nd suppression were separated by spontaneous-level activities instead of the 2nd excitation. among the synchronization neurons examined, the 2nd suppression was present in  <dig> out of  <dig> neurons with band-pass tmtf, whereas it was absent in all the neurons with low-pass tmtf . fisher's exact test revealed a significant effect of the 2nd suppression on the tmtf shape . it is, thus, plausible that the interplay of the 2nd excitation and 2nd suppression constrains tmtf shape .

e: excitation; s: suppression.

modeling of ai temporal behavior
de ribaupierre and colleagues  <cit>  reported in ai single unit study that stimulus-locking responses were greatly related to the temporal interplay of depolarization and hyperpolization. compelling evidence indicates that depolarization and hyperpolization of ai neurons are chiefly based on excitatory post-synaptic potentials  and inhibitory post-synaptic potentials , respectively  <cit> . notably, cox and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated in ai slice preparations that electrical stimulation to thalamocortical afferent fibers  elicits at maximum  <dig> psp components at the soma of a subset of ai neurons in the following order: a fast-epsp, fast-ipsp, slow-epsp and slow-ipsp . this scheme leads to the following prediction how the ai neurons generate firing responses to paired stimuli of variable isi. first, when the 2nd stimulus  is given during the fast-epsp, it may readily elicit firing responses. however, the gap between the discharge clusters elicited by the 1st and 2nd stimulus is seemingly ambiguous.

consequently, stimulus-locking responses, if any, would be weak . second, when the 2nd stimulus is given during the fast-ipsp  or slow-ipsp , it may hardly elicit firing responses. stimulus-locking responses would be negligibly small . third, when the 2nd stimulus is given during the slow-epsp , it may readily elicit firing responses. those discharge clusters are expectedly separated by the fast-ipsp . as a consequence, clear stimulus-locking responses would take place . interestingly, the "predicted tmtf for paired stimuli" resembles the "observed tmtf on click trains" that was schematically drawn based on the data of the synchronization type with band-pass tmtf  except for the short isi potion . this inconsistency may arise from the fact that if the stimuli are repetitively delivered at short isi, impact of initial several stimuli leads to such intense "frequency-dependent depression" as to abolish firing responses to the following stimuli . collectively it is suggested that  as a principle, the temporal interplay of the psp components underlies ai stimulus-locking responses and  at short isi, intense frequency-dependent depression abolishes stimulus-locking responses.

to numerically examine the above conjecture, we conducted a simulation study . the model consists of a single ai neuron which receives external input via various combinations of ampa, gabaa, nmda and/or gabab receptors, each of which was reported to chiefly mediate the fast-epsp, fast-ipsp, slow-epsp and slow-ipsp, respectively . the amplitude of external input was modeled in two different ways:  taking fixed value regardless of isi or  varying in an isi dependent manner due to both frequency-dependent depression and paired-pulse facilitation. each panel in figure 8a shows a version of simulated membrane potentials responding at the best isi . if ampa receptors alone were incorporated into the model , then each input signal elicited firing responses. however, robust onset responses, which were always observed in region β , was unclear. if nmda receptors were added into the model , then firing responses occurred throughout the stimulus train; however, stimulus locking became unclear. if gabaa receptors were added to the model , then the neuron gained the capacity for stimulus locking. while this feature, more or less, resembled our physiological observation , the former differed from the latter in that:  the 3rd stimulus failed to elicit firing responses and  the discharge clusters elicited by the 4th and 5th stimulus merged together. these discrepancies were diminished if gabab receptors were incorporated into the model .

nonetheless, the 4-receptor version does not necessarily parallel our physiological observation. first, this model predicts the occurrence of stimulus locking at much shorter isi  compared to physiological observation. in other words, the predicted β-γ border  was much shorter than the observed one . second, this model predicts "skipping" of firing responses at short isi: for example, the spikes were expected to occur every other stimulus at  <dig>  ms isi  and every three stimuli at  <dig>  ms isi . these features, however, have been scarcely encountered in our physiological recording . in fact, the shortening of isi led to the systematic reduction of responsivity to the latter clicks in a given train  while responsivity to the initial several clicks being relatively well preserved, as reported by plenty of single unit studies using periodic signals  <cit> . these two discrepancies were diminished when we provided the external input with both frequency-dependent depression  and paired-pulse facilitation  . specifically, the capacity for stimulus locking at shorter isi was considerably weakened  with only the onset response being manifested at the γ-δ border  and in region δ . as a consequence, the β-γ border prolonged to  <dig> ms .

at longer isi, in marked contrast to short isi, the 4-receptor version and full version predicted similar response features. for instance, at  <dig> ms the initial two clicks elicited stimulus-locking responses while the following ones did not , similarly to region α . this indicates that the frequency-dependent depression and paired-pulse facilitation are much less influential at longer isi.

next, we investigated the main constraints on responses at long isi. first examined was the contribution of gabab-receptor-mediated ipsp. when the conductance of the gabab receptors  was reduced by factor of  <dig>  , responsivity to the initial several stimuli was enhanced  thereby prolonging the α-β border . contrariwise, when the conductance of the nmda receptors  was reduced, responsivity to the 2nd and latter stimuli decreased  enhancing low-cut effect. manipulation of the conductance of the ampa or gabaa receptors did not greatly influence responses at long isi . taken together, it is suggested that the g¯gabab and g¯nmda act as main constraints on the temporal filtering at long isi: if the former is reduced, the tmtf tends to be more low-pass whereas if the latter is reduced, the tmtf more band-pass.

discussion
by using click signals, we investigated neural mechanisms underlying isi-dependent responses of the ai neurons which had the capacity for stimulus-locking responses . the β-γ border, i.e., the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses, lay at on average ~ <dig> ms  and was level tolerant over high spls . the time course of excitability during  and after  the click trains suggested the involvement of short-term plasticity of thalamocortical synaptic connections. comparison between response features to the click trains and a single click  led to the notion that the temporal interplay of excitation and suppression basically determines the capacity for stimulus-locking responses as well as tmtf shape. a single-cell dynamic model well replicated the physiological data  suggesting that isi-dependent responses of the synchronization neurons are configured through the temporal interplay of the post-synaptic potentials  along with short-term plasticity of thalamocortical synaptic connections.

perceptual relevance of the observed ai responses
case studies about ai-impaired patients indicated that ai is responsible for the temporal-order threshold . the mean value of the β-γ border , i.e., shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses , agree well with the temporal-order threshold  <cit> . the β-γ border was nearly invariant at the best spl and  <dig> db below it  in accordance with the level tolerance of the temporal-order threshold over high spl  <cit> . these findings strongly support the notion that the β-γ border serves as a neural correlate of the temporal-order threshold. accordingly, it could be postulated that click trains are clearly heard as a series of "discrete" events as long as stimulus-locking responses dominate in ai. by taking count of the view that the temporal-order threshold and perceptual boundary of cv syllables at least partially share common neural processes , it is possible that the β-γ border also serves as the basis for the perceptual boundary of cv syllables.

the psychological studies have revealed that a total body of click trains of isi ≥ ~ <dig> ms produces two kinds of sensation: at isi of ~30– <dig> ms, it leads to "rhythm" percept; at isi ≥ ~ <dig> ms, rhythm percept fades away while the sensation of "fluctuation" remains  <cit> . since the value of the α-β border  as well as its level tolerance  is consistent with the rhythm-fluctuation boundary , it is possible that region α dominantly represents "fluctuation" whereas region β does "rhythm" percept.

at isi < ~ <dig> ms where individual clicks are no longer clearly heard as discrete events, a total body of click trains leads to three kinds of sensation with partial overlap  <cit> . at isi of ~3– <dig> ms, a buzz or rattle like sensation is produced, defined as "roughness"; at isi of ~5– <dig> ms, tone quality of sensation dominates, whose perceived frequency is directly related to waveform periodicity ; at isi < several ms, another mode of pitch sensation dominates, which depends on the fundamental frequency . none of the isi range of these sensations does not fit to that of region γ or region δ  making it unlikely that our single unit data have direct relevance to these sensations. steinschneider and colleagues  <cit>  suggested that periodicity pitch may be represented in ai by oscillatory neuronal ensemble responses locking to temporal envelope, and spectral pitch by rate-place coding that is sensitive to both the fundamental frequency and other harmonics in the train. further insight into neurophysiological bases of these sensations would be obtained by coordinated single/multiunit recordings and psychoacoustic experiments.

comparison to previous ai studies in un-anesthetized animals regarding to cell-type classification
an accumulating body of single unit studies in un-anesthetized animals has investigated ai responses to periodic acoustic signals such as click trains  <cit>  and amplitude-modulated sounds  <cit> . irrespective of methological differences , these studies appear to agree that ai neurons comprise largely two subsets: one subset responds predominantly at long isi  in a stimulus-locking manner  while another subset does at short isi  in a sustained manner .

the following three findings indicate that our synchronization neurons  correspond to the subset that was reported to conduct temporal code. first, the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses in those studies  was similar to the β-γ border of our synchronization neurons . second, at shorter isi , the studies reported that the neurons intermittently fired without stimulus locking. this feature resembles region γ responses of our synchronization neurons. third, at much shorter isi , the studies reported that only the onset response was evident. this feature, as well as its cutoff isi, is quite akin to region δ of our synchronization neurons.

our non-synchronization neurons with high-pass rmtf showed non-stimulus-locking responses during the presence of the click trains . such responses occurred only at short isi  with shorter isi leading to larger driven rate . this feature closely resembles the responses of the subset that was reported to conduct rate code. on the other hand, our non-synchronization neurons with low-pass rmtf  do not correspond to either subset mentioned above. they may belong to the "unclassified neurons" in wang and colleagues' study  <cit> , which were reported to respond in some manner to click signals without clearly defined stimulus-locking responses or non-stimulus-locking rate responses.

comparison to previous ai studies of neural mechanisms underlying stimulus-locking responses
de ribaupierre and colleagues  <cit>  revealed that ai stimulus-locking responses are related to the temporal interplay of depolarization and hyperpolization. while this interplay potentially results from non-synaptically mediated after-hyperpolarization  <cit> , growing evidence indicates that this interplay is based mainly on the sequence of epsps and ipsps  <cit> . in particular, cox and colleagues  <cit>  proved in rat ai slice preparations that epsps and ipsps are mediated chiefly through ampa/nmda receptors and gabaa/gabab receptors, respectively . to date, however, it has been unclear whether and how these psp components are related to stimulus-locking responses of ai neurons.

on the other hand, there is physiological data suggesting that ai stimulus-locking responses are mediated through other neural processes than the interplay of psp components. for example wehr and zador  <cit> , by employing the whole-cell recording technique on ketamine-anesthetized rats ai, measured the excitatory and inhibitory synaptic conductances elicited by click pairs of variable isi. they found that inhibitory conductances were too short-lived to account for suppression of spiking responses to the 2nd click which was delivered at isis ≥ several hundreds milliseconds. eggermont  <cit> , based on physiological data, proposed a model in which presynaptic facilitation and depression determine the low-pass characteristics of ai stimulus-locking responses.

our single-cell dynamic model comprehensively integrates the above findings/suggestions in that the capacity for stimulus-locking responses  is explained in terms of the temporal interplay of the psp components along with short-term plasticity . this view is compatible with the pioneering work of grothe  <cit>  that proved the critical contribution of epsps and ipsps to stimulus-locking responses of auditory brainstem neurons for encoding interaural time difference. furthermore, our model can explain the neural processes that give rise to the other isi-dependent ai responses such as in regions γ, δ and α .

it has been proved, in a gap-in-noise detection paradigm where leading and trailing wideband noise had the same frequency content, that the minimum gap between the noises  for stimulus-locking responses was  <dig> ms for a 20-ms leading noise,  <dig> ms for a 50-ms leading noise, and reached an asymptote of  <dig> ms for a 200-ms leading noise  <cit> . this implies that temporal resolving capacity of individual ai neurons is not fixed, but varies dynamically as depending on the duration of the leading signal. since our model was based on the physiological data obtained using only 1-ms long clicks, this is best suited for neural processes that are triggered at the stimulus onset, not later in the stimulus.

the present study revealed that recovery period of ai spiking activities was in the order of seconds . this range is consistent with the values reported in awake  and ketamine-anesthetized animals  but is much longer than those measured in barbiturate-anesthetized animals . a number of observations indicate that barbiturate reduces spontaneous and evoked spiking activities  <cit> . this leads to a conjecture that frequency-dependent depression, which results chiefly from temporal exhaustion of readily releasable neurotransmitter pool  <cit> , is much less potent and less durable under barbiturate anesthesia than the other conditions. under barbiturate anesthesia, weight of the influence on the recovery period may shift from frequency-dependent depression, which lasts for seconds  <cit> , to ipsps which extend for maximally several hundreds milliseconds.

relative contribution to ai stimulus-locking responses: intra-ai processing vs. sub-ai processing
there is a marked resemblance between the predicted tmtf  and observed tmtf  except for the short isi portion . remarkably, these tmtf curves derived from rather different experimental conditions: the former was based on the data obtained by electrical stimulation to rat ai slice preparations ; the latter, during acoustic stimulation in un-anesthetized cats. by taking account of a large difference in the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses  between un-anesthetized  and anesthetized animals , it seems likely that the neural processes of ai stimulus-locking responses are much less susceptible to the mechanical infringement of slicing the brain and species difference than the pharmacological effects of anesthetics. some anesthetics, such as pentobarbital, are known to potentate gabaa-ergic inhibition  <cit> . this may enhance the fast-ipsp and consequently diminish the slow-epsp, especially in its early phase . as a result, the transition point from the fast-ipsp to slow-epsp will shift afterward , prolonging β-γ border . slice preparations, on the other hand, do not suffer such artificial enhancement of gabaa-ergic inhibition but retain local circuitry. these considerations favor the idea that ai stimulus-locking responses are elaborated mainly through intra-ai processing rather than simple preservation of sub-ai processing. the above idea receives support from the previous studies that directly compared the best isi within pairs of functionally connected medial geniculate body  neuron and ai neuron  <cit> . in those studies, spiking activities of individual mgb and ai neurons were simultaneously recorded and the functional connection was confirmed if their activities showed a single cross-correlogram peak within 1– <dig> ms lag time, the mgb neuron leading the ai neuron, under both spontaneous and stimulus-driven conditions. importantly, no rank correlation was revealed for the best isi; mgb neurons with longer  best isi did not preferentially connect with ai neurons with longer  best isi. this suggests that the generally observed prolongation in the best isi from mgb to ai  <cit>  cannot be simply attributed to a degradation of temporal resolution due to intrinsic membrane properties or synaptic delay but is rather due to more elaborated intra-ai processing.

CONCLUSIONS
our physiological observation suggest that β-γ border, the shorter cutoff isi for stimulus-locking responses of ai neurons, serves as a neural correlate of the temporal-order threshold and vot boundary of cv syllables. the present modeling study supports the idea that the observed isi-dependent responses are largely mediated through temporal interplay between epsps and ipsps at the thalamocortical synapse along with its short-term plasticity.

the parameter values in our model were not directly measured in the current recording study but were determined referring to other published data . under this proviso, the weight of ampa, gabaa, nmda and gabab receptors was arranged to better predict the observed phenomena. in fact, relative weight of the receptors may vary across neurons, and other cellular and/or network mechanisms may also contribute to the observed phenomena. further insight into this issue would be glimpsed by measuring the membrane potential of the ai neurons during acoustic stimulation or analyzing the effect of selective receptor antagonists on their stimulus-response features.

