BACKGROUND
intense sexual selection can lead to competing males evolving alternative ways to obtain fertilizations, thereby enhancing their reproductive success  <cit> . in genetically-based polymorphic species, alternative mating strategies  are characterized by distinct behavioural and morphological traits that help males  ameliorate their mating disadvantages when facing superior competitors  <cit> . for example, in some polymorphic lizards  <cit> , birds  <cit> , fish  <cit>  and marine isopods  <cit> , large and/or colourful males are aggressive and defend breeding territories to exclude competitors. as a consequence, subordinate males have evolved amss, such as sneak copulations that are accompanied by adaptations to sperm competition  <cit>  to possibly circumvent overt aggression. amss are expected to be maintained as long as the resulting average fitness of one strategy equals that of the others co-occurring in the population  <cit> , with frequency-dependent selection favouring rare over common phenotypes  <cit> .

sexual selection theory predicts that strong mating preferences for males with elaborate ornaments that reflect their quality or dominance should deplete genetic variation in these traits  <cit> . there are, however, cases in which males as a result of high variance in mating success and thus strong sexual selection exhibit striking, genetically-based polymorphism in display traits . further, several studies in a broad range of taxa  consistently suggest that such variation in male phenotypes  is adaptive and correlates with asymmetric social dominance relationships defining amss. a mechanism by which variation in male phenotypes is maintained is through frequency dependent selection for amss  <cit> . for instance, in the side-blotched lizard , males have evolved amss  and the relative fitness of each strategy fluctuates depending on the frequency of the competing strategies from one generation to the next  <cit> . under frequency-dependent selection, the rare strategy appears to have mating advantage  <cit> . negative frequency-dependent selection is often invoked to explain polymorphisms that are not shaped by sexual selection  <cit> .

although not necessarily independent of frequency dependent selection, a less explored mechanism for the maintenance of polymorphisms involves complex, balancing selection in which different aspects of sexual and natural selection select for unique phenotypes . for instance, female mating preferences may favour colourful males, while agonistic male-male competition may favor large males  <cit> . this lack of synergism between the two aspects of sexual selection may allow for the invasion of amss and thus promote the maintenance of polymorphisms  <cit> .

in many species, males can use overt aggression as a tactic to circumvent female choice  <cit> . for instance, dominant males can prevent attractive males from gaining access to females  <cit> . however, male aggression can also facilitate female choice if winners of male contests signal their quality  to females  <cit> . further, in many taxa, the success of mating attempts ultimately relies on female consent  <cit> , and thus; females may still exercise choice despite overt male aggression  <cit> . this potential for conflict and synergism between intrasexual competition and intersexual mate choice can result in opportunities for certain males to exploit different components of sexual selection  <cit> , facilitating the evolution and maintenance of amss  <cit> . here, we explore how overt male aggression can influence male mating success and facilitate the persistence of colour polymorphism in the pentamorphic fish poecilia parae.

the south american poeciliid p. parae exhibit five y-linked, discrete colour morphs  <cit> . these morphs include:  immaculata, the smallest and drab-coloured males that resemble juvenile females;  parae, the largest males that exhibit a striped tail and black vertical body bars that intensify during social interactions; and  the blue, red, and yellow males that are of intermediate body size and display colourful body flanks  <cit> . males and females mate promiscuously, with males providing no resources during mating  <cit> . poecilia parae breeds year-round  <cit> , suggesting an opportunity for intense competition among males to identify and monopolize sexually receptive females. in p. parae, the carotenoid-based red and yellow morphs are strongly preferred by the majority of females as mates, and the smaller immaculata males are the least attractive males  <cit> . however, because the immaculata morph specializes in sneak copulations with apparent adaptations for sperm competition  <cit> , such a mating strategy would be successful only if sneaker males can circumvent pre-copulatory female choice, intrasexual aggression, or both  may be the result of their competitive abilities in open mixed groups  <cit> .

in this study, we experimentally test for the role of male-male competition in the evolution and maintenance of amss. if indeed, particular morphs specialize in male-male aggression, we predict that agonistic interactions  may limit the mating opportunities of the attractive  morphs,  have the potential to influence female mating preferences, and  enhance the mating success of aggressive males. results consistent with these predictions would suggest that the opportunity to exploit male-male competition may facilitate the maintenance of genetically-based polymorphisms.

RESULTS
 female mate choice and male dominance
on average, females spent  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the time in the region close to the test males. in the experiment where males were not allowed to interact , females spent more time with the parae, blue, red and yellow than with the drab immaculata males . after observing male-male interactions , females switched their mating preferences when parae males were winners of interactions against blue , red , and yellow males . similarly, aggression displayed towards the blue males modified female choice favouring red  and yellow  males . we found no statistical differences between the mate choice scores of red and yellow males  for the pre-male and post-male competition experiments .

on average, parae males dominated blue, red and yellow males . immaculata males never initiated aggressive interactions during the staged contests against other males, and they were attacked most frequently by yellow males  and in less proportion by parae males . blue males typically lost to red  and yellow  males. yellow males were dominant in 60% of their encounters with red males .

in addition, the five morphs differed in the rate of received  and initiated  aggressive behaviours . overall, the immaculata and parae morphs were less likely to be attacked when compared to the blue, red, and yellow males . in contrast, parae males initiated more aggressive behaviours than the immaculata, blue and red morphs . parae and yellow males did not differ significantly in rate of initiating aggression .

 competition for access to females and mating success
the total number of aggressive behaviours was fewer when males were allowed to directly interact with females than when females were separated from males and only observed male-male interactions . morphs differed in the number of aggressive behaviours received  and initiated  during the open aquaria experiment. parae and yellow males received fewer attacks , but, along with red males, initiated the greater proportion of aggressive behaviours . compared to parae, blue, and red males, yellow males initiated more aggressive behaviours  against immaculata males. in contrast, parae males initiated the least number of aggressive behaviours towards immaculata males , yet directed more attacks to blue  and red  males.

the number of copulations  gained as a result of individuals being able to fend off their competitors differed significantly among morphs . parae males experienced an increase in mating success when competing against blue  and red  males, but not with yellow males .

yellow males obtained significantly more copulations after winning against blue males  and marginally significant after winning against immaculata males . moreover,  <dig> % of copulations obtained by yellow males were the result of aggressive interactions  with females and sneak copulations.

discussion
our results suggest that certain p. parae morphs have evolved the use of overt aggression as an ams. several lines of evidence support this interpretation. first, males of the parae and yellow morphs consistently dominated their competitors during staged contests by excluding rival males from gaining access to females. second, when females and competing males were allowed to freely interact, parae and yellow males gained a substantial proportion of matings by directly monopolizing females and limiting the mating opportunities of the blue and red morphs, explicitly showing that aggression indeed results in increased mating success for dominant males. finally, females observing male-male interactions modified their mate choice favouring dominant over subordinate males for contests that involved males of the parae, red, and yellow morphs. these results suggest that the opportunity for intense intrasexual competition can facilitate the evolution and maintenance of amss when females display strong preferences for attractive but not necessarily dominant males .

during the staged contests, immaculata males, the smallest and the least preferred males by females, were typically submissive. in our study, the mating success of immaculata males relied on the strategy of appearing like juvenile females to avoid harassment when approaching receptive females and in taking advantage of their smaller body size to sneak copulations. the juvenile female-mimic strategy was mostly effective when immaculata males were competing with the parae, blue, and red males. these behavioural patterns suggest that the immaculata morph has evolved a strategy to circumvent male agonistic interactions and female mate choice .

our experiments are consistent with previous findings that uncovered variation in female mating preferences for colourful males  <cit> . when male-male competition is excluded, a large proportion of females strongly preferred red and yellow males; however, some females showed consistent preferences for parae and blue males as well  <cit> . in the experiments where females were physically separated from males with a clear barrier, red and yellow males did not differ in their ability to attract females, even after the test females observed yellow males dominate over red males. however, in the experiments where males and females could physically interact, yellow males were dominant over red males and were capable of restricting access of red males to females. this difference in aggression translated in greater association time with females for yellow males. surprisingly, however, the observed preference did not differ in their realized mating success , suggesting that even though aggressive yellow males can restrict the access of red males to females, female preference for red males was able to counteract male aggression. that is, in cases in which red males were subordinate, females still managed to circumvent the attempts of dominant yellow males to monopolize matings and mated with the attractive red males. similar female mating behaviours have also been reported in guppies , wherein paternity in multiply sired broods was biased towards subordinate males .

how then does intrasexual competition contribute to the maintenance of the striking colour polymorphism in p. parae? because sexual selection operates at distinct stages , males can evolve unique strategies that specialize in one or few stages of sexual selection . for instance, females may have strong mating preferences for particular males, but the most dominant and aggressive males can exclude attractive males from gaining access to females  <cit> . other amss can circumvent both female choice and male aggression by mimicking females and adopting a sneaker strategy . furthermore, males exploiting postcopulatory sexual selection could also evolve sperm related traits that enhance their competitive abilities during sperm competition  or postcopulatory female choice .

indeed, several studies have demonstrated that under intense episodes of sexual selection, males experiencing continuous mating disadvantages should evolve strategies that exploit different components of sexual selection . in these examples, frequency-dependent selection is the most plausible explanation in facilitating the co-existence of the amss  <cit> . in p. parae, however, frequency-dependent selection cannot fully explain the persistence of the five morphs, as their frequency in nature is consistent over time . field surveys from  <dig> to  <dig> indicate that immaculata and parae males are the most abundant, followed by blue males, with red and yellow males being rarest  <cit> . in this case, different forms of balancing selection may help explain the persistence of the five morphs in p. parae. for instance, females show a strong mating preference for the red and yellow males  <cit> , and so these males should be most abundant. red and yellow males, however, are rare, and this may be due to strong predator  preference for prey with carotenoid colour patches  <cit> . therefore, the interaction between female mating preference and selective predation may provide opportunities for less attractive males to evolve amss, and invade and persist in the population. our study suggests that the parae  morph use intrasexual aggression to monopolize females and obtain matings. however, in this and many other systems, female cooperation is needed to achieve successful matings , and so, while parae males are able to monopolize access to females, female mate choice may still counteract the effects of male aggression, and prevent parae and yellow males from driving the other morphs to extinction. the drab female-mimic immaculata morph, besides being cryptic to visual predators, represents an alternative strategy that efficiently seems to circumvent both female mating preferences and male-male competition . this form of balancing selection in which female mate choice and intrasexual competition, combined with predator preferences for red and yellow males, interact may ultimately provide opportunities for amss to evolve and persist in the population.

lastly, although blue males gained some matings as a result of aggressive interactions and variable female mating preferences  <cit> , the factors that allow for the persistence of this morph is under current analysis. recent studies suggest a strong role for environmental heterogeneity in favouring the maintenance of colour polymorphisms  <cit> . for instance, as shown in the pentamorphic sulawesi fish, telmatherina sarasinorum  <cit> , female mating preferences may vary as a response to spatial and/or temporal fluctuations in the visual environment  <cit> . preliminary surveys of p. parae habitat indicate that the visual habitat is variable, with some areas being rich in short wavelength light. this suggests the intriguing possibility that, in their natural settings, blue males may be able to exploit microhabitats rich in short wavelengths ambient light to appear more conspicuous and thus more attractive to females . hence, the role of sexual selection under environmental heterogeneity may explain the persistence of the blue p. parae morph.

CONCLUSIONS
frequency dependent selection is typically invoked to explain the evolution and maintenance of genetically-based polymorphisms/amss. under this scenario, morphs should experience cyclical fluctuation in their frequencies, with rare morphs having a selective advantage over common morphs. alternatively, and somewhat independent of frequency dependent selection, complex balancing selection may explain the evolution and maintenance of polymorphisms in cases where the frequencies of morphs experience little or no changes over time. in our work, the antagonistic interaction between different components of sexual selection , in addition to natural selection by predators, allows for the invasion of amss and thus the maintenance of the striking polymorphism in p. parae.

