BACKGROUND
mesenchymal stem cells can be broadly defined as a population of cells that have the ability to self-renew, adhere to plastic, and to differentiate into one or more specialized cell types  <cit> . tissue specific stem cells, such as mesenchymal stem cells  derived from bone marrow or adipose tissue, were initially thought to have a differentiation capacity limited to the tissue of origin. however, recent studies have shown that these cells may have the ability to differentiate into cells of mesodermal, endodermal, and ectodermal origins  <cit> . the term "mesenchymal stem cell" most often refers to stem cells derived from the stromal fraction of bone marrow, but can also be applied to stem cells derived from adipose tissue. adipose tissue is also derived from the mesenchyme and contains a supportive stroma that is easily isolated  <cit> . both adipose derived stem cells  and bone marrow derived stem cells  can be easily harvested in significant numbers and exhibit stable growth and proliferation in culture.

mscs have garnered increasing amounts of attention for their potential use in cell-based therapies and in regenerative medicine because of several attractive features:  they are easily isolated by bone marrow aspiration or liposuction under local anesthesia;  they can be extensively expanded in culture without loss of differentiation potential;  mscs can differentiate into multiple cell types;  mscs have the ability to seek out sites of tissue injury and repair the tissue by differentiating to replace injured cells or by creating an environment favorable for the repair of damaged tissue by endogenous cells  <cit> . the utilization of mscs derived from the adipose tissue or bone marrow of mice is appealing for use in extensive studies in the field of adult stem cell research due to the low cost of maintaining mice. these murine mscs  may be used to study stem cell properties in an in vivo setting for the purposes of evaluating therapeutic strategies that may have clinical applications in the future.

whenever cells are to be used in a transplantation scenario, the question of how to track the engraftment, persistence, and differentiation of the administered cells arises. tracking the cells should help determine whether a tissue is repaired by the transplanted stem cells, by activation of host stem cells, or by host cells recruited by the transplanted stem cells to the site of injury.

several reporter gene or tracking strategies are currently being developed to assist investigators with experimental stem cell therapies. cells can be transfected or transduced with vectors carrying a fluorescent transgene, but these methods are limited by the efficiency of gene transfer and retention  <cit> . other reporter genes may encode enzymes such as β-galactosidase , chloramphenicol acetyltransferase, and firefly luciferase. these enzymes require the addition of substrates to visualize labeled cells, which may lead to background staining if endogenous enzymes can also process the added substrate  <cit> . fluorescent dna binding dyes such as bis-benzimide are also available  <cit> , but are also limited by binding efficiencies and background fluorescence from dna released from dead cells. transplanting cells harvested from a male donor into a female host and searching for the y-chromosome is also a simple and effective strategy for tracking cells, but this technique cannot be utilized in living cells.

one solution to this problem is to transplant cells with an easily detectable or identifiable genetic reporter element. an ideal reporter gene would  cause no adverse effects to the stem cells or host development;  be ubiquitously expressed in all transplanted cells;  be precisely localized to transplanted cells;  be reliably detected in living cells, tissue mounts, and fixed and paraffin-embedded sections; and  be compatible with visualization of other markers  <cit> . for these purposes, an ideal approach is to harvest stem cells from a transgenic mouse strain expressing a transgene marker. these cells can be transplanted into non-transgenic mice without the complication of background staining.

one such transgene marker is enhanced green fluorescent protein . egfp is an excellent reporter because it can be visualized in living cells in culture and has already been useful in monitoring gene expression, protein-protein interactions, and trafficking and localization in vivo  <cit> . egfp-expressing transgenic mice are readily available and are a possible source for murine ascs  and murine bmscs  which constitutively express egfp  <cit> . these mice are uniformly green with the exceptions of hair and red blood cells  <cit> .

the efficiency of establishing stable cell lines with an integrated egfp gene is normally low, therefore cells from egfp transgenic mice may prove more useful and easier to culture  <cit> . however, employing egfp as a means of tracking cells has a couple drawbacks. one limitation is that egfp/gfp is thought to induce cell death  <cit> . intense excitation of the protein in vitro for extended periods of time can generate toxic free radicals, and the presence of gfp may also lead to increased dna methylation  <cit> . egfp was also designed to be expressed in the cytosol of a cell, which could lead to toxic effects if present in high concentrations. in spite of these potential obstacles, cell lines from transgenic mice often look normal and healthy even though they express significant amounts of egfp  <cit> .

this study seeks to characterize and compare four different groups of mmscs consisting of mascs and mbmscs derived from c57bl/ <dig> mice and mascs and mbmscs derived from egfp transgenic c57bl/ <dig> mice . characteristics such as differentiation potential, colony forming unit capabilities, cell surface marker profiles, and growth kinetics of these four groups of cells were evaluated in order to give future investigators a clearer understanding of the properties of egfp transgenic mmscs . mesenchymal stem cells derived from egfp transgenic mice may prove useful in future testing and development of stem cell therapies and regenerative medicine applications because of their inherent stem cell properties and constitutive expression of the fluorescent protein egfp.

RESULTS
morphology of transgenic mmscs
the morphology of transgenic mmscs is consistent with that of normal mmscs in that they are fibroblastic in appearance. mbmscs and gfptgbmscs seem to be more spindle-shaped than mascs or gfptgascs, thus individual mascs and gfptgascs require more surface area on the culture dish due to their larger and more flattened shape. gfptgmscs fluoresce when examined through a fitc filter , and remained fluorescent and maintained morphology through passage  <dig> . the mmscs were not cultured past passage  <dig> for this study.

differentiation assays
when cultured mmscs  were exposed to an osteogenic induction medium, they aggregated and formed calcium deposits after  <dig> weeks. an alizarin red stain for precipitated calcium salt was performed on differentiated cells. the mmscs  readily underwent osteogenic differentiation into mineralizing cells, and the transgenic mmscs and normal mmscs differentiated in a similar manner . however, quantitation of the levels of differentiation in these cell populations indicated that the mbmscs  ratio =  <dig>  +/-  <dig> ) and gfptgbmscs  appeared to differentiate into mineralizing cells to a greater degree than the mascs  and gfptgascs   . graphs represent the ratio of normalized od of differentiated cells and normalized od of control cells.

the ability to differentiate into adipocytes in response to  <dig> weeks of culture in adipogenic induction media was similar between the mmscs and transgenic mmscs . the mascs  and gfptgascs  differentiated along adipogenic lineages and had slightly higher levels of lipid accumulation when stained with oil red o than mbmscs  or gfptgbmscs , though this difference was not statistically significant  . graphs represent the ratio of normalized od of differentiated cells and normalized od of control cells.

gfptgascs and gfptgbmscs retain their ability to fluoresce when examined through a fitc filter even after undergoing adipogenic  or osteogenic differentiation assays. the fluorescence after osteogenic differentiation is not pictured because osteogenic differentiation is not easily illustrated without an alizarin red stain, which consequently quenches the fluorescence due to the low ph of the stain.

a chondrogenic differentiation assay was performed with all mmscs , and all cell types formed stable pellets. however, the mmscs produced little proteoglycans in response to chondrogenic differentiation media. the inability of mmscs from c57bl/ <dig> and other strains of mice to undergo efficient chondrogenesis has been noted previously  <cit>  and may be attributed to the lack of murine specific cytokines.

facs analysis
flow cytometric analysis of cell surface markers revealed that all of the mmscs and gfptgmscs were virtually identical in their patterns of expression . cells were tested for expression of markers such as cd <dig> , sca- <dig> , cd <dig> , cd11b , and cd <dig> . all cells exhibited very low expression of epitopes generally associated with hematopoietic cells such as cd <dig> , cd11b , and cd <dig>   <cit> . approximately half of the cells expressed cd <dig> , which is a marker generally associated with mesenchymal stem cells  <cit> . most cells expressed sca- <dig> , which is a marker associated with mscs, but also with hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors  <cit>  .

growth kinetics
all mmscs and gfptgmscs were plated at a density of  <dig> cells/cm <dig> in  <dig>  cm <dig> plates and cultured for  <dig> days. fold increase in density was analyzed every  <dig> days throughout the culture and calculated by comparing the density at each time point to the original plating density of  <dig> cells/cm <dig>  as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the four groups of mmscs varied greatly from one another in their growth rates. mascs had a 46-fold increase  in cell number while gfptgascs only had a 16-fold increase  within the same time period . similarly, mbmscs had a 402-fold increase  in cell number while gfptgbmscs only had a 187-fold increase  .

colony forming unit assay
assays for colony forming units offer a convenient means of assessing the proliferative capacity that mscs retain after the cells have been expanded in culture  <cit> . the proliferative capacity of mmscs and gfptgmscs was examined by comparing cfu assay results between these groups of cells. no statistically significant differences were found between mascs , gfptgascs , mbmscs , or gfptgbmscs  in their abilities to generate colony forming units .

discussion
isolation of mscs from mice is often more difficult than from other species  <cit> . only a small amount of bone marrow and adipose tissue is available per mouse and harvesting these tissues can sometimes be problematic. often there is unwanted growth of non-mesenchymal cells that can take over the culture. however, these challenges can be overcome to develop murine mesenchymal stem cell lines with consistently similar biologic properties. this study focused on comparing adipose derived and bone marrow derived stem cells from egfp transgenic c57bl/ <dig> mice and normal c57bl/ <dig> mice. even though these cells were isolated from 3– <dig> donors for each cell type, the characterizations of these four different cell types are relatively comparable with few differences.

mmscs from egfp transgenic mice are similar in their fibroblastic morphology and in differentiation capability to those from non-transgenic mice. however, when mascs and gfptgascs are compared with mbmscs and gfptgbmscs there are clear distinctions. mascs and gfptgascs appear more flattened and wider in diameter when compared to mbmscs and gfptgbmscs. both types of mbmscs undergo osteogenic differentiation more readily than mascs or gfptgascs. these distinctions point to tissue-specific differences between murine stem cells derived from adipose tissue and bone marrow. perhaps mascs contain more adipogenic committed progenitor cells compared with mbmscs, and mbmscs contain more osteogenic committed progenitor cells compared with mascs. finally, the expression of egfp does not seem to affect the ability to differentiate along adipogenic or osteogenic lineages, and cells retain their fluorescence even after undergoing differentiation.

all four cell types were also analyzed by flow cytometry for specific cell surface markers. cells were tested for expression of markers such as cd <dig>  sca- <dig>  cd <dig>  cd11b, and cd <dig>  all cells exhibited very low expression of epitopes generally associated with hematopoietic cells such as cd <dig>  cd11b, and cd <dig>  <cit> . these results suggest that the cultures were virtually free of hematopoietic cells. approximately half of the cells expressed cd <dig>  which is a marker generally associated with mesenchymal stem cells  <cit> . most cells expressed sca- <dig>  which is a marker associated with mscs and also with hematopoietic and endothelial progenitors  <cit> . the cell surface marker profiles of these transgenic and non-transgenic mascs and mbmscs are very similar to those previously reported  <cit> . the presence of egfp appeared to have no effect on surface marker expression. interestingly, mmscs derived from both bone marrow and adipose tissue had similar cell surface marker profiles. this is not surprising since both cell types are isolated from the stromal cell fraction of the original tissue and are isolated based on their adherence to plastic  <cit> .

comparisons of growth curves from the four cell types yielded interesting results. first, the gfptgmscs seemed to grow more slowly than their non-transgenic counterparts. however, the differences were not statistically significant due to variation among donors. perhaps increasing the sample size of donors would decrease the amount of variation and illustrate a significant difference in growth kinetics. secondly, it seems that adipose-derived murine stem cells grow more slowly than those derived from bone marrow. again, the differences were not statistically significant due to variation among donors. perhaps the media used to culture mascs should be customized to maximize growth potential.

finally, all four cell types readily formed single-cell derived colonies when plated at low density. the presence of egfp in the transgenic cells did not seem to affect the proliferative capacity of the cells after expansion in culture.

CONCLUSIONS
the availability of mesenchymal stem cells with the potential for the long-term stable expression of a genetic marker has important applications for the advancement of stem cell research. mscs with a fluorescent marker can be used in experiments utilizing transplantation procedures since they can be easily tracked and identified. this study highlights the importance of thorough in vitro characterization of genetically marked cell populations before in vivo transplantation. in summary, mascs and mbmscs from non-transgenic and egfp transgenic c57bl/ <dig> mice have very similar characterization profiles. the presence of egfp in the transgenic cells does not seem to change stem cell properties, thus supporting the notion that these cells can be utilized in future experiments related to stem cell therapy. these results may be interesting to investigators desiring to employ egfp transgenic murine stem cell lines in experiments related to stem cell therapeutics or regenerative medicine.

