BACKGROUND
microarray technology offers a high throughput approach to transcriptional profiling on a genome wide scale. however, the relatively large amount of starting material required for standard hybridization has limited its full potential. in complex biological systems such as the nervous system, the utility of this approach is complicated by the fact that even in anatomically discrete regions, many divergent cell types are intermingled. it is often desirable to investigate gene expression profiles of distinct cell types and although laser microdissection provides a solution to the problem of tissue procurement, the small amount of rna that can be harvested has precluded a straightforward combination of both technologies. this limitation is compounded by the need of replication essential for statistical analysis.

another scenario in which the lack of sufficient tissue availability has been challenging is the correlation of the phenotype in individual experimental animals with comprehensive gene expression profiles. for example, so far it has not been possible to correlate the inter-individual behavioural variability in animal models of chronic pain with the corresponding correlates in gene expression in the principal anatomical components of the pain pathway as such structures in individual animals do not yield sufficient amounts of rna for standard hybridization protocols.

to overcome these issues, increasingly sophisticated approaches to rna amplification from small tissue samples have been developed for use with microarrays. these fall principally into two categories. one is based on pcr and is characterized by an exponential increase in copy number while the other is based on the t7-polymerase in-vitro transcription  to achieve a linear amplification of targets. for maximum fidelity, linearity of target amplification is desirable. thus, substantial work has focused on exploring the t <dig> linear techniques  <cit> , in particular the affymetrix small sample protocol ii has been assessed by numerous studies with interesting results. analysis based on correlating intensity levels and assessing concordance in detection calls has indicated a high level of reproducibility  <cit> . however, occasional failure to maintain the true abundance level of transcripts was also found  <cit>  due to the protocol 3'bias  <cit> . such bias is thought to be related to the use of random hexamers to prime the rt reaction in the additional round of amplification. with priming that is remote from the 3'end, rt may not be successfully completed causing a diminution in the signal from the 5' regions.

these observations are useful indicators of protocol validity; though, the ultimate fidelity criterion is the ability to maintain differential expression between different tissues or under varying experimental conditions. some previous studies have reported a 50% drop in significant changes in gene expression using rna amplification  <cit> , suggesting that rna amplification may suffer major problems and is potentially unsuitable for microarray analysis.

in this study, we critically appraise the suitability and merits of transcript amplification from small biological samples for microarray expression profiling using the affymetrix small sample protocol ii. we confirm previous findings on the reproducibility and fidelity of the protocol. we present compelling evidence for the 3' bias introduced by rna amplification. we show how distortions in intensity may be reflected in the expression ratios from biologically different samples. importantly, we explore the effect of distortions in expression ratios on their statistical significance.

RESULTS
in this study, we undertake a detailed analysis of target amplification for microarrays using the affymetrix small sample protocol ii. this analysis was performed using control data from standard protocol preparations as reference. for the rest of the article, we refer to the standard protocol as the onera  protocol and the small sample protocol as the twora  protocol. twora and onera samples from three different biological groups were used in this study: the drg  group, the sn  group and the sa  group. in each group, there are  <dig> replicates from the twora and  <dig> replicates from the onera . while, the main objective of this study is to assess the extent to which biologically relevant variation in gene expression can be detected in the twora, we begin by assessing the reproducibility of the twora protocol and its fidelity in maintaining the relative abundance of targets.

reproducibility and fidelity in maintaining expression levels
scatter plots of log <dig> intensities from paired twora replicates show expectedly high level of consistency similar to that observed with the onera replicates   ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  among all possible pairs of the twora replicates and the onera replicates from all biological groups). however, comparing the average log <dig> intensity values from the onera and the twora  for a single tissue, we see evidence of variability implying that the twora protocol may distort the signal.

we used an anova approach to confirm that the variability between protocol groups is greater than that among replicates within each group. in particular, a one-way, two-levels anova analysis was performed for each gene separately, with  <dig> measurements from the onera  and  <dig> measurements from the twora . first, the between group mean sum of squares msa as well as the mean residual sum of squares mse were calculated. the median of the msa was higher than the median of the mse  in all biological groups: drg  <dig>  , sn  <dig>  , sa  <dig> .

to test whether protocol variability is significantly greater than the residual variability, we derived p-values from the f-values  for each gene . in fact, the p-values were far from uniformly distributed. storey suggests the following estimate of the proportion of hypotheses from the null using p-values: the fraction of p-values above the median p-value m, divided by   <cit> . this results in the following estimate of the proportion of genes with significantly higher amplification variability: drg 47%, sn 50%, sa 41%. that is, in all cases at least 40% of genes show differences between protocols, which are not explained by variability within replicates.

signal distortion following twora
to investigate signal distortion by the twora protocol, we looked at the well-documented 3' bias feature of the protocol in the drg dataset . bias arises from greater 3' representation of targets during twora while 5' regions are often lost. this causes amplified rna to be shorter than normal. previously published work explored the increase in the 3'/5' signal ratios only from control genes  to prove that such effect occurred) <cit> . in this study, we undertook a more comprehensive analysis by using information from all probesets on the array. more specifically, we correlated the deviation in log <dig> intensity following twora  – obtained by subtracting the log <dig> intensity in the onera from that of the twora – with the probesets 3' locations on corresponding targets  . the trend suggests that probesets distal from the 3' end are more likely to endure an attenuation of signal intensity following twora whilst those close to the 3' end are likely to show intensification of signal.

in a separate but related analysis, probesets whose absolute Δlog2in values were greater than  <dig> were reviewed for their 3' location distribution . this was compared to the distribution of 3'location of all probesets on the array. the distribution for all probesets appears to be skewed and peaks at around  <dig> bp. the distribution of probesets with intensified signal shows an additional peak to the left suggesting a distinct population of probesets closer than average to the 3' end . this is further highlighted by a decrease in the 25% quantile relative to the overall population in the boxplots on figure 3c. conversely, the distribution from probesets with attenuated signal shows a second peak to the right indicating an overrepresentation of more distal interrogation points relative to the 3' end of targets . this corresponds to an increase in the 75% quantile . these results show for the first time that the most severe signal distortions following twora are strongly associated with 3' positional bias.

interestingly, with both populations of deviant probesets , there is a peak that overlaps with that from the distribution of the average population. this implies that among these deviant probesets, there is a population that is at the same distance from the 3' end as the general population; yet, their intensities are shifted in the twora. this suggests that other factors, apart from 3'bias, are likely to be involved in distorting the signal. one possible factor is the abundance of the transcript. thus, we correlated the deviation in log <dig> intensity following amplification  with the log <dig> intensity for the drg, onera . the plot indicates some bias in the extreme Δlog2in values along the intensity scale. this is due to the fact that the intensity range is limited; in other words, intensity cannot be higher than the saturation level  or below background noise .

fidelity in maintaining expression ratios
the ultimate aim of microarrays is the identification of differential expression. thus, a good amplification protocol should faithfully maintain expression ratios. to verify this, we cross-compared expression ratios from biologically distinct tissue samples treated with the onera and the twora protocols.

first, we considered the  pair. expression ratios on log <dig> scale from the onera samples were correlated with their equivalents from the twora . the significant changes in expression  seem to be consistent in the twora and the onera groups. these are well documented in the literature . however, there are relatively few differences in gene expression between these two biological samples, probably due to the fact that the tissue from the injured animals included areas of the spinal cord not affected by the axotomy, which could have caused a dilution of effect in the relevant areas. to reliably evaluate the effect of the twora protocol on ratios, a larger profile of differential expression is needed. this was possible with the  pair. thus, we decided to base our assessment of the effect of the twora on ratios on the  dataset.

encouragingly, log <dig> expression ratios from the  treated with the onera and the twora protocols are comparable; though they show more variability than their counterparts from the  pair . moreover, the regression line  appears to be shifted from the diagonal in a way that suggests that the expression ratios are on average slightly lower in the twora relative to the onera.

variation in ratios
from our previous analysis, we know that the twora protocol may shift the absolute intensity levels. however, this only affects expression ratios if the intensity is shifted unequally in the two biological samples. that is, deviations in intensity  following twora, that differ in the two samples, can result in variability in the expression ratios from the onera and the twora groups.

to get further insights into how unequal shifts in the intensity level following amplification of different biological samples affect the expression ratios, we ranked probesets by the absolute difference in their onera and twora log <dig> expression ratios and selected the top  <dig> for further analysis . specifically, we examined the intensities of these selected probesets across all four groups: the onera and the twora drg, sn. the resulting intensity profiles were classified into four categories depending on the direction of change in intensity and the tissue where this change occurred . the most populated categories show a significant reduction in the intensity in one of the samples whilst the intensity in the other sample is minimally reduced . less frequently, the intensity increases with amplification in one of the samples but not in the other sample .

interestingly, with all four categories, expression ratios are reduced following twora. moreover, the majority of the selected probesets have varying intensity levels in the drg versus sn, onera. frequently these genes are absent in one sample but highly expressed in the other sample , which may explain the deviation in expression ratios following twora. if one takes the example of hipk <dig>  the log <dig> intensity in the sn was reduced from  <dig>  in the onera to  <dig>  in the twora. however, hipk <dig> is absent in the drg , thus an equivalent reduction in the intensity level in this sample is not possible . as such the log <dig> expression ratio is shifted from - <dig>  in the onera to  <dig>  in the twora. alternatively, in other cases, if amplification increases the intensity in one sample, an equal shift in the other sample would not be possible if the intensity was close to saturation .

thus, distortions in the expression ratios may occur when a shift in intensity  in one sample cannot be mirrored in the other sample because it would cause the intensity to fall outside the dynamic range of the scanner. this relates to the previous analysis presented in figure  <dig>  certainly, this phenomenon does not apply to genes with similar intensity levels in the two samples since a shift in intensity in one sample is equally possible in the other sample.

to assess the extent to which this phenomenon explains the deviation in expression ratios observed across the whole set of targets on the chip, we undertook an alternative analysis. we selected all probesets where a shift in intensity following twora in one sample would cause the intensity in the other sample to fall outside the intensity range, that is below the background noise or higher than the saturation level. these limits were chosen to be the 3% and 98% quantiles of the distribution of signal intensity on the chip, respectively. the analysis was conducted by first determining the maximum Δlog2in  across the two samples for each gene. thus, if the maximum Δlog2in is found in sample a, we add the same Δlog2in to the onera log  <dig> intensity from sample b. if the resulting value is outside the chosen limits, the probeset is selected by our analysis.

since the selected probesets suffer from a floor and ceiling effect, we shall refer to them as fce probesets for the rest of the article. clearly, the fce probesets are the same probesets that show the most deviant expression ratios following twora  and correspondingly the most pronounced variation in shifts in intensity  in the drg and sn samples . in fact, the correlation in the  expression ratios across protocols  =  <dig>  is improved to  <dig>  when the fce probesets are excluded. interestingly, we found that the fce probesets show consistent Δlog2in following twora in the sa and sn groups . this is because their intensities are similar in the  but different in the  datasets.

similarity in inferring significance in ratios
the primary aim of a microarray experiment is to detect significant changes in gene expression. our results suggest that ratios are most commonly reduced among the genes with large expression ratios in the onera, thus likely to be differentially expressed. indeed, we found good evidence from the literature to suggest that  <dig> genes of those with the  <dig> most discrepant ratios following twora are indeed differentially expressed between the sn and drg . despite reductions in the ratios, genes can remain significant following twora if their ratios are still large relative to the average population in the twora. moreover, among the population of genes with high expression ratios in the onera , many do maintain their ratios in the twora, most likely due to a faithful twora of the transcripts in the two biological samples.

we applied two different statistical tests  to identify transcripts differentially expressed in the  tissue samples prepared with both protocols . with each statistical method, an fdr based multiple testing correction was used and genes were ranked by their fdr values in ascending order. to measure the extent of agreement between protocols over genes identified as significant, we defined the significance similarity score  as the proportion of genes common to subsets of highly ranked genes from the onera and the twora  comparisons. the results are summarised in table  <dig>  higher sss were obtained using limma compared to the z-scores method. with limma,  <dig> out of the top  <dig> most significant genes were common to the onera and the twora comparisons as oppose to  <dig> using z-scores statistics.

for a more global assessment of the effect of distortions in expression ratios on their statistical significance, we used a scatter plot of negated log p-values  from the limma analysis of the onera and the twora  . the fce probesets are highlighted in red on figure  <dig> and it can be seen that their nlpv are least correlated between the two protocols, due to distortions in the expression ratios . amongst the fce probesets, some still show reasonable nlpv following twora . inspection of these genes revealed that they have large expression ratios in the onera and moderate ratios in the twora . by contrast, those fce probesets with low nlpv  in the twora have had their log <dig> expression ratios reduced severely following twora .

interestingly, the latter have, on average, moderate expression ratios in the onera . this is expected since with moderate expression ratios, any reduction would have a greater impact on their significance level. indeed, looking at the whole population of probesets, out of those with a nlpv between  <dig> and  <dig> in the onera, only 69% have an nlpv above  <dig> in the twora, compared to probesets with high nlpv  in the onera where 87%  of them have nlpv above  <dig> in the twora. this suggests that the twora protocol is more suitable with experiments where large differences in gene expression are occurring.

discussion
microarray technology is currently limited by the need for relatively large transcript quantities, which makes it incapable of handling small biological samples. the t <dig> in-vitro transcription has been widely explored to achieve a linear amplification of targets for microarrays. much work has considered the effect of linear amplification on the ability to profile gene expression. although, the reproducibility of such techniques and their fidelity in maintaining absolute levels of expression have been extensively analysed, much less is known about their ability to accurately reproduce differential expression in distinct biological samples. this study gives further insights on the impact of linear amplification using the affymetrix small sample protocol on expression ratios and differential expression.

our analysis confirms the high reproducibility of the small sample twora protocol and the occasional failure in its fidelity to maintain the original levels of gene expression. in this study, robust analyses were used to confirm the 3' bias role in signal distortion. instead of limiting our analysis to control genes, as previously undertaken by other groups  <cit> , evidence was obtained by examination of intensity data from all probesets on the array. in addition to 3'bias, this work has explored the relationship between distortions in signal intensity following twora and the original intensity level prior to twora. the fact that the intensity range is limited by background noise on one end and saturation on the other end implies that intensity may only be shifted by a limited amount. this relationship bears important consequences on the consistency of the twora protocol in amplifying targets with varying intensities across different samples. thus, the shifts in intensity following amplification will not appear to be equivalent in the two samples if the shift in one of the samples is limited by the range of the scanner. this has the consequence of distorting the expression ratios, as clearly demonstrated by our data.

unsurprisingly, the statistical significance of expression ratios is only affected when the expression ratio in the twora is reduced to the point where it can no longer be distinguished from noise. importantly, large ratios are less likely to be critically diminished and more likely to remain significant following twora. this explains why despite the distortions in ratios in our dataset, there was up to 87% agreement in the top significant genes  from the twora and onera . on the other hand, less agreement was observed among the less pronounced ratios  since distortions are more critical. this leads us to the important conclusion that twora may affect the statistical significance of genes with moderate expression ratios to a greater extent. another important finding by this study is that limma performs best at recognising similarity in differential expression between the onera and the twora. thus, the choice of statistics will also affect the quality of information obtained from microarray analysis of amplified samples.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the affymetix small sample amplification protocol is useful with the following caveats: first, it should be only used when tissue homogeneity is a crucial factor and sufficient amounts of starting material cannot be obtained by any other means. secondly, target amplification using the small sample protocol appears to be suitable in situations where big differences in gene expression are expected. fortunately, it is reasonable to expect large differential expressions with experiments characterising different cells within a mixed tissue where amplification of transcript is necessary. finally, application of such technique in combination with limma statistical analysis is useful in experiments where the ultimate purpose is to experimentally characterise a finite number of targets, for example the top  <dig> differentially expressed genes.

however, expression data obtained from amplified samples might be less suitable for more comprehensive numerical analysis, for example characterising regulatory networks, due to the problems caused by possible shifts in signal and expression ratios.

