BACKGROUND
loops and turns are generally mediated by a stretch of residues with varying backbone conformations. they occupy more than 30% of a globular protein  <cit>  and are often found at the active sites of a protein providing molecular recognition, specific interactions between two molecules and helping to maintain globular shape of the protein  <cit> . in the context of tertiary structure these are used to connect major secondary structures, like α-helix and β-sheet  <cit> .

turns or shorter loops are more amenable for systematic characterization. turns of various lengths have been identified, starting from three-residue γ-turn to six-residue π-turn, and the four-residue β-turn has been subjected to rigorous investigation. β-turn was first identified by venkatachalam  <cit>  and subsequent studies  <cit>  include it as one of the major secondary structures in proteins. though initially turn conformations were thought to be mediated by a hydrogen bond between the co and nh at two ends of a polypeptide stretch, the presence of such hydrogen bond is not a strict requirement and a limiting distance between two terminal cα-atoms has been used to identify the β- and α-turns  <cit> . exclusively on the basis of hydrogen bond pattern an earlier study has identified six-residue π-turns , which were characterized according to the backbone conformation of the residues  <cit> . a systematic classification of π-turns of both hydrogen-bonded and non-hydrogen-bonded types is necessary in the light of what has been done for shorter α-turns for a proper appraisal of turns in protein structures.

by conventional definition π-turns are six-residue long, in which the co of residue  forms a hydrogen bond with the nh of residue  . watson  <cit>  first identified such a turn in the crystal structure of myoglobin. in  <dig>  schellman  <cit>  reported that α-helices generally terminate with a particular hydrogen bond pattern at the c-termini, forming  ←  and  ←  hydrogen bonds, with the  residue occurring in the left-handed α-helical region . this pattern was subsequently named as schellman motif  <cit> . baker and hubbard  <cit> , discussing the distortions in α-helices, referred to this conformation as αc <dig> distortion. subsequently, milner-white  <cit>  observed that π-turns can occur in either handedness and suggested the name 'paperclips' for the conformation. further studies  <cit>  reconfirmed that right-handed α-helices generally terminate with a residue in left-handed α-helical conformation , which is predominantly gly and to a lesser extent, asn. these observations were substantiated by the introduction of simple stereochemical rules for helix termination  <cit> , analysis of helix-stop signals  <cit>  and the experimental study of the schellman motif  <cit> . all these analyses looked at the π-turn as a helix terminator and the database search was limited to the helices terminated by a residue in αl conformation.

earlier π-turns were identified on the basis of terminal hydrogen bonds  <cit> . however, for the identification of β-turns a more general approach was taken by considering the cases, in which terminal cα-atoms are within  <dig> Å and the middle residues having restricted φ, ψ angles  <cit> . this included non-hydrogen-bonded turns also and the occurrence of a large number of turns was useful to detect conformational features of sub-classes of β-turns. here we have taken a similar approach for identifying π-turns after excluding the ones that also contain parts of other major secondary structural elements  in the central positions,  to . previous classification of π-turns  <cit>  was mainly based on the conformation of the  residue. however, we differentiated π-turns on the basis of backbone torsion angles of all the central residues. we have differentiated π-turns into two major types, hydrogen-bonded  and non-hydrogen-bonded  . the identified turns can be considered as isolated turns as they are not part of any other secondary structures. the turns, which occur at the α-helix termini are named as π-turns forming schellman motif   and they form a special case of π-turn, stabilizing terminal residues of α-helix. a typical schellman motif  <cit>  has two main-chain hydrogen bonds, but if the internal β-turn between  and  is absent they are named as sch-β. a true schellman motif with the β-turn is termed as sch+β.

RESULTS
identification of different π-turns
the numbers of occurrences of different types of π-turns are provided in the table  <dig> .  <dig> hydrogen-bonded π-turns  were identified by the program dssp, where the middle residues did not occur in helical or strand region. these are isolated π-hb turns . among  <dig> turns  <dig> are in aaaa conformation .  <dig> π-turns occur at the c-terminal end of α-helix forming true schellman motif  . in these π-turns,  to  are in helical conformation with an internal β-turn between  and . when we relaxed our criteria of schellman motif and included those cases where internal β-turn was absent, another  <dig> turns were obtained . the distribution of cα-cα distances between the terminal residues in case of π-hb turns is shown in figure  <dig> , with an average of  <dig>   Å. consequently the end-to-end distance to detect non-hydrogen-bonded π-turns  was set to  <dig>  Å . in  <dig> cases two or more π-turns were identified, which had overlapping stretches of residues – these were excluded. a total of  <dig> non-overlapping turns were obtained with no helical or strand residues in the middle and the terminal residues not connected by hydrogen bond .

the standard deviations are in the parentheses. the classes are defined using the conformational designations shown in figure 2a.

classification of π-hb and π-nhb turns from the distribution of φ, ψ angles and their conformational features
the distribution of φ, ψ angles for the middle four residues of isolated π-turns is shown in figure  <dig>  the φ, ψ was divided into different rectangular regions, like what was previously done for α-turns  <cit> . this in general followed the work of effimov  <cit>  and rooman et al  <cit> . it is to be mentioned that region 'a' in the ramachandran plot  was not further divided into smaller sections and similarly for the  residue 'a' region  was not sub-divided, as the distribution, shown in figure  <dig>  did not support such divisions. region 'e'  or 'e'  was divided further into 'b' and 'p' or 'b' and 'p' respectively, for all the residues in π-hb turn. we noted the different combinations of conformational regions of the participating residues. four-letter codes defining their occurrence in regions of φ, ψ plot were used to denote different π-turns. this resulted in  <dig> types of isolated π-hb turns, but only  <dig> conformational types have occurrences greater than 5%. these are aaaa, pgaa and aaaa , with aaaa being the major class . when terminal cα-cα distances were calculated, pgaa type showed the largest distance  and aaaa seemed to be the most compact . if we consider the conformation of the  position only, it is observed that in  <dig> cases the residue occur in the left-handed α-helical region , while  <dig> occur in the right-handed α-helical region . these numbers are in agreement with the previous study   <cit> .

when π-turns occurring at the ends of α-helices,  and    <cit> ) were classified, only  <dig> types were observed, with aaaa being overwhelmingly the largest . when we relaxed our criteria of schellman motif by taking both sch+β and sch-β cases, we got a total  <dig> π-turns occurring at the c-terminal end of helices, which could be grouped into  <dig> conformational types. aaaa was the most predominant , followed distantly by aaaa . all the aaaa cases are present in the sch-β category, indicating that a π-turn with aaaa conformation at the end of α-helix may hinder the formation of an internal β-turn.

an interesting systematics involving the backbone torsion angles can be illustrated using the aaaa type of π-turns  – for the first three residues in the a conformation there is a progressive shift of φ angle towards a more negative value, the shift being quite pronounced  between the positions  and  . such changes, also observed in α-turns of the type aaa, have been explained by the increase in the o⋯o distance between neighboring carbonyl oxygen atoms and the consequent reduction in the electrostatic repulsion  <cit>  – in the absence of intrahelical hydrogen bonds keeping the carbonyl groups parallely oriented within helices, these are frayed when located outside helices. the variation in φ angle is not restricted to aaaa type only, but is also seen in aaaa, where after a reduction of φ along the first three residues there is an increase at the fourth. indeed, a decrease in the φ angle and an increase in ψ may be a general feature when the conformation is aa involving any two consecutive residues, as can be seen in the turn types under π-nhb category.

for the π-hb turns our study indicates that aaaa conformation to be most frequent, both for the isolated and sch categories. this observation is a major refinement over the earlier study  <cit> , where isolated and sch types were not treated separately. the α-helices generally terminate with a residue at the αl-region, which correlates well with the presence of aaaa turn with schellman motif. placement of  residue in left-handed region at the ends of α-helices provides a 'helix stop signal'  <cit> , which is necessary to terminate a growing helix. but interestingly, isolated π-turns also frequently contain  residue in the αl-region. with the first three residues of π-turn being accommodated as part of α-helix in a schellman motif, sch+β , the aaaa conformation of the turn provides the most efficient way of terminating the helix by also fulfilling the hydrogen-bond forming potentials at two pairs of main-chain atoms. as mentioned above, the aaaa type can also terminate a helix in an insignificant number  of cases of sch-β, which would have lesser stability as the internal hydrogen bond can not be formed.

for the classification of π-nhb turns from the φ, ψ angle distribution we did not split regions 'a', 'a', 'e', 'e' into smaller subsets  <cit> , such as 'r' and 'g' , 'r' and 'g' , 'b' and 'p' , 'b' and 'p' . even with these broad regions we got a large number of turn types, but among these only  <dig> types populate almost half  of all the turns . these types are aeaa, eaaa, eaaa, eaae, aaaa and aeea. for all the conformational classes of π-nhb turns a good number starts with 'a' or 'e' conformation , whereas only 20%  of the cases both start and end with 'a' . terminal cα-cα distance is a measure of non-bonding interaction between the two residues and the values provided in table  <dig> indicate that eaae type has the least - cα-cα distance.

presence of shorter turns as part of π-hb and π-nhb turns
as π-turns are relatively longer , we looked for the presence of any smaller hydrogen-bonded or non-hydrogen-bonded turns, such as β- and α-, embedded in them. indeed we find that most of the π-turns are composed of overlapping β-turns. there could be three overlapping β-turns involving -, - and - residues . we identified the β-turns on the basis of the cα-cα distance of the terminal residues and the φ, ψ angles of the middle residues  <cit> . only  <dig> cases could be identified where there is no β-turn within a π-hb turn. the - residues are usually not involved in β-turns. various combinations of β-turns occurring within the commonly observed π-turns are reported in table  <dig>  i-i-x  is the most frequent π-hb. aaaa π-turns are dominantly composed of i-i-x ; aaaa π-turns are mostly of the type i-x-x . two examples of such π-turns having β-turns within are shown in the figure 3b. when we consider sch category of turns we observe that the i-i-x combination of β-turns is the dominant  followed by x-i-x . the i-i-x combination correlates with the occurrence of three consecutive residues in the right-handed α-helical region ; the combination x-i-x is obvious as a true schellman motif  contains an internal β-turn involving the residues  to  . it is notable that the major combination of β-turns is i-i-x, which is common to both π-hb and sch categories, each having aaaa as the major turn type.

the number of occurrence is given in parentheses.

a x indicates no characteristic β-turn. the conventional nomenclature of β-turns  has been used. a multiple turn i-i-x indicates that there is a type i turn involving residues -, another type i involving -, and the turn type involving - does not conform to any β-turn type.

considering π-nhb turns 18% are found to be devoid of any β-turn. in a large number of cases only one type-i β-turn could be identified, with combinations of β-turns designated as x-i-x, i-x-x and x-x-i , the first of which occurs with the highest number . types viii, ii, via <dig>  via <dig> and vib β-turns are also observed to different extent. a type viii β-turn contains two consecutive residues with conformations ae. similarly type ii β-turn appears with ea conformation of two consecutive residues. altogether in  <dig> cases of π-nhb turns type via turns are observed and for these the middle residues occur in ea or ed conformation. likewise in  <dig> cases of π-nhb turns type vib turns are observed and they have ee conformation for the middle residues.

results in table  <dig> indicate that two overlapping type-i β-turns  to  and  to ) in π-hb turns occur in most of the cases. in type-i β-turns the middle residues occur in the 'a' region, which could be accommodated in aaaa type of π-turns. this observation also holds good for π-nhb turns. interestingly, aaaa type of turns is mostly devoid of internal consecutive β-turns and 64% of them can be represented as i-x-x. this implies that aaaa, but not aaaa is amenable to having an additional short-range interaction. for the π-hb turns the less frequent occurrence of aaaa relative to aaaa may be explained on the basis of greater existence of an embedded β-turn in the latter. type-viii β-turns are rather frequent in π-nhb turns and this can be correlated to the change of conformation of the middle β-turn forming residues from 'a' to 'e'.

so far we have considered if a π-turn can have one or more β-turn within it. similarly, one can see if multiple α-turns can form a π-turn. α-turns were found out by checking if distances between cα-atoms three residues apart was < <dig>  Å  <cit> . from figure 3c it is evident that at most two α-turns  to  and  to ) can exist within a π-turn. results indicate that within almost all π-hb turns there is at least one α-turn. among the  <dig> π-hb turns  <dig> contain embedded α-turns.  <dig> examples have both - and - α-turns. in  <dig> cases only - α-turn is observed and  <dig> cases have only - α-turn. thus the possibility of having - interaction is significantly higher than having a - interaction.

we also looked for conformations of such α-turns within a π-turn. among the  <dig> π-turns with only - hydrogen-bonded α-turn, the conformation of π-turn is mostly aaaa ; thus the α-turn is in aaa conformation. of the  <dig> cases of π-turns with only - interaction,  <dig> are in aaaa conformation, such that the α-turns are in aaa conformation. for the cases with two overlapping α-turns,  <dig> have the designation aaaa,  <dig> pgaa and  <dig> aaaa. the α-turn conformations have the combinations of aaa and aaa in the first; pga and gaa in the second; and two consecutive aaa turns in the last type of π-turns. two examples, one with two overlapping α-turns and another containing only a single α-turn are shown in figure 3d.

the higher number of embedded α-turns with - interaction rather than the - interaction owes to the fact that major conformation of hydrogen-bonded α-turn is aaa that matches with the first three positions of aaaa type of π-hb turns.

propensities of residues to be in different π-turns
propensity values were calculated from the observed and expected number of occurrences of each residue from  to  positions in π-hb and π-nhb turns and the values for the middle positions  to ) are presented in figure 4; the results are statistically significant as can be seen from the z-values provided in figure  <dig> . at  position pro has a high value in both types of turns, and additionally asn, asp, ser and thr are preferred in π-nhb. the high propensity of pro, along with that of gly, is also observed at  for π-nhb turns. gly has a high preference for the  position in both types of turns – this is due to the conformation at this position being in the 'a' region  <cit> . of all the residues occurring at  position of π-nhb gly has the highest occurrence .

the position i is markedly occupied by asn, asp, cys and ser for π-hb, as well as π-nhb turns and pro is conspicuous  at this position for π-nhb turns . the presence of asn and asp can be attributed to the fact that these can mimic the backbone chain effectively and provide additional hydrogen bonding using side-chain polar groups to the middle residues of π-turn  <cit> . the  position is devoid of pro in π-hb , though π-nhb contains it sufficiently. however, pro can act as hydrogen-bond acceptor and thus it can be present at the  position in π-hb. we also looked for the residue propensities around π-turn and found that aromatic residues like trp, tyr and phe are important at position  for both types of turns. for the π-nhb, lys also has a high propensity at this position . at , aromatic residues  and lys, ile, val and pro are abundant for both the types. the presence of aromatic residues at the  position and pro at  for π-nhb turns can be explained by the formation of π-stacking interaction involving side-chains of aromatic residues and pro  <cit> .

residue composition of π-turns and their resemblance with other secondary structures
as type aaaa conformation is common to both π-hb and π-turns occurring at the end of helices , we looked for any similarity in residue composition between these two types of turns, by calculating the correlation coefficients of percentage composition at different positions. the residue compositions match well except at the position . figure 5a shows that  and  positions are occupied by residues of similar types, . the correlation is relatively less at position   and is only  <dig>  at . we analyzed the position-wise propensity-profile of residues occurring in both types of turns, i.e. π-hb turns and schellaman motif with aaaa conformation. figure 5b shows the histogram of propensity values calculated for each of the middle positions . for the  position, asn, asp, cys, his and ser are prominent in the former type and ala, cys, lys, met are found chiefly for the latter type . pro is particularly favored at the  position for the π-hb turns; in contrast, pro is absent at this position in schellman motif. after  position pro marks its presence again at  . higher correlations in residue compositions at  and  positions  are due to the occurrence of similar residues and similarly the match between the histograms at positions  is poor  leading to a poorer correlation.

next we found out the correlation coefficients at different positions of π-hb turns  with other helices and turns. the matrices obtained are represented in figure  <dig>  when compared with hydrogen-bonded α-turn of the type aaa, a great deal of similarity in residue composition is observed with the aaaa type of π-hb turns, though aaaa π-hb turns are less correlated  and  positions are correlated) . the residue usage at  position of type-i β-turns is found to be similar to both aaaa and aaaa types of π-hb turns . no particular trend in correlation is seen between π-turns and n- and c-termini of α-helix. the matrix of correlation coefficients between aaaa π-hb and c-terminal of 310-helix is presented in figure 6c and the matrix for aaaa π-hb and n-terminal of 310-helix is given in figure 6d. 310-helices are mostly three-residue long and so ncap and c <dig>  n <dig> and c <dig>  n <dig> and c <dig> and n <dig> and c <dig> represent the same positions  <cit> . thus the observations at the n- and c-termini of 310-helix may indicate the same effect.

correlation between positional residue compositions in different secondary structural elements may have implications how one type of secondary structure is converted to another. the high degree of similarity between aaaa π-hb turns and aaa hydrogen-bonded α-turns may indicate that the conversion between them is facile.

secondary structures around π-turns
it has been reported that π-turns of the type παl  residue in left-handed α-helical region) are found mostly at the end of α-helices and constitute the schellman motif  <cit> . according to our convention the schellman motif is included in aaaa type of π-turns – an example of the motif with  ←  and another internal  ←  hydrogen bonds is shown in figure 7a. π-turns have also been reported earlier in β-hairpins with four-residue loops  <cit> . table  <dig> indicates that π-hb and π-nhb turns are mostly found in between two β-strands and sometimes they are also engaged in forming hairpin type of structures. of the total  <dig> π-hb turns,  <dig> cases have terminal residues in β-strands with the middle residues mostly in turn conformation. out of  <dig> cases,  <dig> are involved in forming hairpin motif of the type 4: <dig>  according to the nomenclature adopted by sibanda et al  <cit> . considering the conformational classes of π-hb turns we find that  <dig> out of  <dig> aaaa turns are in etttte type of secondary structures . out of  <dig> turns  <dig> are in hairpin structures. in paaa type of π-hb turn  etttte type of secondary structure is observed . two examples are shown with aaaa and paaa types of π-hb turns in figure 7b.

athe combination of secondary structures with > <dig> occurrence are shown. there is no occurrence of isolated aaaa and aaaa types of π-hb turns immediately after the α-helix.

baccording to dssp notation e: β-strand, t: hydrogen-bonded turn, b: isolated β-bridge, s: bend and we represent non-regular structure by c.

cbased on the number observed with the given combination of secondary structures  relative the total number in the class.

of all the major π-nhb turns the preference for a particular type of secondary structure is observed in aaaa, eaae and eaaa turns. the formation of β-strands at the ends of π-turn is observed in a large number of cases and they are also involved in β-hairpin structure. apart from the terminal residues, the middle residues form different types of structures in π-nhb turns. in a large number of cases these are found in bend  structure. two examples of eaaa turns are shown in figure 7c, one containing the s structure and the other with a non-regular secondary structure at the  position.

thus the above observations suggest that the most common structural motif where π-hb and π-nhb turns are found is β-hairpin . earlier we observed that the five-residue α-turn could be the connectors of two anti-parallel β-strands  <cit> . likewise, beyond α-turn, π-turns of both hydrogen-bonded and non-hydrogen-bonded categories could be part of β-hairpins longer by one-residue.

π-turns in active sites and residue conservation
an analysis was carried out to ascertain the functional relevance of residues involved in π-turns. as active sites are located on surface pockets we first determined if residues in π-turns are located in such regions of the structure. it was found that close to a third of all turns  have residues that are indeed located in such cavities. as π-hb turns are independent of the schellman motif that has structural importance in the context of α-helix, and also because they have lesser conformational variability compared to π-nhb, π-hb turns were considered further. again, a third of π-hb turns in cavities  are situated in such a way so as to interact with ligand or metal, or harbor residues that are catalytically important or involved in forming disulfide cross-linkage or forms the active site. a detailed list of all such entries is given in additional file  and an example is shown in figure  <dig>  which indicates the usefulness of π-turn in providing the site of binding of ions  and ligand. the information on residue conservation is available only for  <dig>  cases, and 53% of them have at least three residues in the turn that are fully conserved . the result  shows that generally a residue, which is functionally important, is also conserved. but in many cases the neighboring residues are also conserved, suggesting the importance of a cluster of π-turn residues in providing the correct environment of the active site.

CONCLUSIONS
π-turns of both hydrogen-bonded and non-hydrogen-bonded types have been analyzed and classified based on the φ, ψ angles of the middle residues. this work generally follows our previous study on α-turns  <cit> . the presence of shorter four-residue β-turn  <cit>  and five-residue α-turn  <cit>  within the π-turns is observed frequently. the sequence-structure relationship and the context of occurrence of different conformational classes of π-turns enable one to detect subtle features of the turn structures, which are found at the c-terminal end of helices and between two anti-parallel β-strands – thus π-turns have an important role in the termination of both α-helix and β-strands. 37% of π-hb turns occur at surface cavities and 32% of these are involved in binding ligands or constitute active site. additionally, 77% of π-hb turns have conserved residues among homologous proteins – all these pointing to the functional importance of these turns. the work would be useful in protein structure prediction algorithms  <cit>  and in designing sequences  <cit>  occurring at the end of helices and in β-hairpin regions.

