BACKGROUND
during plant cell separation, the polysaccharide networks of the cell wall that connect cells are dismantled with ‘surgical precision’  <cit> . cell separation can lead to total detachment either within an organ  or between an organ and the parent plant . cell separation can also occur locally, leading to development of intercellular spaces in leaves or fruit for example. generally, both abscission and dehiscence take place at predetermined zones of isodiametrically flattened cells, arranged in anything between two to  <dig> cell layers  <cit> . these cells start to differentiate some time before the actual organ separation, and remain arrested in this developmental stage until a diverse set of signals, including ethylene and auxin, trigger a cascade of expression of genes whose products regulate the actual cell separation. in the model that sexton and roberts  <cit>  presented, ethylene is the primary signal that drives the leaf abscission process, whereas auxin reduces the sensitivity of abscission zone cells to ethylene, thus preventing or delaying abscission.

studies on changes in enzyme activity in abscission zones have primarily focused on cell wall-degrading enzymes and their genes  <cit> . the first enzyme proposed to contribute to wall loosening at the site of abscission was endo-β- <dig> -glucanase , or cellulase  <cit> . expression of an egase gene in phaseolus vulgaris increased during ethylene-promoted abscission, was repressed by the application of auxin, and was restricted to the abscission zone tissue  <cit> . an increase in expression of egase genes has also accompanied abscission of sambucus nigra leaflets  <cit> , tomato  flowers  <cit>  and pepper  flowers and leaves  <cit> . at the enzyme level, an increase in egase activity was also found during leaf, flower, and fruit abscission . as the primary site of abscission-related wall breakdown is the pectin-rich middle lamella, research has also focused on pectinolytic enzymes. increases in the activity of polygalacturonase  have been reported in abscission zones of tomato leaves, flowers and fruit  <cit> , peach  leaves and fruit  <cit>  and leaflets of sambucus nigra  <cit> . in general, increased pg activity coincides with the loss of tensile strength of the zone and is restricted to the sites where cell separation takes place. over-expression of the apple  fruit-specific pg gene mdpg <dig> using the constitutive camv 35s promoter reduced cell adhesion in leaf abscission zones and induced premature leaf shedding in transgenic apple plants  <cit> . during pod dehiscence, several pg genes required for cell separation have been identified in arabidopsis  <cit> . expansins, extensins and xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolases  have also been suggested to contribute to cell wall loosening during abscission  <cit> .

fruit peeling is another process where an abscission zone develops. here a biologically programmed zone of separation below the peel is responsible for the separation from the flesh. however, unlike in abscission of leaves or flowers, force needs to be applied to separate peel and flesh. the ease and cleanliness of peel separation is a function of cell wall changes in the peel and flesh during ripening, and so the focus of peelability research has been on changes in gene expression and enzyme activity in tissues where detachability develops. peelability has been most extensively studied in citrus spp. and banana .

in the final stages of rind development in orange  there are changes in the cellular structure of the albedo tissue that abuts the juice sacs. the cells enlarge and develop elongated protuberances, resulting in a spongy network of starfish or spider-shaped cells with large intercellular spaces  <cit> . in easy-peel satsuma mandarins , structural changes that happen early in development and changes in pectins result in a loss of adhesion of the albedo to the juice sacs  <cit> . changes in mrna levels of xth, expansin, extensin, glycine-rich protein and pectin acetylesterase genes were found which may contribute to rind development and the formation of large intercellular spaces in the albedo. differences in gene expression patterns of expansin, glycine-rich protein and pectin acetylesterase between the albedo and flavedo have been implicated in the tissue separation process  <cit> .

in banana , the separation of the peel from the pulp occurs along the loculus, the inner face of the skin where the vascular bundles are located. as in abscission zones of leaves or flowers, the transition region between the peel and the pulp is already well distinguished in young fruitlets, having rows of small isodiametrical cells with large, rectangular-shaped airspaces in between the rows  <cit> . differential cell wall changes and activity of cell wall enzymes between peel and pulp tissues seem to lead to tissue separation, with softening occurring much faster in the pulp than in the peel. pectin solubilisation from the cell wall occurred to a greater extent in the pulp than in the peel. pg activity was higher in the peel tissue than in the pulp, suggesting this enzyme played a major role in the softening of banana peel  <cit> . two ripening-related pectate lyase genes and maxet <dig>  a fruit-specific xyloglucan transglycosylase  gene, were differentially expressed in the peel and the pulp during ripening  <cit> . two extensin gene sequences present in the pulp and the peel were not only distinct from each other but also differentially expressed. in pulp, extensin mrna was down-regulated during ripening, whereas in peel it was up-regulated  <cit> , perhaps reflecting biochemical events designed to change the structure of the cell wall. similarly in nicotiana plumbaginifolia stems and roots, up-regulation of extensin rna has been shown to increase in cells that require reinforcement of their walls  <cit> .

the fruit of one kiwifruit  species, a. eriantha, typically become peelable when they are ripe and soft  <cit> . however, there are wide variations in location of peel detachment in the outer pericarp cell layers, and how cleanly the cells debond in this detachment zone. only two studies have investigated the development of peelability in actinidia species. an initial study compared a hybrid of a. chinensis var. deliciosa and a. eriantha showing good peel detachment with the a. chinensis var. deliciosa cultivar ‘hayward’ showing poor peel detachment that is typical for this species  <cit> . the structure of the fruit skin  and outer pericarp layers was quite similar between these two lines, and no structural differences were observed during development of detachment  <cit> . the mechanical properties of the skin of a. chinensis and several a. eriantha genotypes have been investigated in a second study that provided information on skin–flesh adhesion, skin compliance in tension, and skin tearing. substantial differences in peel detachability and peel strength were observed amongst the tested genotypes  <cit> . in this study, two closely related a. eriantha genotypes were investigated; a ‘good-peeling’  and a ‘poor-peeling’  genotype . these two genotypes have been shown to differ substantially in their peeling behaviour - less force was needed to detach the peel of the gp genotype from the flesh, and the peel had higher elastic and plastic components  <cit> .

the aim of the research described in this paper was to determine differences between the gp and pp genotypes with respect to pectin localisation, cell wall monosaccharide composition, gene expression and enzyme activity in cell walls from tissue on both sides of the detachment zone, peel and outer pericarp. three time points covering a very narrow firmness range associated with development of detachability and changes in skin strength and flexibility were selected to minimise the occurrence of ripening-related softening changes and maximise the likelihood of detecting immunological, molecular and biochemical differences related to peel detachability or required for modification of peel strength and flexibility. immunolocalisation using monoclonal antibodies directed against pectin epitopes was carried out to give information on pectin localisation and epitope changes during development of the detachment zone, in the peel and the outer pericarp as well as in the zone of detachment itself. determination of cell wall monosaccharide composition and degree of esterification of cell wall material gave information on differential changes in chemical composition of cell walls of both genotypes over the course of development of the detachment zone. the expression of genes involved in cell wall breakdown and cell wall loosening  were tested and related to their participation in development of detachabilty and fruit softening. finally, by comparing pectin-modifying enzyme activities  in the peel and the outer pericarp, we sought to evaluate their influence on cell adhesion, and by comparing hemicellulose-modifying transglycosylase and hydrolase activities  we sought to understand their effect on cell wall and tissue strengths within those tissue zones.

RESULTS
structural comparisons of two a. eriantha genotypes showed the absence of an abscission-type detachment zone
in ripe fruit of the gp genotype, peel tissue detached in one piece, cleanly and in even thickness from the flesh, indicating strong adherence of cells within the peel tissue . in the pp genotype, the peel broke often while detaching, leaving behind a moist surface and fruit flesh clumps attached to both peel and outer pericarp. the peel was thicker and uneven compared to the gp genotype . hand sections of the peel of ripe fruit showed that most cells in the gp genotype appeared to detach from each other cleanly, showing a complete separation of cell walls in the detachment zone . a greater degree of cell rupture and breakage was found in the pp genotype .fig.  <dig> peeled actinidia eriantha fruit images  and rough hand sections  of detached peel. peeled fruit of the good peeling  genotype  and poor peeling  genotype , highlighting differences in strength and tearability of the peel. the surface of the fruit after peel detachment is dry in the gp genotype  and moist in the pp genotype . the peel of the gp genotype comes off thinly and in even thickness . the peel of the pp genotype is uneven and thicker . most cells in the gp genotype detach cleanly, with complete separation of cell walls in the detachment zone  , whereas in the pp genotype, a greater degree of cell rupture is found  . bar a, b = 1 mm; bar c, d = 100 μm




the structure of the skin and outer pericarp of fruit from the two a. eriantha genotypes was then investigated by light microscopy of toluidine blue o-stained sections . in both genotypes the fruit surface consisted of several layers of vertically compressed dead cells with thickened walls from which large multiseriate hairs extended. the dead cell layer overlaid a collenchyma-like hypodermis of radially flattened tightly packed cells with thickened walls . the hypodermis extended six to eight cell layers deep in the gp genotype and 10– <dig> cell layers deep in the pp genotype . below the hypodermis is the outer pericarp which consisted of small and large parenchyma cells with thinner cell walls than the hypodermis. in the gp genotype there was a gradual progressive increase in the size of parenchyma cells deeper into the fruit, and large cells were found at a depth of 400– <dig> μm . in contrast, the interface between the hypodermis and thinner parenchyma cells of outer pericarp in the pp genotype was relatively abrupt, and large cells were found adjacent to the hypodermis . for comparison, the small parenchyma cells had a maximum cross-sectional dimensions of ~100 μm, and the large cells ~400 μm in both genotypes.fig.  <dig> toluidine blue o-stained sections of skin and outer pericarp tissue from the fruit of the good-peeling  and poor-peeling  actinidia eriantha genotypes. the surface layers of dead collapsed skin are arrowed in a, d. peelability stages: detachability not developed ; detachability developing ; fully detachable peel . the extent of hypodermal tissue in each genotype is indicated with black double headed arrows , and the width of peel detached during peeling with red double headed arrows . l, large cell. bar = 100 μm




in both genotypes, as the fruit ripened and softened and as detachability developed, changes occurred in the staining of cell walls but no structural differences were observed between the two . cells of the outer pericarp showed a decrease in toluidine blue o staining, indicating loss of cell wall integrity, as well as swelling and cell separation , changes typical for kiwifruit softening  <cit> . stain intensity was retained to a greater extent in cells close to the hypodermis, and also in large cells in the outer pericarp compared with small cells. in the pp genotype, cells of the hypodermis showed little change in stain intensity , whereas staining of hypodermal cells in the gp genotype seemed to reduce as detachability developed . no morphologically identifiable abscission zone was apparent at any developmental stage investigated.

changes in pectin methylesterification and galactan side chain distribution are associated with the development of detachment
immunolocalisation was performed using three antibodies with specificity for different epitopes in pectin. jim <dig> recognises unesterified or partially methyl-esterified epitopes on the homogalacturonan  backbone of pectin; jim <dig> recognises partially methyl-esterified hg epitopes   <cit> ; whilst lm <dig> recognises linear galactan tetrasaccharide epitopes in -β-d-galactan side chains of rhamnogalacturonan-i pectin  <cit> .

jim <dig> labelling was not particularly strong in fruit of both genotypes before development of detachability . in the gp genotype, labelling intensity seemed to decrease just beneath the hypodermal layers, whereas the hypodermal and outer pericarp areas were labelled with similar intensity in the pp genotype. the cell wall labelling pattern was similar in both genotypes, with the tricellular junctions being most intensely labelled . in fruit where detachability had started to develop, labelling increased in both genotypes, but the overall pattern of labelling remained the same. labelling in the pp genotype extended well into the outer pericarp whilst in the gp genotype it did not . in fruit where detachability was fully developed , labelling had become weaker in the gp genotype and was absent from the outer pericarp . in contrast, in the pp genotype labelling was strong in the hypodermal region and immediately adjacent outer pericarp and was weakly retained in other outer pericarp regions. overall, in the pp genotype, labelling in the hypodermal region and 2– <dig> cell layers of outer pericarp seemed to increase over development of detachability, whereas the remaining outer pericarp labelled more weakly but similarly to earlier stages .fig.  <dig> immunolabelling of good-peeling  and poor-peeling  genotypes of actinidia eriantha fruit using the jim <dig> antibody conjugated to alexa™ <dig>  for detection of unesterified and low-esterified homogalacturonan epitopes in the pectin backbone. position of the auto-fluorescing dead skin layer indicated by , and double headed arrows indicate the extent of hypodermal tissue in each genotype. peelability stages: detachability not developed ; detachability developing ; fully detachable peel . bar = 100 μm




immunolabelling with jim <dig> and lm <dig> was generally less intense than with jim <dig> and declined during softening, although the overall pattern of labelling of each antibody was retained to the stage when detachability had started to develop . at this stage labelling with jim <dig> was quite weak in the gp genotype, with the hypodermal region and immediately adjacent outer pericarp cell layers showing little or no label. stronger labelling occurred deeper in the outer pericarp, although only stretches of cell walls were labelled, the most intense being associated with large cells . the pp genotype showed weak but consistent labelling throughout the hypodermal and adjacent outer pericarp cell walls. labelling increased in intensity deeper into the outer pericarp, where it was much more uniform than in the gp genotype . immunolabelling with jim <dig> and lm <dig> at the non-detachable stage is shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig> fig.  <dig> immunolabelling of good-peeling  and poor-peeling  genotypes of actinidia eriantha fruit when detachability was developing  using jim <dig> for detection of partially methyl-esterified homogalacturonan epitopes in the pectin backbone  and lm <dig> for detection of -β-d-galactan side chains of rhamnogalacturonan-i pectin . both antibodies were conjugated to alexa™ <dig> . position of the auto-fluorescing dead skin layer indicated by , and double headed arrows indicate the extent of hypodermal tissue in each genotype. bar = 100 μm




labelling with lm <dig> in the gp genotype was mostly restricted to the three to four hypodermal cell layers below the skin, with only weak labelling in the outer pericarp . in the pp genotype, again hypodermal cells immediately below the skin were labelled, with the rest of the hypodermis having only weak labelling. stronger, but discontinuous, labelling was found in the outer pericarp .

differences in peel detachability are associated with changes in cell wall monosaccharide composition
the immunolocalisation results suggest that changes in the localisation and composition of cell wall pectin are involved in the development of detachability in a. eriantha. investigating the monosaccharide composition of cell walls of both genotypes , the total non-cellulosic monosaccharide content of cell wall material significantly decreased in the peel tissue of the pp genotype during development of detachability, whereas in the gp genotype and the outer pericarp of the pp genotype it remained relatively constant. the galactosyl content in the cell walls showed little change over development of detachability; however, the cell walls of the pp genotype had overall more galactosyl residues in both peel and outer pericarp than that in the gp genotype. cell wall galacturonyl acid-, rhamnosyl-, and arabinyl residues  and fucosyl-, xylonyl-, and mannonyl residues  were similar between the two genotypes and showed little change while detachability developed, except for the glucosyl content, which decreased in cell walls of both genotypes.table  <dig> non-cellulosic monosaccharide composition and degree of methylesterification  of cell wall material prepared from peel and outer pericarp of the good-peeling and the poor-peeling actinidia eriantha genotypes over the development of detachment

the monosaccharide composition is expressed in μg anhydro monosaccharide per mg cell wall material, and de as the molar ratio of methanol to uronic acid in %. peelability stages: nd, detachability not developed; dd detachability developing; fd, fully detachable peel. ts, total non-cellulosic sugars . rha, rhamnose; ara, arabinose; gal, galactose; ua, uronic acid; fuc, fucose; xyl, xylose; man, mannose; glc, glucose. data are means of n = 4 ± standard deviation.  and  represent statistical significance  between gp and pp at the same developmental stage 


arepresents statistical difference of dd compared to fd


bbetween np and fd within the pp genotype




in the cell wall material of the peel tissue, the degree of esterification  was between  <dig> and 65% in both genotypes; however, it increased in the pp genotype while detachability developed. at the fully detachable stage , the de was significantly higher than at the non-detachable stage  in the pp genotype. in the outer pericarp, the de was higher in the gp genotype  than in the pp genotype , and significantly so at the ‘detachability developing’  and ‘fully detachable’  stage compared with the de in the pp genotype .

gene expression changes during the of development of detachability
reverse transcriptase quantitative pcr  using gene specific primers  was used to examine differences in the expression of genes associated with pectin and hemicellulose modification during the development of detachability. expression of pg genes pgc <dig> and pgc <dig> was detected in the peel and outer pericarp of the gp and the pp genotypes . the peel of the gp genotype showed significantly higher expression of both pg genes when detachability developed and at the fully detachable stage when compared to the corresponding stages of the peel of the pp genotype. a pectate lyase gene  described in atkinson et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  was also expressed in both genotypes, albeit at a lower level in the pp genotype .fig.  <dig> expression of polygalacturonase , pectate lyase , xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase  and expansin  genes in actinidia eriantha good-peeling  and poor-peeling  genotypes over the development of detachability. note different scales in panels. op = outer pericarp. peelability stages: nd, detachability not developed; dd, detachability developing; fd, fully detachable peel. n = 3 ± standard error.  represents statistical significance between peel tissue and  between outer pericarp tissue of gp and pp at the same developmental stage  




fourteen xth genes have previously been shown to be expressed in kiwifruit  <cit> . five of these genes, xth <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  were expressed at moderate to high levels in both a. eriantha genotypes during development of detachability . xth <dig> was highly expressed in the peel and outer pericarp of both genotypes. whereas xth <dig> was significantly higher expressed in the peel of the pp genotype, the expression of xth <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> was significantly higher in the peel tissue of the gp genotype. xth <dig> and xth <dig> were only expressed at low level, whilst xth2– <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed no expression at all.

based on expressed sequence tag  expression data from kiwifruit  <cit> , eight expansin genes  were examined in this study . four genes  were shown to be highly expressed over the development of detachability. exp <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were expressed at low to medium levels , whilst exp <dig> expression was not detected. in the peel, exp <dig>  exp <dig> and exp <dig> showed significantly higher expression in the gp genotype especially when detachability was developing and at the fully detachable stage, whereas exp <dig> showed significantly higher expression in the pp genotype at all developmental stages. expression of these four genes significantly increased in the peel of the gp genotype, whereas exp <dig> decreased in the pp genotype over development of detachment. exp <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were expressed in the outer pericarp of both genotypes; exp <dig> was highly expressed in the pp genotype but not in the gp genotype .

differences in the abundance and activity of pectinolytic enzymes and expansin during the of development of detachability
the activities of two pectinolytic enzymes, pg and β-galactosidase , were monitored during the development of detachability. bgal activity was similar between the two genotypes  except in the outer pericarp at the fully detachable  stage, where bgal activity was significantly higher in the gp genotype than in the pp genotype . most bgal activity was extracted in a low salt  buffer , suggesting that the enzyme activity was freely soluble and not cell wall-bound. western blotting using an apple bgal antibody indicated the presence of several isoforms in both genotypes, with the peel containing more bands than the outer pericarp .fig.  <dig> activity of the pectinolytic enzymes β-galactosidase  ; and polygalacturonase   in low salt extracts of the good-peeling  and poor-peeling  actinidia eriantha genotypes over development of peelability. peelability stages: nd, detachability not developed; dd, detachability developing; fd, fully detachable peel. bgal, n = 4 ± standard error; pg, n = 3 ± standard error.  represents statistical significance between gp and pp at the same developmental stage . in d,  represents statistical significance of fd compared to nd within the pp genotype




polygalacturonase activity was overall significantly higher in the pp genotype than in the gp genotype in both tissues throughout development of detachment . in the gp genotype, only a small amount of pg activity was detected in the outer pericarp before detachment started to develop  , but activity was undetectable at all other stages and in the peel . in the pp genotype, pg activity increased over development of detachability and was significantly higher at the fully detachable stage  compared with the non-detachable stage  in both tissues . polygalacturonase activity was detected only in ls extracts, indicating that this kiwifruit pg was freely soluble and not cell wall-bound.

some of the activity accredited to pg in the gel diffusion assay may have derived from a pectate lyase enzyme acting on the hg backbone of the pectin substrate, as a pectate lyase gene was expressed in both genotypes . however, western analysis with an antibody directed against kiwifruit pectate lyase did not reveal the presence of protein in either genotype despite gene expression.

western analyses using an antibody raised against kiwifruit exp <dig> protein showed at least two expansin protein isoforms were present in both genotypes in the outer pericarp and peel tissue. a third isoform, with lower molecular weight, was present in the peel of the gp genotype .

changes in hemicellulose-modifying enzyme activities during the development of detachability
xyloglucan transglycosylase/hydrolase , mannan transglycosylase/hydrolase and xylan transglycosylase/hydrolase are enzymes with dual activity; they can either remodel their respective hemicellulose substrates by transglycosylation , or hydrolyse them .

the gp genotype had high levels of xet activity in the peel and the outer pericarp throughout the development of detachability. the pp genotype had only low levels of xet activity in the peel tissue throughout development of detachability, whereas in the outer pericarp, xet activity increased while detachability developed. however, xet activity in the outer pericarp was consistently lower than in the gp genotype, and significantly so when detachability had not developed yet  and when peel was fully detachable  . the bulk of xet activity was released in high salt  buffer, showing that xet was mostly cell wall bound.fig.  <dig> activity of transglycosylases and hydrolases acting on hemicelluloses in the peel and outer pericarp of the good-peeling  and poor-peeling  actinidia eriantha genotypes. activities: xyloglucan transglycosylase  ; mannan transglycosylase  ; xylan transglycosylase  ; xyloglucanase  ; endo-β-mannanase  ; xylanase activity  . ls, low salt; hs, high salt. peelability stages: nd, detachability not developed; dd detachability developing; fd, fully detachable peel. n = 3 ± standard deviation.  represents statistical significance between gp and pp at the same developmental stage . in e and j,  represent statistical significance of fd compared to nd within a genotype 




mannan transglycosylase activity was extracted in ls and in hs buffer, indicating freely soluble and cell wall-bound isoforms. the same activity trends were observed in both ls and hs extracts. figures 7c and d show the results for mannan transglycosylase in the hs extract. whereas enzyme activity was similar in both genotypes in the outer pericarp over development of detachability, it was significantly higher in the gp genotype in the peel tissue at all developmental stages.

xylan transglycosylase activity was on average higher in the peel of the gp genotype than in the pp genotype before detachability developed  and when detachability was developing . in both genotypes, xylan transglycosylase activity in the peel increased over development of detachability, and was for both genotypes significantly higher in the fully detachable stage than in the nd stage . in the outer pericarp, xylan transglycosylase activity was similar in both genotypes when detachability developed  and at the fully detachable stage . at the non-detachable stage , xylan transglycosylase activity was significantly higher in the pp genotype compared to the gp genotype .

xyloglucanase activity was mainly extracted in ls buffer. enzyme activity was significantly higher in the peel of the gp genotype than in the pp genotype at all developmental stages, and decreased slightly in the gp genotype over the course of development of detachability . the peel tissue of the pp genotype and outer pericarp from both genotypes showed only low levels of activity at all developmental stages .

endo-β-mannanase activity was mainly extracted in ls buffer. the activity was low in peel tissue, and increased slightly over development of detachability in both genotypes . in the outer pericarp, endo-β-mannanase activity increased in the gp genotype over development of detachability; at the fully detachable stage , the activity was significantly higher than at the not detachable  stage of this genotype. at the fully detachable stage, endo-β-mannanase activity in the outer pericarp was significantly higher in the gp genotype than in the pp genotype .

xylanase activity was extracted in hs buffer. in the peel tissue, xylanase activity increased slightly over development of detachability and was similar in both genotypes at all developmental stages . in the outer pericarp, xylanase activity increased in the gp genotype compared with the pp genotype over the course of development of detachability; the activity was significantly higher in the gp genotype when detachment developed  and when peel was fully detachable  compared with the pp genotype .

endo-β- <dig> -glucanase activity against various soluble cellulose substrates was not detected in either genotype .

western analyses with an antibody raised against kiwifruit xth <dig> showed multiple bands in peel and outer pericarp of both genotypes , indicating that the antibody cross-reacted with other xth proteins. band intensity was much stronger in the gp genotype than in the pp genotype. western analysis with antibodies directed against xth <dig> from kiwifruit, papaya endoxylanase, and endo-β-mannanase from tomato seeds did not reveal the presence of xth <dig>  xylanase or endo-β-mannanase protein in either genotype.

discussion
abscission and dehiscence zones, as well as peel detachment areas in the fruits of banana or mandarin, have morphologically distinct structural features that predict where cell separation will take place. in fruit of a. eriantha, however, neither skin nor outer pericarp show structural features that would predict either where cell detachment will occur, or how clean the separation will be. although the hypodermis in both genotypes showed considerable structural difference from the outer pericarp tissue, the adhesion of hypodermal cell layers  remained relatively strong throughout ripening. instead, detachment occurred in the outer pericarp region further below, once a peeling force had been applied. our research showed that the main aspects that seem important for development of peelability are differences in degree of methylesterification, galactose loss, and pg and xth enzyme action, leading to spatially distinct softening zones  that are detachable once the fruit is soft.

the differential methylesterification pattern of the pectic hg backbone as observed by immunolocalisation made the location where detachment occurred apparent. in the gp genotype, jim <dig> labelling of low-esterified hg ended sharply just below the hypodermis in the outer pericarp region where the detachment took place. jim <dig> labelling of highly-esterified hg started in the same region and extended further into the outer pericarp, whilst the hypodermis was hardly labelled at all. in the pp genotype, labelling with both antibodies showed gradual changes and extended from the hypodermis deep into the outer pericarp. these results suggest that, in the gp genotype, the cells at the interface between jim <dig> and jim <dig> labelling provide a discontinuity in strength where the peel will detach, whereas in the pp genotype, no such zone exists. hg is the major component of middle lamellae and hence strongly influences the strength of cell adhesion in a tissue. it is deposited in cell walls in a highly methyl-esterified form but is then de-esterified  <cit> . domains of adjacent de-esterified galacturonic acid residues can be cross-linked by calcium, resulting in gel formation that contributes to intercellular adhesion and also conveys different mechanical properties to the tissue. in vitro analysis of model pectin gels indicated that the compressive strength, elasticity, and water-holding capacity as well as the porosity of gels was significantly influenced by both the de and the esterification pattern of hg domains  <cit> . the chemically determined de of hg in a. eriantha cell walls was over 50% in the peel and outer pericarp cell walls of both genotypes at all developmental stages, indicating highly-esterified hg chains in both genotypes. however, only the pp genotype labelled with jim <dig> specific for high-methylesterified hg, whereas in the gp genotype little to no labelling occurred. this suggests that either the epitope specificity of jim <dig> is not met by the esterification pattern present in cell walls extracted from the gp genotype, or that the epitopes are masked in the cell wall and inaccessible for antibody binding.

galactans have been argued to modify mechanical properties of cell walls. in tomato fruit, galactans are abundant in the pericarp of green, firm tomatoes but absent from the locular gel and the epidermal and subepidermal cells  <cit> . in pea cotyledons, they appear at a time late in development prior to seed maturation and dehydration. mechanical compressive testing of cotyledons before and after galactan appearance showed that the walls with galactan were twice as firm as the ones with no detectable galactan  <cit> . in the gp a. eriantha genotype, only the outer hypodermal layers showed high label intensity for galactan; labelling in the pp genotype on the other hand was present throughout the peel and outer pericarp. additionally, cell wall galactosyl content were significantly higher in the pp genotype. this may point to a greater firmness or stiffness of the peel of the pp genotype, and – together with the much lower transglycosylase activities in this tissue – may lead to easy rupture or tearing of the peel, whereas the peel of the gp genotype is more elastic or flexible  <cit> . although bgal activity was high, neither genotype lost great amounts of galactose from the cell wall while detachability developed. as in tomato, isoforms of the whole bgal gene family may be responsible for concerted degradation of galactan observed in kiwifruit. in a. eriantha, several isoforms of bgal were present as shown by western analysis and, as in tomato, they may have various roles during fruit growth and ripening. in tomato, only the suppression of a bgal isoform appearing very early in development  had a major impact on tomato skin structure, resulting in severe fruit skin cracking  <cit> ; a lower cell wall galactosyl content and fruit firmness compared with those in the wild-type were observed only when the fruit was still developing, but not later when the fruit was ripe.

in a. eriantha, cell wall compositional changes during development of detachment were subtle. however, differences in enzyme activity were observed that point to differential softening of peel and outer pericarp tissue as a major factor in development of peelability. the gp genotype showed higher expression of pgc <dig> and pgc <dig> genes than the pp genotype during development of detachment, but did not show pg activity. to examine whether there were any mutations in the pg gene of the gp genotype, two full-length pg genes were obtained from outer pericarp tissue of both a. eriantha genotypes and their sequences compared . the first gene pgc <dig> , showed high homology  to a partial pg gene previously isolated from ripe a. chinensis var. chinensis fruit   <cit> . the second gene, pgc <dig> , showed ~75% amino acid identity to pgc <dig>  sequencing of these full-length pg sequences from both genotypes showed no frame-shift or other mutations that would lead to a non-functional protein in the gp genotype.

as pg activity was only detected in the pp genotype, enzyme-related hg breakdown in the pectin domain could lead to localised softening and weakening in peel and outer pericarp. this might account for the lower peel elasticity measured in this genotype  <cit>  and the easy tearing and fragmentation of this tissue upon detachment. gel strength and ultimately cell adhesion is influenced by the overall length of hg. the longer the hg chains, the stronger the gel, either at low de by calcium cross-linking, or at high de by hydrophobic interactions  <cit> . hence in the gp genotype, any hg gels formed in peel and outer pericarp cell walls might be stronger than in the pp genotype, as hg chains of high molecular weight range would be maintained in this genotype due to lack of pg activity. differential softening in the absence of an abscission zone is also seen in ‘banana finger drop’, where fruit break off the crown when they are ripe. banana genotypes showing frequent finger drop had higher levels of water-soluble pectin, lower cdta-soluble pectin levels and higher pg and pectate lyase activity levels in the pedicel tissue adjacent to the rupture area than genotypes whose fruit rarely break off the crown. hence it was concluded that breakage occurred due to localised softening and weakening in this tissue area due to significant changes to the cell wall pectin domain mediated by pg, whereas other areas  remained unaffected .

in a. eriantha, transglycosylase activities were significantly higher in the peel tissue of the gp genotype than in the pp genotype, and two xth genes were almost exclusively expressed in this tissue. re-arrangement of hemicelluloses by transglycosylases in peel cell walls of the gp genotype may ensure that the tissue remains strong but also more flexible and elastic when fully peelable, and that the peel might therefore tear less. correspondingly, the lower transglycosylase activities in the pp genotype may lead to a weaker skin that easily tears. transglycosylase activities are reported to play a role in the outermost tissue layers of other fruit. thompson et al.,  <cit>  reported the importance of xet in epidermal cell walls of developing tomato, where xet activity was found to be proportional to the relative expansion rate of fruit until growth ceased. johnston et al.,  <cit>  found increased levels of xylan transglycosylase activity in apple peel compared with that in cortex tissue, and schröder et al.,  <cit>  reported highest mannan transglycosylase activity in tomato peel.

xyloglucan transglycosylase activity was also present in the outer pericarp of both genotypes, and increased over development of detachment in the pp genotype. these activities may reflect changes that are mainly softening related, since an increase in xet activity in the outer pericarp tissue during softening has been found in a. chinensis var. deliciosa  <cit>  and in two a. chinensis var. chinensis genotypes  <cit> , kiwifruit species that are not peelable. in a. eriantha, this xet activity may be related to xth <dig>  as only this gene is highly expressed in the outer pericarp of both genotypes.

xyloglucanase, endo-β-mannanase and xylanase activities were significantly higher in the outer pericarp of both genotypes. endo-β-mannanase and xylanase activities appeared to increase in the outer pericarp as detachment developed and this occurred earlier in the gp genotype than in the pp genotype. the more advanced hydrolysis of these hemicelluloses in the outer pericarp of the gp genotype may aid cell separation and detachment of the peel from outer pericarp. chanliaud et al.,  <cit>  found strong and complementary mechanical effects for transglycosylating and hydrolytic enzymes using cell wall composite material made of cellulose and xyloglucan. in this system, extensive cross-linking of cellulose with xyloglucan resulted in a weaker, less stiff, and more extensible structure than with cellulose alone  <cit> . treatment with a xyloglucanase degraded most of the surface cellulose-bound and cross-linking xyloglucans, and the resulting composite material became more stiff and stronger, including a decrease in creep behaviour, thereby providing evidence that hydrolytic enzymes can have a strengthening effect on cell walls. xyloglucan transglycosylase activity had a complementary effect on the composite, as it increased its ability for molecular rearrangement as measured by creep. it was concluded that xyloglucanase and xet action can lead either to increased strength  or to enhanced viscoelasticity  of the xyloglucan/cellulose networks in muro  <cit> . in our study, the peel of the gp genotype had higher xyloglucanase and higher xet activity than the pp genotype. one could speculate that the xyloglucanase activity may be strengthening the tissue to prevent breakage during the peeling action, and that re-arrangement of the xyloglucan in the peel tissue of the gp genotype mediated by xet resulted in higher flexibility of the peel tissue. whether effects like this also play a role with hydrolases and transglycosylases acting on mannans and xylans in the cell wall remains to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
a novel cell separation mechanism has been found in kiwifruit in the absence of a morphologically identifiable abscission zone, making the fruit peelable. examining two closely-related kiwifruit genotypes with contrasting detachment behaviour, cell wall features were identified that were important in the development of detachment using immunolocalisation, gene expression analyses and enzyme activity assays. the main differences between genotypes were in degree of methylesterification, galactose loss, and pg and xth enzyme action. xyloglucan-, mannan-, and xylan transglycosylase activities were higher in peel tissue than in the underlying flesh, ensuring that the peel tissue remained strong but also more flexible and elastic during detachment. these findings broaden the tasks of these enzyme activities from being involved in cell expansion to being involved in determining the mechanical properties of plant tissues. these results provide direction for future studies aimed at investigating transglycosylase action in other plant surface tissues.

