BACKGROUND
in recent years dna microarrays as other high throughput molecular techniques became first choice investigation methods for dna and rna studies. early applications included expression profiling and dna mutation analysis  <cit> . recently, single nucleotide polymorphisms  and comparative genomics hybridization also found widespread solutions in microarray based assays  <cit> . the optimization of the microarray workflow, including the hybridization step, is thus a primary target for the evolution of more efficient protocols.

the identification of compatible solutes in hyperthermophilic microorganisms, and of their stabilization effect, prompted us to test their effectiveness in microarray protocols. the accumulation of low molecular mass compounds is known to be a common strategy used by microorganisms to survive in environmental and stressful conditions  <cit> . hyperthermophiles accumulate compatible solutes  rarely encountered in mesophiles. these solutes are generally negatively charged, whereas mesophiles accumulate primarily neutral solutes.

mannosyl glycerate  is a compatible solute accumulated by some thermophiles and hyperthermophiles in answering to osmotic aggressions. mannosyl glycerate was initially identified in marine red algae of the family ceramiales, and then in archaea bacteria  <cit>  and it was shown to be a good enzyme stabilizer  <cit> . recently, mg was also found to be a very effective nucleic acids stabilizer during frost preservation and transport. mg stabilizing properties are shared by some of its synthetic derivatives like mannosyl lactate . in turn, diglycerol phosphate  is a new and rare hypersolute from archaeoglogus and it displays remarkable properties of protein stabilization  <cit> . ectoine  and its derivative hydroxyectoine  were found in halophile organisms where they play the role of proteins and nucleic acids protectors, as well as free radicals suppressors  <cit> .

the use of osmolytes to improve protein stability is a well established practice. on the contrary no reports have yet demonstrated the effect of hypersolutes on nucleic acids hybridization in vitro. to test the effect of hypersolutes on dna hybridization, we have chosen the affymetrix system, currently one of the most used and tested microarray platforms. these chips consist of hundreds of thousands oligonucleotides, or more, in situ synthesized by a combination of photolithography and oligonucleotide chemistry  <cit> . in the expression profiling chips that we used here each mrna transcript is represented by a probe set, i.e. a group of oligonucleotides of around  <dig> nucleotides in length. this platform is attractive for our purposes because it extends its relevance beyond the rna expression field. in fact chips with identical technology are also used for snp detection and for genome re-sequencing. the core element in the affymetrix design is the perfect match/mismatch probe strategy: for each probe designed to be perfectly complementary to a target sequence, an identical partner probe, except for a single central base mismatch, is generated. these probe pairs allow quantitation and subtraction of signals caused by non specific cross hybridization. currently, the affymetrix procedure requires the use of  <dig> microgram of un-amplified rna. this rna amount might still be too high for those studies, where the available sample is limited. amplification could be performed, in such cases, but it is an expensive and time consuming step in addition to the standard labeling procedure.

the aim of our work was that of verifying whether hypersolutes can further improve this efficient system. since this platform is well characterized, we could apply proprietary and open source quality control techniques. the results we describe here show that three hypersolutes, hect, dgp and mg, proved to be very beneficial for the outcome of affymetrix microarray experiments.

RESULTS
a preliminary screening of all hypersolutes: non ionic ectoine  and hydroxyectoine , potassium salts of diglycerol phosphate , mannosyl glycerate  and mannosyl lactate  at three different concentrations in the hybridization solution  was carried out. hydroxyectoine, dgp and mg reduced background, in particular at the lowest concentration, while no significant difference in absolute signal intensity was detected . only these compounds were hence further investigated, and the concentration range extended towards lower values.

additional hybridizations with the  <dig> hypersolutes were performed at  <dig> and  <dig> mm and repeated at  <dig> and  <dig> mm. this plan was set up to investigate the concentration effect and to determine the most effective working concentration of hypersolutes in the hybridization buffer. each run was carried out in quadruplicate, in addition to a control test  for each series. quality assessment by normalized unscaled standard errors , relative log expression  and pseudo images was performed with bioconductor package affyplm. all chips passed the quality control  and were included in the following statistical analysis.

further qc parameters were assessed by using the affymetrix proprietary tools. means of raw q, background, scaling factor and percent present calls values with their standard deviations and p values  are reported in table  <dig> 

affymetrix quality control parameters; raw q, background , scaling factor  and percent present calls : mean and standard deviation  among replicates; % gain of solute respect to the controls, with relative p values. hect: hydroxyectoine; dgp: potassium diglycerol-phosphate; mg: potassium mannosylglycerate. * p-value <  <dig> 

raw q and background values were within the acceptable ranges for all the assays and very similar to each other, with the exception of high concentration dgp . twenty five mm hect and  <dig> mm dgp and mg resulted in higher sample quality, reduction of arrays surface auto-fluorescence and of nonspecific binding. individual scaling factors ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the  <dig> and  <dig> mm series and between  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the  <dig> and  <dig> mm series, and were all acceptable being within two-fold of each other.

one of the most interesting parameters for investigators is probably the percent present calls, defined as the fraction of "expressed" probe sets relative to the total of the array. the higher number of genes can be measured as present , the most useful the results will be. hect, dgp and mg increased percentage of "present" calls, thus improving array sensitivity. this positive effect was more pronounced at low solute concentrations . in particular, the use of  <dig> mm hect as additive to hybridization yielded a  <dig>  % gain in present calls.

we also used chips pseudo-images in the diagnostics of array. chips pseudo-images of robust linear model weights are a computational method to measure the quality of microarrays. areas of poor quality are indicated by green , while high quality by light grey spots . an example of the weights' pseudo-images is reported in figure  <dig> for chips hybridized in the presence of  <dig> mm mg  and its control. the image plot of the control chip shows a larger number of green areas, corresponding to poor quality, than that of the hypersolute. thus pseudo-images confirmed that hybridizations in the presence of  <dig> mm mg produced higher quality microarrays.

the graphs of the normalized unscaled standard errors  and the relative log expression  are displayed as bar charts in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. in both cases, the values were normalized on the corresponding controls , as described in the methods section. poor quality chips have normalized nuses and rles higher than  <dig> , while high quality chips have normalized nuses and rles lower than  <dig>  nuses and rles for almost all  <dig> and  <dig> mm compatible solute concentrations were lower than  <dig>  indicating improved arrays quality. only in two cases,  <dig> mm dgp and hect, the nuses were slightly higher than controls. on the other hand, the error indexes for the  <dig> and  <dig> mm solute concentrations were higher than the controls. the values reported in figure  <dig> and  <dig> were referred to experiments run at the same site.

the hybridizations were performed on affymetrix genechip test <dig> arrays. these chips are commonly used for the assessment of target quality and contain probes representing a subset of genes from different organisms. the fragmented crna used in our assays hybridized to the human and the highly conserved probes. the results reported above were obtained by analyzing the whole array. in order to exclude solutes-induced cross-hybridization, we also measured pms and mms only for human probes. the mean values of pm > mm confirmed the higher quality of hybridizations with <dig> mm dgp,  <dig> mm hect and  <dig> and  <dig> mm mg . notice that i.e.  <dig>  means 80% of pm larger than mm, according to the affy bioconductor package  <cit> .

discussion
the positive effect of compatible solutes in the hybridization of microarrays could be due to the involvement of solutes in different processes. for example, low concentrations of hypersolutes might improve the specificity of dna:crna interactions by destabilizing imperfect double helices, containing unpaired nucleotides. hypersolutes might on the contrary stabilize the perfect matched pairings typical of the short affymetrix probes . the combination of these two effects would thus lead to the higher signal to noise ratio observed in our dgp, mg and hect hybridizations. additionally, the reduction in background could be a result of the lower solid support auto-fluorescence. finally, a stabilization of the crna in solution, during the overnight hybridization, might be the last component in the chain of events leading to the improved s/n ratio. the effect of hypersolutes on hybridization efficiency was not related to potassium ions  since ml did not show a significant improvement over control .

the positive effects of hypersolutes on test <dig> hybridizations were displayed both for the total probe sets and for the human specific probe sets. cross-hybridization induced by compatible solutes was not detectable by our analysis. the small improvement in the percentage of present calls, applied at genome level, would add as many as 500– <dig> genes to an expression profile.

finally, the beneficial role of compatible solutes might be very valuable for other affymetrix systems, like the snps platform. considering the higher constrains of the snp chips, genotyping might benefit from compatible solutes even more than expression profiling. it is likely, but remains to be experimentally verified, that different high throughput techniques, either solid state, or beads-based solution systems, might also gain from using compatible solutes.

CONCLUSIONS
low millimolar concentrations of hydroxyectoine, potassium diglycerol phosphate and potassium mannosylglycerate reduced dna microarray background and improved hybridization efficiency. the results were highly significant when analyzed by comparing different quality control measures: raw q, background , scaling factor , percent present calls , chips pseudo-images, normalized unscaled standard errors  and relative log expression . twenty five mm dgp,  <dig> mm hect and  <dig> mm mg were shown to be the optimal solutes and concentrations. the experiments were carried out and confirmed in two different affymetrix facilities. the application of this finding to hybridization protocols could result in a significant improvement of microarray experiments, not limited to expression profiling.

