BACKGROUND
salmonella enterica is indigenous to the gastrointestinal tracts of many mammals, birds, and reptiles without the manifestation of adverse effects on the host. however, subclinical infections of salmonella in animals have the potential to cause disease in humans exposed to food products that are mishandled during processing or inappropriately cooked  <cit> . cross-contamination during the slaughter process contributes to the transmission of food borne pathogens and therefore increases the risk of disease in humans. throughout the processing plant, opportunities arise for the spread of bacteria from contaminated carcasses to uncontaminated carcasses  <cit> .

regardless of whether the source of contamination was pre-harvest or post-harvest, salmonella is difficult to remove from carcasses due to its ability to adhere to chicken skin and endure the different stages of processing  <cit> . laboratory research, as well as in-plant trials, has demonstrated this relationship  <cit> . therefore, persistence of salmonella within the processing plant may be partially explained by interactions between chicken skin and salmonella  <cit> . under controlled conditions, chemical treatments are effective in the reduction of salmonella levels on broiler carcasses or skin  <cit> . however, gaps in the knowledge base exist relative to the persistence of salmonella during processing and the most appropriate methods for reduction and control of the microorganism.

bioluminescence imaging  is a technique that can be used for real-time quantification and tracking of live bacteria in hosts  <cit> . previously, a bli based real-time monitoring system for salmonella enterica serotypes was developed by our group that employs the plasmid paklux <dig>  which carries a bacterial luciferase gene isolated from photorhabdus luminescens  <cit> . however, the use of this plasmid-based bioluminescence system requires continuous antibiotic selection during the course of experiments to prevent plasmid instability in salmonella enterica serotypes  <cit> , which may not be suitable for long-term in-vitro and in-vivo studies.

in response to this limitation, we now report cloning of the luxcdabe operon into a stable tn7-based transposon system that inserts the luxcdabe genes into a specific location in the salmonella chromosome. we successfully used this transposon system to stably insert the bacterial lux operon into eleven salmonella enterica serotypes isolated from the broiler production continuum, including post hatchery, prior to harvest, arrival at the plant, pre-chill tank, and post-chill tank. we also conducted a series of experiments to quantify bioluminescence expression in these salmonella enterica isolates under environmental conditions that may be present in poultry processing. this reporter system can be applied in future research to further understand how salmonella are able to persist throughout the poultry processing continuum, and similar situations pertinent to the food industry.

RESULTS
construction of plasmid pben276
plasmid pgrg <dig> features a site-specific recombination system based on the bacterial transposon tn <dig>  <cit> . the tn <dig> system inserts at the atttn <dig> site and is oriented specifically such that the right end of tn <dig> is adjacent to the 3' end of the glms gene  <cit> , and it has been used for transgene insertion into the chromosome of escherichia coli, salmonella, and shigella  <cit> . plasmid pgrg <dig> is also a temperature-sensitive delivery plasmid that can be cured after transgene insertion at the atttn <dig> site by culturing at 42°c. plasmid pben <dig> contains the luxcdabe operon between the tn <dig> transposon arms on plasmid pgrg <dig>  and its expression is driven by the e. coli frr promoter , which controls expression of a house-keeping gene encoding ribosome recycling factor. thus the lux operon will be expressed constitutively. the chromosomal insertion point is specific and insertion of lux operon does not disrupt the function of glms gene, therefore it is highly unlikely that bacterial physiology will be affected adversely  <cit> .

characterizing the bioluminescent properties of salmonella enterica
plasmid pben <dig> was utilized to insert the bacterial lux operon into chromosomes of eleven salmonella enterica serotypes. bioluminescence correlated well to bacterial population density in all serotypes used, as exemplified in s. montevideo  . the minimum detectable concentration of all eleven serotypes was, in decreasing order : s. kentucky -  <dig>  × 104; s. mbandaka -  <dig>  × 104; s. enteritidis -  <dig>  × 104; s. schwarzengrund -  <dig>  × 104; s. montevideo -  <dig>  × 104; s. alachua -  <dig>  × 104; s. typhimurium -  <dig>  × 103; s. seftenberg -  <dig>  × 103; s. heidelberg -  <dig>  × 103; s. newport -  <dig>  × 103; s. braenderup -  <dig>  ×  <dig>  minimum detectable numbers of salmonella isolates expressing bioluminescence from the chromosome were higher compared to minimum detectable numbers of salmonella isolates expressing plasmid-based bioluminescence  <cit> . one possible explanation for this difference is a copy number effect; a single copy of the lux operon is inserted into the chromosome with the tn <dig> system, while multiple copies of the gene are expressed in plasmid systems. plasmid paklux <dig> is a pbbr <dig> derived plasmid which characteristically has a medium copy number   <cit> . another possible explanation is due to promoter effect; the frr promoter drives expression of luxcdabe in the tn <dig> system, and the lacz promoter drives expression in the paklux <dig> plasmid system  <cit> . our previous work showed bioluminescent salmonella isolates carrying plasmid paklux <dig> emit, on average,  <dig>  p/s/cm2/sr per cfu  <cit> ; in comparison, salmonella isolates carrying the lux operon in the chromosome emit, on average,  <dig>  p/s/cm2/sr per cfu. the intended purpose for this system is to use it as a screening tool for potential pathogen mitigation strategies, and this threshold of detection is sufficient for this purpose.

transgene stability in the chromosome of salmonella enterica
our group evaluated the stability of the lux operon in the chromosome following transposition by subcloning bioluminescent salmonella enterica serotypes under non-selective conditions for  <dig> days at 37°c. previous work from our group with plasmid-based bioluminescence expression showed the plasmid was unstable without antibiotic selection. the average half-life of plasmid paklux <dig>  which contains the luxcdabe cassette, was approximately seven days in salmonella enterica serotypes without antibiotic selection  <cit> . this current study provides evidence for a  <dig> day period indicating stability of the lux operon in the chromosome of these salmonella enterica serotypes with minimal bioluminescent flux . a notable observation was low initial expression of bioluminescence from s. schwarzengrund . this serotype increased bioluminescence expression over the course of the experiment and reached similar levels of the other serotypes at approximately day  <dig> . the differences observed for s. schwarzengrund are interesting. it is important to note that the tn <dig> transposon system does not insert randomly in the salmonella chromosome. the tn <dig> transposon system is site specific; insertion is only allowed at the atttn <dig> site. therefore, 'luxcdabe mutants' are not possible. bacterial density values  for s. schwarzengrund were also similar to bacterial density values for the other serotypes. the differences in bioluminescence expression are due to a difference in host serotype background. determination of the cause of this serotype-specific effect is beyond the scope of the current manuscript. it is of interest that expression of bioluminescence in s. schwarzengrund was also the lowest in the plasmid lux system, paklux <dig>  reported previously  <cit> . these results indicate plasmid pben <dig> can be utilized to construct a stable reporting system within the chromosome of salmonella enterica serotypes for use in extended in-vitro and in-vivo trials.

assessment of bioluminescent assay at various temperatures
genes luxcdabe encode bacterial luciferase which catalyzes the oxidation of reduced flavin mononucleotide  and a long chain aliphatic aldehyde in the presence of o <dig> to produce flavin mononucleotide  and acid with light emission. because fmnh <dig> production is dependent on a functional electron transport chain, only metabolically active bacteria emit light  <cit> . thus, bli provides a sensitive real-time measurement of the effects of various chemical, biological and physical stimuli on bacterial metabolism  <cit> . we utilized our bioluminescent salmonella enterica serotypes to validate our model under a temperature range that bacteria in food products are commonly exposed to . therefore we investigated the relationship between cellular metabolic activity, characterized by bacterial light production, and temperature variation. the temperatures selected were 37°c, 25°c and 4°c.

mesophiles, such as salmonella grow best in moderate temperatures  with normal enzymatic activity. in this experiment luciferase reaction within salmonella was monitored. at 37°c and 25°c bli measurements were consistent within the replicates of the different serotypes. however, a change in temperature will have an impact on enzyme kinetics. decreasing temperature, to 4°c, will slow molecular motion and inhibit the luciferase reaction. decreasing temperature will also decrease the rate of metabolism, which translates to decreased concentration of substrate, fmnh <dig>  available for the luciferase reaction. at 4°c we observed an expected reduction in bioluminescent signal compared to readings at the two higher temperatures, 37°c and 25°c . however, over the time required  to complete bli measurements at 25°c we observed a rapid increase in the bioluminescent signal between the first and the last wells read. we found that luciferase activity is restored shortly after removal from refrigeration temperature, so temperature effect is minimal after introduction to ambient temperatures . these results were consistent and validated that our reporting system using bioluminescent salmonella can be successfully applied to monitor within a temperature range that bacteria in food products are commonly exposed to.

the stage on our luminometer has adjustable temperature with the lowest temperature setting being 25°c. future work will include the development of a mechanism for maintaining plates at refrigeration temperatures while on the reading stage of the instrument to overcome this limitation.

development of chicken skin assay for real-time monitoring of bioluminescent salmonella enterica
salmonella presents a major problem for the poultry industry due to its persistence during the processing of chicken carcasses and few options exist that completely eliminate the bacteria from the chicken carcasses besides proper cooking. the physiological mechanisms which allow the bacteria to persist throughout processing of the chicken carcass are largely unknown and until the mechanics of attachment of the bacteria are more comprehensively understood, salmonella may well remain a food safety concern.

we have developed a model, which uses a real-time stable reporting system incorporating our bioluminescent tagged salmonella enterica serotypes, which can be used to evaluate various pathogenic mitigation strategies. further, this model may eventually aid in the understanding of how these serotypes are able to survive the processing continuum. we performed this experiment to demonstrate the potential value of this model as a screening tool by evaluating the performance of our bioluminescent salmonella on chicken skin sections at two temperatures in an aqueous environment. we selected s. mbandaka and s. montevideo for this skin attachment experiment based on the consistent bioluminescence expression we observed within these serotypes . individual aqueous solutions, each containing a salmonella enterica serotype, were prepared and introduced to chicken skin according to protocol . separate plates  containing replicates of each serotype were placed on a rotating stage at 4°c and 25°c for  <dig> h. immediately following this step, bioluminescent imaging was collected after a five minute interval at 37°c for both serotypes and is reported . bioluminescent monitoring demonstrated the ability to quantify bacteria numbers on chicken skin following cold and warm washes. our previous work showed washing with 25°c water suppressed the reproduction of salmonella on chicken skin likely through the physical removal of bacteria  <cit> . given that salmonella is a mesophile, refrigeration temperatures further limit bacterial growth and the bacteria become metabolically static. bioluminescent values, confirming bacteria numbers, at post-wash  were not shown to be significantly different compared to pre-wash values for both serotypes . bioluminescent values at post-wash  were greater compared to pre-wash values but the difference was not shown to be significantly different . the increase in bioluminescence following the 25°c wash period is due to increased bacteria growth under favorable metabolic conditions  and nutrients provided by the chicken skin in solution. with our model we were able to quantify a change in bacteria number by monitoring bioluminescence following treatment.

these results provide evidence that our model may serve as an accurate and efficient means for in-vitro evaluation of the efficacy of pathogen mitigation strategies, i.e. antimicrobial compounds  and processing parameters, that may be utilized in the poultry processing industry to control salmonella enterica. future work utilizing our lux reporter system in our chicken skin model will feature an extended time course to better reflect the duration of exposure to conditions bacteria might be subjected to in the poultry processing environment.

CONCLUSIONS
our work demonstrates a novel, real-time monitoring system for salmonella enterica serotypes that is stable and has potential use for in in vivo and in vitro trials. our results show the efficiency of plasmid pben <dig> to confer bioluminescence to eleven wild-type salmonella enterica isolates by inserting the luxcdabe operon into the atttn <dig> site on the chromosome. chromosomal insertion of the gene is significant in that external antibiotic pressure is not required for perpetuation of the luxcdabe cassette. this system has the potential to eventually be utilized for the evaluation of potential pathogen mitigation strategies upon salmonella under different environmental conditions over extended time courses, which was not previously possible due to limitations of plasmid-based reporter systems.

detection was successful following metabolic inactivity due to refrigeration temperatures and results provide support for application of our model in trials simulating processing plant environmental conditions. future experiments are planned using this system to evaluate the efficacy of various amcs. we expect this research may provide a foundation for future work to understand the mechanism of attachment of salmonella to chicken skin and its ability to persist during the poultry processing continuum.

