BACKGROUND
a host can deal with an infection by directly limiting a pathogen burden  or by withstanding the negative consequences of the given burden . biomedically, tolerance implies that the host with the most aggressive immune system may not necessarily be the healthiest  <cit> . evolutionarily, tolerance expands the range of strategies a host could employ to maximize fitness under infection conditions, and may impose evolutionary constraints, requiring the host to balance these potentially antagonistic strategies. from the pathogen’s perspective, tolerance may relax or remove selection imposed by the canonical immune system, potentially resulting in a neutral or positive effect on pathogen fitness  <cit> .there is widespread evidence that tolerance is an important feature of host defense, but how this strategy evolves in concert with resistance and other life-history traits in animals, especially across variable environments, remains unknown.

from the host perspective, the superficial outcome of both resistance and tolerance can be the same: the retention of fitness. however, the long-term ecological and evolutionary dynamics are predicted to have very different outcomes. importantly, resistance is expected to have a direct negative effect on pathogen fitness, whereas tolerance will have a neutral or positive effect  <cit> . this increase in pathogen fitness promoted by host tolerance could result in increased pathogen prevalence, which may increase the benefit of alleles that confer tolerance in the host, possibly offsetting any costs of those alleles. oppositely, hosts with costly resistance alleles may reduce pathogen prevalence to levels where the resistant allele is no longer beneficial  <cit> . theoretical work has shown that this negative feedback loop under a resistance strategy could result in the maintenance of polymorphism for resistance alleles, whereas the positive feedback loop created when a tolerance strategy is employed is more likely to result in the fixation of tolerance alleles in the population  <cit> . in this study, we measured genetic variation for both tolerance and resistance to empirically test this simple model. our prediction was that we would find little genetic variation for tolerance if the simple positive feedback model is true, but that negative feedback loops would result in considerable variation for resistance.

while the predicted evolutionary outcomes of tolerance and resistance are very different, the natural dynamics are complicated by both internal constraints and external variability. the model proposed by roy  <cit>  assumes that resistance and tolerance alleles are independent, that there is only a single locus determining each strategy, and that each strategy exhibits the same evolutionary cost. the model also assumes a single, non-evolving, pathogen genotype and a constant environment. theoretical work has relaxed some these simplifications  <cit> , showing that variation in costs of the defense strategies could maintain variation in both tolerance and resistance, but these issues have not been empirically addressed in animals. we empirically address these complexities by quantifying costs, response to altered dietary environment, genotype-by-diet interactions, and the relationship between these two strategies.

disentangling defense into separate components of resistance and tolerance, and understanding how these distinct strategies are related to each other, is crucial to understanding the evolution of host defense. however, first we must know how tolerance manifests and how it should be quantified. empirical studies in animals have mainly focused on measures of health as estimates of tolerance, including survival  <cit> , weight  <cit> , and red blood cell count  <cit> , whereas plant work has focused on more direct fitness estimates such as total fruit set  <cit>  and seed production  <cit> . these different metrics of tolerance could have different evolutionary outcomes because they may differentially affect pathogen fitness  <cit>  and may trade off with different aspects of host physiology. statistically, tolerance has been defined as the slope of the line where the health or fitness estimate is plotted against pathogen burden. three recent studies have explicitly tested for natural genetic variation for tolerance in animals using this framework. two found evidence for variation in tolerance  <cit> , whereas one did not  <cit> .

although tolerance in practical terms has been studied in agriculture for over 100 years  <cit> , recent interest in evolutionary questions about tolerance in natural systems was stimulated by a study in morning glory that demonstrated a negative relationship between resistance and tolerance  <cit> . however, this negative relationship does not seem to be generalizable, and the current consensus in the plant literature leans towards a positive relationship between these two strategies, where a host allocates defense resources to both resistance and tolerance  <cit> . in animals, räberg et al.  <cit>  found a negative relationship between resistance  and tolerance  in laboratory mice infected with plasmodium chabaudi. tolerance and resistance may be correlated because of pleiotropic mechanisms, linkage disequilibrium, or physiological constraints. inconsistencies in the relationship between resistance and tolerance could result from system-specific mechanisms  <cit>  and/or different definitions or metrics of tolerance and resistance.

dietary environment and metabolic status can affect defense through both tolerance and resistance. resistance is affected by dietary environment  <cit> , and there is antagonism between defense and growth/tissue repair  <cit>  as well as reproduction  <cit> . we hypothesized that a tradeoff between resistance and tolerance might be mediated by processes that are responsive to dietary environment, with the underlying assumption that tolerance strategies include tissue repair and growth, while resistance includes canonical immunity. alternatively, a positive relationship between these two strategies would suggest that increased resource allocation to defense results in simultaneously improved resistance and tolerance, as would be expected if the underlying mechanisms of these strategies were overlapping. we predicted that dietary environment would alter both tolerance and resistance, but that the relationship between the two might change in a diet-dependent manner.

in the present study, we were able to identify genetic variation for both tolerance and resistance and show that maintenance of this polymorphism could result from a balanced optimum between these two strategies, shaped by evolutionary costs of defense and genotype-by-environment interactions. we hypothesized that dietary environment would alter the balance between tolerance and resistance, and that different environments may favor different defense strategies. we estimated tolerance both as functions of survival and fecundity under infection conditions to understand whether these are in fact different processes and distinct forms of tolerance. we followed these traits over time, developing a framework for defense that acknowledges that infection is not a binary state but a dynamic process consisting of multiple phases of infection. this study sheds light on the evolvability of tolerance and resistance, and how these distinct strategies may influence the evolution of host-pathogen interactions.

RESULTS
dynamics of p. rettgeri infection
in order to understand how defense dynamics change over time – including the relative balance of tolerance and resistance – we measured bacterial load, fecundity, and survival in ten outbred drosophila melanogaster genotypes once per day for five days after infection with providencia rettgeri . each fly was infected with approximately  <dig> bacteria. bacterial load increased to an average of approximately  <dig>  ×  <dig> bacteria per fly in the first day after infection. load decreased on day  <dig> to  <dig>  ×  <dig> bacteria per fly and did not significantly change between days  <dig> and  <dig>  by day  <dig> average load levels decreased to  <dig>  ×  <dig> bacteria per fly and did not significantly change between days  <dig> and  <dig> . the majority of the mortality occurred within the first two days after infection; across all treatments,  <dig> % of infected flies were dead by this point compared to  <dig> % of the uninfected control flies. between days  <dig> and  <dig>  survival of infected flies fell from  <dig> % to  <dig> % over all genotypes measured . fecundity per individual female was greatly reduced during the first three days of infection, the same time period when pathogen loads were highest and most mortality occurred. the largest difference between infected and uninfected occurred two days after infection, with a mean of  <dig>  offspring per infected female and  <dig>  offspring per uninfected female . these infection dynamics revealed two distinct phases of infection, which has not been considered in previous theoretical or empirical work on tolerance. based on this observation, we have split the infection into an “acute” phase and a “chronic” phase. the acute phase is defined as the first three days after infection, when pathogen levels are highest within the host and greatest mortality and reduction in fecundity occurs. the chronic phase is defined as days  <dig> and  <dig>  when pathogen levels are lower and appear stabilized and mortality and fecundity have returned to near uninfected levels.

*represents an interaction between factors.

see methods for full models.

bacterial load is the response variable. genotype is a random factor in the model. bacterial load changes over time and across dietary environment. diet and day post-infection are both predictors of load.

*represents an interaction between factors.

the proportion of flies alive each day post-infection is the response variable. genotype is a random factor in the model. load, diet, and day predict mortality. mortality tolerance is affected by diet , day , and the interaction between these two factors .

the response variable is infected fecundity. genotype is a random factor in the model. load, diet, and day predict infected fecundity. diet does not affect fecundity tolerance . day post-infection marginally predicts fecundity tolerance .

is there genetic variation for tolerance and resistance?
after initial characterization of the dynamics of bacterial load, survival, and reproduction, we sought to determine whether the host d. melanogaster population was genetically variable for defense quality, and whether that defense quality varied with diet. the 10 f <dig> outbred genotypes in our study are derived from the drosophila genetic reference panel , a panel of  <dig> inbred lines that were each created from an independent single female collected in raleigh, nc, usa  <cit> . to avoid effects of inbreeding, we chose  <dig> of these lines at random and established outbred f <dig> genotypes using a ring cross design, such that each of the  <dig> chosen dgrp lines contributed a mother to one experimental genotype and a father to another . all phenotypes were genetically polymorphic among our outbred progeny . three linear models were fitted to the data to determine the magnitudes of genetic variation for resistance , fecundity tolerance , and mortality tolerance . daily fecundity tolerance was estimated as the number of offspring produced each day normalized by the bacterial load estimated for the genotype on that day. mortality tolerance was measured as the daily mortality rate per fly normalized to the bacterial load. the terms included in these models and their interpretations are given in table  <dig>  separate models were run on the data from the acute and chronic phases of infection.

genotype was a strong predictor of bacterial load in both the acute and chronic phase of infection , clearly demonstrating genetic variation for resistance. we found genetic variation for fecundity tolerance in the acute phase of infection , but not in the chronic phase . we also found genetic variation for mortality tolerance in the acute phase of infection , but not in the chronic phase . it is striking that bacterial load does not predict infected fecundity  or mortality  in the chronic phase of the infection. thus, although we have genetic variation for bacterial load in both the acute and chronic phase of infection, the impact of this burden on fitness differs dramatically between the two phases of infection.

the response variable is bacterial load. the significant effect of genotype represents genetic variation for resistance.

*represents an interaction between factors.

the response variable is infected fecundity. the significant genotype*load interaction represents genetic variation for fecundity tolerance. the significant genotype*diet*load interaction represents a genotype-by-environment effect for fecundity tolerance.

the proportion of flies alive each day post-infection is the response variable. the significant genotype*load interaction represents genetic variation for mortality tolerance. the significant genotype*diet*load interaction represents a genotype-by-environment effect for mortality tolerance.

complex relationship between defense strategies and diet
all phenotypes  varied significantly with diet . the 24-hour bacterial load measurement ranged from a median of  <dig>  ln bacteria per fly to  <dig>  ln bacteria per fly on the low-sugar diet , and  <dig>  to  <dig>  ln bacteria per fly on the high-sugar diet . survival ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % on the low-sugar diet, and  <dig> % to  <dig> % on the high-sugar diet over five days after infection. the mean fecundity of infected flies at two days after infection ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  adult offspring per fly on the low-sugar diet , and  <dig>  to  <dig>   on the high-sugar diet.

we hypothesized that the nutritional quality of the rearing diet might influence the quality of defense, either through resistance or tolerance. to test this, we evaluated defense quality after rearing on either high-sugar or low-sugar diets. both diet and day post-infection were significant predictors of load , but there was no significant interaction between diet and day. this suggests that the dynamics of the resistance phenotype  does not change across the diets used in this experiment . diet also significantly influenced mortality tolerance , with higher mortality and thus lower tolerance observed on the high-sugar diet. in contrast, we found no evidence for a dietary effect on fecundity tolerance . thus, despite the fact that both fecundity and bacterial load are independently sensitive to diet, the relationship between them is not.

given that diet shapes resistance and mortality tolerance, we hypothesized that the quantitative effects of diet depend on host genotype. we found evidence for genotype-by-diet determination of fecundity and mortality tolerance  in the acute phase of infection. we also found a marginal genotype-by-diet effect on fecundity tolerance during the chronic phase of infection . this apparent interaction effect on fecundity tolerance disappears from the acute phase of the infection, if we reanalyze the data with per-fly daily fecundity estimated from the number of females that are alive at the end of each day instead of the number of flies that are alive at the beginning of the day . this indicates that the effect of the genotype-by-diet interaction on fecundity tolerance in the acute infection may be driven by the effect of the interaction on daily mortality. we did not find evidence for a genotype-by-diet interaction influencing resistance in either the acute or chronic phase of infection . other experiments studying resistance against p. rettgeri with more genotypes and more extreme diets have found genotype-by-diet effects for resistance . this suggests our study may have lacked power to detect these effects, or that these effects are only detectable when the diets span a greater range of nutritional quality.

relationship between resistance and tolerance
we evaluated the relationship between tolerance and resistance to determine whether these strategies trade off with one another, or if they act in an additive or synergistic manner. first, we defined overall fecundity tolerance as the least squares mean of infected fecundity from model a using data from the acute phase of infection. this model incorporates uninfected fecundity to control for general vigor differences among the genotypes, as well as the bacterial load sustained by each genotype. mortality tolerance was defined as the proportion of flies surviving three days post-infection . resistance is defined in this analysis as the inverse of systemic bacterial load at 24 hours after infection. contrary to the expectation under tradeoff models, we found a positive correlation between resistance and fecundity tolerance on both diets when all genotypes are included . interestingly, two genotypes that share a parental line and had less than 10% survival when infected  as well as the highest bacterial load were entirely responsible for the positive relationship between fecundity tolerance and resistance on the low-sugar diet. when these two genotypes were removed from the analysis, the relationship remained significantly positive on the high-sugar diet , but becomes non-significant on the low-sugar diet . a similar pattern was seen when the proportion of flies surviving three days after infection was used to estimate tolerance, except that in this case, the relationship between resistance and tolerance became non-significant on both diets after excluding the two high-mortality genotypes . the stronger relationship on the high-sugar diet suggests that these traits can potentially be decoupled in a diet-dependent manner. excluding the two high-mortality genotypes from this analysis may be biologically appropriate if the relationship between bacterial load and health or fitness is not linear. in other words, it is possible that at very high bacterial loads there is a threshold in which the host is not able to tolerate that burden, and health or fitness do not decrease at the same rate above this threshold as they do at lower bacterial loads.

the roy  <cit>  model assumes that the tolerance and resistance alleles are equally costly, and this cost is driving the feedback loops that will maintain variation for resistance but not for tolerance. to estimated the cost of each defense strategy, we tested the correlation of overall estimates of fecundity tolerance, mortality tolerance, and resistance with an overall measurement of uninfected fecundity, which was the sum of uninfected fecundity in the first three days after infection . there was no relationship between daily-uninfected fecundity and any of the defense phenotypes . this provides no evidence for a fecundity cost of defense and indicates that general vigor did not drive defense quality in our study. we did find a weak negative correlation between fecundity prior to the infection experiment and bacterial load at 24 hours post-infection on the low-sugar diet . however, this tradeoff was not evident on the high-sugar diet  and became non-significant on the low-sugar diet if the genotypes displaying high mortality were excluded from the analysis. this trend is consistent with a diet-dependent tradeoff between reproduction and resistance in the early phase of an infection. weak negative correlations were also seen between pre-infection fecundity and both fecundity and mortality tolerance on the low sugar diet, but none of these were significant . we found no correlation in quality of defense between the acute and chronic phases of the infection, reaffirming that these are truly independent infection states. the general lack of correlation between reproductive fitness and defense may be a result of low power of the experiments or unnaturally permissive experimental conditions.

discussion
we found two distinct phases of infection over the five days that defense was assessed. the acute phase  was characterized by a high pathogen burden, severe mortality, and a reduction in fecundity. the chronic phase  consisted of a still substantial but stable pathogen burden that was in no way predictive of mortality or fecundity. we found genetic variation for resistance, mortality tolerance, and fecundity tolerance in the acute phase of the infection, but only for resistance in the chronic phase. experimental diet significantly influenced resistance and mortality tolerance during the acute phase of the infection. however, fecundity tolerance was not sensitive to diet. that is, even though diet altered both pathogen load and fecundity, it did so proportionally such that the relationship between load and fecundity  was unchanged. using overall estimates of resistance and tolerance in the acute phase of infection, we found a positive relationship between resistance and tolerance, although the strength of this relationship was diet-dependent. we also demonstrate a weak evolutionary cost of resistance, but fail to detect any cost of tolerance.

during the chronic phase of infection, pathogen levels remained constant. this finding suggests either that the host and pathogen have reached an equilibrium where the immune system is killing bacteria at the same rate that the bacteria are replicating or that the bacteria have stopped replicating and are no longer exposed or sensitive to host immunity. we speculate that the latter may be occurring, because mortality and fecundity both return to near uninfected levels during the chronic phase. further understanding the patterns of infection from the perspective of both host tolerance and pathogen virulence will clarify how both players interact to create host tolerance.

current theoretical models describing variation of resistance and tolerance in the context of host-pathogen coevolution assume a single state of infection  <cit> . the empirical distinction between the acute and chronic phases of infection demonstrated here emphasizes the importance of looking at disease dynamics over time before extrapolating predictions about the spread of disease and evolution of defense in the wild. if transmission of p. rettgeri were to occur during the chronic phase of infection, then our results could be interpreted as supporting a model where tolerance alleles have fixed in the population. infection tolerance through static chronic infection, which may not have major fitness consequences, should be integrated in future theoretical work on defense and infectious disease dynamics.

consistent with previous studies  phase of infection. the continued presence of genetic variation for tolerance is inconsistent with basic theoretical models predicting tolerance alleles to be more likely to fix in the population than resistance alleles  <cit> . non-independence between resistance and tolerance, or genotype-by-environment interactions may explain this inconsistency.

although diet altered all three phenotypes measured , it did not alter fecundity tolerance. in other words, the relationship between fecundity and pathogen load did not change across the two diets used in this experiment. however, mortality tolerance was very sensitive to diet. we expected that both fecundity and mortality tolerance would be sensitive to diet because both egg production and survival are regulated by metabolic pathways such as insulin-like signaling, which are responsive to alteration in dietary sugar . we observed that host females do not completely stop egg production under infection conditions, nor do we see any evidence for “egg dumping” – a rapid increase in egg output to maximize short-term fitness upon infection  <cit> . instead, we observe only a minimal reduction in fecundity after infection, implying that females continue to invest in short-term reproductive output even though it may increase the risk of dying from infection and hence potentially limit lifetime fecundity.

we observed genotype-by-diet effects on mortality tolerance and fecundity tolerance, but saw no significant genotype-by-diet interaction for resistance. while increasing dietary glucose increased pathogen burden, there was little evidence for genetic variation in immunological sensitivity to dietary sugar in this study. since there are significant genotype-by-diet effects on tolerance but not resistance during acute infection, we infer that the genes underlying tolerance are likely to function outside of the canonical resistance pathways.

in general, we found a positive relationship between resistance and tolerance, which supports the hypothesis that resource allocation to defense contributes to both resistance and tolerance  <cit> . although, conceptually, a tradeoff between resistance and tolerance is easy to imagine and has some theoretical support , the empirical evidence is very mixed. several high-impact papers have demonstrated a negative relationship between the two strategies  <cit> . however, a meta-analysis of  <dig> ecological and agricultural studies of herbivore defense strategies did not find a significant relationship between resistance and tolerance  <cit> , and several studies have demonstrated a positive relationship between the two strategies  <cit> . this lack of consensus may be a result of idiosyncrasies of specific host and pathogen combinations  <cit> , as well as to employment of different measures of tolerance and resistance across studies. our observation that the strength of the relationship between resistance and tolerance is diet-dependent suggests that environmental heterogeneity could decouple these two traits and allow them to evolve independently.

the observed tradeoff between pre-infection fecundity and bacterial load was driven by two genotypes that both were derived from line ral- <dig>  after the experiment was performed, it was discovered that this genotype contains a premature stop codon in the antimicrobial peptide gene, diptericin. diptericin is a downstream effector of the imd pathway, which is responsible for resistance against gram-negative pathogens. although traditional life-history theory would suggest that an evolutionary tradeoff may be a result of limited resources between maintenance of the immune system and reproduction, we speculate from our results that it is more likely driven by direct costs of immunity, such as collateral damage from active antimicrobial activity. other work has demonstrated a tradeoff between immunity and lifespan by showing that constitutive activation of the gram-negative bacterial recognition protein, pgrp-le, reduces lifespan. this phenotype can be rescued in flies with a homozygous loss-of-function mutation in the nf-kb transcription factor, relish  <cit> . these results, combined with our study, suggest that the downstream effectors are the modulators of these tradeoffs, because if the tradeoff was simply based on resource availability, functional downstream effectors would play a smaller role than recognition and signaling molecules.

we did not observe any costs of tolerance. this suggests that resistance is more costly than tolerance, at least in terms of early-life reproduction. it is possible that under different conditions, increased power, or through measurements of different life-history traits, such as longevity, we may have found a cost of tolerance. although this is the first attempt to identify costs of tolerance in animals as uninfected fitness, many studies in plants have found costs of tolerance  <cit> , but some have failed to detect these costs  <cit> .

we have empirically demonstrated that defense as tolerance and resistance is a dynamic process with multiple phases of infection, and that these defense strategies are differentially affected by diet and genotype-by-diet interactions. future theoretical work should aim to incorporate these complexities into disease models, while empirical studies should acknowledge these alternative, yet synergistic, strategies and how they change over time and environment.

CONCLUSIONS
here we show that infection dynamics as well as dietary environment influence estimates of both tolerance and resistance, emphasizing that infection status is not a dichotomous state but a continuum that may yield different defense strategies in different contexts. the presence of genetic variation for fecundity and mortality tolerance is contrary to simple theoretical models, and we show that context dependence and non-independence between defense strategies may be maintaining this variation. the presence of a weak evolutionary cost of resistance, but no costs of tolerance suggests that direct costs of limiting a pathogen burden may be more costly than dealing with the negative consequences of that burden.

