BACKGROUND
yersinia pestis is the etiological agent of plague, alternatively growing in fleas or warm-blood mammals  <cit> . fleas acquire this organism via blood meal from a bacteremic mammal, usually a rodent. to produce a transmissible infection, y. pestis colonizes the flea midgut and forms a biofilm in the proventricular valve optimally at  <dig> to 26°c, blocking its normal blood feeding  <cit> . human beings are occasionally infected by directly contacting infected animals or by being bitten by the blocked fleas. thus, y. pestis must experience a temperature shift during the transmission process between rodents, fleas, and humans. it is considered a facultative intracellular pathogen. after the initial subcutaneous invasion, the bacteria migrate into the regional lymph nodes via the subcutaneous lymph vessel. most of the organisms that invade the lymph nodes are engulfed and killed by the polymorphonuclear leukocytes  that are attracted to invasion sites in large numbers. however, a few bacilli are taken up by tissue macrophages, providing a fastidious and unoccupied niche for y. pestis to synthesize virulence determinants  <cit> . residence in this niche also facilitates the bacteria's resistance to phagocytosis  <cit> . the moiety escaped from macrophages can multiply outside of host cells and eventually cause systemic infection. the hypothesized prevailing conditions of phagolysosomal microenvironments include acidic ph, oxidative stress, iron scavenging, nutrition limitation, and killing or inhibiting activities of antibacterial peptides. to survive these stressful environments, y. pestis likely makes appropriate adaptive responses, primarily reflected by the transcriptional changes of specific sets of genes.

a dna microarray is able to determine simultaneous changes in all the genes of a cell at the mrna level  <cit> . we and others have measured the gene expression profiles of y. pestis in response to a variety of stimulating conditions , including temperature alteration tolerance  <cit> , increased osmolarity  <cit> , ion deficiency  <cit> , antibiotic treatment  <cit> , oxidative and acidic stresses  <cit> , antibacterial peptide treatment  <cit>  and nutrition limitation. we also identified the regulons controlled by each of the regulatory proteins, fur  <cit> , phop  <cit> , ompr, and oxyr, by comparing the gene expression patterns of the mutant transcriptional regulator with that of its parental strain. in order to acquire more regulatory information, all available microarray data of y. pestis including those published signature expression profiles  <cit>  were collected and subjected to clustering analysis, which infers functionality to the clusters of co-regulated genes.

the transcriptional and genomic information gleaned from coordinately regulated genes was also used to computationally search for potential operons  and cis-acting dna regulatory motifs . some important findings were further verified by biochemical experiments, including rt-pcr and gel shift assays. this analysis provides an opportunity to gain a global view of environmental modulation of gene expression patterns in y. pestis.

RESULTS
comprehensive analysis of large sets of microarray expression data is useful to dissect bacterial adaptation to various environments and to understand bacterial gene transcriptional regulation  <cit> . for example, kendall and his colleagues have compared the general responses of mycobacterium tuberculosis induced by a variety of different in vitro conditions   <cit> . after the determination of the csra, slya, and phopq regulons in samonella typhimurium, the relevant regulon members are monitored to define the synergetic or antagonistic roles between these three regulators in cell infection models  <cit> .

recently, many signature expression profiles of y. pestis have been reported  <cit> . all the microarray expression data from our laboratory were analyzed using standardized microarray procedures such that they are suitable for comprehensive analysis. comparative transcriptomics analysis presented here can be used to mine the regulatory information from these available microarray data, providing an opportunity to gain a global view on environmental modulation of gene expression in y. pestis. this analysis provides an additional dividend towards the transcriptional regulatory networks of y. pestis.

virulence genes in response to multiple environmental stresses
in this work,  <dig> expression profiles of y. pestis were collected for further integration. we hypothesize that the stress conditions used in these experiments will be encountered by this bacterium during its infection and life cycle. the data supported the notion that y. pestis has evolved its ability to coordinately regulate a wide set of genes to survive a wide range of environmental perturbations. almost all of the known virulence genes were active in the stress responses. thus, identification of the expression patterns of virulence genes upon a wide set of environmental changes will provide a reference to screen for uncharacterized genes that shown the same differential gene expression under the same stressful conditions.

the transmission and infection of y. pestis can be roughly divided into stages of maintain in fleas, adhesion to host surface, invasion into epithelial or endothelial cells, intracellular growth, antiphagocytosis, and extracellular proliferation . y. pestis possesses a set of virulence determinants that promote infection in mammalian hosts and/or transmission by flea vectors, and different virulence genes have been proven or proposed to be involved in different infection stages .

as described previously, expression profiles of y. pestis showed that almost all the putative virulence genes of y. pestis were differentially regulated upon temperature alteration  <cit> . our data showed that y. pestis known virulence genes also respond to other environmental stresses besides temperature shift . for example, the hemin storage locus, hmshfrs  <cit> , was repressed by temperature upshift, high osmolarity, nutrition limitation, and streptomycin treatment. the ymt gene encoding yersinia murine toxin  <cit>  was also regulated by temperature upshift and streptomycin treatment.

y. pestis synthesizes several antiphagocytic factors, including f <dig> capsular antigen  <cit> , ph <dig> antigen  <cit>  and yersinia outer proteins   <cit> . expression of yops was regulated by temperature alteration, increased osmolarity, and nutrition deficiency under normal ca2+ condition. these data suggest that the low-calcium response of type iii secretion system  appears to be triggered at the mrna level by other environmental cues in addition to temperature upshift and ca2+ limitation. f <dig> capsular antigen is expressed much more at 37°c than at 26°c  <cit> . ph <dig> antigen , encoded by the chromosomal psaa gene, expresses in vitro between ph  <dig> and  <dig>  at  <dig> to 41°c  <cit> , or when bacteria live within phagocytic phagolysome  <cit> . the psaefabc operon encodes a chaperone/usher pathway involved in the secretion and assembly of ph <dig> antigen as a polymer  on the surface of y. pestis in macrophages  <cit> . psae is thought to be a positive regulator of the psaabc locus and is required for maximal expression of the ph <dig> antigen  <cit> . a recent study showed that the psaefabc locus is regulated by rova  <cit> . the microarray data showed that the f <dig> operon was upregulated upon temperature upshift, low ph medium, oxidative stress, low mg2+, and nutrition deficiency, while the psaefabc locus was induced by temperature alteration, acid stress, low mg2+, nutrition limitation, high salinity and hyperosmotic stress. it is reasonable to assume that synergetic operation of complicated microenvironments within mammalian hosts account for the full expression of these two loci.

prediction of operons from microarray data
operon prediction is the first step toward elucidating gene regulation and reconstructing regulatory networks. most approaches for prokaryotic operon prediction were developed on the basis of genomic and/or phylogenetic information  <cit> . for these methods, training with experimental information of known operons is required to generate the predictors. however, little experimental data of operon structure is currently available for y. pestis. to predict the potential operons of y. pestis, we attempted a method that incorporated the empirical correlation coefficient from microarray expression data with the genomic annotation data, including gene orientation, intergenic distance, functional similarity, and intra-genome conservation.

stress-responsive operons predicted from microarray expression data
by using the criteria described in methods, we identified  <dig> potential operons that consisted of  <dig> genes in y. pestis . nineteen of these potential operons have been previously studied in other bacteria. there was good agreement between our results and a recent report in which the adjacent genes of y. pestis co <dig> are predicted to be within an operon based on the greater conservation of operons in multiple species  <cit> .

'r' represents the correlation coefficient of adjacent genes; '*' represent the defined operon has the similar expression pattern in two other published microarray datasets  <cit> ; '?' inferred functions of uncharacterized genes; '-' means the corresponding operons have not been experimentally validated in other bacteria.

verification of predicted operons by rt-pcr
four predicted operons were chosen for validation by rt-pcr . given that genes in an operon are expressed to a single mrna molecule, reverse transcriptase was used to synthesize first-strand cdna that was subsequently used as template for pcr. products were analyzed from the beginning, middle, and end of a multi-gene cluster, so as to define where the multi-gene cluster transcript starts and ends. for the operons, ypo1994- <dig> , katy-cybc-cybb , and ypo1087- <dig>  analyzed, there was perfect consistency with the above in silico prediction. microarray analysis showed that ypo <dig> and ypo <dig> were co-expressed, but due to low-quality data it failed to provide the expression data of their downstream genes, ypo <dig> and ypo <dig>  rt-pcr demonstrated that all these four genes were expressed as a single mrna molecule , and thus they constituted an operon.

this analysis predicted a total of  <dig> operons in y. pestis. the advantage of our strategy is that a high accuracy rate would be achieved by integrating microarray experimental data with genomic information. although there are many bioinformatics tools available for predicting operons, results presented here demonstrated a new reliable strategy for operon prediction and verification, which will be helpful for functional studies. however, only a small number of operons could be predicted, due to the fact i) that only stress-responsive genes were included for this analysis, and ii) that a lot of contiguous gene pairs passed the criteria, but incomplete array data made it difficult to define the border of their primary mrna transcripts 

functional inference of clustering, uncharacterized genes
clustering microarray expression data can be viewed as a data reduction process, in that observations of gene expression in each cluster can be over-represented . this process provides much greater insight into functional classes of co-expressed genes, since genes that are functionally related should be co-regulated and consequently should show similar expression profiles  <cit> . thus, clustering genes with similar expression patterns can potentially be utilized to predict the functions of gene products with unknown functions, and to identify sets of genes that are co-expressed and may play the same roles in different cell cycles. we analyzed the expression data with unsupervised algorithms and identified four clusters of co-expressed genes that were associated with ribosome biosynthesis, iron/heme assimilation, and sulfur and energy metabolism. the possible roles of uncharacterized genes may be inferred by referencing other members in each cluster.

clustering analysis and functional classification of co-expressed gene clusters
clustering analysis of the whole microarray dataset was analyzed and four distinct clusters of co-expressed genes, cluster i, ii, iii, and iv, were identified .

cluster i consisted of more than  <dig> genes, most of which are functionally related to biosynthesis of ribosomal proteins. the ribosome is the factory of protein synthesis, and it determines the capacity of the cell to synthesize proteins, thus determining the growth rate of the bacteria. since most of the members in cluster i were down-regulated in response to a temperature shift from  <dig> to 37°c, high osmolarity, mg2+ limitation, nutrition deficiency, and antibiotics treatment, y. pestis appeared to slow its growth rate under these conditions .

cluster ii contains dozens of genes involved in iron/heme assimilation. it is noticeable that almost all of these genes in this cluster were upregulated in response to iron scavenging in wild type  strain, and to iron excess in fur mutant grown at 26°c or 37°c. as shown in table  <dig>  genes in cluster ii could be divided into three categories, a , b , and c . genes in category a  are experimentally proven to be involved in iron/heme assimilation in y. pestis  <cit> . category b genes showed high degree of similarity with those known to be responsible for iron/heme assimilation in other bacteria. those genes in category a and b were also found to be iron-responsive in the previously published expression data  <cit> . however, category c consisted of the yack and yhhn-znta genes that are functionally related to metal metabolism; sufabcdse that encodes constituents of fe-s cluster assembly  <cit> ; nrdhief which is responsible for glutaredoxin and ribonucleoside-diphosphate reduction  <cit> ; and some genes  without any functional information. category c genes are likely indirectly or directly related to iron/heme utilization and metabolism.

sulfur is one of the nutrients necessary for bacterial life. genes responsible for sulfur uptake and utilization constitute the cys regulon in gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . cluster iii contains members of the cys regulon, including tauabcd, ssueadcb, cyspuwam, and sbp <dig>  these genes were regulated by most of the environmental stresses under study, implying that sulfur metabolism might play important roles in the adaptation of y. pestis to various environmental perturbations. two genomic loci, ypo1316- <dig> and ypo4108- <dig>  are also included in this sulfur-metabolism-related cluster. most of the gene products within these two loci were annotated as conserved hypothetical proteins. these two genomic loci might have functions related to sulfur metabolism.

as shown in cluster iv in figure  <dig>  sdhcdab and sucabcd involved in tricarboxylic acid cycle had an expressional pattern similar to that of nuoa-n and cyoabcde involved in aerobic respiration. the microarray data showed that these energy metabolism-related genes were down-regulated upon heat shock, high osmolarity, mg2+ limitation, and streptomycin treatment, but they were upregulated upon chloramphenicol treatment. these results indicated a general retardation of energy generation in y. pestis might occur in response to these suboptimal growth conditions.

prediction of regulatory dna motifs from clustering data
functionally related members within a cluster of co-expressed genes are likely to be regulated by similar mechanisms; sometimes expression of these genes is even controlled by a single regulatory protein. promoter dna sequences containing short  and relatively conserved regulatory dna motifs represent the predominant contact sites with the regulatory protein. in this study, the promoter-proximate dna sequences were collected from each cluster of co-expressed genes. the subsequent motif discovery analysis indicated the presence of dna motifs that resembled the experimentally proved fur, purr, crp, and fnr boxes of e. coli and other bacteria  <cit> , respectively.

computational discovery of regulatory dna motifs
functionally related members of a cluster of co-expressed genes are likely regulated by similar mechanisms, and even share common cis-regulatory dna elements within their promoter dna regions. the presence of a motif-like sequence within the upstream region of a gene suggests that it is likely a direct target of the corresponding regulatory protein.

here, collections of upstream dna sequences from each of the above four clusters were searched for potential regulatory motifs . dna boxes were found in the promoter regions of each collection. a  <dig> basepair  box  was detected in the upstream dna regions of the cluster i genes. it is very similar to the e. coli purr box   <cit> . a  <dig> bp box  was found for the  <dig> genes in cluster ii. it is a 10-1- <dig> inverted repeat that resembles the e. coli fur box   <cit> . a  <dig> bp box  was found within the upstream regions of the cluster iii genes. it is a part of the e. coli fnr box   <cit> .

a box sequence  was strictly present in the promoter regions of  <dig> genes in cluster iv. it is a part of the binding boxes of crp  <cit>  and fnr  <cit> . previous dna-binding studies showed that crp bound to exactly the same sequence as that recognized by fnr  <cit> . the arca regulator can recognize a relatively conservative sequence   <cit> . an arca-box-like sequence  was found in the upstream sequence of  <dig> genes in cluster iv .

in addition to the dna boxes mentioned above that described the regulatory motifs with a contiguous oligonucleotide, we constructed their corresponding position-specific scoring matrix  .

emsa analysis of fur binding
the above motif discovery analysis showed that there were fur-box-like sequences found in the promoter regions of many genes in cluster ii . the presence of a sequence with high similarity with fur box is a predictor of fur-specific binding. to validate the motif discovery results, eight genes/operons  were chosen from cluster ii, covering all three categories shown in table  <dig>  emsa  was performed to evaluate the binding of fur to the upstream promoter dna. each promoter region was radioactively labeled, incubated with purified his-fur protein, and then subjected to native gel electrophoresis. the band of free promoter dna disappears with the increasing amounts of his-fur protein, and a dna band with decreased mobility appears, presumably representing the fur-dna complex. thus, the fur protein binds to the promoter region of each gene/operon tested in vitro , indicating that the fur regulator directly controls the expression of these eight genes/operons.

CONCLUSIONS
the comprehensive transcriptomics analysis benefits our understanding of the molecular determinants of bacterial pathogenesis and cellular regulatory circuits. our study gave some hints to the possible function of uncharacterized genes and regulatory elements of y. pestis such as operons and dna regulatory motifs. this kind of analysis would provide an opportunity to gain a global view of environmental modulation of gene expression patterns in y. pestis, which also serve as a basis for integrating increasing volumes of microarray data using existing methods.

