BACKGROUND
the human genome contains approximately  <dig> billion base pairs. only approximately 2% of these encode the proteins which carry out almost all of the known cellular functions  <cit> . the remaining 98% of the human genome has, by and large, been considered "junk" dna. during recent years, data from tiling arrays and large-scale sequencing of cdnas indicates that large amounts of the junk dna is transcribed, not only intronic dna as parts of unprocessed pre-mrnas, but as tightly regulated cell-specific transcripts from both strands in intronic as well as intergenic regions . approximately 8% of our genome consists of sequences classified as human endogenous retroviruses , ancient remnants of retroviral integrations and their subsequent expansions in the genomes of our ancestors  <cit> . these herv elements have degenerated over millions of year of evolution and can, with few exceptions, no longer encode complete proteins let alone engender infectious viral particles  <cit> . since genomic regions harboring repetitive elements, including herv, are for methodological reasons usually excluded from array-based large-scale expression studies, their potential transcriptional activities and biological relevance remain largely uncharacterized, despite the numerous observations of their differential expression in human diseases  <cit> .

as for the rest of the genome, evidence is mounting that genomic regions containing herv elements are transcriptionally active in human tissues, see  <cit>  and related references. systematic studies of herv expression patterns across tissues have been limited to quantifying expression of single elements or collective expression of entire herv families  <cit> . these studies suggest that levels of transcripts encoding herv elements vary between tissues  <cit> . the repetitive nature of hervs makes designing assays that specifically detect individual elements difficult and carefully optimized probe assays are usually required for specificity  <cit> . the sheer number of members in the different herv families  <cit>  makes it a prohibitively expensive and sample consuming to determine expression patterns of more than a few elements within the different herv families. therefore, a systematic evaluation of expression patterns of individual members of a herv family across tissues and individuals has not previously been performed. we have previously used analysis of melting temperatures  in semi-quantitative pcrs  as a proxy marker of sequence differences between amplicons generated by primers targeted toward the herv-w family  <cit> . by manually categorizing melting temperatures into 3- <dig> distinct groups, cell type specific expression patterns of herv-w elements in human cell lines were observed  <cit> . sequencing and mapping of pcr-products representative of these different groups indicated that a number of genomic loci were transcriptionally active in these cells. cell-type specific changes in the expression patterns following serum deprivation or influenza a/wsn/ <dig> virus infection indicate regulated expression of several of these loci.

we recently refined the tm-assay by using a molecular beacon as an internal control for temperature variations over the heat-block in the thermocycler and an automated analysis program for more precise and unbiased tm acquisition. by this approach, the resolution was improved by a factor of ten  <cit>  allowing acquisition of more detailed data. these data can subsequently be analyzed by application of mixture models analysis for an objective determination of minimum numbers of sequences represented by the detected tms and the frequency distributions of these tms  <cit> .

in the present study we applied these techniques to determine expression patterns of transcripts containing herv-w gag sequences with unprecedented resolution, however, absolute expression level differences between tissues were not examined. we report expression pattern profiling of transcripts containing herv-w gag sequences in human primary fibroblast cultures and tissues including; blood, thymus, spleen, ovary, testis, liver, and regions of the brain.

RESULTS
we applied the gaussian curve fitting and temperature normalization with a molecular beacon method previously described  <cit>  to human tissue samples. when we had accumulated  <dig> individual tm observations from a wide range of human tissues we constructed a model  of the minimum number of tm categories required to explain the spread of the data . the mixture model tm-analysis technique predicted a model of mixture proportions into  <dig> tm categories. this number of categories was found to be optimal according to akaike's information criterion  as previously described  <cit> . with this model we proceeded to fit sets of individual tms recorded from tissues to the model consisting of the  <dig> tm categories.

data points were subsequently plotted in frequency distribution histograms visualizing expression patterns in different tissue and cell types, figure 2a. to investigate if expression patterns of transcripts containing herv-w gag sequences differ between regions of the human brain, four regions of cerebral cortex and the cerebellum were analyzed. frequency histograms presenting these data are presented in figure 2b. to investigate the extent of inter-individual variation of expression of transcripts containing herv-w gag, we also analyzed whole blood obtained from seven blood-donors, figure 2c. to try to distinguish the genetic from the environmental components of the expression patterns of herv-w gag elements, we employed cultures of human primary fibroblasts from healthy individuals and subjected them to serum deprivation. this was also intended as a high resolution follow up from our previous work on the environmental influence on expression pattern of herv-w gag elements <cit> , figure 2d.

heat-maps of p-values obtained from pair-wise chi-square comparisons of expression patterns in the different tissues are illustrated in figure 2e-h. all comparisons, except that between spleen and pbmc, suggest significantly differing patterns of transcripts containing herv-w sequences in human tissues, figure 2e. similarly, expression of such transcripts also differed between the investigated regions of the brain . blood samples from the different individuals, however, exhibited a far more homogenous expression pattern . we observed that primary fibroblast cultures exhibited a higher degree of variation between individuals than the less cytologically defined whole blood samples . the patterns became more similar between individuals in response to serum deprivation, in line with the hypothesis that herv-w gag expression correlates to specific expression changes.

to illustrate the degree of variation in expression patterns between samples, we calculated the relative distances  between single tissues and averages of tissues . of all tissues tested, thymus and testis exhibited the most differing expression patterns of transcripts containing herv-w gag sequences . indeed, approximately 70% of all transcripts detected in cdna from testis or thymus matched single tm-categories, whereas the distribution was more even between tm categories in other tissues. the distances calculated between individual blood samples were smaller than those observed between different tissues or brain regions . patterns of herv-w gag expression between individuals varied more in brain regions than in spleen tissue samples, whole blood or primary fibroblast cultures. taken together, variation in expression patterns in primary fibroblast cultures were reduced in response to serum deprivation .

we next looked at similarities in expression patterns between tissues by constructing neighbor-joining trees based on correlations in expression patterns between samples. as can be seen from figure  <dig>  brain regions were more closely correlated to each other than to other tissues. similarly, placenta, spleen, thymus and pbmc were also more closely correlated to each other than to the brain regions or gonads. blood samples had a relatively even distribution of mixing proportions into the  <dig> tm categories and are consequently poorly correlated to all other tissue samples.

discussion
we here report expression patterns of transcripts containing herv-w gag sequences in human tissues. transcripts containing herv sequences in general, along with other repetitive regions of the genome are generally not prioritized in human genomics studies. due to the difficulty in finding specific primers and probe sequences, cross-reactions between different elements would render regular pcr or array based techniques ineffective for distinguishing individual members within a herv-family. tm-analysis has the advantage of detecting variations in the sequence of an amplified region, predicting the least number of different sequences required to account for a set of tm data. it can, however, never predict more than the minimum number of different sequences as different sequences can have indistinguishable tms  <cit> . expression pattern variations between such sequences can therefore remain undetected. however, with tm-analysis it is possible to screen samples for differences in expression patterns requiring sequencing of only a limited number of products within a tm category of interest. these can subsequently be differentially analyzed by more specific assays, as exemplified in  <cit>  or can be sequenced selectively based on tm. the approach used allows a higher resolution of repetitive sequence analysis without the expense of large scale sequencing. the evaluation of cost versus gain in information of the method used here as compared to the high throughput sequencing data produced in next generation sequencing technologies is a subject for future studies.

the current findings illustrate part of the hidden complexity of the human transcriptome. we can conclude that expression of herv-w gag sequences varies between human tissues systematically and consequently in a non-random fashion. tissue type and cell composition appear to be a larger determinant of the expression profile of such transcripts than the individual from which the tissues were obtained. for instance the expression profile of herv-w gag containing transcripts in testis, a pooled sample of, according to the manufacturer,  <dig> individuals contained only  <dig> categories of  <dig> possible represented .

neighbor-joining of the pearson correlation coefficients resulted in a dendrogram which groups brain regions and gonads together and tissues rich in cells of the immune system together. this dendrogram resembles similar constructs built from coding transcript expression data  <cit> , indicating that transcripts containing herv-w gag elements vary between tissues similarly to such transcripts. due to the limited number of data points the tree structure is not stable and is hence only an indication of similarities. previous studies on transcription in different tissues, including different brain regions, suggest that functional specialization is reflected at the level of transcription  <cit> . based on the clustering of tissues in figure  <dig>  it appears as if this extends also to the transcription of herv-w elements.

we observed that the degree of differences in expression patterns of herv-w gag elements between individuals was not constant across tissues and cells. expression patterns of coding transcripts are known to vary in whole blood samples depending on age, gender, time of day and health status  <cit> , despite this whole blood exhibited the most homogenous expression pattern of the tissues investigated here. interestingly, expression patterns in brain tissue exhibited the largest variation across individuals of all tissues examined. since spleen samples obtained from the same individuals, displayed far less variation, these findings cannot be attributed to post-mortem or nucleic acid purification artifacts. indeed, franz and coworkers  <cit>  reported that death caused exaggerated homogeneity in expression profiles of coding transcripts in human brain. human fibroblasts lines from different individuals were maintained for 3- <dig> passages under identical conditions, yet differences between individuals remained, regardless of treatment. thus, in addition to environmental cues, genetic or epigenetic components  <cit>  appear to contribute to the herv-w gag expression patterns.

whether this tissue specific transcription is a consequence of specific mechanisms or reflects transcriptional leakage from transcription of coding regions remains to be established. indeed, putative promoter structures  in the herv-w and other families are active in human cells  <cit> . recent studies indicate that tens of thousands of human transcripts are initiated at retroviral promoters  <cit> . furthermore, gogvadze and coworkers  <cit>  recently reported functions of herv-k transcripts in regulation of gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
our current findings that human tissues harbor patterned and extensive expression of genomic loci containing herv-w elements, suggests that functionality for such transcripts cannot be ruled out. finally, the methodological approach used here proves itself useful for detailed analyses of transcripts originating from repetitive regions. the potential applications for this method would be to examine expression pattern alterations of repetitive sequences in disease states. detailed expression patterns of repetitive elements have yet to be explored in cancers or neurodegenerative diseases where specific or total expression changes have been documented. this methodological approach might be useful for determining whether such quantitative changes originate from specific loci or from global expression changes of repetitive elements.

