BACKGROUND
porcine circovirus associated disease , also known as porcine circovirus disease and previously as post weaning multisystemic wasting syndrome , emerged in the early 1990's and soon became a major animal health problem in many swine-producing regions worldwide  <cit> . the disease has several clinical presentations and can result in high mortality in growing pigs. most frequently, pcvad clinically manifests as excessive and rapid weight loss in growing pigs, respiratory illness, and increased mortality. post-mortem findings frequently include generalized lymphadenopathy on macroscopic examination, and lymphoid depletion and/or histiocytic replacement of follicles in lymphoid tissues on microscopic examination  <cit> . porcine circovirus type  <dig>  has been recognized as a necessary cause of pcvad, but several other infectious and non-infectious factors have been identified as component causes acting through various mechanisms  <cit> . studies of epidemics at the herd-level within distinct geographical regions  <cit>  are disproportionately rare, relative to the impact that pcvad had on production, possibly due to diagnostic uncertainty and availability of geographical and temporal information required to make inferences about the spread. reports describing large-scale extensive investigations of pcvad involving trace-back and trace-out are limited  <cit> , likely reflecting the epidemiology of pcv <dig> infection, and the non-reportable nature of the disease. management changes  <cit>  and vaccination have been used to control the disease. in north america, commercial vaccines first became available during  <dig>  and since then became one of the most commonly used vaccines in growing pigs.

studies conducted in different regions before vaccine introduction identified spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal trends as factors contributing to patterns of the disease spread  <cit> , although not under all conditions. in our accompanying article  <cit> , we have identified spatial trends in pcvad risk and described the nature of spatio-temporal dependence. this dependence was interpreted as the existence of a pattern of local spread. on the basis of this exploratory analysis, we have postulated further hypotheses about local spread and investigated them here. the primary objective of this study was to evaluate risk factors for incidence cases of reported pcvad. the main exposure of interest was local spread, which in this manuscript was defined as the unidentified mechanism of pcvad spread from infectious to susceptible premises located within  <dig> km of the euclidean distance.

RESULTS
*sd = standard deviation, iqr = interquartile range, n = number of observations

a frequency of monthly contacts through incoming movement of nursery and finisher pigs

b frequency of monthly contacts through incoming visits of service vehicles without pigs 

a based on the wald test for conditional maximum likelihood.

b based on the likelihood ratio test for conditional maximum likelihood.

c ref = referent group.

d frequency of all contacts was calculated on the basis of visits to herds.

e based on  <dig> observations where such information was applicable.

f median unbiased estimator.

ownership-adjusted high-risk local exposure
ownership-adjusted high-risk local exposure
a p-values are based on the wald test for estimates of a model obtained using maximum likelihood method and based on score test for estimates obtained using exact method.

b overall p-values are based on the likelihood ratio test for estimates of a model obtained using maximum likelihood method and based on score test for estimates obtained using exact method.

c estimates of the local spread where obtained from the exact logistic regression after adjusting for the herd prrs status and easting as a binary variable. adjustment for the easting as a continuous explanatory variable could not be evaluated.

d best median unbiased estimates.

discussion
in the accompanying article  <cit> , spatio-temporal clustering at the small spatial and temporal scale was detected, suggesting that local spread was a possible pattern of pcvad spread. specifically, using the space-time k-function, we detected considerable spatio-temporal clustering of cases up to approximately  <dig>  km of spatial and  <dig> mo of temporal distance to a pcvad case , with the highest increase at  <dig> km of spatial and  <dig> mo of temporal distance. in contrast to the previous method, the approach taken here required that we define local exposure using fixed spatial and temporal distance, recognizing that this could lead to some misclassification of exposure. we aimed to use cutpoints that would provide a balance between specificity of defining exposures  and number of herds that would be classified as exposed . thus, three km of spatial distance was selected subjectively and used as the only analytical approach for geographical distance, while a temporal distance of  <dig> mo was used as the most important, but not the only, temporal cutpoint. this spatial cutpoint was in concordance with how local spread was defined in a field during the  <dig> outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the uk  <cit> . our assumption was that the causative agent of pcvad from the initially infected premises would not be more contagious to neighboring farms than the foot-and-mouth disease virus.

the limitation of our original finding of the existence of apparent local spread was that the results were not adjusted for factors that could facilitate such a conclusion, even in the complete absence of radial spread of a causative agent from an infected farm to a neighboring susceptible herd. one such factor is ownership of the premises. in at least some ontario regions, premises under the same ownership cluster geographically, and finding a pattern of spatial or spatio-temporal clustering of infectious disease might be facilitated by introducing infected animals from the same source, concurrent change in management, or frequency of other component causes, or simply by recall bias of the interviewee. it was therefore of interest to explore the nature of local spread after adjusting for ownership, and a time-matched case-control study was considered a suitable design for this objective.

of interest for this investigation was finding that cle was not associated with the emergence of incident pcvad cases. thus, even if local spread existed, the farms that reported a "historical" pcvad problem did not contribute to the emergence of incident pcvad cases in the neighborhood, at least in this study. on the other hand, the existence of spatio-temporal clustering at the small geographical and temporal scale - described in the accompanying article  <cit>  - was confirmed in this study by having a significant variable that was indicative of hrle. the results suggested that pcvad-positive herds were more likely to have neighboring herds  involved in a recent pcvad outbreak , than the pcvad-negative herds. it is also noteworthy that this local exposure showed some limited dose-response relationship, with odds of being a case higher for herds that had two infectious herds within a 3-km distance than for herds with no infectious herds or only one such herd. interaction of hrle with time was biologically plausible and in agreement with previously reported results of pcvad spread. woodbine et al reported that radial spread was important in the later period of pcvad spread in great britain  <cit> . when considered as the only term in the model, local spread has a time-varying nature . the variable indicative of local spread  became statistically significant in october of  <dig>  corresponding approximately to the 50th percentile of reported pcvad outbreak times, and remained significant until the end of the study.

however, when hrle was partitioned into within-ownership and outside-ownership, it was obvious that the likelihood of local spread was determined primarily by the co-existence of neighboring herds under the same ownership that experienced a pcvad outbreak at concurrent times. the point estimate for the odds ratio of "high-risk local exposure within ownership" in the final model was very high and with very wide confidence intervals. this certainly is a limitation of this analysis and is a consequence of absence of this exposure in the control herds, as visible from descriptive statistics. however, collectively these results suggest that it is possible that such a mechanism of "local spread" could be driven by mechanisms that do not involve any type of spatial interaction between the neighboring farms . we have no information that would allow us to further investigate these hypotheses. our results, however, suggest that exploratory spatial and spatio-temporal analysis should be substantiated by additional analyses that will take ownership or pig movement into consideration, particularly in zones where spatial clustering of premises under the same ownership exists. we defined ownership at the highest possible level, and this might have some impact on the results. large systems might have had several independent pig flows, and, theoretically, neighboring premises might belong to different flows . in such situations, the nature of high-risk exposure would likely be incorrectly classified as within-ownership. we believe that the latter scenario is relatively infrequent and would likely have a low impact on overall results and general interpretation. this issue of ownership, however, does warrant access to suitable ownership and movement databases that would allow epidemiologists to adjust their analysis for the proper ownership and the contact structure. in addition it is important to note that the interaction of hrle with time was not significant once the ownership was accounted for. although the interaction of hrle with time was a biologically plausible term to include in the final model, the owhrle was selected instead because we considered these results were more insightful in explaining the underlying biological processes.

the final model also contained two additional confounders: herd prrs status and the linear effect of easting. prrs infection in individual pigs has been identified as a factor contributing to pcvad due to its effect on the immune system, and as a risk factor for pcvad expression in observational studies  <cit> .

also of interest was the finding that the frequency of direct contacts, including through breeding animals for a subset of suitable herds, was not identified as a risk factor. this was a surprising finding because introduction of infectious agents through live animals is considered an important component of pcvad emergence  <cit> . two factors might have contributed to this. first, the frequency of visits used as a covariate in this analysis does not necessarily correspond to the time prior to a pcvad outbreak in a herd. it is possible that the frequency of direct contacts changed in response to the pcvad outbreak or an outbreak of another disease . while short-term change in frequency of movements can be expected as a part of outbreak control, a long-term change is much less likely because it would require a change in the type of farming system, typically associated with high cost. the second possible explanation is that emergence of pcvad is linked with the specific pcv <dig> source, and not with the general measure of frequency of incoming visits or movements. this is of note because either pcv <dig> as a necessary cause, or prrsv or other agents as component causes, could spread through movement of animals and have an impact on disease emergence.

although frequency of feed deliveries was identified as the only significant factor related to visits, this was most likely a chance finding, on the basis of the following rationale. the significance of this association was influenced by one herd that reported a very high frequency of feed deliveries, but the feed was delivered from the farm's own feed mill. this would contrast with the logical explanation that a causative agent was distributed either through feed from an external point source, or indirectly through delivery trucks between farms. feed has been discussed as a possible source previously  <cit> . evaluation of pcv <dig> transmission through feed containing contaminated porcine plasma yielded opposing results under experimental conditions  <cit> .

case definition was the largest limitation of this study, and the rationale for including it in the analysis is given in the accompanying article  <cit> . briefly, preliminary analysis with more specific case definitions gave us similar results. additionally, the evaluation of epidemic spread under current conditions using complete set of diagnostic criteria is not possible because of high vaccination usage and endemic presence of pcv- <dig> infection in many herds. introduction of commercial pcv <dig> vaccines likely influenced the development of this outbreak. a major supplier gradually introduced its product to canada in april of  <dig>  <cit> . we fitted the final model only with cases that reported pcvad prior to april of  <dig> and found results  similar to our final model. we thus believe that results reported here were not influenced in a substantial manner by vaccination.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the spread of pcvad due to high-risk local exposure was primarily driven by herd ownership. it was therefore impossible to distinguish local spread from common direct or indirect sources that contributed to the emergence of disease concurrently in different premises under the same ownership. surprisingly, frequency of direct or indirect contacts did not differ between case and control herds. this also applies to frequency of feed delivery, which, although statistically significant, was driven by a single highly influential point, which in itself did not align with a biological rationale for spread through feed deliveries. two risk factors that remained stable were herd prrsv status and directional spread in a western direction. multivariable analysis following exploratory spatial analyses proved to be a useful complement for this study. after completion of this analysis, our conclusions about disease spread have changed. accounting for ownership and contact structure will become increasingly important in swine populations because investigation of spatial and temporal information alone would have yielded incomplete results and different recommendations.

