BACKGROUND
modular small-world network topology may represent a basic organizational principle of neuroanatomical connectivity across multiple spatial scales  <cit> . small-world networks are clustered , and efficiently interconnected   <cit> . modular networks are characterized by the presence of highly interconnected groups of nodes   <cit> . hence a modular small-world connectivity reconciles the opposing demands of segregation and integration of functionally specialized brain areas  <cit>  in the face of spatial wiring constraints  <cit> . however the mechanisms underlying the emergence of small-world connectivity in a developing nervous system remain unknown. in this study, we utilize nonlinear dynamical and network analyses to shed light on such mechanisms. we do this by using a model which examines the influence of neuronal dynamics on the underlying structural connectivity.

cortical structure and dynamics are highly interdependent. on relatively fast time scales, structure enables the emergence of complex dynamics  <cit> . on slower time scales dynamics act to reshape the structure via mechanisms such as activity-dependent dendritic development, synaptogenesis and synaptic pruning, as recently reviewed  <cit> . the influence of structural connectivity on neuronal activity is illustrated by the observation that profound disturbances in complex cognitive functions often result from relatively subtle disruptions in the underlying neuroanatomy, as for example in schizophrenia  <cit> . on the other hand, disruption of spontaneous activity in the developing cortex interferes, for instance, with specific axonal branching of pyramidal neurons  <cit> . furthermore, detrimental effects of early visual deprivation illustrate the importance of spontaneous and sensory driven neuronal activity on circuit formation in the primary visual cortex  <cit> .

there hence exists a "symbiotic" relationship between structural brain connectivity and brain activity. such a relationship is thought to be central to the emergence of complex neuroanatomical connectivity from a relatively unstructured neuropil  <cit> , and is increasingly examined computationally  <cit> . previously, in a mathematical model of this relationship, random structural connectivity guided by emergent synchrony patterns was shown to evolve to modular small-world connectivity  <cit> . here, we first advance the biophysical justification of this model, and then provide a detailed quantitative analysis of the relationship between structure, function and dynamics that accompanies the ensuing neuroanatomical self-organization.

the relationship between structural and functional brain connectivity is gaining rapid interest. recent studies have explored this relationship by simulating neuronal dynamics on large scale neuroanatomical connectivity networks. these studies found that the resulting functional patterns passively reflect the underlying structural connectivity on slow time scales  <cit> , but are significantly less constrained on faster time scales  <cit> . however, because the underlying structural connections were chosen a priori  and were subsequently treated as static, these studies did not address the influence of activity upon structure, as mediated through dynamically driven structural plasticity. such an influence forms the core of our investigation.

several models of complex network growth have been well established in the wider network community. these include the well known preferential attachment model  <cit> , as well as spatial growth models  <cit> . however, there has been much less focus on dynamically influenced network growth and plasticity  <cit> . in the brain network literature, dynamically driven network plasticity was implicitly implemented by sporns et al.  <cit> , who showed that a supervised search for structural networks exhibiting high functional complexity, retrieves cortical-like modular small-world connectivity. however, the algorithm of sporns et al. is based on a supervised search for a "functionally optimal" topology from thousands of generated networks, and is consequently implausible in a maturing nervous system. hence the mechanisms underlying the emergence of small-world cortical connectivity, and particularly the reciprocal influence of activity upon structure have been relatively unexplored.

the nonlinear nature of neuronal dynamics  <cit>  provides a foundation for an alternative, activity-dependent model. for instance, a conductance-based "neural mass"  model, developed to understand basic mechanisms of corticocortical coupling  <cit>  was recently employed to simulate neuronal dynamics on a large scale structural connectivity matrix of the macaque  <cit> . this approach provided a novel explanation for the existence of two anticorrelated networks, as previously reported in human functional neuroimaging studies  <cit> . in contrast, figure  <dig> shows the functional patterns that are generated by this same neural mass model on a random structural network, given as an image map in the top panel. the absence of modularity in a random network renders it unlike the known connectivity of the cortex. however, the spatiotemporal activity that unfolds on this structure  evidences partial synchronization amongst the weakly and randomly coupled nodes, resulting in a modular functional connectivity matrix . this appearance of synchronous clusters in coupled nonlinear systems is a common feature of high-dimensional nonlinear systems  <cit> . it is intuitive to propose that the presence of functional modules will gradually, through activity-dependent synchrony-favoring rewiring, enable the emergence of similar modules in the underlying structural connectivity.

this intuition underlies the activity-dependent model of structural rewiring proposed by gong and van leeuwen  <cit>  and further explored in this paper. this model simulates spontaneous cortical dynamics using coupled chaotic logistic maps, and gradually rewires the underlying structural connectivity towards the resulting synchrony patterns. the model hence represents a crude approximation of hebbian learning in a spontaneously active – or "resting state" – ensemble of coupled oscillators. the learning is hebbian as the connections are established between synchronous neurons and pruned between asynchronous neurons. the model hence simulates activity-dependent synaptic rewiring – an important mechanism of structural plasticity in the developing, as well as in the mature brain  <cit> . note that synaptic rewiring is conceptually different to mechanisms of functional plasticity , such as spike-timing dependent synaptic plasticity  <cit> .

consistent with the approach of gong and van leeuwen, the present study approximates neuronal dynamics using an ensemble of coupled chaotic unimodal maps. such maps are well known to exhibit universal dynamical properties  <cit> . hence generic properties of interacting nonlinear systems are well captured by networks of such simple maps. importantly in a neuroscientific context, chaotic unimodal maps were recently used to model neuronal bursting behavior  <cit> . we previously reported  <cit>  that unimodal maps are topologically similar to a poincaré first return map of a chaotic neural mass model attractor . the first return map  is a useful approximation of the full dynamics of the chaotic neural mass model. a major advantage of unimodal maps is their computational simplicity, which permits a detailed quantitative analysis of the mechanisms of self-organization, within a framework of general biophysical plausibility.

we hence seek a detailed exploration of the nature of this structural self-organization. we observe that, as in figure  <dig>  coupled chaotic dynamics generate ordered, modular functional patterns, even on random structural networks. through the adaptive rewiring rule, structural topologies are reshaped by these patterns towards a modular small-world connectivity. we find that central hub nodes play a key role in the cohesiveness of this small-world network – the noisy dynamics of these hubs enable them to persist in structural networks despite ongoing rewiring and despite their comparative absence in functional networks.

RESULTS
interdependent evolution of structural and functional networks
our model consists of an ensemble of chaotic logistic maps, coupled via a directed binary structural connectivity network. the dynamics of these maps generated a series of functional connectivity networks on static structural networks. as the dynamics evolved, structural networks were gradually adjusted towards emergent synchrony patterns: periodically, a node was randomly chosen and its connections were rewired such that it gained a link to a node with which it was most synchronous, and lost a link to a neighbor with which it was least synchronous. we measured synchronization using the absolute difference  between individual unit states . we began simulations from initially random structural connectivity and proceeded until asymptotic conditions, as characterized by globally invariant structural and functional clustering and closeness.

a key difference between structural and functional connectivity is the robust presence of inter-modular links in structural networks, and a relative absence of these links in functional networks. inter-modular links represent the crucial difference between a structural small-world and a functional lattice  <cit> . below, we investigate the mechanisms underlying the persistence of these links in structural networks, by considering the distinct dynamics of central hub nodes.

the degree distributions in both structural and functional networks do not evolve toward a scale-free, or broad-scale distribution . the presence of a scale-free degree distribution in structural brain connectivity remains controversial, chiefly because spatial constraints and high wiring cost are thought to impede such an organization  <cit> .

robustness of structural self-organization
we incorporated spatial constraints into our model by placing nodes randomly on the surface of a sphere, and subsequently restricting potential synapses to the spatially closest 40% of all neighbor pairs. such an arrangement introduces some local clustering into the initial network topology . activity-dependent rewiring further increases such clustering, and importantly preserves high closeness, despite the spatial limitations. hence, the resultant evolution is qualitatively equivalent to a non-spatially constrained topology. a similar result is obtained when the initial network was an ordered lattice, and no spatial constraints were imposed . given the initial lack of hubs in a lattice, it hence appears that hubs emerge during network evolution.

we evaluated the effects of incorporating a memory function into the rewiring rule, therefore effectively rewiring the system towards slow time scale functional networks . an analysis incorporating a linear memory function  likewise shows an evolution to a small-world structural network . an equivalent evolution was also observed when networks were rewired at a fast learning rate  – that is, when a rewiring was made at every iteration of the dynamics, instead of at every  <dig> iterations.

we evaluated the dependence of the model on parameters by systematically varying the coupling parameter ε and the control parameter μ . we hence evaluated structural evolution under a range of coupling strengths, and under periodic through to strongly chaotic dynamics. figure  <dig> illustrates asymptotic structural clustering and closeness for different parameter values. note that evolution to a small-world topology occurs across a large region of parameter space, as consistent with a previous exploratory analysis  <cit> . however the networks remain random-like under periodic dynamics , under weakly chaotic dynamics with strong coupling , or at the other extreme, under strongly chaotic dynamics with weak coupling . there also exists a small region of parameter space , under which the networks acquire ordered  topologies.

correlation between structural and functional network metrics
we initially examined correlations between structural networks and averaged fast time scale functional networks. figure 7a shows that these correlations are very high at the asymptotic state. in addition we examined node-wise correlations between structural network metrics and averaged functional metrics extracted from fast time scale networks. the structure-function similarity in local clustering and the discrepancy in global closeness at the asymptotic state  are reflected in the corresponding correlations between node-wise clustering  and closeness . correlations between other network metrics  are intermediate to these two extremes. no such correlations are present in the initial networks, while the correlations in evolving networks are qualitatively different – as illustrated by the transient early anticorrelation between clustering .

there also exists an alternative approach to extracting correlations from structural and functional networks. this involves exchanging the sequence of our initial analysis by firstly calculating correlations between the structural and fast time scale functional networks, and subsequently temporally averaging these correlations. this second approach emphasizes the instantaneous expression of structure-function correlations. figure 7a–c shows that correlations obtained in this way are significantly weaker. figure 7d shows the gradual increase in correlation strengths that accompanies the transition from a fast, to a slow time scale analysis, at the asymptotic stage of rewiring.

the dynamics of central and peripheral nodes
central and peripheral nodes manifest distinctly different dynamics . we define nodes to be "central" or "peripheral" according to their connection patterns. specifically, nodes are said to be peripheral when they mostly connect with nodes in their own module  and central when they mostly connect with nodes in other modules . peripheral nodes receive homogeneous inputs, and consequently exhibit high synchrony and low-dimensional chaotic dynamics. on the other hand, central hubs connect with nodes in multiple modules, receive discordant inputs, and consequently exhibit unsynchronized, high-dimensional stochastic dynamics. noisy hub dynamics correspond to high rewiring likelihoods , with a high chance of losing or gaining a connection when rewiring occurs . in addition, within hub populations, nodal degree positively correlates with link loss, and negatively correlates with link gain . these findings hence suggest that at the asymptotic state, rewiring largely occurs between hubs, in a cyclical-like pattern.

continuous network plasticity gradually "mixes" individual structural metrics across the network, even though the network-wide metric averages remain invariant. figure 9a shows the gradual decorrelation of node-wise structural metrics as a function of rewiring steps. centrality indices continually fluctuate, and decorrelate more rapidly than clustering. figure 9b–d shows exemplars of this mixing of node-wise metrics at the asymptotic stage of evolution, when the topology is globally invariant. in these panels, nodes were rank-ordered at the first sampled time step and then assigned a rank-specific color. at subsequent steps, nodes were reranked and therefore reordered, but the color-coding remained fixed. the mixing of colors hence represents fluctuations in rank positions. for example, red strips in the midst of deep blue in figure 9c, correspond to nodes which have significantly dropped their centrality rank over the sampled interval.

figures 10a and 10b show representative maps for peripheral and central nodes, illustrating the respective thin and cloud-like patterns. figure 10c shows the dynamics of an intermediate node, whose map resembles the poincaré return map of the neural mass model in figure 2b. figure 10d shows the dynamics of a node with  periodic activity which exhibits contracting dynamics, and therefore a negative lyapunov exponent.

discussion
the elusive nature and role of structural and functional brain connectivity  <cit>  is a frontier topic in systems neuroscience  <cit> . while empirical studies, aided by computational techniques, provide fascinating insights into development and maturation of brain networks  <cit> , modeling studies allow the causal mechanisms behind such development and maturation to be parametrically explored. we explored a simple, biophysically motivated model, to probe the underlying mechanisms of large scale neuroanatomical self-organization. we observed that random structural connectivity is reshaped by ordered functional connectivity towards a modular topology. however, in spite of the order in functional networks, structural topology remains robustly interconnected, and therefore small-world, due to the noisy dynamics of central hub nodes.

our construction of functional networks is based on the calculation of euclidean distance between one-dimensional unit states , and will necessarily generate ordered fast time scale functional connectivity, no matter how chaotic the dynamics. more importantly, however, functional networks constructed on a slower time scale likewise remain ordered , suggesting that the topology of synchronous connections repeatedly recurs. these recurring ordered functional topologies reflect clustered synchronization of the coupled chaotic dynamics  <cit> . by varying the parameters we note that structural evolution to a clustered topology occurs most prominently under chaotic dynamics and moderate coupling – hence, there must be sufficient homogeneity  in order to enable the formation of synchronous functional clusters, but also sufficient variability  to enable the emergence of multiple such clusters.

on a random structural network, synchrony is likely to be stronger between nodes with chance higher connectivity. it is probable that early in neuroanatomical development, higher connectivity strongly correlates with spatial proximity. we find that such connectivity is subsequently reinforced by activity-dependent rewiring; a process which leads to the emergence of clustered structural modules. therefore, in our simulations, functional networks emergent on random structural networks, anticipate the asymptotic modular connectivity. our model illustrates a potential mechanism by which brain-like structural connectivity may emerge in an unsupervised way, without a global search for optimal connectivity. it is known that a global search  is a hard combinatorial optimization problem in a sparse network  <cit> , and is hence unlikely to occur in vivo.

we find that slow time scale functional connectivity strongly reflects the underlying structural connectivity, in agreement with recent reports  <cit> . functional networks fluctuate at faster time scales, but gradually become more stable and constrained by structure at slower time scales. the fluctuation of fast time scale functional connectivity may be enabled by the presence of structural hubs. these nodes interconnect multiple modules, and consequently preserve a small-world structural topology in the face of ordered functional connectivity. structural hubs may therefore enable the delicate interplay between the segregation and integration of functionally specialized processing, which is thought to represent the hallmark of functional brain complexity  <cit> . the rapidly expanding network-based analyses of structural connectivity in empirical data have already identified candidate hub locations and their putative roles  <cit> .

the present theoretical approach may also be used to interpret functional connectivity findings from empirical studies, by validating structural connectivity patterns against dti data, and validating functional connectivity patterns against eeg or meg data  and fmri data . for example, a detailed classification of hubs in mammalian neuroanatomical networks has recently been performed  <cit> , but the nature of the dynamics of these hubs has not been studied. whilst we do not explicitly explore this approach through forward modeling , such an implementation would be relatively straightforward.

the role of noise in neural systems is currently a subject of considerable interest  <cit> . we heuristically defined noise to correspond to high-dimensional dynamics arising from uncorrelated, but ultimately deterministic inputs  – in this way our definition is conceptually different from network models with an explicit stochastic component  <cit> . the dynamics on a random network show very little noise with near global synchronization. at the asymptotic state, most nodes exhibit low-dimensional chaotic dynamics, because they are embedded in densely interconnected modules with homogeneous intra-modular dynamics. a smaller number of hub-like nodes exhibit high-dimensional noisy dynamics. noise in this system can hence be seen to have attained a strong topological structure, being generated within the network and then "directed towards" the few central hub nodes. this high-dimensional activity allows such hubs to explore the dynamical neighborhoods of other nodes, participate as both connection donors and recipients, and ensure the system remains structurally connected. noise in this system is highly organized and is an emergent feature of the global dynamics.

we also explored the influence of slower time scale dynamics on activity-dependent rewiring, by incorporating a memory function into the rewiring rule. such a function may represent a gradual consolidation of memories in cortical tissue. however, the use of a memory function which linearly decays with time is putatively problematic, given that the resulting slow time scale networks neglect any itinerant dynamics and consequently fail to capture the richness of instantaneous functional states . future studies would benefit from a memory function that could capture the multiscale temporal character of functional connectivity, such as a sequence of coupled exponential functions  <cit> . such an approach may also reveal small-world functional networks, in accordance with a multitude of recent empirical reports  <cit> .

a clear neurobiological limitation of the present study is the use of the simple unimodal map. we have provided a cursory justification for this by comparing the poincaré first return map of a detailed neural mass model with the unimodal topology of the logistic map . furthermore, the neural mass model and logistic map both share the same underlying dynamical mechanisms, namely homoclinic chaos around a single fixed point. kwok et al.  <cit>  have also observed evolution to a small-world using the same adaptive rewiring rule but with a hindmarsh-rose spiking neuron model. however, in order to provide a more detailed analysis of the structure-function-dynamics tripartite, we returned to the logistic map to enable a computationally parsimonious derivation of structural and functional measures, and explicit calculation of invariant measures of dynamical behavior such as the lyapunov exponent. such an approach lays the groundwork for more exact descriptions of phenomena in complex dynamical models, with consequent functional interpretations of specific biophysical dynamics such as bursting.

CONCLUSIONS
we explicitly conceptualized the interdependent relationship between structural and functional brain connectivity, and explored the mechanisms by which this relationship may lead to the emergence of cortical-like structural networks. our study theoretically reinforces the central role for neuronal dynamics in the emergence of complex brain connectivity. we show that functional connectivity becomes gradually more constrained by the underlying structural connectivity, as functional networks are extracted at increasingly slower time scales. the fluctuations of functional networks at faster time scales may arise from the noisy dynamics of central structural nodes.

