BACKGROUND
dna methylation is a stably inherited epigenetic modification in eukaryotes. the regulation and characteristics of the dna methylation still remain enigmatic, although the importance of it has been demonstrated in many biological processes such as gene expression regulation, genomic imprinting, x chromosome inactivation, maintenance of genomic stability by transposon silencing. it has also been implicated in the development of diseases such as cancer . dna methylation is also essential for the proper differentiation and development of mammalian tissues  <cit> . for instance, the knockout of genes encoding the dna-methyltransferase  enzymes, which are responsible for de novo methylation of dna, results in embryonic lethality in mice  <cit> . in mammals, methycytosine is observed mostly at cpg dinucleotides, except for the cpgs in cpg islands  <cit> . dna methylation is unevenly distributed in genomes: the intergenic regions, and repetitive elements are usually hypermethylated, while the 5′ and 3′ flanking regions of genes are relatively hypomethylated compared with the intragenic regions . recently, whole genome methylation has been extensively examined in mammalian species  <cit>  due to advanced sequencing technologies.

previous studies have revealed the patterns of global dna methylation in a single or few tissues across species , or in multiple tissues or developmental stages in a single organism . the dna methylation pattern is generally conserved, and through comparative analyses of dna methylation across mammalian species, it has been suggested to play a role in tissue-specific gene regulation  <cit> . when tissue-specific differentially methylated regions  in human and mouse tissues including heart, colon, kidney, testis, spleen, and muscle were compared, they could be distinguished clearly according to the corresponding tissues based on their methylation status  <cit> . it is probable that there are a large number of potentially important functional differences in methylation levels across species. in primates, relative tissue methylation levels generally differ among species  <cit> . however, there is insufficient evidence indicating that methylation differences exist at subspecies or breeds level.

thoroughbred horse  is a horse breed that has been manipulated by humans for improved speed, agility, and endurance in england. ths have been selected for racing ability. thus the genetic traits related to athletic performance against th have been extensively studied, including genotyping and transcriptome analysis . jeju horse  is an indigenous korean horse, is physically a small and rugged pony  <cit> . they have been raised for meet source, farm labor, riding, and racing in jeju island, south korea. detailed genetic characterization of jh is thought to be crucial for the conservation of and for effective breeding strategies of this indigenous animal. thus, many studies have been performed to analyses phylogenetic relationships, and discovering genetic marker . however, until now, there have been no studies associate the traits of jeju horse with epigenetic patterns. with the advent of next-generation sequencing  and genome-wide association studies, some studies were performed using ngs and microarray technology in thoroughbred horses  <cit> . these studies concentrated only on gene expression and genetic markers of athletic ability during and after exercise. methylation analyses in animals exhibiting racing traits have not yet been reported. many previous studies suggested that exercise induces methylation changes  <cit> , and athletic ability is closely associated with methylation  <cit> . the regulation of methylation profiling related to exercise genes is important for exercising horses. therefore, identifying methylation profiles related to exercise ability will be invaluable in studying athletic traits in racing horses. nonetheless, there are no studies about the influence of methylation on the racing ability of th let alone jh while the traits governing the economics of horse racing, such as the racing ability, speed, disease resistance, and recovery ability, are of important resource in the horse industry.

here, we report the data and analyses of genome-wide dna methylation patterns in the skeletal muscle, heart, lung, and cerebrum of th and jh, and tissue-specific dna methylation differences between the two horse breeds produced by methyl-dna immunoprecipitation sequencing .

RESULTS
global methylation analysis of thoroughbred and jeju horses
we profiled the global dna methylation status of physicality-associated organs  of th and jh using medip sequencing. about  <dig> -  <dig> million raw reads from each samples were sequenced resulting in on average 820 k/mm <dig> of cluster density, producing about  <dig>  -  <dig>  gbp. after low-quality data filtration, about  <dig> % -  <dig> % reads, assessed as clean data, were analyzed and mapped . on average,  <dig>  and  <dig>  million unique mapped reads were obtained from the four tissues of th and jh, respectively, with a high-quality read lignment against the horse reference genome .

in the identification the global dna methylation pattern, the number of methylated peaks in medip-seq is important  <cit> . we obtained  <dig> – <dig>  methylated peaks in the th and jh tissues , using the peak detection methodology which covers approximately  <dig> - <dig> % of the horse genome  . these methylation peaks were observed with a moderate correlation of chromosomal length and gene number between methylation regions . the degree of methylation was high in the intergenic regions containing repeats, followed by the intron and coding sequence  regions in both th and jh . however, the methylation density in the cds region was higher than that in the intergenic region, whereas the methylation density in the other intragenic region such as 3’-utr, intron, upstream 2 kb at transcription start site , and 5’-utr was lower than that of the intergenic region . repeat elements showed a relatively high methylation density. in comparison with most of the repetitive elements, long interactive nuclear elements , short interactive nuclear elements , and long terminal repeat  elements exhibited a high level of methylation density in both th and jh . in this study, we demonstrated that the depletion or decrease of methylation density was found around tss as well as promoter regions in both th and jh, whereas the gradual increase of that was found in gene body .table  <dig> 
peak distribution in different components of the thoroughbred horse and the jeju horse

the average methylation density in different genomic regions. methylation density within the gene regions, intergenic regions, and repeats were calculated by dividing the peak length in that region by the area of that region for thoroughbred  and jeju  horse-derived dna. further repeats were classified in different classes and the average methylation level of each class was calculated in thoroughbred  and jeju  horses.  distribution of methylation density around gene body, including upstream to downstream 2 kb, was calculated for all refseq genes.



the methylation of cpg islands in the promoter regions is known to regulate gene expression and it was reported to be hypomethylated in the vertebrate genome  <cit> . the horse genome contained a total of  <dig>  cpg islands. of these cpg islands, about  <dig> %  were methylated in the skeletal muscle of th,  <dig> %  in the heart of th,  <dig> %  in the lung of th, and  <dig> %  in the cerebrum of th . in addition, about  <dig> %  were methylated in the skeletal muscle of jh,  <dig> %  in the heart of jh,  <dig> %  in the lung of jh, and  <dig> %  in the cerebrum of jh. therefore, we observed the most abundant cpg island methylation in the lung tissue in both th and jh. most of the methylated cpg islands were located in the intergenic regions in both the th and jh. in the case of the gene body region, methylated cpg islands were present largely in the intron regions, followed by the cds regions.table  <dig> 
summary of methylated cgis in the different tissues of the thoroughbred and jeju horses




differential dna methylation in thoroughbred and jeju horses
we observed a total of  <dig>  differentially methylated regions  in the four different th and jh tissues, indicating differences in their methylation profiles . the th’s skeletal muscle was hypermethylated compared to that of jh, whereas the heart, lung, and cerebrum of th showed a hypomethylated pattern compared to those of jh . we also analyzed methylation events in the intergenic, gene body, and promoter regions in the four tissues of th and jh. as shown in figure 2b, the gene body region in the skeletal muscle of th showed a relatively high level of methylation, whereas the gene body in the heart of th showed a high hypomethylation pattern, compared to other tissues. we also examined dmrs within the repeat region, and found that sine and line elements showed a high level of methylation in skeletal muscle compared to that of jh. the satellite regions indicated a high hypermethylation density in lung tissue compared to that of jh . here, based on our dmr data, we provide the dmrs associated with comprehensive maps of the dna methylome of th and jh .figure  <dig> 
genomic distribution of differentially methylated regions  in the thoroughbred horse compared to the jeju horse.  the number of hyper- and hypomethylated dmrs in  <dig> different tissues of thoroughbred horses.  distribution of hyper- and hypomethylation density in different genomic regions such as intergenic, gene body, and promoter regions.  hyper- and hypomethylation density in repeat regions, classified according to the family.
comprehensive maps of the entire dna methylome of thoroughbred and jeju horses. circular representation of the hyper- and hypomethylation levels for four different tissues of thoroughbred horse.



medip-seq data validation
to validate the results obtained with medip-seq data, three regions were selected in the horse genome for analysis by bisulfite sequencing. we randomly chose one region with a relatively high level of methylation, one region with a moderate level of methylation and one region of differential methylation region between th and jh. the bisulfite sequencing results showed a high degree of consistency with the medip-seq data . these results indicated that our genome-wide methylation results obtained by medip-seq are reliable.figure  <dig> 
the validation of medip-seq data by bisulfite sequencing . a high methylated region obtained from medip-seq data was selected randomly and its methylation pattern was profiled by bsp. the box indicated amplification regions. cpg dinucleotides are represented by circles on vertical bars. each line represents an independent clone, and methylated cpgs are marked by filled circles, unmethylated cpgs by open circles.



analysis of functional categories of dmr-containing genes
to explore the biological functions associated with dmr-containing genes in the thoroughbred horse, we analyzed the gene ontology  categories of these genes using david   <cit> . all genes analyzed with go annotations were used as the reference list. we selected some categories associated with exercise ability in the horse  <cit> . several categories were related to exercise ability; however, we chose the category sets associated with overexpression and tissue capacity functions . comparison of gene methylation showed that there were  <dig>  dmrs among th and jh. dmrs and genes that are unique or shared among the four tissue types examined are shown in figure 5b. genes having high numbers of dmrs are dominant in the muscle  and heart . these two tissues have more dmr-containing genes than the cerebrum and lung; in particular, th’s muscle tissue has the highest number of hypermethylated dmr-containing genes among the four tissues analyzed. the frequency of hypomethylation in the cerebrum, lung, and heart tissues was higher in th than the jh.figure  <dig> 
functional classification and comparison of differentially methylated regions .  go analysis of biological function.  the venn diagram for comparison of dmrs that are unique or shared in four tissues derived from thoroughbred and jeju horses. 
k-mean clustering  analysis of differential methylated genes.



tissue-specific dmrs were identified by k-mean clustering in the methylation regions in the four tissues. several genes containing dmrs were clustered, and were divided into  <dig> clusters . the k-mean clustering of  <dig> genes revealed differential methylation in each tissue , p =  <dig>  for heart-related clusters , p =  <dig>  for lung-related clusters , and p =  <dig>  ~  <dig>  for cerebrum-related clusters ). clusters of tissue-specific dmrs were located upstream of the tss, which is 5 kb upstream of genes in the skeletal muscle and cerebrum. however, in heart and lung tissues, each cluster of dmrs was evenly spread over the region upstream and downstream of the tss site. in heart tissue, tissue-specific dmr clusters were detected in several genes, while in the lung tissue, tissue-specific dmr clusters were detected in  <dig> genes.

discussion
we report the analyses and data generated by methyl-dna immunoprecipitation sequencing to provide the genome-wide dna methylation patterns in skeletal muscle, heart, lung, and cerebrum tissues of th and jh. in the horse genome, gene body regions showed a higher methylation density than the intergenic regions. also the repetitive elements had a high methylation density while cpg islands showed a low methylation density. these patterns revealed in this study were similar to those previously reported in other species, from plants to mammalians  <cit> .

the promoter and 5'-utr regions play an important role in the regulation of gene expression and they have been reported to be hypomethylated  <cit> . in the case of the gene body region, except for the 5'-utr, dna methylation contributed to chromatin structure alteration and regulation of the transcription elongation efficiency  <cit> . we report an increased level of methylation in the cds, intron, and 3'-utr regions in th and jh, these results are similar to those from previously reported animal studies  <cit> . repeat elements occupied about 30–50% of the mammalian genome; among these, line elements were predominantly interspersed. in the horse genome, line elements were also the most predominantly interspersed repeat elements  <cit> . repeat elements are usually associated with genomic instability through structural changes such as transposition, translocation, and recombination  <cit> . to maintain genomic stability, dna methylation functions as a silencing mechanism for repeat elements  <cit> . thus, a major proportion of genomic methylation has been reported to occur in repeat elements, which is supported by our data. we found that dna methylation was predominantly seen in line elements, consistent with findings from previous animal studies  <cit> . additionally, sine and ltr elements were hypermethylated in the horse genome, similar to the results in other animal studies  <cit> . methylation of these elements is known to be a crucial factor in the maintenance of genomic stability through the suppression of transcription, transposition, and recombination  <cit> . thus, hypermethylation of repeat elements in the horse genome might play an essential role, as a defense mechanism to maintain genomic stability in the presence of active repeat elements. cpg islands have been universally reported to be regions of gene regulation via methylcytosine, possibly through the mechanism of transcriptional repression. these regions in the mammalian genome are known to be generally demethylated, in spite of having a high gc content  <cit> . intragenic and intergenic methylated cpg islands affect functional gene expression through the regulation of promoter activity, and intergenic methylated cpg islands play a crucial role in the regulation of alternative promoters and splicing  <cit> . in this study, we found that about  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the cpg islands were methylated in th and jh genomes, respectively, which is similar to that observed in the human genome   <cit> . further analysis of the density of methylated cpg islands in intragenic regions showed a higher methylation level in exons  than in introns  in the horse genome. these results were consistent with the findings in humans and rats  <cit> . taken together, we provide a comprehensive data and information of the whole methylome in horse, they can enable researchers to perform in depth analyses of the roles played by dna methylation in horses and probably in other mammals.

dna methylation is one of the main epigenetic modification mechanisms; thus, the study of dmrs within tissues or individual organisms is important. in several studies, various levels of dna methylation could regulate tissue-specific transcription and may be important during development and differentiation  <cit> . thus, the analysis of dmrs among tissues is essential in understanding tissue specific gene expression. in particular, methylation analysis between breeds in a well-known subspecies can provides invaluable information on the evolutionary divergence and evidence for useful traits. we successfully identified differentially methylated regions within four tissues in two horse breeds. similar results have been reported in pig tissues from various breeds  <cit>  that can be compared. differential methylation patterns were observed in seven tissues  from laiwu, a specific pig breed  <cit> . in addition, the level of methylation in the liver tissue genome of other breeds of pigs  also differed  <cit> . distribution patterns of dna methylation are generally conserved among these three pig breeds, but some dmrs were detected in the coding genes and repetitive element regions in liver tissue. in this study, we also observed that distribution of dna methylation in the two breeds showed generally conserved pattern but, some dmrs were detected a high density in the gene body, including the coding regions and introns. gene body methylation, especially intronic dna methylation, may be associated with alternative splicing  <cit> . thus, these results suggest that methylation has important effects on gene transcription in individual breeds. furthermore, in the repeat region, the density of dmrs was dominant. thus, the high density of dmrs in repeat regions could also induce differences in transcript variation and expression. in summary, differences in dna methylation patterns and the density of dmrs in the four tissues of individual breeds may play a crucial role in the process of development and the corresponding gene expression.

gene containing dmrs in the tissues of th showed high representation in the categories of atp binding and cytoskeletal protein binding. atp binding functions play a role during exercise, as they affect atpase activity. atpase activity-induced atp lysis subsequently caused intermediate molecular interactions using the energy of atp lysis  <cit> . in th, these functions may play important roles and the dominant expression of these gene categories is required. in particular, during exercise, atp binding could induce muscle contraction  <cit> . after atp binds the myosin head, muscle contractions are initiated due to the detachment of myosin from actin filaments  <cit> . dmrs in the tissues of th are also overrepresented in cytoskeletal protein binding. generally, the cytoskeleton plays important roles in both intracellular transport and cellular division  <cit> . in eukaryotic cells, the cytoskeleton can be classified into three types: microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules  <cit> . muscle activity-related units such as actin, keratin, and tubulin are included in the cytoskeleton. thus, genes having dmrs could influence their binding and activities, thus differentially affecting the exercise ability in th. these functional categories of genes with dmrs suggest that dna methylation has an important effect on the regulation of genes categorized as being involved in atp and cytoskeletal binding. thus, these differences in methylation status in the tissues of th and jh may indicate differences in their gene expression levels and exercise ability characteristics.

CONCLUSIONS
we have generated, for the first time, dna methylomes for th and jh. we provide the dna methylation landscape and differentially methylated genomic regions in these horse species, indicating that dmrs represent comprehensive maps of the dna methylome in th and jh. these dna methylome maps could be useful for further studies of epigenetic gene regulation in various horse breeds. the epigenetic system existing in the horse genome lays the foundation for studying the involvement of epigenetic modifications in horse domestication and improvement and provides a more systemic analysis of dna methylation.

