BACKGROUND
furunculosis caused by aeromonas salmonicida spp salmonicida is a bacterial disease affecting salmonid species, including cultured and wild atlantic salmon  , salmonids and other fish species  <cit> . disease may have local and systemic, acute, subacute and chronic forms with diverse symptoms ranging from erratic swimming and slight darkening of skin, to haemorrhage on the abdominal walls, viscera and heart and ulcerative lesions  <cit> . furunculosis is caused with non-mobile, aerobic gram negative bacillus aeromonas salmonicida. this is an opportunistic pathogen with diverse strains that are characterized with different virulence. furunculosis may cause heavy losses in salmon aquaculture due to mortality, decrease of growth rates, feed conversion and fish quality. large-scale vaccination made it possible to reduce the incidence of disease and the use of antibiotics  <cit> . at present commercial vaccines against furunculosis are widely used and a number of experimental vaccines has been tried  <cit> . vaccination decreases mortality of atlantic salmon but fails to prevent it completely. difficulties in the development of neutralizing vaccines are most likely accounted for by the high diversity of a. salmonicida strains and mechanisms of pathogenicity, which can be determined with various factors including type three secretion system, a layer protein, lipopolysaccharide, iron binding and outer membrane proteins, peptidases and toxins of different nature . knowledge of the virulence factors is far from complete. the limited success of protection against furunculosis is also related to high individual variation of responses to vaccination in atlantic salmon  <cit> .

vaccination against furunculosis provides pathogen specific protection  <cit> . this indicates an important role of acquired immunity, which is however insufficient for the complete prevention of mortality. outcomes of disease may depend substantially on the events, which take place after the recognition of pathogen. activation of b and t cells and the complement system results in mass production of humoral factors that regulate recruitment of immune cells in blood and infected tissues. this results in the orchestration of anti-bacterial defense, including effector mechanisms, neutralization and clearance of exogenous and endogenous toxins, pathogens, damaged cells and their components. defensive responses form a complex network, which may vary substantially among individuals. there are many possible scenarios with successful and deleterious outcomes. we used multiple gene expression profiling to outline the mechanisms that determine success of vaccine protection against furunculosis in atlantic salmon and to search for the correlates of protection. microarray analyses have been performed in fish vaccinated against different pathogens  <cit> , however, to our knowledge, this study is the first attempt to search for the correlates of vaccine protection.

RESULTS
design of analyses
to search for the correlates of vaccine protection against furunculosis, individual samples of fish that survived to the end of challenge test with no apparent symptoms of disease  were hybridized with pooled samples of salmon with manifestation of furunculosis   <cit>  at the onset of mass mortality . the same design of hybridization was applied to unvaccinated fish and the results were used to filter the vaccine-independent changes of gene expression . pathogen was detected with qpcr in the liver and spleen of all analyzed fish though the load was substantially lower in hr . pilot microarray analyses of different tissues  found greatest differences between hr and lr in the liver and this organ was chosen for the continuation of studies. real-time qpcr results from all uninfected fish were used to form a calibrator sample in order to verify the microarray results and to determine the direction of gene expression changes. we report only genes that were associated with survival in vaccinated salmon.

recruitment of immune cells
up- and down-regulation of the immune cells markers  could be evidence for the changes in the composition of leukocytes in the liver. mammalian homolog of cd <dig>  is expressed in mature b and t cells and myeloid cells  <cit>  while cd <dig> , also found in myeloid and b cells, is in addition expressed in fibroblasts, endothelial cells and in the basal epithelial cells  <cit> . genes regulating cell motility also changed in both directions  with greater magnitude of responses seen in lr. induction of leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin , which attracts neutrophils  <cit>  was markedly greater in lr. src kinase-associated phosphoprotein 55-related protein  was down-regulated. this protein is involved in signalling activated by interactions between cells and extracellular matrix   <cit> . microarray analyses revealed lower expression levels in hr of a large group of genes implicated in recruitment and motility of immune cells . both annexin a <dig>  and annexin a <dig>  showed noticeably lower levels in hr. the anti-inflammatory activity of annexins  is attributed mainly to their ability to interfere with neutrophil extravasation  <cit> . in mammals, anxa <dig> is ubiquitously expressed, while anxa <dig> has more selective expression patterns and tissue distribution  <cit> . migration of cells is a highly regulated process controlled by cellular interactions with ecm. hr showed lower expression levels of integrin binding protein , which mediates reduced laminin cell adhesion and inhibition of matrix deposition  <cit> . movement of cells involves the cytoskeleton. the 8-kda dynein light chain  is an essential component of the dynein motor complex that provides the driving force for microtubule-based transport within cells  <cit> . a potential link between cytoskeleton dynamics and gene regulation is implied by the fact that dlc <dig> binds to the inhibitor of the transcription factor nfkb preventing its translocation to the nucleus  <cit> . profilin and cofilin that are involved in the restructuring of the actin filaments had lower expression in hr . same difference was observed in coronin 1-b, an actin-binding protein required for chemokine-mediated recruitment  <cit>  and efficient cell protrusion and migration  <cit> .

signal transduction and regulation of gene expression, anti-bacterial effectors
six genes known for their key roles in closely intervened immune pathways were analyzed with both microarrays and qpcr . all were up-regulated in the infected fish except for junc in the hr group. the nfkb complex regulates numerous genes involved in the immune responses to bacteria  <cit> . microarray analyses suggested greater expression level of nf-kappab-p <dig>  in hr but qpcr analyses did not confirm difference between the study groups. given a 1000-fold increase of nfkb <dig> in pathogen challenged fish in comparison with uninfected controls, discrepancies could be accounted for by the limited dynamic range of microarray analyses. real-time qpcr also did not detect differences between the hr and lr in the expression of nf-kappab inhibitor alpha  that retains nfkb in the cytoplasm. structurally and functionally related c-jun, junb and jund together with the members of fos and atf/creb protein families make up the transcriptional regulator ap- <dig>  which is essential for the cooperative induction of many cytokine genes  <cit> . ap- <dig> mediated regulation is cell type specific, depends on the relative abundance of its subunits and presence of other nuclear factors. for example, the pleiotropic transcription factor yin yang  <dig> , whose higher levels were detected in hr by microarray, plays important roles in immune cells  <cit>  and co-operates with ap- <dig> to regulate gene expression  <cit> .

microarray analyses  showed differences between hr and lr in genes that regulate gene expression at different levels: signal transduction, promoter binding, modification of chromosomes, maturation and maintenance of mrna. several genes with known immune functions showed higher expression levels in lr, including the phosphotyrosine independent ligand for lck sh <dig> or p <dig> that regulates activation of nfkb by tnfα  <cit> . general transcriptional activity seemed repressed in hr in comparison to lr as judged by the profile of tata-binding protein associated factor 2n , involved in the transcription complex assembly and transcription initiation by rna polymerase ii. supportive of gene silencing in hr was the up-regulation of the histone deacetylase  <dig>  <cit> . on the other side, polyadenylate-binding protein  <dig>  that was markedly over expressed in hr is known for its ability to enhance the stability and translation of cytokine mrnas  <cit> .

up-regulation of nfkb and ap- <dig> by pathogens and cytokines induces mass production of immune mediators and effector proteins. expression differences in proteosome components and extracellular proteases   could be an evidence for the higher level of protein degradation in lr. on the contrary, improved resistance was associated with the activation of protease inhibitors that protect tissues from damage. alpha-1-antiproteinase like protein  was up-regulated in hr while lr showed no difference when compared to uninfected control .

cellular and oxidative stress, metabolism of iron
in addition to cytokines and pathogens, nfkb and jun proteins respond to various cell damaging factors, including free radicals and other genotoxic agents that can cause apoptosis, growth arrest, altered dna repair or altered differentiation. ap- <dig> contains cysteine motifs that regulate its activity in response to oxidative stress  <cit> . nfkb can also activate protection against oxidative and cellular stress by providing anti-apoptotic and proliferation-promoting signals. a suite of chaperones and protein adaptors of different types  were expressed at higher level in lr fish  and this could be evidence of cellular stress. genes for proteins involved in regulation of redox status and protection against reactive oxygen species  also showed differences between the study groups. five genes from this functional group that had higher expression levels in hr are presented in figure 5b. in contrast, all genes involved in metabolism of iron had higher expression levels in lr. transferrin is an extracellular transporter of iron and ferritin stores iron inside cells. protoheme ix farnesyltransferase is an enzyme of heme biosynthesis while heme oxygenase  plays a key part in heme degradation. real-time qpcr showed induction of ho in all infected fish, consistent with its potent cytoprotective and anti-inflammatory functions  <cit> , but the expression level was greater in lr . hemopexin transports heme to the liver for degradation and hepcidin regulates iron metabolism at different levels. both genes respond to bacterial pathogens in various fish species  <cit> . differences between lr and hr were also seen in regulators of cell cycle. cyclin d showed lower level in hr. this gene links external cues with regulation of cell proliferation and directs entry to g <dig> phase by phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein  <cit> . our previous studies found marked activation of cyclin d with toxicity and pathogens  <cit> .

complement
the complement is a complex system consisting of  <dig> pathways , which helps to kill and clear pathogens. the complement components are present in plasma as inactive proteins and the biochemical cascade is triggered by recognition of pathogens. in higher vertebrates, the complement pathways are activated in different ways. the c1q component of c <dig> complex of the classical pathways  binds to antigen-antibody complexes thus linking the innate and adaptive arms of immunity. c-type mannose-binding lectin  has the same role in lectin pathway  but unlike c1q commonly does not require antibody. the alternative pathway  does not include specialized pathogen binding proteins. to date, the sensor proteins of cp have not been identified in salmonid fish. we included in analyses the c1q binding protein , which showed greater expression in hr . c1qbp is a ubiquitously expressed protein found intracellularly, on the cell surface, in plasma and the extracellular matrix. it interacts with a host of proteins including the globular heads of c1q molecules, thus potentially modulating the numerous c1q-mediated functions  <cit> . the functional analog of mammalian mbl is also unknown. microarray results suggested down-regulation of a c type mbl in hr. however qpcr analyses found a 1000-fold induction of mbl in hr while there was no difference between lr and the uninfected control. this disagreement can be accounted for by the limited ability of cdna microarrays to discriminate between transcripts of structurally similar members of multi-gene families. blastx search of the mbl sequence presented on the microarray  found three rainbow trout and nine atlantic salmon proteins. despite considerable sequence divergence  the salmonid lectins contain highly conserved domains  that, hypothetically, may cross-hybridize. the actual number of salmonid mbl-like proteins and their relation to the complement system remain unknown. the genes for other serum components of the complement had greater expression levels in hr. these are serine proteases of lectin  and alternative pathways , c <dig>  the convergence point of all complement pathways, c <dig> and c <dig>  the parts of membrane attack complex. factor h is a regulator of the alternative pathway while vitronectin  protects tissues against damages caused by the terminal membrane attack complex. the cell surface receptors of c1q and c type lectin had higher expression in lr . we show these genes since theoretically, they may interact with the complement system. however, their roles in salmonid fish are unknown and await exploration.

clearance and reparation
hr was characterized with markedly higher expression levels of genes that protect tissues from damages, neutralize and remove toxic compounds and products of cell degradation . fibronectin  is an acute phase protein required for protection and reparation of ecm  <cit> . cyp3a <dig> can metabolise a number of endogenous and exogenous compounds  <cit>  while liver bile salt export pump  mediates transmembrane movement of phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol from liver hepatocytes into bile  <cit> . ma analyses found a panel of genes involved in clearance, detoxification and reparation of tissues with higher expression levels in hr . removal of cholesterol seems to have high importance as evidenced by the profile of atp-binding cassette transporter  <dig> , a cholesterol efflux pump in the cellular lipid removal pathway  <cit> . the intermediary metabolic enzyme alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase  is involved in the detoxification of glyoxylate, a product of amino acid metabolism and purine degradation in atlantic salmon  <cit> . previously we reported up-regulation of this gene in the liver of trout exposed to toxicity  <cit> . a number of genes with higher expression in hr have roles in the transport and modification of lipids. the exact metabolic function of the up-regulated transporter fatty acid-binding protein- <dig>  in atlantic salmon's liver remains unclear  <cit> . diacylglycerol kinase delta  <dig>  is involved in the conversion of diacylglycerol to produce phosphatidic acid. one more lipid-binding protein, beta- <dig> glycoprotein i, also known as apolipoprotein h is a precursor of anti-bacterial peptides  <cit> . differences between the study groups were observed in several genes encoding growth factors. melanoma-derived growth regulatory protein   mediates detachment of cells from ecm structures enhancing their migratory potential  <cit> . the up-regulated fibroblast growth factor- <dig> is a potent mitogen that induces dna synthesis and cell proliferation  <cit> .

discussion
vaccines development is targeted at the complete neutralization of pathogens via binding to antibodies or tcr. however to date this aim has not been achieved for many diseases of atlantic salmon including furunculosis. vaccination reduces mortality but fails to provide a complete protection as confirmed in this study. vaccinated hr fish that survived to the end of challenge test still showed relatively high levels of infection in the liver and spleen and induction of genes known for strong responses to bacterial pathogens. for example nfkb was induced 1000-fold with respect to the uninfected control. markedly lower pathogen loads in hr suggested that survival of the vaccinated salmon was most likely determined with the ability to suppress and clear bacteria. comparisons of gene expression within the groups of vaccinated and naïve fish found large scale differences between hr and lr. it is noteworthy to mention that analyses with vaccinated fish did not find significant role of genes involved in adaptive immune responses. this was in contrast with our studies of salmon challenges with virus , which showed clear dependence between resistance evaluated by time of survival and activation of adaptive immunity  <cit> . rapid stimulation of igs was also seen in salmon challenged with the parasite, salmon louse  <cit> . apparently, pathogen did not stimulate further activation of adaptive immunity in the vaccinated fish. therefore one may assume that vaccine-dependent protection of salmon infected with a. salmonicida was determined mainly with the events that take place after recognition of the pathogen. given high complexity and diversity of this network and limited level of knowledge, multiple gene expression profiling provides an efficient approach to search for the protective mechanisms.

the gene expression analyses were designed with focus on the mechanisms of vaccine-dependent protection against furunculosis. genes with greater expression changes in hr can be regarded as candidate markers of protection while opposite regulation may indicate either pathology or unsuccessful defense. overall, expression changes that can be interpreted as active anti-bacterial responses tended to be greater in lr. we produced an indirect evidence for larger regulation of immune cells recruitment in lr. more detailed study of the immune cells populations is complicated with shortage of cell-specific markers for salmon. interaction of recruited and resident cells with pathogen components and cytokines activates signal transducers and other regulators of gene expression. we found increase of several genes known for their key roles in responses to pathogens and the magnitude was either greater in lr or equal in lr and hr .

a panel of genes for proteins involved in metabolism of iron had higher expression in lr. these regulations indicate the need to reduce the levels of free inorganic iron and heme. ho was activated in all infected fish but the magnitude was greater in lr. ho is the rate-controlling enzyme of the degradation of heme into iron, carbon monoxide, and biliverdin, which is subsequently converted to antioxidant bilirubin  <cit> . extracellular iron ions bind to transferrin, which delivers it into cells. within cells iron is stored as complex with ferritin. damage of erythrocytes is one of the symptoms of furunculosis. heme and iron catalyze production of free radicals through fenton's reaction thus increasing risk of oxidative stress. shortage of iron may suppress proliferation of pathogenic bacteria and therefore sequestration of bioavailable iron and heme is regarded as anti-bacterial defense. in case of furunculosis this strategy is obviously unsuccessful.

the complement system was the only group of immune genes that showed strong association with survival and several genes presented in figure 8a can be considered as candidate markers of vaccine protection against furunculosis. the complement system is the major link between the effector anti-bacterial mechanisms of adaptive and innate arms of immunity. the role of complement in antibody mediated defense against a. salmonicida was demonstrated in rainbow trout. combination of specific igm and complement accelerated ingestion of bacteria and ingestion-activated respiratory burst in phagocytes  <cit> . the complement pathways converge at the level of c <dig> convertase, which initiates the anti-bacterial effector mechanisms. c <dig> and the downstream genes, the parts of membrane attack complex had higher expression levels in hr, especially c <dig>  mobilization of the effector complement mechanisms correlated with survival, however it remained unknown, which of the complement pathways was responsible for these changes. increase of c1qbp, the negative regulator of cp was greater in lr. this could be regarded as indirect evidence for higher activity of cp in hr, however, the expression difference between the study groups was relatively small. furthermore, it remains unknown if cp provides the only or the major connection between the complement system and acquired immunity in salmonid fish. homolog to mammalian c1q was found in lampreys, primitive vertebrates that lack adaptive immunity  <cit> . the link between the classical pathway and antibodies appeared in the course of vertebrate evolution but the timing of this event remains undefined. c1q is the member of a large multi-gene family with diverse functions  <cit> . analysis of non-redundant atlantic salmon mrna sequences with blastx revealed  <dig> distinct c1q related transcripts. to our knowledge, the antigen-antibody complex binding protein of salmonid cp has not been identified so far. in theory, interaction between the fish complement and acquired immunity molecules can be mediated by mp. mbl interacts with immunoglobulins in mammals  <cit>  despite the principal role of cp in recognition of antibody antigen complexes. the qpcr analyses showed dramatic up-regulation of mbl in hr. given the lack of changes in lr, this gene is one of the most promising markers of the vaccine-dependent protection. however taking into account the presence of multiple lectins with unknown roles in atlantic salmon, induction of mbl does not necessarily mean activation of mp. furthermore, masp showed no increase in hr in comparison with uninfected control. expression profiles of the complement factors bf and b/c2-b suggested higher activity of ap in hr, however, differences between hr and lr were minor. diversity of putative sensor proteins in salmonid fish and limited knowledge on their functions impede interpretation of the gene expression data.

importantly, hr showed greater expression of factor h, the negative regulator of ap, and vitronectin , a protein that protects host tissues from the complement damages. similarly, the transcript encoding alpha antiproteinase-like protein was up-regulated in hr relative to lr. vaccine-dependent resistance to furunculosis was clearly associated with the abilities to prevent and repair damages from pathogen and immune responses and to neutralize and clear toxic compounds of endogenous and exogenous origin. the genes shown in figure  <dig> can be divided in three functional groups - tissue reparation, clearance and xenobiotic metabolism - each represented with a gene whose markedly greater up-regulation in hr was confirmed with two methods. elevated levels of fibronectin can be beneficial since fn <dig> is involved in reparation of tissues at the wound contraction stage of wound healing  <cit> . due to its opsonic properties, fibronectin takes part in the removal of unwanted substances in the liver by phagocytic kupffer cells  <cit> . cyp3a <dig> metabolizes a strikingly large number of xenobiotics including bacterial toxins and more than half of modern prescription drugs. this gene is down-regulated in inflammatory conditions by a range of cytokines and nfkb  <cit> . hence individuals with strong innate immune responses may have a higher risk of bacterial intoxication. the role of abcb <dig> in bacterial diseases has not been reported so far. one may speculate that the transporter protein that directs phospholipids from liver to bile can be important for clearance of remains of killed cells and bacteria. transcriptomic comparison of salmon with high and low resistance to pathogen indicated pivotal importance of processes that deserve more attention in studies of fish diseases.

CONCLUSIONS
gene expression analyses revealed significant differences between vaccinated fish with high and low resistance to furunculosis. we did not find strong association between survival and most anti-bacterial responses though hr showed higher expression levels of several complement components. results suggest that outcomes of vaccination depend largely on the ability of host to prevent the negative impacts of immune responses and to repair damages. this can be illustrated with the inductions of protease inhibitors, negative regulators of complement, genes involved in metabolism of lipids and xenobiotics and growth factors. studies outlined a number of genes with positive and negative correlation with protection.

