BACKGROUND
transgenic animals are fundamental tools for basic biological research and are widely utilized in the biotechnology and agricultural industries  <cit> . since the first transgenic mice were produced by microinjection of dna into single cell embryos, i.e. zygotes, in  <dig>  <cit> , transgenesis has become a reliable and powerful method for the creation of new research tools. in mice, nearly  <dig>   transgenic alleles have been created for a variety of purposes including tissue specific expression of fluorescent proteins or other “reporters”, tissue specific expression of recombinases  and for expression of human disease genes  <cit> .

the primary method for creating transgenic animals involves microinjection of purified supercoiled or linearized dna, i.e., transgene, consisting of genomic or cdna sequence and, in some cases, residual cloning vector sequence  <cit> . the injected transgene randomly inserts into the zygotic genome, typically as a multiple copy array. for the majority of transgenic animals, expression of the transgene in resulting founder lines is carefully tested and founder lines with favourable expression levels in the desired tissues are then selected. however, the transgene insertion site is not typically characterized because traditional methods for transgene insertion site discovery are either expensive and/or offer low resolution  or are complicated by the multicopy nature of the inserted sequences . however, without this information the position of the insertion site with respect to known genes or regulatory regions and any potential phenotypic complications arising from the proximity of the insertion to these functional elements cannot be established. in addition, rearrangement of the transgene or deletions/rearrangements of the host genome at the insertion site also remain undiscovered. when the transgene insertion site is unknown, genotyping assays to distinguish zygosity must rely on more expensive quantitative pcr approaches based on copy number  <cit> . these costs are compounded for research animal repositories like the jackson laboratory, which manages over  <dig> unique strains of transgenic mice.

there is also evidence that transgene expression is impacted by chromosomal location. chromosomal regions that are subject to epigenetic modification can have a direct impact on transgene expression from one generation to the next. variability in transgene expression between generations, sexes, environments, or genetic backgrounds is not unusual  <cit>  and is related to copy number where higher copy number is associated with high expression . however, depending on the insertion site, higher copy number can also result in epigenetic modification and transgene silencing  <cit> . thus, to fully understand how insertion site might contribute to phenotypic outcomes, to more cost effectively manage transgenic strains and to fully understand instability in transgene expression, routine identification of transgene insertion sites is desirable.

recently, successful transgene insertion site discovery using paired end high throughput sequencing has been reported  <cit> . data analysis takes advantage of split reads and discordant mapping of paired reads that are characteristic of reads mapping to insertion sites. however, as with earlier laboratory based approaches , the multi-copy arrays that are characteristic of many insertion sites contribute to a low signal to noise ratio in the resulting data, which in turn necessitates high coverage. additionally, small fragment libraries  that are commonly used for paired end sequencing result in a low representation of mapped read pairs that successfully span either end of the transgene insertion. while data on the nature of transgene insertion sites are still emerging, our experience as well as published data from other laboratories show that many transgenes insert in regions that are rich in repetitive sequences like line and sine elements, which in turn negatively impacts the percentage of uniquely mapping reads around the insertion site  <cit> . enrichment for sequences in and around a chromosomal rearrangement, whether it’s a translocation breakpoint or a transgene insertion, prior to paired end sequencing is an effective strategy for solving the signal to noise problem by effectively increasing coverage around the insertion or rearrangement  <cit> . however, this approach requires the manufacturing of a custom array or probe pool for each unique strain, which becomes cost prohibitive for large sets of unique strains.

here, we describe a methodology for transgene insertion site discovery using high throughput sequencing of libraries made from mate pair sequences that span larger genomic distances  <cit> . mate-pair library sequencing is similar to paired end sequencing in that dna fragments can be sequenced from both ends. however, mate-pair approaches have the added advantage of providing paired sequence from the ends of comparatively large dna fragment sizes, which promotes the recovery of reads that span insertion sites. we show that 3–5 kb fragment size mate-pair libraries and a scoring scheme specifically designed for transgene insertion site discovery allowed us to successfully discover transgene insertion sites in two widely used mouse models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis . we have found that identification of integration sites from mate-pair data has high signal to noise ratio when directly compared to similar analysis on typically short fragment paired end libraries.

RESULTS
illumina high throughput sequencing was done on paired end  and mate pair libraries  made from genomic dnas from two widely used transgenic mouse models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t . the transgene sequence for sod1-g93a includes a  <dig>  kb region from the human sod <dig> locus  and is present in transgenic animals at relatively high copy number   <cit> . the transgene sequence for prp-tdp43a315t contains the human full length a315t mutant tar dna binding protein  cdna inserted into the xhoi cloning site of the cloning vector moprp.xho  and the copy number is unknown  <cit> .table  <dig> 
coverage estimates and orphaned reads mapping statistics


raw coverage#
analysis coverage#
orphaned reads mapped to mus
*pe: paired end library.

*mp: mate-pair library.


#raw coverage corresponds to the sequencing reads generated from machine. analysis coverage is calculated from quality filtered reads and this dataset is used for insertion site discovery.



paired-end sequencing
paired end data were mapped to the transgene sequences, and read pairs with only one end mapping to the transgene sequence were identified based on sam flags. the unmapped mates  of these pairs were then mapped to the mouse genome .

previously published dna fish data showed the sod <dig> transgene insertion site to be on chromosome  <dig>  and our dna fish data for prp-tdp43a315t  showed the tdp <dig> insertion site to be on chromosome  <dig>   <cit> . using these results as a guide, all reads mapping to the relevant chromosome were extracted using a perl script and candidate insertion sites were nominated based on the presence of overlapping reads with mates mapping to the transgene sequence. the paired end data were sufficient, in combination with the dna fish data, to nominate an insertion site on mmu <dig> for the sod1-g93a transgenic. however, only  <dig> out of  <dig> , <dig> 100 bp reads were informative, indicating an insertion site at chr12: <dig> , <dig>   which was subsequently validated by pcr and sanger sequencing.

for prp-tdp43a315t, we were unable to nominate a candidate insertion site from the paired end library data on mmu <dig>  for both sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t, the paucity of informative reads  was due to a combination of factors including the genotype of the samples , the amount of sequencing data generated  and the small insert size of the library .

moreover, in the case of prp-tdp43a315t, the transgene consists of a mouse expression cassette  harbouring a human mutant tdp <dig> cdna. therefore, informative reads consisted of reads representing the transgene as well as reads representing the endogenous mouse prnp locus . indeed, when the data were mapped to the mouse genome, a large cluster of reads  was found at the endogenous prnp locus on mmu <dig>  conversely, the sod <dig> transgene consisted of the human sod <dig> locus, such that all reads consisting of human sod <dig> sequence were informative.

mate pair library sequencing
to increase the signal to noise ratio, mate pair libraries from ~ <dig> - <dig>  kb fragments were constructed and sequencing data were generated at ~32x theoretical coverage. the mate pair library data were analysed using an approach similar to that described above for the standard small fragment paired end libraries, where the data were first mapped to the transgene sequence and then orphaned reads were mapped to the mouse genome . for both transgenic strains, nearly  <dig> orphaned reads were mapped to the mouse genome, of which ~ <dig> % were found to be in candidate region .

insertion site scoring procedure
to identify the most significant clusters of aligned reads a transgene insertion site scoring procedure was created . this scoring procedure takes a tab delimited text file with  <dig> fields. a screen-shot of a snippet of a file is shown in supplementary material . the transgene insertion scoring procedure first divides the genome into blocks and determines the number of reads mapping in each block. the genome-wide threshold for significance for transgene insertion site scores is calculated by random alignments to the reference mouse genome .

this analysis process nominated insertion sites for both sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t . pcr primers designed to flank the proximal and distal ends of each insertion were designed  and, as expected, these primers amplified products that were unique to animals hemizygous for the relevant transgene . capillary sequencing of the pcr products confirmed the insertion sites for sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t at chr12: <dig> , <dig>  chr9: <dig> , <dig>  and chr9: <dig> , <dig>  , respectively. in both cases, the genomic regions surrounding the transgene insertion sites contain interspersed low complexity repeats, particularly line elements .figure  <dig> 
igv  view of mate pair library data aligned to the mouse  genome. significant clusters of reads map on mmu <dig>  and mmu <dig>  each span ~ <dig> -4 kb, as expected based on the insert size of the mate pair library.
the sod1-g93a insertion site on mmu <dig>  the sod1-g93a transgene insertion site is at chr12: <dig> , <dig>  in this region, there are no annotated coding sequences, nor is there functional non-coding sequence, as evidenced by the lack of evolutionarily conserved sequence. instead, this region contains a number of low complexity line elements and simple repeats . direct sequencing of the insertion site revealed the orientation of the last copy of the transgene in the multi-copy array with respect to the chromosome . orientation of the chromosome is depicted proximal to distal  in both panels.
the prp-tdp43
a315t
insertion site on mmu <dig>  there are two closely linked transgene insertion sites on mmu <dig>  these are chr9: <dig> , <dig>  and chr9: <dig> , <dig>  , respectively. similar to the insertion site for sod1-g93a, these insertion sites are not within coding sequences, but are instead embedded in low complexity line elements. moreover, these insertions are in close proximity to olfactory receptor genes, which share a high degree of sequence similarity and are known to evolve by tandem duplication . the orientation of the last copy of the transgene in the proximally inserted array and the truncated first copy of the transgene in the distally inserted array are shown in . orientation of the chromosome is depicted proximal to distal  in both panels.



comparison of paired end and mate-pair data for sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t
to demonstrate that mate-pair libraries are more effective than short fragment paired end libraries with comparable sequencing data, we randomly extracted reads from sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t mate-pair libraries at 5x, 10x and 15x theoretical genome coverage . the entire insertion site identification analysis was performed for data extracted at each of the above coverage levels. a summary of analysis results is shown in figure  <dig>  in the sod1-g93a paired end library sequenced at 18x coverage, we could not discern the true insertion site, and a location at mmu <dig> emerged as the top candidate. however, in the mate-pair sod1-g93a analysis, the locus on mmu <dig>  emerged as top candidate with sequencing data as low as 10x theoretical coverage, and, at 15x coverage, two of the three replicates crossed the significance threshold of  <dig>  at the true site . in the prp-tdp43a315t paired end analysis sequenced at 18x coverage, mmu <dig> emerged as the top candidate  but in mate-pair library analysis even at 5x coverage all the top candidate sites belonged to chr <dig> . the high scoring, mmu <dig> hit at the prnp locus was excluded because the transgene contains an expression cassette derived from the mouse prnp gene. from this analysis, it is clear that mate-pair data have a higher signal to noise ratio when compared to paired end data, even at lower sequencing depth. moreover, where dna is available from homozygous animals, the depth requirements would, theoretically, be lower by half. while mate-pair library preparation is more than twice the cost of paired end library preparation, mate pair libraries allow for successful insertion site identification at lower coverage . with lower sequencing cost compensating for more costly library preparation, this approach is a cost-effective, reliable solution for routine insertion site identification.figure  <dig> 
a summary of coverage analysis. top hit in standard paired end and in mate-pair library analysis shown at different coverage . the max  corresponds to number of reads mapping in 1000 bp blocks. chr <dig> is not plotted in the analysis for prp-tdp43a315t as chr <dig> reads represent the endogenous mouse prnp locus. using the same max  the sod1-g93a and prp-tdp43a315t transgene has only two points on the plot, at 5x and 15x coverage, respectively.



CONCLUSIONS
high throughput sequencing of larger fragment mate-pair libraries at as little as 10x coverage is an effective approach for transgene insertion site discovery when used in combination with an analysis pipeline that provides statistically relevant read cluster identification . mate pair libraries provide improved signal to noise ratio when compared to standard fragment paired end sequencing at similar coverage.

the transgene insertion sites for the two transgenic strains used for this pilot project did not contain protein-coding sequences. instead the transgene insertion sites were associated with line  elements, which are non-ltr type retrotransposons that are frequently associated with chromosomal rearrangement breakpoints  <cit> . transgene insertion sites are frequently associated with chromosomal rearrangements as well as rearrangements and/or fragmentation of the transgene itself  <cit> . staged alignment of high throughput sequencing data, where reads are first aligned to the transgene sequence and then only orphaned mates of those reads are aligned to the host genome, simplifies the analysis such that a single cluster of mapped reads indicates a clean insertion, whereas two clusters in close proximity can indicate a deletion in the host genome. more complex rearrangements within the host genome would likely be revealed by various arrangements of clusters in cis and translocations would presumably be revealed by the presence of multiple significant clusters occurring in trans  . however, since the approach we used for this study only samples the host genomic sequence immediately flanking the transgene insertion, local inversions of the host genome will be missed.

direct sequencing of pcr products designed from the mate pair sequences that align within clusters allows for molecular characterization of the transgene ends, which can reveal rearrangements at either end of the transgene array. additional features of the transgene array itself, including copy number and organization of array subunits are not revealed by using mate pair library sequencing at 10x coverage and would likely require additional sequencing  and possibly, de novo assembly.

while only a handful of transgene insertion sites have been molecularly characterized, it is clear that many are associated with line and/or sine elements  <cit> . while it is possible that these regions may be unusually accessible to transgene integration due to their open chromatin configuration in pronuclear stage embryos  <cit> , we cannot exclude the possibility that this type of integration is enriched in transgenic strains through selective breeding .

