BACKGROUND
chili pepper fruit  gives rise to a strong pungent sensation when eaten, due to the presence of capsaicinoids, with capsaicin  as the most known example
 <cit> . capsaicinoids have been considered as anti-obesity, antimicrobial and antineoplastic agents
 <cit> , and for the prevention of hypertension
 <cit> . additionally, capsaicin is a very potent agonist of the pain receptor trpv1
 <cit>  and is therefore used as a therapeutic drug in the treatment of peripheral neuropathy. since the discovery of capsaicinoids there has been substantial amount of research dedicated to the understanding of biosynthetic pathways leading to capsaicinoids in different cultivars of capsicum sp. although the biochemical pathways leading to capsaicin are described, there is still a knowledge-gap with regards to the identity of some of the involved enzymes .

in brief, capsaicin synthesis in capsicum sp. is achieved through combination of two separate pathways, namely:  phenylalanine conversion to vanillylamine; and  valine conversion to 8-methyl-6-nonenyl-coa acid via the fatty acid metabolism. the two pathways are connected in a capsaicinoid synthase-catalysed condensation reaction between vanillylamine and 8-methyl-6-nonenyl-coa to form capsaicin
 <cit> . a key step in the biosynthetic route to capsaicin is the conversion of vanillin to vanillylamine via transamination of the aldehyde moiety into the corresponding amine
 <cit>  . the responsible enzyme for transamination of vanillin has previously been addressed to be putative aminotransferase  
 <cit> . although functional studies in vivo clearly indicate that pamt is responsible for the transamination of vanillin in capsicum sp.
 <cit> , the pure enzyme has, to the best of our knowledge, not been characterised in vitro.

in this study, the gene encoding pamt was functionally expressed in escherichia coli and the polyhistidine-tagged enzyme was purified to homogeneity using affinity chromatography and subsequently characterised. it is confirmed that pamt converts vanillylamine to vanillin, and should therefore from now on be called "vanillin aminotransferase ". the enzyme can also be used for the kinetic resolution of racemic 1-phenylethylamine to -1-phenylethylamine and acetophenone, and thus carries the potential to be applied for biocatalytic transamination for the preparation of chiral amines.

RESULTS
cloning, expression and purification of vamt
codon-optimised synthetic c. chinense vamt gene was cloned into an e. coli expression vector downstream of the iptg-inducible t <dig> promoter, resulting in plasmid pnw <dig> . the plasmid was used to transform e. coli bl <dig>  generating strain tmb <dig> . at first the expression of the protein was investigated with induction at optimal temperature for e. coli growth , however, no enzyme activity in cell free lysate could be registered. possible explanations include the formation of inclusion bodies or other incorrect folding of the recombinant protein as previously observed for other systems
 <cit> . to solve this problem, a lower temperature  for the protein induction-expression step was chosen, which led to a high expression of the active enzyme. the polyhistidine-tagged protein was purified from cell free lysate using affinity chromatography, and no contaminating proteins could be detected by sds-page analysis of the purified enzyme solution .

functional validation of vanillin aminotransferase activity
most known transaminases of both bacterial and plant origin accept l-alanine as amine donor
 <cit> . the purified enzyme was therefore first evaluated for the conversion of vanillin to vanillylamine with a high excess of alanine as amine donor. it was, however, not possible to detect any formation of vanillylamine. conversion was neither observed with the following amine donors: d-alanine, gaba, glutamine and ornithine. however it cannot be excluded that some vanillylamine  was formed since transamination of a small amount of vanillin was previously observed in crude cell extract from pungent pepper capsicum annuum and with gaba as amine donor
 <cit> . however, the gibbs free energy of the reaction, Δg0’, as calculated by using the group contribution method
 <cit> , was Δg0’ = + <dig>  kcal/mol when using l-alanine and other amino acids as amine donor. the reaction was consequently thermodynamically favouring the reverse reaction and a high conversion of vanillin was, even with an excess addition of the amine donor, not expectable. it has previously been shown for other transaminases that a  product removal system was required to reach conversion of aromatic ketones to amines
 <cit> . therefore, the enzyme was instead evaluated for the conversion of vanillylamine to vanillin using pyruvate as amine acceptor. in this case, the formation of vanillin could be detected shortly after the start of the reaction , which indicates that vamt indeed is responsible for vanillylamine formation in c. chinense. whether this activity can be found in orthologous plant transaminases and is a general trait, or if it is a specific natural function of vamt that has been evolved over time, is unknown. blastp search within the ncbi database  with the amino acid sequence of vamt identified γ-aminobutyrate  transaminases, catalysing the conversion of gaba to succinate semialdehyde as the most similar enzymes. the amino acid sequence of vamt notably shared 76-83% identity to known plant gaba transaminases originating from arabidopsis thaliana <cit> , apple
 <cit>  and tomato
 <cit> . none of these enzymes have been investigated for the ability to convert vanillin or vanillylamine. in fact, transamination of vanillin has, to the best of our knowledge, only been reported for the ω-transaminase from chromobacterium violaceum dsm  <dig> 
 <cit> ; however, transamination of numerous aryl substituted aldehydes and ketones have previously been described for ω-transaminases originating from various soil-living bacteria, for example ω-tas from aspergillus terreus, hyphomonas neptunium, and arthrobacter ata-117
 <cit> . it is likely that there are several other transaminases unrelated to vamt that are able to convert vanillin to vanillylamine.

potential for biocatalytic transaminations
to evaluate whether vamt has any potential for biocatalytic transamination for the preparation of chiral amines, kinetic resolution of -1-phenylethylamine  was examined and which enantiomeric selectivity the enzyme possesses. the kinetic resolution of -1-pea using pyruvate as amine acceptor was initiated by addition of the enzyme and was allowed to continue for 24 hours. the products were extracted with heptane and analysed using chiral hplc. -1-pea was fully converted into acetophenone, while -1-pea remained, leading to an ee > 99% at 50% conversion of -1-pea. alike vamt, most known transaminases that have been used for the generation of chiral amines are s-selective
 <cit> , with a few exceptions of r-selective enzymes
 <cit> .

to investigate which co-substrates were accepted by vamt, kinetic resolution with different amine acceptors was carried out . in addition to pyruvate, it was shown that oxaloacetate was also accepted as co-substrate by the enzyme. the enzyme was not able to use 2-oxoglutarate as amine acceptor, which is in accordance with other known gaba transaminases of plant origin
 <cit> ; nor was it able to use succinate or acetone as amine acceptor. however the aromatic aldehyde p-hydroxybenzaldehyde displayed some reactivity.

the optimal ph for vamt activity was investigated by following the relative conversion of -1-phenylethylamine to acetophenone at different ph between  <dig> to  <dig> . noteworthy, the enzyme displayed activity over a broad ph range , and had the highest activity at ph 7- <dig>  which is rather unique in comparison with several other transaminases that have a higher ph optimum
 <cit> . the high activity at physiological ph demonstrates that vamt is suitable for whole-cell transamination systems where the reaction takes place in the cytoplasm of viable and metabolically active cells.

CONCLUSIONS
for the first time, the catalytic activity of vanillin transaminase from chili pepper plant capsicum chinense was demonstrated with the purified enzyme in vitro. the enzyme displayed high transaminase activity towards vanillylamine and -1-phenylethylamine with pyruvate or oxaloacetate as amine acceptor, and the enzyme was active at a broad ph range. thus, vamt can be used for the preparation of chiral amines, and represents an interesting candidate to be used in whole-cell biocatalysis with recombinant microorganisms.

