BACKGROUND
the post-genomic era in research on biological organisms is characterized by an avalanche of data obtained on tissues or cells by high-throughput techniques like microarrays, proteomics and metabolomics
 <cit> . these data are first statistically analyzed to produce lists of differentially-expressed molecules between experimental conditions
 <cit> . a biological meaning to these differentially-expressed molecules is then searched by querying encyclopedic information on cell mechanisms and pathways
 <cit> . for that purpose, coding genes are generally clustered based on their cellular component, molecular function, or biological process referenced in gene ontology databases; this may be automatically compiled using web tools such as david
 <cit> . a detailed analysis of these clusters can be done manually by experts reviewing a focused literature, especially when these sub-lists include well-known genes in their own domain of expertise. however, this does not quickly allow the identification of upstream regulators in the underlined pathways, nor does it provide an integrated view of the cellular responses. these aspects are difficult to attain due to the large , complex  and multi-scale nature  of the system to be analyzed. the situation is also complicated by the fact that the key upstream regulator may be not included in the list of genes suggested as differentially-expressed according to a threshold probability.

therefore, post-genomic analyses could benefit from automatic and efficient analyses of experimental data confronted to encyclopedic information. among the existing methods, causal networks have been used to predict the propagation of regulation effects  and to check consistency between variations and experimental data. these approaches allow gene network reconstructions based on microarray time-series data, mainly in a dynamic bayesian statistical framework
 <cit> ; predictions of network behavior can be made based on formal approaches
 <cit> . these methods are suitable for analyzing the variations between experimental conditions in which the regulators affect reaction speeds . they do not take into account enzymatic reactions in which substrates are catabolized to produce other molecules. therefore, the regulatory roles of enzymes, hormones, and protein-protein interactions in signaling cascades, are not considered.

in the present study, a method was proposed to solve this problem by modeling regulations and biochemical reactions in a new unified formalism of regulated reactions. this formalism was designed to merge and analyze any information available in various encyclopedic sources such as kegg
 <cit> , metacyc
 <cit> , pathwaycommon
 <cit>  and transpath
 <cit> . we focused on transpath database providing information on mammalian signal transduction and metabolic pathways, such as gene regulatory pathways, protein-protein interactions, and direct modifications of proteins
 <cit> . our method enabled the conversion of the regulated reactions in a causality graph, so that a crawling algorithm could be used to identify direct and indirect relationships between molecules. candidates were then proposed according to their ability to regulate many targets  or to be specific to a set of few targets , so that an output of  <dig> to  <dig> molecules could be further considered to easily screen the upstream key regulators. the accuracy of the method was evaluated by calculating the success rate in retrieving expected transcription factors from a large number of input lists of target genes, each with a known solution. rate of success was evaluated to  <dig> % or  <dig> % of the tested situations when sets of  <dig> or  <dig> regulatory candidates were considered, respectively. the method may also benefit from a post-prioritization among candidates based on the automatic addition of functional ontology information. lastly, the ability of the method to identify upstream gene regulators from a list of metabolites participating in glycolysis was illustrated.

RESULTS
both regulations and biochemical reactions have been merged into regulated reactions, as illustrated in figure 
 <dig>  these regulated reactions corresponded to a set of signed relationships between substrates and products and regulators of reactions, that can be activators , inhibitors  or modulators . importantly, these regulators included transcription factors , by assuming that the regulated gene was the product of a reaction using a non-limiting unknown substrate, and the enzymes catalyzing biochemical reactions between substrates and products. the regulated reaction set was then transformed in a causality graph to qualitatively interpret variations in the amounts of molecules, mass transfers between reactions, and reaction speeds  in causes and effects .

effects of neighborhood on graph connectivity
this formalism of regulated reactions can be theoretically applied to all encyclopedic databases; however, information was obtained from the transpath database as a case study. the causality graph obtained after converting encyclopedic information in a regulated network had a large-scale nature, with more than  <dig>  nodes and  <dig> , <dig> directed edges . in comparison, information in transpath source included about  <dig>  molecules and  <dig>  reactions. this difference was related to the fact that many links were created in the causality graph when a molecule was shared by many regulated reactions, and these links were propagated throughout the graph. edges with a positive sign outnumbered the negatives edges , which is in agreement with the view that a large number of biochemical reactions under physiological conditions are preferentially catalyzed in one direction
 <cit> .

encyclopedic information
a
b
c
aobtained from the transpath database that includes a description of biochemical reactions, protein-protein interactions, and transcription factors involved in signal transduction of mammalian cells.

breactions and effects  were unified in the concept of regulated reactions, which corresponded to a set of substrates, products and regulators . these regulators included transcription factors  and enzymes . a boolean attribute was added to distinguish between reversible and irreversible reactions.

cthe regulated reactions were converted in a causality graph to model the variations in the amounts of molecules, fluxes and reaction speeds , and to predict their consequences . because nodes were shared between various regulated reactions, the conversion of the regulated reaction network in the causality graph led to a large increase in the number of nodes and edges.

to analyze graph properties, three input lists with different number and nature of molecules  were considered. details were provided in additional file
1: table s <dig>  irrespective of the list, the proportion of molecules and the number of reactions included in the regulated reaction networks dramatically increased with the level of neighborhood considered throughout graph computation . this proportion was notably reduced when the original information was filtered by removing the first  <dig> or  <dig>  molecules participating in most of the reactions. this means that the regulated reaction set was more specific to the input target list when these molecules were not taken into account during neighborhood computation. the topological properties of the network provided an explanation for this situation. indeed, as for many metabolic networks in various organisms
 <cit> , the structural connectivity of the network  indicates that most nodes had few links, but a few highly connected nodes  linked the rest of the less connected nodes to the system. this supports the view that this network as other large networks
 <cit>  self-organized into a scale-free structure. the network diameter  increased with the level of neighborhood, which was expected because new nodes were added to expand the network. topological attributes were kept with the conversion of the regulated reaction set into the causality graph.

hub
c
a
neighborhood
b
d
γ
e
d
d
athree case-study situations were analyzed by using lists with different number and nature of targets: i) the list  <dig> included  <dig> unique genes targeted by ppara <cit> , ii) the list  <dig> included  <dig> gene transcripts that were either up- or down-regulated after addition of agonists of ppara in cell culture
 <cit> , and iii) the list  <dig> consisted in seven metabolites involved in the successive steps of glycolysis in mammalian cells
 <cit> . details are provided in additional file
1: table s <dig> 

bthe first level neighborhood was obtained by taking all the reactions in which the input molecules were involved. the second level was obtained by adding all the new molecules involved in these latter reactions. the third level was an iteration of this procedure.

cthroughout the neighborhood computation, the first n molecules involved in most reactions in cell metabolism were ignored. in the tested situations, n corresponded to  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> . after neighborhood computation, these molecules  were added to the network only in the case where they participated in reactions selected from the input lists.

dthe proportion  of molecules and reactions  that were selected from the full graph in the regulated reaction network  was calculated.

ethe topological properties of the network were analyzed using different network statistical parameters. a r value close to  <dig> indicates that the graph was scale-free. assuming that the probability p that a molecule in a network interacts with k other molecules follows a power law , a high γ value indicates that there were few highly connected nodes in the network. the quantity l denotes the average shortest path length by which one can reach node a by node b, and d corresponds to the graph diameter. within a row, the sign “–“ indicates that the computation of these parameters had failed. this analysis shows that the conversion of regulated reactions in a causality graph kept the original structure of the network.

accuracy of the method to provide the expected transcription factor among a reasonable set of regulatory candidates
to address the accuracy of the method in proposing relevant upstream regulatory candidates, it is important to consider different lists of target genes, each having a known solution. for that purpose,  <dig> different lists of target genes  that are referenced in the transcriptional regulatory element database  as being controlled by a given tf in human, mouse or rat, were submitted. success was attributed only to tests in which the known solution was present among a reasonable set of candidates having the highest scores for coverage or for specificity, respectively. as expected, the rate of success increased with the number of candidates considered in the output lists  to reach a maximum of  <dig> % in situations where sets of  <dig>  molecule candidates were retained. importantly, the known tf was included in the output lists of candidates whether or not the tf was present or absent in the input lists of targets. together, this provides evidence that the formalism of regulated reactions transposed into causality graph is suitable for the identification of upstream key regulators. success was better when the specificity score was considered. it was also improved when not only “gene” terminology but also “molecule” terminology  in the transpath database were considered for solutions . finally, the rate of success was still reasonable when small sets of specific molecule candidates  were considered . this means that this method was able to curate a reasonable number of potential regulators among the ~ <dig>  tf and the ~ <dig> - <dig>  protein coding genes in the human genome
 <cit> . the rate of success fell to  <dig> % and 10%, respectively, when lists were randomly swapped to calculate a sub-graph of causalities from biologically irrelevant lists of targets. this demonstrates that few regulatory candidates could be identified by chance only. in some tests considered as failed, the set of retained candidates included isotypes rather than the expected tf . this is likely because many targets were shared by the various isotypes . in the majority of the failed tests, many molecules shared similar scores in the answer set. this means that users had to consider a trade-off between a reasonable rate of success and the time needed to review a dedicated literature to prioritize among a large number of candidates. the number of candidates in the answer set can be chosen at each computation, but we recommend retaining sets of  <dig> to  <dig> candidates as good trade-offs.
a


lists of target genes
b
number of regulatory candidates considered
c
lists of randomly-shuffled genes
b
athe rate of success corresponds to the number of situations out of  <dig> tests, where the known transcription factor  referenced in the transcriptional regulatory database 
 <cit>  was present among n regulatory candidates that were automatically provided. candidates were scored for coverage  or for specificity . because the known tf can have the same score as a set of other candidates , the probability to find the known tf among the candidates was estimated under the hypothesis that ex aequo candidates were randomly ordered. the results indicate that rate of success increased with the number  of candidates considered.

ba total of  <dig> different lists of genes, each of these lists being regulated by a known transcription factor, were automatically extracted from tred. these lists contained between  <dig> to  <dig> target genes . in a first step, each list of genes targeted by a known tf was successively submitted to analysis. in a second step, all genes included in these lists were randomly shuffled to constitute  <dig> lists of biologically non-relevant targets.

cthe results indicate that the rate of success was reasonable when  <dig> to  <dig> candidates in the answer sets were considered .

proposed candidates other than the expected tf might be relevant upstream regulators of experimentally-derived lists of target genes
because the overlap between experimentally-obtained target genes and the targets reported in the majority of knowledge libraries is surprisingly small
 <cit> , proposing candidates other than the expected tf may be biologically relevant. to further examine this aspect, two lists of target genes  that have been experimentally-demonstrated
 <cit>  to respond to ppara, a tf that regulates various aspects of fatty acid metabolism and storage, were analyzed. irrespective of the score used, it is first important to note that ppara was successfully proposed among an examined answer set of  <dig> regulatory candidates , with one noticeable exception where ppara was included in a non-dissociable set of  <dig>  candidates sharing a similar score. among the candidates, isotypes delta  and gamma  were elicited with scores similar to those assigned to ppara. they could be considered as true positive candidates, because microarray analysis of cell lines ectopically expressing ppar family members
 <cit>  had shown that many of the established ppar target genes are equally receptive to all  <dig> receptors although preferential targets do exist for each isotype . the same situation applies to retinoid x receptors , because rxrs are well-known obligate heterodimer partners for ppar actions in controlling the storage and use of energy, and they play integrative roles across multiple metabolic systems
 <cit> . less expected, vitamin d receptor  and the heterodimer complex vdr-rxra were also found . in support of this finding, a cross-talk between vdr- and ppar-signaling pathways in modulating gene expression has been reported in various cell types and vdr and ppars compete for a predominant hetero-dimerization with their rxr partners
 <cit> . many of the proposed candidates having the highest scores for coverage or for specificity could also be biologically relevant, because they participated in pathways closely related to ppara actions on lipid metabolism
 <cit> . this concerns lipid metabolism itself , cholesterol homeostasis , fatty acid transport and lipid transfer  and peroxisomal oxidation . finding candidates involved in the elongation and desaturation of fatty acids  was also biologically relevant, because long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are ppara agonists
 <cit> . lastly, the presence of the macrophage antigen cd <dig> in the answer set matches with the observation that adipose tissues of ppar alpha-null mice exhibited an up-regulation of cd <dig> mrna
 <cit> . importantly, none of these candidates were controlled themselves by ppara
 <cit> .
ppara 
gene targets

input list 1
a
a
a
a
score: coverage
b
b
adetailed lists are provided in additional file
1: table s <dig>  with i) list  <dig> including  <dig> regulated genes identified as controlled by ppara from a literature review
 <cit>  and ii) list  <dig> including  <dig> differentially expressed genes in response to ppara agonists in cell culture
 <cit> .

bregulatory candidates of these lists were elicited by an automatic algorithm based on encyclopedic information extracted from the transpath database and modeled as a causality graph. the candidates were scored for coverage  or for specificity  and the first 50th candidates having the highest scores were retained.

cthe range  indicated that the genes or the protein complex in which they participated had the same score as a set of nj- ni+ <dig> molecules. when a molecule or a complex appeared more than once, only its best position was shown.

prioritizing upstream regulators could be done by functional clustering
because the proposed candidates may be included within a non-dissociable set of molecules having same scores, an ultimate step in our method was to evaluate the benefit of automatically adding functional information to candidates. for that, a dedicated web-service available online without fees
 <cit>  can be used. the results show that the input list of regulated transcripts and the output list of proposed regulatory candidates shared clusters related to fatty acid and cholesterol metabolisms , which was expected considering roles of ppars
 <cit> . importantly, clusters included fewer genes when calculated from the list of candidates than from the input list of regulated genes. at least one ppar isotype was apparent in clusters calculated from the candidate list, which was not the case when clusters were calculated from the regulated transcripts. moreover, a new cluster termed ppar signaling pathway including the three ppar isotypes and their heterodimer partners rxrs, was apparent in the answer list . the method had also found candidates for clusters related to cell adhesion, migration, and developmental process. among these, tgfb <dig> is considered to regulate numerous cell adhesion processes including cell proliferation, differentiation, motility, and apoptosis
 <cit> . this gene is also a known target of oxysterols and various lipid compounds
 <cit> , which may give an explanation for its identification as a regulatory candidate from the list of ppara-responsive genes. altogether, these results indicate that our method coupled with automatic functional annotation is able to select a small subset of genes regulating various functions originally represented among the regulated genes. it provides the biologist with a clear synthesis of the information and relevant upstream candidates across the clusters.

regulated targets
a
b
fatty acid metabolism
c
atranscripts experimentally identified as responsive to ppara agonists in cell culture
 <cit>   were clustered using the david functional annotation tool
 <cit> . only clusters with an enrichment >  <dig>  and a benjamini score <  <dig>  were kept. eventually, a synthetic description was chosen to name the cluster.

bfifty upstream regulatory candidates that were automatically-proposed according to best specificity scores  were clustered. all molecules were first linked to their related genes, with heterodimer protein complexes  being switched in the two genes .

cthe results show that the input list of regulated transcripts and the output list of proposed candidates notably shared clusters related to fatty acid and cholesterol metabolisms. all clusters were enriched in transcription factors, and especially in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors  isotypes and their partners rxr  when calculated from the list of regulatory candidates.

upstream integrative candidates were proposed from a list of up-regulated metabolites
in the present study, the formalism had merged biochemical reactions with gene regulations. therefore, it is meaningful to illustrate the possibility offered in analyzing a list of metabolites to retrieve molecular regulators. seven metabolites involved in the successive steps of glycolysis
 <cit>  were submitted as regulated targets. a list of  <dig> unique gene candidates was proposed to explain an increased abundance in these metabolites . they included genes encoding two facilitated glucose transporters glut , which are well-known regulators of glucose uptake in eukaryotic cells
 <cit> . genes coding for  <dig> enzymes that catalyze the progression of glycolysis and neoglucogenesis  or were associated with other minor glucose pathways, were also included in the answer set. in addition, map3k <dig>  mapk8/jnk <dig> and ddit <dig> are recognized as playing important roles in upstream regulation of glucose metabolism, because they participate in the mapkk/mapk pathway acting as an integration point for multiple biochemical signals. especially, map3k <dig>  controls a variety of cell functions including transcriptional regulation; it stimulates mapk8/jnk <dig> <cit> , which itself plays a crucial role in controlling systemic glucose and lipid metabolism
 <cit> . expression of the transcription factor ddit <dig> after mapk signaling is also able to regulate glucose homeostasis
 <cit> . thus, merging biochemical reactions with gene regulations allows an integrated view of regulators acting in glucose homeostasis . other proposed candidates might also be biologically relevant, when considering glucose starvation as a cellular stress activating the heat-shock proteins  and other minor glucose pathways such as glucosamine synthesis .
a


upstream regulatory candidates
b
athe input target list included the  <dig> metabolites in the successive steps of the glycolytic pathway in mammalian cells
 <cit> : glucose; glucose-6-phosphate; d-fructose-6-phosphate; fructose- <dig> -biphosphate-1; d-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; phosphoenol-pyruvate and pyruvate. they were supposed to have an increased abundance  in the situation tested.

bthe regulatory candidates were proposed from the confrontation of the target list to encyclopedic information within a causality graph. gene ontology  terms for biological process and function were then associated.

CONCLUSIONS
a new formalism has been proposed to model encyclopedic information on molecular and cellular mechanisms into regulated reactions. a causality graph associated with a scoring procedure was used to propose upstream regulators from various sets of differentially-expressed targets that may include gene transcripts as well as metabolites. this method was also compatible with the classical causality networks
 <cit> . therefore, it can be used for sign prediction in further works.

