BACKGROUND
one of the challenges facing researchers conducting microarray studies is deriving meaning from lists of thousands of differentially expressed genes among the phenotypes examined  <cit> . a relatively new approach for systems-based analyses involves testing for enrichment of gene classes or sets; the most popular method employing gene-class analysis is gene set enrichment analysis . gsea tests whether a set of genes, defined a priori, is enriched in expression in one treatment relative to another. each gsea set consists of genes united by a shared association , leveraging prior knowledge into the analysis and thereby providing an advantage over an approach in which only individual genes are examined. an enrichment score is calculated for each set to reflect the distribution of set constituents across a list of genes ranked by correlation with the experimental treatment. a higher enrichment score corresponds to a shifting of gene set constituents towards either end of the ranked list representing strongly positive or negative correlations. for a specific microarray experiment, gsea tests whether genes from a given set are randomly distributed or, alternatively, are up- or down-regulated in one phenotype relative to the other.

the statistical significance of a set's enrichment score is determined by comparison to a distribution of scores generated by permuting the ranked list by phenotype class. a measure of expected false discovery rate  is used to refine the significance of high-scoring sets when a large collection of gene sets is analyzed.

the gsea approach uses a modified kolmogorov-smirnov test. some authors have criticized the gsea approach for being a rube goldberg machine-like solution to a problem that could be adequately solved with a simpler instrument, such as a x  <dig> test that assumes a normal distribution of scores  <cit> . while it is unclear which statistical approach best tests for gene set enrichment, it is generally accepted that the gsea approach is able to provide novel insights from complex expression patterns  <cit> .

gsea is human-centric: the gsea platform  <cit>  is built around human genome data and hugo  gene symbols, a standard vocabulary of gene terms  <cit> ; array elements without associated hugo symbols are ignored by gsea. for each known human gene, the hugo gene nomenclature committee  approves a single gene name and symbol. researchers not using human microarray platforms must annotate elements in their array with hugo terms in order to use gsea along with its database of gene sets. this is clearly a non-trivial task for distantly related model organisms, as a substantial proportion of genetic elements on such an array will have no known human homolog. however, this enhanced annotation allows access to thousands of curated gene sets available in the molecular signatures database  that leverage human health knowledge, allow meaningful comparisons between humans and distantly related model organisms, and potentially provide novel insights into human health.

mcgary et al.  demonstrated the value of comparisons between humans and distantly related model organisms for understanding the evolution of emergent phenotypes arising from sets of conserved genes  <cit> . in that study, sets of genes associated with specific human genetic disorders were mapped to sets of homologous genes in model organisms associated with functions distinct from the human genes . that approach was used to identify novel candidate genes for the human disorder.

similarly, a gsea-based analysis could leverage phenotype homology with two different approaches. first, starting with a gene set associated with a given human disorder , gsea could be used to assay a number of conditions in which those genes might be differentially expressed in an appropriate model organism. in this way, gsea could provide novel insights into that disorder by generating hypotheses about circumstances under which the human disorder is mimicked, exacerbated or even triggered. second, gsea could be used to predict the human health consequences of a given treatment or condition  by comparing the gene expression profile associated with that contaminant  to a collection of candidate human gene sets chosen to represent a range of reasonable pathways, functions or phenotypes of interest.

here, we describe an enhanced annotation of the ecoarray fathead minnow  <dig> k microarray  using hugo symbols  <cit> . this enhanced microarray resource allows analyses using the gsea approach and comparisons between fathead expression and sets associated with human health.

to test the ability to gsea to recover results consistent with standard microarray analyses, we reanalyzed a previous study of fathead minnows, pimephales promelas , that used the ecoarray fathead minnow  <dig> k gene microarray platform to examine gene expression changes in response to methylmercury exposure  <cit> . that study considered genes with greater than two-fold differences from control in liver tissue from fish exposed to methylmercury over short  or long  exposure periods. they identified  <dig> genes that exceeded this threshold following acute treatment and  <dig> genes following chronic treatment. examining these genes with the fatigo functional profiling tool  <cit> , they identified gene ontology  categories  <cit>  found to be enriched in response to the acute and chronic methylmercury treatments. in all treatments, analyses identified methylmercury-induced changes in expression of apoptosis-associated genes, including caspase, tumor necrosis factor and fatty acid synthase.

in order to test the ability of gsea to conduct meaningful comparisons of human disease-associated sets with model organism expression profiles, we compared liver gene expression profiles from the fathead minnow methylmercury treatments  <cit>  to msigdb-derived sets associated with gene expression in human livers damaged by hepatocellular carcinoma  and hepatitis b. we predicted that these sets would be enriched in the fish expression profiles, reflecting similar processes associated with generalized liver damage. these comparisons were designed to investigate the broader biological significance of methylmercury exposure by fathead minnows while providing a clear comparison of liver damage in a non-mammalian model organism to human liver damage associated with specific disorders.

RESULTS
annotation of ecoarray  <dig> k fathead minnow microarray for gsea analysis
we identified  <dig>  hugo symbols for the  <dig>  elements on the ecoarray fathead minnow microarray platform . the annotated fish genes include homology to  <dig>  unique hugo symbols, about 36% of the ~ <dig>  symbols in the hugo database. this number of human homologs is consistent with the number identified  for five other fish species using similar methods  <cit> , given that the  <dig>  elements on the fathead array were selected in part for their degree of conservation with other species  <cit> .

gene duplication in the fish lineage may have led to cases where more than one fish array elements mapped to the same human hugo symbol. there were  <dig> array elements that shared a hugo symbol association with at least one other array element. these include situations where 1) fathead genes are represented by more than one array element; and 2) two  fathead genes were homologous to the same human gene due to gene duplication in the fish lineage. using the est sequence data, it is difficult to distinguish between these two possibilities; gsea assumes that all such duplicates fall into the first category. we concluded that cases from the second category would not unduly influence the interpretation of the analyses since the post-duplication sister genes likely have similar functions.

similarly, gene duplication in the mammalian lineage has led to cases in which a single fish array element mapped equally to more than one human protein . of the ~ <dig> such cases, in which the blast search identified two or more hits with equal e-values , we selected the hit with the higher score . these cases were examined individually.

gsea analysis results for go categories derived from klaper et al. study
of the  <dig> go-bp  classes identified by the klaper et al.  <cit>  study ,  <dig> sets for acute and  <dig> sets for chronic treatments, gsea identified six significantly enriched sets in the acute treatment  and no sets in the chronic treatment . consistent with the klaper study, gsea identified the majority of sets to have experienced up-regulation  in the treatments relative to the controls. nearly all the enriched gene sets were associated with metabolic and biosynthetic processes.

results for gene sets representing each go-bp class identified by klaper et al.  <cit> , tested for enrichment by gsea following acute methylmercury treatment. go terms and definitions can be used to retrieve each set  from msigdb  <cit> ; size refers to the number of genes in the set; es and nes are the enrichment scores and normalized enrichment scores  for the set; nom p-value is the nominal p-value for the nes. gene sets representing go-bp classes with statistically significant normalized enrichment scores are highlighted in bold.

results for each go-bp class identified by klaper et al.  <cit> , tested for enrichment by gsea following chronic methylmercury treatment. size refers to the number of genes in the set; es and nes are the enrichment scores and normalized enrichment scores  for the set; nom p-value is the nominal p-value for the nes.

gsea analysis of the msigdb c <dig> collection of gene sets
due to the highly conservative nature of the false discover rate  implemented by gsea, many gene sets from the msigdb c <dig> collection  with statistically significant enrichment scores failed to surpass the fdr threshold and, consequently, could not be definitively identified as enriched following methylmercury treatment. table  <dig> lists gene sets with normalized enrichment scores  that were below a normalized p-value of  <dig>  and a fdr of  <dig> .

results for msigdb c <dig> gene sets , listing sets with nes scores that are both statistically significant and below the fdr threshold. size refers to the number of genes in the set; es and nes are the enrichment scores and normalized enrichment scores  for the set; nom p-value is the nominal p-value for the nes, fdr q-vlaue is the false discovery rate ratio . one of these sets  is a liver associated set highlighted in table  <dig> 

in the acute treatment, gsea identified  <dig> significantly enriched up-regulated sets under the fdr threshold . these consisted of metabolic, biosynthetic and several cancer-associated sets. there were no significantly enriched down-regulated sets passing the fdr test; failing fdr  were significantly down-regulated sets associated with cytotoxicity, which is of biological significance for hepatotoxicity and, potentially, for hcc.

in the chronic treatment, gsea identified  <dig> significantly enriched down-regulated sets under the fdr threshold . these primarily include apoptosis and caspase sets. there were no significantly enriched up-regulated sets passing the fdr test; failing fdr  were significantly up-regulated metabolic and biosynthetic processes sets, which are of biological significance for hepatotoxicity and, potentially, for hcc.

gsea analysis results for human hcc and hepatitis b gene sets
a sub-set of the msigdb c <dig> collection, consisting of  <dig> human gene sets associated with hcc and hepatitis b, was also tested against the p. promelas methylmercury treatments . in the acute treatment, gsea found one down-regulated  and two up-regulated sets . in the chronic treatment, gsea found no down-regulated and one up-regulated set .

results for gene sets representing hepatocellular carcinoma  and hepatitis, tested for enrichment by gsea following methylmercury treatment. here, we test whether liver-associated sets are enriched following methylmercury exposure. size refers to the number of genes in the set; es and nes are the enrichment scores and normalized enrichment scores  for the set; nom p-value is the nominal p-value for the nes. descriptions of each set  can be found by searching for set names at the msigdb  <cit> .

discussion
comparisons of gsea and fatigo profiles
our gsea results are consistent with the fatigo results of klaper et al.  <cit> . while few of the fatigo sets were significantly enriched in the gsea analysis, all sets were up- or down-regulated in the same direction  and the sets significant in the gsea analysis tended to include those go processes highlighted by klaper et al. as being important consequences of liver methylmercury exposure. this includes predominantly up-regulation of metabolic and biosynthetic processes  and down-regulation of apoptosis .

it is noteworthy that the gsea-based approach uses the entirety of the ~ <dig>  annotated elements on the array, rather than only the most highly differentially expressed genes. this difference in the scope of analysis provides an explanation for why all fatigo process terms were not significantly enriched in the gsea analysis . in other words, gsea enrichment of a set containing many genes associated with a given function is somewhat different than a fatigo-style analysis that reports the function of a single given up-regulated gene: while fatigo asks whether any system or pathway is statistically over-represented in the  most up-regulated genes , gsea asks if the dozens of genes associated with a given system or pathway are significantly collectively enriched  in a study that simultaneously considers all annotated genes on a chip .

there are important distinctions between the expression profiles associated with acute and chronic exposure, potentially reflecting metabolic changes occurring after prolonged exposure to a toxin  observed by other researchers  <cit> . this difference may be due to either accumulation of methylmercury over time or acclimation of the tissue over time. these differences also reflect the very different nature of the two experiments, performed by different labs using different protocols.

overall, the c <dig> results were limited by a fdr due to the size of the msigdb-c <dig> database. the few gene sets that passed this threshold were consistent with fatigo results and the general conclusions of klaper et al.  <cit> . primarily, these include sets associate with up-regulation of metabolic and biosynthetic processes and down-regulation of caspase and apoptosis pathways. published studies of apoptosis induction by methylmercury involved neurological  <cit>  and reproductive systems  <cit> , so it is not necessarily unexpected to observe the opposite response in the liver, the primary site of detoxification. the up-regulation of general metabolic processes might be involved in detoxification, although none of the sets we identified were specifically associated with dna repair, which has been noted in similar experiments  <cit> .

comparisons to human liver disease
the smaller, select group of gene sets, involving liver damage associated with hcc and hepatitis b, provided meaningful comparison between human liver disease and fish methylmercury exposure rather than simply a list of the altered biological functions . the scores of these sets are similar to the scores of the highest-scoring sets from the broader analysis .

fathead minnow liver tissues following acute methylmercury treatment were enriched for a set  composed of genes that differentiate among patients with advanced hcc with respect to response to chemotherapy treatment. fish in the acute treatment are also enriched for genes highly expressed in interferon-resistant hepatoma cell lines . this indicates a shared response between acute methylmercury exposure  and hepatocellular carcinoma , which is potentially useful for guiding the understanding of methylmercury toxicology.

fathead minnow liver tissues following chronic methylmercury treatment were enriched for sets associated with hcc  and hepatitis b ; see table  <dig>  these sets are indicative of a shared response between chronic exposure  and serious liver impairment  due to cancer and hepatitis infection. that both hcc and hepatitis b are enriched is not surprising, since there is a relationship between the two conditions  <cit> .

while it is well known that other heavy metals are directly associated with cancer  <cit> , for mercury it is less clear, despite indirect evidence involving liver cancer  <cit> . hcc is generally secondary to hepatitis infection or cirrhosis-associated liver damage by hepatotoxicity . mercury induces oxidative stress, which leads to the enhanced biosynthesis of liver enzymes associated with antioxidant and toxic response systems  <cit>  and genotoxicity  <cit> . liver damage can occur from even topical exposure  <cit> . using exhaustive histological and microarray comparisons between zebrafish livers and human cells exposed to mercury, ung et al.  <cit>  identified mercury-induced hepatotoxicity involving many of the same systems and pathways revealed by our gsea-based study, including apoptosis, proteasomes, and other systems associated with toxicity response  and hepatotoxicity .

CONCLUSIONS
the comparison with klaper et al.  <cit>  is an indication that gsea  are useful for model organisms that are not yet endowed with completely sequenced and fully annotated genomes. this provides both a systems-based gene-class analytical tool  and a mechanism to compare to gene expression profiles from non-human model organisms to profiles associated with human phenotypes and another tool for understanding human health implications when using model organisms and a framework from which testable hypotheses can be generated. for these applications, the strength of gene-class approaches is in the a priori designation of sets to be tested. also, in considering all genes on a chip rather than only those most up-regulated, gene-class analyses can identify subtle patterns easily missed by fatigo-like analyses.

