BACKGROUND
oligonucleotide tiling arrays are a popular tool for detecting transcriptionally active regions on a genomic scale. they comprise short oligomeric probes  immobilized on a slide surface; a typical custom-built tiling array today contains about  <dig>  features. tiling arrays are distinct from traditional microarrays, which are most often used to measure differential gene expression in multiple biological conditions. as such, different techniques must be employed in their analysis  <cit> .

the principle behind microarray analysis is similar to that of traditional hybridization using nitrocellulose membranes  <cit> : when fluorescently-labeled sample  is applied to the array-bound features , complementary regions of probe and target dna will anneal to form a stable duplex. thus, any probe whose complementary target is present in the sample mixture should bind fluorescent label.

however, observed fluorescent intensity  can derive not only from such gene-specific binding, but also from non-specific binding. this occurs when target dna anneals in a nonspecific manner to the probe. non-specific binding is dependent upon probe sequence, but independent of the amount of its true target in the sample; thus, it is unrelated to the transcriptional activity or expression level of the gene it is designed to assay.

controlling for such background hybridization is an ongoing concern in microarray studies, and particularly important for tiling arrays where the absolute intensity  is sought and where less discretion is allowed in probe selection. traditional microarrays typically include only a handful of probes per gene, which can be carefully chosen to optimize binding and target discrimination. in tiling arrays however, such probe choice is impossible, and as such mismatch  probes become an important tool to enhance probe performance.

mm are often included on microarrays to differentiate specific from nonspecific hybridization. the rationale for their inclusion relies on three assumptions: first, that nonspecific binding affects perfect match  and mm probes equally; second, that the mismatch reduces the affinity of gene-specific binding to the mm; and third, that fluorescence signal per bound transcript is identical for pm and mm  <cit> . in affymetrix genechips® for example, the central base of a  <dig> mer probe is replaced by its complement; subtracting mm signal from pm intensity  is meant to yield true probe signal corrected for non-specific background. however, mm signal is often greater than pm signal  <cit>  and either ignored entirely  <cit>  or simply used to exclude outliers.

all nucleotide substitutions do not have an equal impact on hybridization efficiency. previous work has explored these differences in solution  <cit>  and in silico  <cit>  using solution-phase algorithms, but solution-phase kinetics do not translate well to solid phase hybridization  <cit> .

while many experiments include probes with single mms, and much previous work has focused on trying to model hybridization on microarrays  <cit> , the hybridization behavior of various degrees of mm structure on arrays remains poorly understood. more elaborate mismatch strategies for oligonucleotide microarrays have been investigated in the context of resequencing and mutational analysis  <cit> . moreover, experiments examining mm behavior on arrays often rely on spike-in  <cit>  or custom synthesized sample mixtures  <cit> , which limit non-specific hybridization and differ from the complex mixtures normally present in array experiments.

in array design, a great deal of work has focused on selecting the best probes from genomic dna. several software programs exist to design oligos for microarrays: commoligo  <cit> , arrayoligoselector , oligoarray  <cit> , oligoarray  <dig>   <cit> , and oligopicker  <cit> . factors considered include maximizing probe uniqueness in the genome to minimize cross-hybridization, and altering probe length to conform to a needed range of melting temperature. little thought is given to selecting nucleic acid substitutions for mm probes; typically, the pm middle base's complement is chosen, without consideration for the potential differences in signal that can arise from these choices.

the behavior of multiple mm per probe has not been deeply explored. in  <dig>  dirisi and coworkers examined the effects of multiple mm on  <dig> mer probes arranged according to two schemes: internal , and anchored   <cit> . while the relative intensity in the anchored mm set decreased gradually as more mm were added, the internal mm set disrupted hybridization much more efficiently and fell off too rapidly to extract the cost per mm.

here, we present the results of two large-scale microarray experiments to explore mm oligonucleotide behavior with real sample mixtures under tiling-array conditions. we designed two microarrays to assess the performance of mm oligonucleotides, one design using the baker's yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae , and the other design using human genomic material . mm probes were selected from a set of fourteen designs. these include three singlecenter designs , five centered designs , five staggered designs  and one deletion of the central position. experiments were carried out in triplicate, and the data has been deposited in the geo database .

the yeast array includes a  <dig> kb region surrounding the highly-expressed act <dig> gene, tiled double-stranded with 36-mer probes at  <dig> bp spacing. for each pm oligo derived from this gene's sequence, all fourteen mm oligos designs were included. the yeast array also includes six additional genes, tiled single-stranded with 36-mer probes at  <dig> bp spacing, with a smaller set of four mm oligos per pm. the human array includes three refseq genes  with flanking regions, tiled double-stranded with 36-mer probes at  <dig> bp spacing . thirteen mm oligos were included for each human pm probe .

we analyze the effect of each mm substitution under real conditions, and examine the impact of including multiple mm in a single probe. though there do exist some caveats – namely, that the conclusions presented here may not apply exactly to different array types, oligonucleotide lengths, labeling methods and so on – these results will be useful in computing nonspecific hybridization of individual probes, and as a general guideline for designing mm probes for tiling arrays: a new and exciting application of array technology, where single mm probes no longer suffice.

RESULTS
genomic regions from seven s. cerevisiae genes and three human genes were tiled with perfect match  and mismatch  oligos, the arrays were probed and the resulting intensities normalized as outlined in the methods section.

four distinct classes of mm oligo were employed: singlecenter, wherein the nucleotide at the center position  is changed; centered, wherein mismatch bases are added incrementally from the center of the oligo; staggered, wherein mismatch bases are distributed throughout the length of the oligo; and deletion, wherein the center position  is removed, and the oligo is elongated by adding the next base in genomic sequence. the location of mismatch bases in these designs is given in table  <dig>  and schematized in figure  <dig>  the aforementioned genes were tiled with various sets of these mm designs.

design of mismatch oligo classes: singlecenter , centered  and staggered .

our normalization scale equates median log intensity of high-expression regions to  <dig> , and median log intensity of non-coding regions  to  <dig>  ; thus, an oligo with intensity equal to that of a highly-expressed region will be assigned a score of ~ <dig>  while an intensity near baseline will score ~ <dig>  mm oligos were evaluated by taking the difference in normalized intensities . this value is expressed as a percentage of the total intensity range.  original data is available from geo .

single center mms
behavior of each possible nucleotide substitution was assessed with singlecenter mm oligos. figure  <dig> shows the cost per individual replacement, assessed over all regions tiled .

in both species, c→a was the most disruptive change , followed by c→g  and t→a ; g→a, t→g and c→t were the next most disruptive changes. the least disruptive changes were those beginning with adenine, a→c , a→t , and a→g , followed by t→c, g→c, and g→t. in human, the two least disruptive mms actually increased median spot intensity relative to pm. it should be emphasized that a wide range of values was found in each case . the aforementioned values are the median intensity changes.

gc skew
singlecenter nucleotide substitutions were grouped into equivalent mispairs as shown in table  <dig>  the median intensity difference  vs. mispair orientation is given in figure 4b–e. a consistent skew is seen: nucleotide substitutions that increase the gc content of the  <dig> mer probe have a higher median intensity than those that decrease it or leave it unchanged. this trend is seen across all tiled regions , in the highest intensity spots  and the lowest intensity spots as well .

all possible single nucleotide substitutions, grouped into equivalent mispairs : base substitution  leads to mispair  with resulting effect on gc content of oligo .

the twelve individual singlecenter nucleotide substitutions were then regrouped into three classes according to their effect on the gc content of the oligo. overall, the median intensity difference of a single substitution at position  <dig> can vary between -4% and -8% in yeast depending on its effect on gc content . in low expression regions, this spread remains pronounced  whereas in highly expressed regions, the spread is narrower . in human  the same effect is seen. overall, the median intensity difference of a single center substitution varies between 0% and -5% depending on gc effect; in low expression regions, this range shifts upwards  and in highly expressed regions the skew is lessened .

non-specific binding due to homopolymer c nucleotide runs
we have found that oligonucleotides that contain consecutive runs of c nucleotides longer than or equal to four show abnormally high fluorescent intensity for the case of the human pm data. in figure 4h we plot the average intensity of probes containing a homopolymer run of nucleotides  of a given length. we observe that the hybridization intensities of oligonucleotides containing a run of four or more c's are significantly higher than the average array signal intensity. this effect is not simply due to these oligonucleotide probes containing large amounts of c nucleotides: we have observed that probes specifically with runs of four or more c have higher intensities than oligonucleotides with the same c nucleotide content but lacking a contiguous run of c. we also observe that oligonucleotide probes with no a show enriched signal intensities.

this effect does not appear to be caused by direct binding of oligonucleotides to reverse complements by watson-crick base pairing, since this effect is not present for consecutive runs of g's. we hypothesize that runs of c's cause oligonucleotide probes to exhibit non-specific cross-hybridization to targets other than their reverse complement. potentially, this binding might be more exotic than regular watson-crick base pairing. this effect has been observed for other sets of human tiling array data, however this effect is not present for the yeast pm data. one possible explanation for the enhanced signals from oligonucleotides probes with poly-c runs is offered by nelson et al. in  <dig>  <cit> , in a study which identified an artifact caused by the t <dig> primer used by the in vitro transcription system that caused certain oligonucleotide probes to yield increased signal. however, this still does not explain the differences in poly-c intensity observed between human and yeast arrays.

when designing tiling microarrays, care should be taken to avoid oligonucleotide sequences containing runs of consecutive c, since these may not probe only intended targets and may instead yield ambiguous signals.

deletion mms
deletion mms were found to have an effect similar to singlecenter mms. full results are available in supplementary material online.

multiple mms
for multiple mm studies, we focused on two individual highly expressed genes, yeast act <dig> and human hbg <dig>  these were partitioned into exonic and intergenic regions by annotation reference . the median intensity difference for each mm design is given in figure .

in exonic regions , additional mismatches cause a downward trend in intensity relative to the pm. in intergenic regions, mismatches show no distinct trend, but instead fluctuate about the pm intensity.

cost per additional mm
extracting the slopes of these curves, we determine that each additional mismatch in the centered scheme costs ~7% of pm intensity in both yeast and human, whereas each mismatch added in a staggered scheme is approximately three-fold more disruptive .

using mm to discern coding regions
to assess the performance of the various mm classes at discerning transcribed sequence, a set of pair-wise t-tests were performed. a  <dig>  kb region  was selected from within a known coding region, and contrasted with a non-coding region of equal size. a t-test was performed for each mm with the pm. this was done for two genes, act <dig>  and hbg <dig> .

in known coding regions, all mms differed significantly from the pm . the s <dig> design  was the most different from pm . in known non-coding regions, mms displayed a range of performance: some were significantly different from pm , whereas the s <dig> design was indistinguishable from pm in both cases .

because the windows for scoring transcribed fragments are often short , the above assay was repeated with  <dig> probes per window. the same pattern was observed: in a window containing known coding sequence, all mm classes could be distinguished from pm , with the s <dig> design displaying the smallest p-value . in non-coding windows, most mm classes were indistinguishable from pm, and again the s <dig> design had the highest p-values .

discussion
oligonucleotide probes containing single mismatch  positions are frequently included in microarrays to control for nonspecific hybridization. relative to the perfect match , the mismatch oligo should exhibit much less gene-specific binding, but a similar amount of nonspecific binding; thus, subtracting the mm signal should yield a true pm corrected for nonspecific binding. in practice, selecting the number, type and placement of mm in a given probe is challenging, particularly in the case of tiling arrays which permit far less flexibility in probe selection than traditional expression arrays. we have conducted microarray experiments in two species to demonstrate the behavior of various types of mm design under normal experimental conditions. these results represent a formal examination of previously unstructured and largely anecdotal microarray knowledge, and a resource useful for array design.

single mms at the central position
we demonstrate here that the amount of nonspecific binding exhibited by mm oligos is dependent upon the individual nucleotide substitutions they incorporate, and therefore not necessarily equivalent to that experienced by the pm probe – this finding undercuts a main assumption underlying the use of mm probes. for each of the four dna nucleotides  there exist three possible substitutions, and we find that these twelve possible replacements exhibit a range of effect on mm intensity. some of these are anticipated: for instance, sterically unfavorable purine-purine mispairs such as a·g are expected to destabilize duplex dna more than purine-pyrimidine mispairs. our findings support this, with the three purine-purine mispairs – c→a , c→g  and t→a  – emerging as the most disruptive single substitutions.

however, we are also able to revise and refine predictions stemming from earlier work. using in silico hybridization models of single-point mismatches, athey and coworkers   <cit>  predicted that g→x would be the substitution most disruptive to oligonucleotide hybridization, while a→g and t→g would be the least. we report here that in practice, c→x is most disruptive, and the three a→x changes are least disruptive. zhang and coworkers reported that although g·g is more stable than c·c in solution, the reverse is true on an array  <cit> . we confirm that the g→c substitution  is more stable than the c→g substitution , further supporting the notion that solution-phase values do not necessarily translate to solid-phase hybridization  <cit> .

these results are worthwhile to consider when making single mm changes, particularly when the position to be substituted is c  or a .

gc skew effect
a notable contribution to the spread of intensities from single-point mismatches is a phenomenon we term the gc skew effect. with the exception of homogeneous mispairs , any given non-watson-crick mispair can be produced via two distinct mismatch substitutions . we term these pairs of changes equivalent substitutions. in the absence of nonspecific binding, cross-hybridization, or other array effects, such equivalent substitutions should yield equivalent spot intensity: an a·g mispair, no matter which  was introduced as a mm, should disrupt binding consistently. thus, by examining the intensity differences between equivalent substitutions in aggregate, we can quantify the contribution of factors other than specific binding to observed oligo intensity.

to illustrate this phenomenon, single-point nucleotide substitutions are grouped into dyads, each representing an equivalent substitution. what emerges is a consistent skew, which can be stated as follows: all else equal, any substitution that elevates probe gc content will exhibit higher intensity, whereas any substitution that lowers probe gc content will decrease intensity.

we expect the gc skew effect to be more pronounced both in low-expressed regions – where nonspecific binding is a large component of total signal intensity – and in experiments where high mixture complexity of sample rna provides increased potential for nonspecific hybridization, such as human arrays. we indeed find that in highly-expressed regions the average gc skew is small  and similar in both human and yeast; but in low-expressed regions the average skew is markedly larger in yeast  and larger still  in human.

gc skew likely stems from a combination the increased 'stickiness' of the triple-h-bond arrangement of g and c nucleotides, combined with mixture complexity.  a complex sample rna mixture will offer ample substrate for nonspecific hybridization.

it is evident that gc skew can constitute a large component of the effect of any single mismatch. therefore, if employing mismatches to control for nonspecific hybridization, one should take care to make substitutions that do not alter the gc content relative to the pm oligonucleotide. that is, individual bases should be substituted with their watson-crick complements . this is the substitution matrix employed by affymetrix for genechip® arrays. it should be noted that while insulated from gc bias, these substitutions do nonetheless exhibit differing effects on intensity: in yeast, the maximal intensity spread between c→g  and a→t  is ~7%; in human, it can reach ~9%.

companies such as affymetrix® have for some time insulated single-mm probes from gc bias in this manner. however, the full formalism for why and how this matrix is effective has not previously been reported in the literature. we demonstrate here why this approach is valuable and should be replicated where possible when constructing multiple-mm oligos. 

multiple mms
in addition to all possible single-point substitutions at the center position, we also assayed ten mm oligo designs with multiple mismatches arranged in two schemes: centered and staggered. we report here that on the normalized log scale used in this work, both schemes conform to a fundamentally linear decay of signal, suggesting that multiple mismatches display a largely additive effect.

because efficient duplex hybridization requires an uninterrupted run of complementary nucleotides, we expect the staggered scheme to be most disruptive  <cit> . this is evident in the results: each additional staggered mm causes > 20% intensity drop, whereas each centered mm causes only 7% intensity drop. the staggered curve is linear  from  <dig> through  <dig> mismatches, and diverges at the  <dig> mm level. this behavior is in line with expectation: oligonucleotides with the maximum possible number of mismatches  would share no sequence in common with the pm and should, on average, display signal in line with slide background intensity – the signal displayed by dna regions that are not transcribed and thus should not be present in the target mixture. thus, the theoretical lower bound intensity for unlimited mismatches is the slide background intensity, equivalent to  <dig> on our normalized log scale. in reality this lower bound is reached quite early: with  <dig> staggered mismatches, the signal has already diverged from the linear progression. for centered mm, by extrapolating the linear fit we predict that this scheme should begin to plateau around  <dig> mm per 36-mer probe; after which point additional mm should no longer reliably affect hybridization signal intensity.

although signal decay from centered mismatches is linear to a good approximation, a slight synergistic effect is seen: centered mm progressions in both yeast and human deviate somewhat from true linearity, suggesting some cooperativity between multiple mismatches in this scheme . this agrees with an earlier study, which suggests a synergistic effect between multiple mismatches  <cit> . this is understandable since centered mms are introduced adjacent to one another, creating a contiguous run of mms whose effect may be slightly more than the sum of its parts. in contrast, staggered mms are introduced in isolated locations, and display near-perfect linear decay, suggesting a lack of cooperativity in this scheme.

the intercepts of the fit lines for the centered mm scheme provide an interesting insight into nonspecific hybridization behavior. in yeast and human, these lines have the same slope , but extrapolating back to n =  <dig> mms yields an intensity higher than that of the true pm in either case. this suggests that mm oligos pick up more signal than they should due to nonspecific hybridization, and that the amount of this signal boost is consistent at each n. the amount of this signal boost is encapsulated in the y-intercept value: these are different in yeast  and human , suggesting a differing amount of non-specific hybridization is contributing in each case. the increased rna sample complexity in human may account for the higher signal boost observed at every mm level.

in intergenic  regions, staggered mismatches show no distinct progression, but instead fluctuate about the baseline intensity. this is in line with expectation: in non-transcribed regions, deviation from the pm oligo should be no more or less likely, on average, to base-pair with material in the rna sample mixture. the centered scheme however displays a slight upward intensity trend in intergenic regions. this cannot be explained by gc skew or general nonspecific binding, and presents an interesting matter for further inquiry.

identifying transcribed regions: which mm is best?
a typical goal when employing mm oligos on an array is to help distinguish transcribed from untranscribed regions. a good mm design will thus yield intensities significantly different from pm in transcribed regions, and close to or indistinguishable from pm in untranscribed areas. we assessed the behavior of the various mm classes with respect to this task, and found that while all mm classes could be distinguished from pm in short  or long  windows of known coding sequence, their performance in non-coding windows varied. the s <dig> design  performed best in both human and yeast: its p-value was smallest  across known coding sequence, and largest  in non-coding sequence. if generally applicable, this result suggests that a design bearing multiple staggered mismatches should outperform the traditional single-center mismatch oligos in current use, with respect to discerning transcribed sequence.

this is true in aggregate, but what about taking each oligo on its own? in aggregate, mm are not needed, since instead randomized oligos could be put down to yield background signal which could then be subtracted out. this however does not preserve the  binding characteristics of the pm, which is the idea underlying the mm.

CONCLUSIONS
we have conducted two large-scale microarray experiments to explore mismatch oligonucleotide behavior with real sample mixtures under tiling-array conditions. we show that the amount of nonspecific binding by mm oligos is dependent upon the individual nucleotide substitutions they incorporate: c→a, c→g and t→a  were most disruptive, whereas a→x changes had the least disruptive effect.

we also characterize a marked gc skew effect: all else equal, any substitution that raises probe gc content will exhibit higher intensity, whereas an equivalent change that lowers gc content will decrease intensity. this effect is most pronounced in mid- to low-expression regions, where nonspecific hybridization plays a larger role in total signal intensity. to prevent this skew, substitutions should be made that do not affect the gc content relative to the pm oligo .

multiple mismatches are largely additive in effect: both schemes  conform to a near-linear decay of signal, although staggered mm are three-fold more disruptive. each staggered mm causes > 20% intensity drop, compared with 7% per centered mm. centered mm also display slight cooperativity, likely owing to their adjacent positioning.

rna sample mixture complexity may affect mm binding by increasing the amount of nonspecific hybridization, thereby magnifying the gc skew and boosting the intensity of mm oligos at all levels. it does not, however, appear to affect the cost per incremental mm in either scheme. the increased mixture complexity in human is visible in increased intensity variance, particularly in non-coding regions.

these guidelines should prove useful in designing mm oligonucleotides for tiling array experiments.

