BACKGROUND
several approaches for inferring a phylogenetic tree from the substitution patterns in multiply aligned sequences are available; they include maximum parsimony, distance-based, maximum likelihood and bayesian methods  <cit> . typically, the inferred tree is unrooted, because the explicit or implicit substitution process used is usually time-reversible. an effective way to put the root on the unrooted tree is to perform a phylogenetic analysis on the sequences of interest together with an outgroup, which is a set of distantly related sequences  <cit> . if the ingroup is monophyletic in the combined phylogenetic tree, then the point where the outgroup touches the ingroup tree is the estimated root. the practical challenge is to find suitable outgroups, and if no such outgroup is available, then one is forced to root the tree using just the ingroup. several such methods include the molecular clock and nonreversible substitution processes. it seems clear that compared to the outgroup method, the success of these methods is more dependent on the extent to which the accompanying assumptions about the substitution process are satisfied in the data. for example, the molecular clock method should work well if the lineages indeed evolved more or less at the same rate. likewise, as shown by huelsenbeck et al.  <cit> , a nonreversible process is more likely to succeed the less reversible the real substitution process is.

the nonreversible substitution process, introduced by yang  <cit> , is stationary, i.e., the sequence composition is unchanged in time, and is equal to the equilibrium distribution of the rate matrix q. the consensus is that it does not have enough power to discriminate among the candidate rooted trees. in this paper, we investigate a slightly more general, nonstationary process: in which the initial distribution π may not be the equilibrium distribution of the rate matrix q. a priori, giving up stationarity is expected to produce a much better fit to data, since sequence composition is known to evolve, and should be accounted for. indeed, substitution models where each branch has its own rate matrices had been used to resolve deep splittings in certain phylogenetic trees; see yang and roberts, and galtier and gouy  <cit> . our process, which to our knowledge has not been investigated in this context, may be viewed as the simplest case of such nonstationary processes, with many fewer parameters. thus, it can be used to decide whether the substitution processes on certain branches should be modeled differently. the input to our procedure is a multiple alignment and the topology of an unrooted binary tree. for each rooted tree associated with the given unrooted tree, we seek the maximum likelihood  estimates of the branch lengths, π and q. the rooted trees are then ranked in descending order of likelihoods. we model systematic variation in substitution rates among sites by assigning sites into several classes, and the relative rate for each class is estimated by ml; this is equivalent to the combined analysis framework of yang  <cit> .

we compared the ability of the stationary and nonstationary processes to place the root in three groups of species where the answer is considered well-known:  human, chimpanzee and gorilla,  human, chimpanzee, gorilla and orangutan,  human, mouse, chicken and frog . the analyses were based on all available mitochondrial protein-coding genes, as well as two nuclear protein-coding genes. next, we applied the methods to a set of primate mitochondrial dna sequences.

RESULTS
verification studies
we fitted the nonstationary , stationary  and reversible  substitution models to all available mitochondrial protein-coding genes, as well as the nuclear genes albumin and c-myc, for three groups of organisms:  human, chimpanzee and gorilla,  human, chimpanzee, gorilla and orangutan, and  human, mouse, chicken and frog . the sequences were downloaded from genbank and aligned using the clustalw alignment of the amino acid sequences. most alignments looked quite solid . the beginning of the alignments for the genes cox <dig>  cytb, nd <dig> and nd <dig> were slightly adjusted. the root positions are assumed to be on the  gorilla,  orangutan, and  frog branch, respectively. the branches on a tree are referred to by the organism names, except for the case of four taxa, where there is an internal branch . for groups  and , it was assumed that human was most closely related to chimpanzee and mouse respectively; thus the unrooted tree is determined.

in group  <dig>  the nonsta and sta processes correctly placed the root in  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively, out of  <dig> genes . in group  <dig>  nonsta correctly placed the root in  <dig> genes out of  <dig> genes, compared to  <dig> genes for sta . in group  <dig>  nonsta correctly placed the root in  <dig> genes out of  <dig> genes, compared to  <dig> genes for sta . furthermore, nonsta gives stronger signal, or has better discriminative power: the highest-scoring rooted tree often has noticeably higher log likelihoods than competing rooted trees; this is not so with sta. thus, nonsta is much better than sta in placing the root at the individual gene level. combining the log likelihoods across genes yields overall evidence for the root placements. table  <dig> shows that nonsta is unambiguously correct in all three analyses, while sta only gets the root correctly in group  <dig>  and the signal is weak.

the nuclear genes albumin and c-myc and three mitochondrial genes, cox <dig>  cox <dig> and atp <dig> from group  <dig>  were studied by huelsenbeck et al.  <cit> . for these five genes, nonsta and sta performed equally, getting all the correct root placements, except for atp <dig>  with nonsta again noticeably more discriminative.

primate mitochondrial dna
brown et al. and yang  <cit>  studied a set of mitochondrial dna  sequences from human, chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, gibbon, crab-eating monkey, squirrel monkey, tarsier and lemur. the topology of yang's unrooted tree and the branch labels are shown in figure  <dig>  the mtdna sequences consist of two protein-coding fragments, separated by three rna genes. thus, four site classes are required. analysis with nonsta shows that the root is most likely on the tarsier branch, followed closely by the lemur and "f" branches, and the corresponding log likelihoods are quite different from the others . under sta, the most likely root placements are on the squirrel monkey and lemur branches. thus, both processes give predictions that are consistent  with the idea that the root should be somewhere near tarsier and lemur. however, as observed before, nonsta has much greater discriminative power, and fits the data much better, than sta.

discussion
our results confirmed earlier findings that the stationary process  is not very good at discriminating among rooted trees corresponding to the same unrooted tree. in contrast, the nonstationary  process seems much more effective, with individual genes, and with combined genes. it is quite clear that the difference in log likelihoods between fitting sta and the reversible process  is often small, and statistically insignificant, based on the likelihood ratio test, while those between nonsta and sta, and between nonsta and rev, are often large, and statistically very significant. though the chi-square distribution may be inappropriate  <cit> , it seems to be satisfatory in practice  <cit> . this indicates that nonsta fits the data much better than sta and rev. thus it appears that allowing an initial distribution that is uncoupled with the rate matrix gives a better description of the data, and that the greater capacity of nonsta over sta at estimating the root placement may stem from the ability of nonsta to allow for some amount of evolution in base composition.

although huelsenbeck et al.'s analysis using sta failed to place the root correctly in any of the genes albumin, c-myc, cox <dig>  cox <dig> and atp <dig>  there are some differences between the analyses. the raw data were different: the rat albumin and c-myc genes were used by huelsenbeck et al.; since mouse and rat are very similar, this is not likely to matter much. secondly, the alignments were probably different, though since the sequences are quite similar, this should not be too important. it is plausible that most of the discrepancies between the results is due to the difference in the estimation procedure  and to the fact that in huelsenbeck et al., site variation was modeled by the gamma distribution  <cit> , whereas here we only accounted for the codon position effect.

estimates of the relative rates are quite independent of the model used, and their relative magnitudes are largely within expectations. in particular, for group  <dig>  the relative rates for codon positions  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> fall between . <dig> and  <dig> , . <dig> and . <dig>  and  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. for all genes, the third codon position evolved the fastest, followed by the first and second positions. to gauge the contribution from the third codon position, we left out the corresponding bases in group  <dig> and reran the analysis with nonsta. this gave the correct root placement in only three genes: albumin, c-myc and nd <dig>  showing the usefulness of the third codon position in this dataset, despite its markedly higher substitution rates. we also found that the pairwise identity at the third codon positions for all genes in groups  <dig> ranges from 34% to 61%. base composition being generally nonuniform, the expected pairwise identity at saturation  is lower than 25%. this seems to indicate that the third codon position is not saturated, and hence the phylogenetic information from this position is not just the base composition at each taxon. in addition, the base composition at the third codon position for some genes is quite different from the other positions. our model does not fit these genes as well as a model where separate processes are associated with the codon positions. such a model will be investigated in future.

the nonsta process is only slightly more complicated to apply, compared to the sta and rev processes. the fact that it works quite well in the verification studies and predicts biologically plausible roots for the nine-primate data demonstrates its utility and perhaps argues for its use in routine phylogenetic analysis. in any case, if no suitable outgroup is available, it could be worthwhile to try it. though the nonsta process is the most general time-homogeneous markov process, it is still simplistic and imposes a severe constraint on the evolution of base composition: if two leaf nodes are at the same distance from the root, then the process stipulates that the corresponding sequences must have the same composition. this is patently unrealistic: once lineages split, they should evolve quite independently, and may explain the failure of the process at estimating the root placement for some genes. however, it is still valuable even if it does not always work, in that it can serve as a base from which exploration of richer models can be launched. for instance, one could identify lineages where the evolution significantly deviates from expectations, and then allow these lineages to have different rate matrices, which brings us closer to the very rich models of  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the nonstationary substitution process is simple to use, has much greater power at estimating the root compared to the stationary process, and also fits data much better than the stationary and reversible processes. it seems feasible to use this process in analyses where a suitable outgroup is not easily available. it is also a good starting point for conducting more sophisticated phylogenetic analysis with richer models.

