BACKGROUND
the transition from solitary to social living is one of the key events in evolution: the rarity of this transition has provided a classic problem for evolutionary biologists and the unparalleled success of social animals is of central interest to all ecologists. to investigate the factors underlying this transition, it must be studied in a phylogenetic context and we therefore require clades of extant species that have several independent origins and different degrees of sociality. such clades are exceptionally rare. for many groups, the number of independent origins of sociality is very small, these origins may be buried deep in the past, and the phylogeny may not be known. other groups, for example bees and thrips, are more promising. the social aphids provide particularly fruitful material because there have been many independent origins of sociality and there are clades of known phylogeny containing species covering the spectrum from solitary to fully social organisation. there are estimated to be at least  <dig> independent origins of sociality in aphids  even though only 1% of aphid species is social  <cit> . this dwarfs the equivalent estimates for other social taxa . in addition, aphids have a genetic system – clonality – that is virtually unique among social insects. this reduces the complexity caused by genetic conflict that is present in most social systems and allows us to concentrate on the role of ecological factors, which have probably driven the evolution of all animal societies  <cit> .

the vast majority of aphid species simultaneously produce more than one morph, and the different morphs routinely have different direct reproductive fitnesses. for example, wingless morphs may produce more offspring than winged morphs  <cit> . it is certainly true that such reproductive sacrifice may constitute an altruistic act which enables the altruist to contribute indirectly to the fitness of its clonemates though behaviours such as migration. however, in line with the approach most commonly taken, we exclude such altruism from our definition of true aphid sociality, which we consider to have occurred only when a species has acquired soldiers, morphs that actively defend against predators. it is undoubtedly relevant that these soldiers are often the agents of socially advanced behaviours other than defence, such as nest cleaning  <cit> , nest repair  <cit>  and invasion and exploitation of alien colonies  <cit> .

every species of social aphid forms and inhabits a plant gall at some point in its life cycle  <cit> . the galls provide a rich and indispensable resource to the aphids which are therefore classic examples of "fortress defenders"  <cit> . the gall is especially important for serving as a physical barrier to predators and to alien aphid invaders that seek to exploit the altruism of the home clone, disrupting the alignment of genetic interests among colony mates.

this study concerns the aphid genus pemphigus which contains species that exhibit almost the entire spectrum of sociality from the total absence of defenders to the presence of aggressive, morphologically specialised soldiers  <cit> . pemphigus soldiers generally occur in the first instar of the virginoparous morph on the primary host but defensive behaviour also continues to a lesser degree in later virginoparous instars  <cit> . it is clear that the gall is particularly crucial to the social biology of pemphigus aphids because soldier morphs have been found only at the galling stage  <cit> . we produce a partial phylogeny that includes nine of the sixty-five species of pemphigus that have been described  <cit> . the species of the genus are spread across the northern hemisphere and many have cosmopolitan distributions  <cit> . populus  is the primary host on which the galls are formed  <cit>  and host alternation is the norm, but not the rule: three of the  <dig> species that have been sufficiently studied spend their entire life cycle on poplar. because the genus is entirely without secondary-host soldiers, we can exclude the possibility that a second, dissimilar environment influences social evolution and we can thus focus solely on the galling phase. the pemphigus species that have been scrutinised for the presence of soldiers are presented in table  <dig>  in this study, we have examined in detail the natural history and ecology of three species: pemphigus populi, which does not have soldiers; pemphigus bursarius, which invests moderately in gall defence using monomorphic nymphs that behave as soldiers; and pemphigus spyrothecae, which invests extensively in morphologically specialised soldiers.

the three species that were subject to detailed ecological study are shown in bold typeface. 

within the genus pemphigus there is known to be considerable variation in factors such as time spent on the primary host, the number of aphids within a gall, and the number of emigrants produced during the galling phase  <cit> . by examining these and other ecological, demographic and phenological differences , our aim is to elucidate the key selective factors that have influenced the evolution of sociality in the galling aphids and other fortress-defending organisms.

RESULTS
ecology of p. populi
the average gall volume at the end of p. populi's galling phase was  <dig> ±  <dig> mm <dig>  larger galls tended to contain greater aphid populations, increasing by approximately  <dig> aphid for every  <dig> mm <dig> of gall volume . correspondingly, larger galls also tended to allow the emergence of increased numbers of alate fundatrigeniae .

the index of developmental synchronisation in the gall of p. populi was calculated for all the destructive samples because the full range of instars was never in the gall at the same time. there was no significant difference between the resulting indices for each sample . the index calculated from the pooled samples indicated a high level of developmental synchronisation: on average,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  of the individuals in a gall was belonged within the same single instar.

the average number of fundatrigeniae in destructively-sampled galls was  <dig>  ±  <dig> .  this value accorded well with the average number of alate fundatrigeniae that left the monitored gall and were captured in bags:  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the density of aphids in galls of p. populi at the end of the season is therefore about  <dig>  aphids mm- <dig> 

the opening of the galls of p. populi is highly unusual. wide fissures open in the gall starting at its apex and often extend so far that the gall's inner surface is turned entirely outward. a closed and an open gall are depicted in table  <dig>  alate fundatrigeniae  emerged immediately that the galls opened. this emergence was synchronised: the fundatrigeniae of all the bagged galls emerged on the same day, june  <dig> .

demographic synchrony
reproductive success
immediately following emigration from the gall of the fundatrigeniae ,  <dig> % of galls contained predators,  <dig> % contained inquiline aphids, and  <dig> % contained aphidopathogenic fungus.  <dig>  % of the monitored galls  were thus affected by phenomena that would have been fatal to aphids had they continued to inhabit them. this extremely high rate of gall mortality is shown in figure 1c.

ecology of p. bursarius
the average volume of p. bursarius galls at the time of peak population  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm <dig>  galls with larger volumes again tended to contain larger numbers of aphids, with the aphid population increasing by approximately  <dig> for every  <dig> mm <dig> increase in volume . the trend for a greater number of alate fundatrigeniae to emerge from larger galls was not significant .

as the average number of aphids in galls at peak population was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the density of aphids in the galls of p. bursarius was approximately  <dig>  aphids mm- <dig>  the fourth-instar predominated at the time of peak population. the index value for synchronisation of aphid development was  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the galls were empty by july <dig>  approximately  <dig>  months after they had been formed .

the galls of p. bursarius were open for most of the galling phase. galls were closed for an initial 2– <dig> weeks but virtually all had opened by mid-june . the approximately circular openings measured 1– <dig>  mm in diameter. emergence of alate fundatrigeniae began in mid-june and had concluded by the end of july . peak emergence was in early july. the mean number of fundatrigeniae emerging from each gall was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  for the entire season.

the rate of gall mortality was approximately constant over the entire galling phase . the increase in mortality in response to opening of the galls was not especially pronounced because opening occurred very near to the beginning of the galling phase when failures  of the small founding populations were at their highest.

ecology of p. spyrothecae
the total number of resident aphids within a gall correlated positively with gall volume in all cases. for example, at pembroke sportsground for the galls collected over the sampling period encompassing  <dig> august,  <dig> august and  <dig> september,  <dig>  the aphid population tended to be larger by one for every  <dig>  mm <dig> increase in gall volume . a positive correlation with volume was also true for the number of sexuparae emerging from the galls, which tended to increase by one for every  <dig> mm <dig> increase in gall volume .

the aphid population peak occurred in mid-august. pooling the two peak-population sampling events for every site, the average number of aphids per gall is  <dig>  ±  <dig> . the average gall volume at this time is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm <dig>  the peak density of aphids inside the gall is therefore around  <dig>  aphids mm- <dig>  soldiers and mature sexuparae were particularly numerous at the time of population peak and the peak in population co-incided with the opening of the galls. fluctuations in the numbers of both virginoparous and sexuparous morphs over the entire field season are presented for each site in figure 2b.

aphid population size was influenced by the same factors that affected gall volume. analysis of variance using the statistical model

 number of aphids = day + day × height + day × site + day × height × site + ε 

showed that the first order interaction of day with site was highly significant , just as population differences among trees remained detectable after having accounted for time-dependent and site-dependent differences . again, the height from which the galls were collected was not found to have a significant effect .

there was no relationship between the proportion of soldiers in a mature colony and colony population size at any site. similarly, there was no relationship between the proportion of soldiers in a mature colony and gall size.

for p. spyrothecae, the index of developmental synchronisation was calculated at the time when all morphs were well-represented in the gall . first-instar soldiers predominated, making up  <dig>  ±  <dig>  of the gall. death of a colony's foundress usually occurred 2– <dig> months after the gall's initiation. in mid-august , approximately half of the galls contained a living foundress but all foundresses were dead by mid september .

adult sexuparae began to emerge from the galls immediately that the openings were formed . the elliptical openings ranged from 1– <dig> mm in length  and 1– <dig>  mm in width. emergence continued for a period of almost three months. peak emergence occurred in the month of september at the middle of the emergence period. the average number of sexuparae that emerged from each gall over the course of the season is  <dig> ±  <dig> . gall mortality  increased markedly following the opening of the galls, with the rate of gall mortality at least doubling in all cases .

phylogeny
all four phylogenetic techniques produced the same topology which is given in figure  <dig>  maximum likelihood bootstrapping analysis gives this tree topology strong support. bayesian analysis estimated the posterior probability of this topology to be  <dig> . the tree with the next greatest posterior probability of  <dig>  differed in just one respect: the positions of p. populitransversus and p. populi were exchanged.

bayesian inference was also used to test support for monophyly of species known to possess soldiers. in the unconstrained analysis just described, if we assume that p. trehernei and p. populitransversus both possess soldiers, the cumulative posterior probability of a phylogeny containing a clade which is monophyletic for presence of soldiers is  <dig> . on the other hand, the same analysis estimates that there is zero probability of a tree with soldier monophyly if we assume that neither p. trehernei nor p. populitransversus possesses soldiers. a second analysis which constrained p. gairi, p. bursarius, p. obesinymphae, p. protospriae, and p. spyrothecae to be monophyletic was also conducted. the difference in the harmonic means of the likelihood values from each of the two analyses was used to estimate the bayes factor of  <dig> . this value provides strong evidence that the model with the constraint of a five-species monophyletic soldier clade should not be accepted over the unconstrained model  <cit> . however, the difference resulting from comparison of the unconstrained model to a constrained model which adds p. trehernei as the sixth species of the monophyletic clade is less marked, as indicated by the considerably weaker bayes factor of  <dig> .

discussion
life-history and ecological traits
detailed ecological investigation of the three study species provided a clear demonstration of which factors are likely to have had the predominant influence in producing divergent defensive strategies through evolutionary optimisation of the aphids' life histories .

duration of the galling phase
the duration of the galling phase was approximately two months in p. populi, approximately three months in p. bursarius, and between five and six months in p. spyrothecae. p. populi is thus exposed to the selective environment of the primary host for the shortest time, while p. spyrothecae is exposed for the longest.

aphid density
the lowest aphid density occurred in the galls of p. populi and was up to four times greater in p. bursarius galls and up to twelve times greater in p. spyrothecae galls. these density figures also reflect interspecific differences in the size of aphid populations supported in a gall. whereas the p. bursarius peak populations  were only slightly bigger than those of p. populi , the peak populations of p. spyrothecae were more than four times the size . population size and density are likely to relate to factors such as the duration of the galling phase and the robustness of a colony following negative influences such as predation. population size and density are also likely to have an integral influence on gall hygiene. it was noted that detritus such as moulted cuticle and waste such as wax-covered honeydew accumulated in the bottom of galls of p. populi. this was not the case for galls of p. bursarius and p. spyrothecae, the inhabitants of which push detritus and waste out of the holes in their galls  <cit> .

gall opening
the opening of the gall saw a rise in aphid mortality in all three of the species. this opening releases a colony's winged migrants, but it also compromises the integrity of the gall as a physical boundary to predation  <cit>  and, in p. spyrothecae, is the reference point for the specialised spatial distributions of the various gall morphs  <cit> . the potential risk of predation seems especially high for p. populi, the species without soldiers. although alate fundatrigeniae of this species departed from the gall immediately that it opened, almost 90% of the galls suffered from potentially disastrous incursions by predators, inquilines and pathogens on the day of opening. whereas the opening of galls of p. populi takes the form of extensive rupturing of the gall, opening in p. spyrothecae and p. bursarius is a more subtle process which involves the formation of a small hole  in the otherwise sealed gall. the presence and size of these openings, is known to be a crucial factor which the aphids closely regulate and, if necessary, repair to minimise predation  <cit> .

alate emergence
each of the three species had a unique time for emergence, and there was little overlap among the emergence periods. the emergence of p. populi occurs first, in early june, and is followed by p. bursarius in june-july and finally by p. spyrothecae in august-october. there is also a striking difference between the durations of the emergence periods. p. populi emerge in a single pulse, with all the winged fundatrigeniae leaving their galls in virtually one day. the fundatrigeniae of p. bursarius emerge over a period of up to two months, while emergence of the sexuparae of p. spyrothecae can continue for more than three months .

synchronisation of development
the rapid emergence of p. populi in particular, but also of p. bursarius, is facilitated by a high degree of developmental synchronisation. more than 90% of the aphids within a gall of p. populi tended to be of the same instar and up to 60% were of the same instar in galls of p. bursarius. being from host-alternating species, these instars were soon destined to migrate from the gall. in contrast, first-instar soldiers  comprised the greatest single morph in galls of p. spyrothecae. despite being the most prevalent morph, the concurrent presence of a number of other morphs meant that these soldiers accounted only for approximately 40% of aphids.

phylogenetic inferences
the three species that were subject to detailed ecological study are spread across the partial phylogenetic tree presented in figure  <dig>  the likely origin for the evolution of defensive behaviour is at the branch  which gives rise to the six uppermost species of the tree. behavioural defence is known for five of these six species, with p. trehernei representing the single exception. the loss of defensive behaviour on the p. trehernei branch must remain putative until thorough investigation is made but, if confirmed, the loss is likely to be associated with a life-history shift away from the primary host: the species has not been found to form galls in natural conditions  <cit> . although the partial phylogeny suggests just one origin and one loss of the basic defence trait, it also suggests that pronounced defence through highly aggressive soldiers has evolved twice, once in the case of p. obesinymphae and once in the case of p. spyrothecae . in the latter species, this increased defence is likely to have been supported by the evolution of dimorphism and the loss of all secondary hosts. the phylogeny certainly supports the hypothesis that p. spyrothecae evolved from a host-alternating ancestor  <cit> .

although detailed consideration of the evolution of gall forms  is outside of the scope of the current work, we note that the gall morphologies described by blackman and eastop  <cit>  correspond well with the groups borne out in our molecular phylogeny. there is evidence of phylogenetic conservation of gall morphology in the facts that p. gairi has an elongate midrib gall, p. bursarius, p. obesinymphae and p. populitransversus have round petiole galls, while spiral petiole galls occur only in the p. protospirae/p. spyrothecae subgroup which is therefore probably monophyletic. the apparent phylogenetic conservation of gall morphology may also indicate the likely position of several species that are currently absent from our tree. for example, species such as p. matsamurai have galls that, like those of the study species p. microsetosus and p. populi, form on the leaf and dehisce in a secondary position to the original opening. on the other hand, with the possible exception of p. trehernei , our phylogeny does not include the various species of pemphigus that form twig galls. these species are likely to belong to a separate subgroup, the position of which is yet to be elucidated. intriguingly, because this subgroup would include p. dorocola, a species known to have soldiers  <cit> , a second independent origin of defensive behaviour would be required.

the species examined in our phylogeny represent merely a small proportion of the large number of pemphigus species and those of other related genera. monoecy and defence by soldiers is certainly known to occur in a number of species that were not included in the current research. incorporating these species into future studies will facilitate the expansion and, possibly, the amendment of the evolutionary relationships that we have inferred. broader phylogenetic knowledge combined with improved behavioural and ecological knowledge will undoubtedly provide answers to some of the most interesting questions regarding the relationship between the selective environment and trends in social evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
life-history strategies
hide and run
p. populi has a short galling phase. the short time in the gall means that the time exposed to the predators of the primary host is reduced. maintaining a completely sealed gall further isolates the colony from external influences. the build-up of waste is not a problem because colonies are relatively small and sparsely populated. because the closed gall provides an extremely effective barrier to predation, soldiers are not required. the only time that the colonies are susceptible to predation is during the emergence period. this period is kept extremely brief so that predation is minimised. the pulse of emergence is facilitated by synchronising the development of the instars so that all are mature alate fundatrigeniae at the time of gall opening.

stay and fight
p. spyrothecae has a long galling phase and a long emergence period. these extended periods can be sustained because the species possesses morphologically specialised, aggressive soldiers that are able to defend their colonies against predation. the long time in the gall under the protection of soldiers means that it is possible to increase a colony's reproductive success by having multiple generations and staggered development during the galling phase. the colony size is larger than those of the other species and aphids of p. spyrothecae live at a high density within their galls. the problem of the accumulation of waste at such high densities is controlled by having an opening to the gall by which the waste can be removed. the opening of the gall is relatively small and can be effectively guarded by the soldiers. a sustainable trade-off between preventing predators from entering and allowing migrants and waste to leave is thus possible.

a mixed strategy
p. bursarius has a galling phase and emergence period of moderate length. these periods of exposure can be borne by having moderately aggressive behavioural, but not morphological, soldiers. galls have a small ostiole for most of the galling period. as is the case for p. spyrothecae, the presence of these ostioles can be supported because a balance can be found between ejecting waste and detritus from the gall and repelling predators with soldiers. the moderately high density of aphids makes this waste removal advantageous. prolongation of the emergence period is prevented because the development of the immature aphids, which are all offspring of the foundress, is largely synchronised.

key correlates of sociality
a variety of factors likely to be significant in the evolution of aphid soldiers have been identified. increased defence investment is correlated with increasing aphid density, longer galling periods, longer periods of alate departure, small gall openings, and decreasing developmental synchrony. it is certain that predation pressure, an understudied factor, will have the central role in the evolution of defence. this assertion has been borne out, albeit in somewhat general terms, by the empirical  and theoretical studies that have dealt with the issue to date .

another pivotal factor influencing the degree of defensive specialisation is whether loss of host alternation or other factors have influenced each species' innate predisposition for producing dimorphic offspring. because dimorphism can facilitate the evolution of specialised defenders, it may well also result in increased fitness. particularly in the genus pemphigus, the loss of host alternation is likely to be a key determinate of this predisposition to dimorphism  <cit> . p. spyrothecae is the only study species that is not host-alternating and the loss of host alternation is likely to have increased the length of its galling phase. certainly, other species that are restricted to the primary host, such as p. monophagus  <cit> , also spend a relatively long period in the gall and have dimorphic first instars.

we hope that, by way of example, the current study has succeeded in exposing the excellent prospects that the genus pemphigus holds as a model clade that can advance our understanding of the non-genetic influences upon the continuum that is sociality.

