BACKGROUND
transmembrane proteins are divided to date into two structural classes, the α-helical membrane proteins and the β-barrel membrane proteins. proteins of the α-helical membrane class have their membrane spanning regions formed by hydrophobic helices which consist of 15– <dig> residues  <cit> . these are the typical membrane proteins, found in cell membranes of eukaryotic cells and bacterial inner membranes  <cit> . on the other hand, β-barrel membrane proteins, have their transmembrane segments, formed by antiparallel β-strands, spanning the membrane in the form of a β-barrel  <cit> . these proteins are found solely in the outer membrane of the gram-negative bacteria, and presumably in the outer membranes of mitochondria and chloroplasts, a fact, perhaps, explained by the endosymbiotic theory  <cit> . transmembrane protein topology prediction has been pursued for many years in bioinformatics, mostly focusing on the α-helical membrane proteins. one reason for that, is that α-helical transmembrane segments are more easily predicted by computational methods, due to the easily detectable pattern of highly hydrophobic consecutive residues, and the application of simple rules as the "positive-inside rule"  <cit> . on the other hand, another reason is the relative abundance of α-helical membrane proteins compared to that of the β-barrel membrane proteins. this discrepancy, is present in both the total number of membrane proteins in complete genomes, an also in the datasets of experimentally solved 3-dimensional structures. currently, the number of structures of outer membrane proteins known at atomic resolution raises rapidly, due to improvements in the cloning and crystallization techniques  <cit> . this, fortunately, gave rise to an increase of the number of prediction methods and the online available web-predictors. the first computational methods that were deployed for the prediction of the transmembrane strands were based on hydrophobicity analyses, using sliding windows along the sequence, in order to capture the alternating patterns of hydrophobic-hydrophilic residues of the transmembrane strands  <cit> . other approaches included the construction of special empirical rules using amino-acid propensities and prior knowledge of the structural nature of the proteins  <cit> , and the development of neural network-based predictors to predict the location of the cα's with respect to the membrane  <cit> . the major disadvantages of these older methods, were the limited training sets that they were based on, and the reduced capability to capture the structural features of the bacterial outer membrane proteins, especially when it comes to sequences not having similarity with the proteins of the training set. during the last few years, other more refined methods, using larger datasets for training, appeared. these methods, include refined neural networks ,  <cit> , hidden markov models   <cit>  and support vector machines  predictors  <cit> . some of these methods are based solely on the amino acid sequence and others use also as input evolutionary information derived from multiple alignments. other popular methods such as the method of wimley  <cit>  and bomp  <cit>  do not explicitly report the transmembrane strands, but instead they are oriented towards genome scale discrimination of β-barrel membrane proteins.

in this work, we evaluate the performance of the available prediction methods to date. using a non-redundant dataset of  <dig> outer membrane β-barrel proteins, with structures known at atomic resolution, we compare each predictor in terms of the per-residue accuracy  and that of the strands' prediction accuracy measured by the segments overlap measure   <cit> . we also report the number of the correctly predicted topologies . we conclude, that the recently developed hidden markov model methods hmm-b2tmr  <cit> , proftmb  <cit>  and pred-tmbb  <cit> , perform significantly better than the other available methods. we also conclude that the prediction accuracy is affected significantly, if the full sequences  are used for input and not only the transmembrane β-barrel domain. this finding is again more profound when referring to the nn and svm predictors, since the regular grammar of the hmms maps successfully the model topology to the proteins' modular nature. finally, we developed a consensus prediction method, using as input the individual predictions of each algorithm, and we conclusively show that this approach performs better, in all the measures of accuracy, compared to each individual prediction method separately. although consensus methods have proven to be more accurate in the past, in the case of α-helical membrane proteins  <cit>  and also for secondary structure prediction of globular, water soluble proteins  <cit> , this is the first time that such a method is applied to β-barrel outer membrane proteins.

RESULTS
the results obtained from each individual algorithm, on the test set of the  <dig> proteins are summarized in table  <dig>  it is obvious that all of the methods perform worse for the measures of per-segment accuracy in the case of full-length sequences. on the other hand, for measures of per-residue accuracy, most of the methods perform better in the case of full-length sequences, a fact already mentioned in  <cit> . this is explained, considering the fact that when using full-length sequences, more non-transmembrane residues are predicted correctly, thus increasing the fraction of correctly predicted residues and the correlation coefficient. furthermore, when ranking the different methods pred-tmbbposterior performs better, followed by hmm-b2tmr and proftmb. pred-tmbbnbest, performs slightly worse than pred-tmbbposterior in terms of per-residue accuracy and sov, but is inferior to the other top-scoring hmms in terms of the correctly predicted topologies. in order to assess the statistical significance of these observations and draw further safe conclusions, we should rely on a statistical analysis of the results obtained.

the manova test  yields a highly significant p-value for both the  <dig> independent variables . this means, that there is truly a difference in the vector of the five measured attributes across the different methods and the type of sequence that we use as input. by including in the model the interaction term between the two factors, we get a marginally insignificant p-value , indicating that some of the methods behave differently with input sequences of different type. examining each one of the attributes independently , we observe that the type of the input sequence does not influence significantly the effect on all the measures of per-residue accuracy  but, instead, influences a lot the per-segment measures such as sov , correctly predicted topologies  and correct barrel size . in all cases, the type of the method is a highly significant factor , reflecting the fact that there are true differences in the performance of the methods. the interaction term in the anova is significant only for the sov measure , and marginally significant for the correctly predicted residues . however, these results do not provide us with a clue as to which method performs better  than the others; it states that one or more methods depart significantly from the mean. the ranking of the methods has to be concluded by observing table  <dig> 

in order to discover the statistically significant differences between the methods, we proceeded by grouping the methods according to the type of the algorithm they utilize. this way, we grouped together the hmm-based methods  and the nn and svm-based methods . thus, instead of having a factor with  <dig> levels describing the methods, we now have a factor with  <dig> levels . the manova test  once again yields a statistically significant result, for both the  <dig> factors  and the interaction term , giving us a clear indication that the visually observed superiority of the hmm-based methods has a statistically significant justification. the statistically significant interaction of the  <dig> factors, furthermore suggests that the decrease in some of the measured attributes when submitting full-length sequences, is smaller  for hmm-based methods than for the nn and svm-based ones. in fact, considering the three top-scoring hmm methods, we observe that the per-segment measures are not influenced from the type of the input sequence whereas the per-residue measures are significantly increased with full-length sequences as input, reflecting the fact that more non-transmembrane residues are correctly predicted, as noticed already in  <cit> . considering each one of the measures of accuracy with anova , the type of the method is a highly significant factor in all of the tests, and the type of the input sequence highly significant for the per-segment measures of accuracy. the interaction term is highly significant for sov  and marginally insignificant for correctly predicted residues .

these findings suggest, that the hmm-based predictors perform better, on average, than the nn and svm-based methods, in almost all of the measured attributes. we should mention here, that the difference between hmm and nn/svm methods is larger for the measures of per-segment accuracy than for per-residue accuracy. even the simplest and less accurate hmm-based method, beta-tm, that uses single sequence information compares favorably to the refined nn/svm methods that use profiles derived from multiple alignments. as a matter of fact, only b2tmpred, which uses a dynamic programming algorithm to refine the prediction, predicts more accurately than beta-tm the correct topology and/or the barrel size of the proteins, but still cannot reach the accuracy of the other hmm-based methods. furthermore, the hmm-based methods are not influenced significantly whether full-length sequences or just the β-barrel domains are submitted for prediction. interestingly, the nn/svm methods, often falsely predict the signal peptide sequences as transmembrane strands in the precursors whereas hmms do not. this observation is consistent with the theory regarding the nature of hmm and nn-based methods. thus, it is consistent with the fact that the regular grammar of the hmms can capture more effectively the temporal variability of the protein sequence and map successfully the proteins' modular nature to a mathematical sound model. therefore, it is not surprising that also for α-helical membrane proteins' topology prediction the best available predictors are those based on hmms  <cit> . on the other hand, nn methods are more capable of capturing long-range correlations along the sequence. this results to the correct identification of an isolated strand, but since the β-barrel proteins follow strict structural rules, the modular nature of the barrels is captured more effectively by hmms. nns may often falsely predict isolated transmembrane strands in non-barrel domains or predict strands with a non-plausible number of residues or even barrels with an odd number of strands. from a structural perspective, it is also of great interest to consider that the repetitive structural domains of β-barrels are the β-hairpins whereas the α-helical membrane proteins counterparts are the isolated hydrophobic helices often connected by loop regions of arbitrary length.

these observations, will have a significant impact not only on isolated predictions for one or few proteins, but also on predictions for sequences arising from genome projects where one expects to have the precursor sequences. thus, predictions on such sequences will be more reliable, when obtained from hmm-predictors rather than nn and svm-based ones. however, the performance of even the best currently available predictors are not as good as the predictions obtained for α-helical membrane proteins  <cit> . this is somewhat expected, and has a simple interpretation considering the grammatical structure of the short amphipathic transmembrane β-strands as opposed to the longer and highly hydrophobic transmembrane α-helices  <cit> .

one issue that was not possible to investigate statistically is that of the use of evolutionary information in the form of profiles derived from alignments. it is well known, that the inclusion of information arising from alignments, increases significantly the performance of secondary structure prediction algorithms  <cit> . this was exploited in the past, in the case of α-helical membrane protein prediction  <cit> , and it was investigated thoroughly in a recent work  <cit> . however, for β-barrel membrane proteins there is not such a clear answer. the authors of the methods that use evolutionary information  <cit>  justified their choice showing that the inclusion of alignments as input, improves the performance of their models up to 18%. furthermore, we showed here that nn-based methods, using multiple alignments  perform significantly better, compared to similar methods that are relying on single sequences . however, the top scoring hmm method, pred-tmbb, performs comparably to the other hmm methods that are using evolutionary information, even though it relies on single sequence information. this finding may be explained considering the choice of the training scheme for pred-tmbb, since it is the only method trained according to the cml criterion, and with manually curated annotations for the transmembrane strands. however, it raises an important question as to whether the prediction accuracy, could be improved more by using evolutionary information, or not. future studies on this area will reveal if improvements in the prediction could arise by combining evolutionary information with appropriate choice of training schemes, or if we have eventually reached a limit of the predictive ability for β-barrels membrane proteins, and we depend only on the advent of more three-dimensional representative structures.

comparing the performance of individual methods, one has to keep in mind several important aspects of the comparison. from the one hand, the limited number of β-barrel membrane proteins known at atomic resolution, resulted in having a test set, that includes some  of the proteins used for training each individual method or a close homologue. this does not imply that the comparison of the methods is biased , but that the absolute values of the measures of accuracy may be influenced. thus, when it comes to newly solved structures, we may expect somewhat lower rates in the measures of accuracy for all methods examined. on the other hand, when comparing the results of the individual methods, as they appear in the original publications, we observe some discrepancies. these arise, mainly due to the fact, that when reporting results of a prediction method, the authors usually report the measures of accuracy obtained in the jackknife test . furthermore, the authors of the individual methods report the measures of accuracy obtained using as input different types of sequences, and comparing using as observed different annotations for the transmembrane strands. for instance, other authors report measures of accuracy obtained from the β-barrel domain of the proteins, others from the sequences deposited in pdb, and others report also the results from precursor sequences. as for the observed transmembrane strands used for comparisons, most of the authors used the annotations for the strands found in pdb, and only pred-tmbb used manually annotated segments that resemble better the part of the strand inserted into the lipid bilayer. the last observation, partly explains the better prediction accuracy obtained by pred-tmbb, mainly in the measures of per-residue accuracy .

one important result of this study is the development of the consensus prediction method, for predicting the transmembrane strands of β-barrel membrane proteins. even though consensus prediction has been proved to be a valuable strategy for improving the prediction of α-helical membrane proteins  <cit> , no such effort has been conducted before, for the case of transmembrane β-barrels. a consensus of all of the available methods, does not improve the prediction accuracy compared to the top-scoring methods, indicating that there is a considerable amount of noise in the individual predictions, originating mainly from the low-scoring methods. however, when using the three top-scoring hmm methods  along with one or more of the best performing nn/svm methods  we get impressive results, outperforming the top-scoring methods in almost all measured attributes. as it is obvious from tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the consensus prediction method performs better than each one of the individual predictors. the improvement ranges from a slight improvement around 1% for the correctly predicted residues and correlation coefficient, up to 4% for sov and 15% for the correctly predicted topologies. we should note that these particular results were achieved using pred-tmbbposterior, proftmb, hmmb2tmr, b2tmpred and tbbpred-nn, but other combinations of the aforementioned methods perform similarly . this large improvement in the measures of per-segment accuracy is an important finding of this study.

however, in the web-based implementation of the consensus prediction method, we allow the user to choose at will the methods that will be used for the final prediction. this was decided for several reasons: firstly, for a newly found protein, we might have larger variations on the predictions, and we could not be sure if the choice of different algorithms will give better results or not. secondly, the different predictors are not sharing the same functionality and availability. for instance, some predictors respond by e-mail , most of the others by http , and others may be downloaded and run locally , whereas one of the top-scoring methods  is available as a commercial demo only, requiring a registration procedure. these facts, forced us not to have a fully automated server  but also to allow flexibility on the chosen methods, and let the user decide alone which methods he will use. for this reason, we also give to the users the opportunity to provide, if they wish, custom predictions. this way, a user may choose to use another method, that will come up in the future, or, alternatively, to use manually edited predictions.

CONCLUSIONS
we have evaluated the currently available methods, for predicting the topology of β-barrel outer membrane proteins, using a non-redundant dataset of  <dig> proteins with structures known at atomic resolution. by using multivariate and univariate analysis of variance, we conclude that the hmm-based methods hmm-b2tmr, proftmb and pred-tmbb perform significantly better than the other  methods, in both terms of per-residue and per-segment measures of accuracy. we also found, a significant decrease in the performance of the methods when full-length sequences are submitted for prediction, instead of just the β-barrel domain. however, the hmm-based methods are more robust as they were found largely unaffected by the type of the input sequence. this is an important finding that has to be taken in account, not only in the cases of single proteins' predictions, but mostly in cases of predictions performed on precursor sequences arising from genome projects. finally, we have combined the individual predictors, in a consensus prediction method, that performs significantly better even than the top-scoring individual predictor. a consensus prediction method is for the first time been applied for the prediction of the transmembrane strands, of β-barrel outer membrane proteins. the consensus method, is freely available for non-commercial users at , where the user may choose which of the individual predictors will include, in order to obtain the final prediction.

