BACKGROUND
dehydrogenases catalyze a great variety of redox reactions in fine chemistry   <cit> . however, since they require nicotinamide cofactors to catalyze substrate reduction or oxidation, their biotechnological implementation must address the issues of cofactor stability and thermodynamic equilibria that otherwise prevent quantitative substrate conversion  <cit> . cofactor recycling via electrochemical, photochemical or enzymatic methods is one alternative to overcome these issues  <cit> . enzyme-mediated cofactor recycling is one of the most promising approaches to address redox reaction limitations, enabling quantitative substrate conversions  <cit> . the number of biotransformations that uses nicotinamide recycling systems is exponentially growing. for this reason one of the current challenges in biocatalysis is to develop and optimize more simple and efficient cofactor recycling systems  <cit> .

one way to recycle nad+ is the enzyme-mediated oxidation of the corresponding reduced cofactor using molecular oxygen as an oxidizing agent. in nature, there are two types of nadh-oxidases  depending on their catalytic mechanism: 1) enzymes that oxidize nadh through the two-electron reduction of hydrogen peroxide to two molecules of water  <cit> , and 2) enzymes that catalyze the oxidation of nadh by reducing molecular oxygen to hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . water-forming nadh-oxidases are more interesting for biotechnological applications due to the innocuous nature of water as a byproduct. conversely, the recent application of catalases for in-situ elimination of hydrogen peroxide  <cit>  would boost the application of h2o2-forming nadh-oxidases in biocatalysis.

the h2o2-forming nadh-oxidases are flavoenzymes, where the flavin cofactor acts as electron mediator, carrying the electrons from nadh to molecular oxygen  <cit> . in the last two decades, many h2o2-forming nadh-oxidases have been isolated and characterized from both mesophilic and thermophilic organisms  <cit> . enzymes from thermophilic microorganisms are interesting biocatalysts, because their thermostability is much higher than those from mesophilic origin  <cit> . such resistance to high temperatures facilitates their purification by thermal shocks when they are overproduced in mesophilic hosts like e. coli.

the enormous biotechnological potential of these enzymes have encouraged biotechnologists to approach different downstream strategies to fulfil the stability and productivity requirements imposed by the industry to the enzyme catalysts. immobilization is presented as a useful technology for simultaneously overcoming two primary industrial limitations: re-using and stability  <cit> . for the last  <dig> years many immobilization protocols have been successfully applied to enzymes  <cit> . immobilization techniques may promote enzyme stabilizations that would increase the life-time of the catalyst and therefore the potential of the enzymes as industrial catalysts  <cit> . recently, re-using of immobilized catalysts has been described through reactivation of inactivated insoluble preparations of a survey of enzymes  <cit> . therefore, merging of immobilization and reactivation technologies would be able to multiply the biocatalyst lifetime.

we report the isolation, purification and characterization of a nadh-oxidase from thermus thermophilus hb <dig> and its preliminary optimization for biotechnological purposes. this enzyme albeit 99% identical to that found in thermus thermophilus hb <dig>  presented relevant biochemical differences that encouraged us to study some of its biochemical and biotechnological features for its application in cofactor regeneration.

RESULTS
isolation and expression of recombinant nox
the gene ttc <dig> was amplified from genomic dna of thermus thermophilus hb <dig> as described in materials and methods. the sequence of the cloned gene revealed a tyrosine at position  <dig> as opposed to a histidine found at the same position in the published genome of t. thermophilus hb <dig>  <cit> . this difference was corroborated through a second amplification, cloning and sequencing of the gene from the genomic dna, suggesting that either the published sequence contained an error or that our strain had acquired a mutation during its growth and maintenance in the laboratory over the years. it is worth to note that such his was also found at position  <dig> in the well-studied and 99% identical enzyme from t. thermophilus hb <dig>  <cit>  for which the 3d structure is available . to characterize this variant and shed light on the effect of this single mutation on its activity, the amplified ttc <dig> gene was cloned into a pet22b expression vector to overexpress the protein in e. coli bl <dig>  the vast majority of the recombinant protein was obtained in the soluble fraction facilitating its purification .

temperature-based purification
since this enzyme is from a thermophilic microorganism but cloned in a mesophilic one, purification through thermal shock was approached as the simplest way to achieve high purification factors  <cit> . crude extract from e.coli containing nox was incubated at 80°c, achieving a purification factor of  <dig>  with a yield of 100% ).

aentry 1: crude extract. entry 2: heat treatment  for  <dig> min. entry 3: heat treatment  and further incubation with pei-ag for  <dig> min. entry 4: heat treatment  and sequential b activity at 65°c, ph  <dig> without exogenous fad/fmn.

in order to completely purify nox, ionic chromatographic steps were further carried out using two different matrixes  and sulfate-dextran agarose beads ). these two polymeric coated ionic exchangers are able to absorb the majority of proteins from an e. coli extract  <cit> . notably, neither pei-ag nor sd-ag bound nox, while other proteins form the crude extract were bound to both resin. consequently, nox was ever purer at the supernatant fraction after such ionic step. the designed purification protocol was: a thermal treatment at 80°c for  <dig> minutes, followed by incubation of the supernatant with pei-ag  and then with sd-ag. the final purification protocol gave a yield of 70% with a purification factor higher than  <dig> .

biochemical characterization of purified nox
nox is flavin-dependent and h2o2-forming oxidase
the pure enzyme is a monomer with an electrophoretic mobility corresponding to the size ≈ <dig> kda, as expected from its sequence. it is able to oxidize nadh to nad+ reducing equimolar amounts of oxygen  <cit> . . the crude extract was incubated with different flavin nucleotides. the nox activity was rather low in the absence of externally-added flavin nucleotide. however, when the cofactor was exogenously added, the activity increased at higher flavin cofactor concentrations up to a maximum activity at  <dig> μm of flavin mono- or di-nucleotide . this dependence on flavin cofactor addition confirms that the flavin cofactor is not covalently bound to the native enzyme, as opposed to other oxidases  <cit> .

kinetic parameters
nox is quite active at low temperatures  relative to other enzymes from thermophilic sources. for this reason, steady-state kinetic parameters of this enzyme were calculated at 25°c for the flavin mono- and di-nucleotide cofactors and for the nadh . interestingly, the nox  in presence of exogenous flavin cofactor  showed 6-fold higher catalytic efficiency towards nadh compared to its counterpart nox  under the same conditions. this significant difference was due to the lower km and higher kcat values in favour of the enzyme from our hb <dig> strain and it may be explained by three amino acids found in the primary sequence of the hb <dig> strain  that differ from those found in the hb <dig> strain 

the steady-state kinetics parameters were calculated at ph  <dig> and 25°c . activities were adjusted to a non-linear regression.a kinetics parameters for nadh were calculated using  <dig> μm fad.b kinetics parameters for flavin cofactors were calculated using  <dig> μm nadh.

temperature and ph profiles
other important parameters used to evaluate the biotechnological potential of an enzyme are its response to broad range of ph and temperature, as operational conditions often vary from physiological ones. moreover, incubation of enzymes at extreme conditions may trigger enzyme aggregation or precipitation. we have immobilized nox on agarose activated with cyanogen bromide  to softly attach the protein to the support through a covalent bond, in an attempt to avoid protein aggregation but without pursuing the protein stabilization by immobilization. under mild conditions  nox was quantitatively immobilized onto cnbr-ag, recovering 80% of the immobilized activity. both soluble and insoluble enzyme preparations behaved quite similarly under a broad range of ph and temperatures, indicating that no aggregative effects were taking place . we were unable to measure enzyme activity at temperatures above 90°c due to technical problems as cofactor stability . therefore, 90°c was the temperature where the highest activity was measured, confirming that this enzyme was extremely active under high temperatures. on the other hand, this enzyme as well as its counterpart from hb <dig> strain presented an acidic optimal ph   <cit> , ph values lower than  <dig> could not be measured because nadh was unstable under those conditions.

temperature induces nox hyperactivation at low flavin cofactor concentrations
as it has been mentioned previously, exogenous flavin cofactor was needed to achieve high enzymatic activities. however, when no flavin cofactor was added, an unexpected effect was observed when nox was incubated at high temperatures. incubated enzymes were up to 6-fold more active than those which remained at 37°c. in fact, the higher the temperature of incubation, the higher the hyperactivation achieved . this result was confirmed by analysis of the arrhenius' plots . it is evident that the enzyme incubated at high temperature presented lower activation energy than those which did not . the thermal-dependent hyperactivation drove the enzyme to a relatively high specific activity  in limited flavin cofactor conditions  at 37°c, which was  <dig> times lower than the activity in presence of that flavin cofactor  under the same conditions.

stabilization of nox via immobilization
protein immobilization has been shown as an interesting alternative to overcome two important hurdles that enzymes are faced with in order to be used on an industrial scale: re-using and stability. to this end, we have immobilized nox onto agarose through three different chemistries. firstly, nox was covalently attached to cnbr-ag via its n-terminal  <cit> . this immobilization was performed under very mild conditions to have an enzyme preparation with properties very similar to those of the soluble enzyme  <cit> , but where enzyme-enzyme interactions were diminished. secondly, nox was reversibly immobilized via imac chemistry onto agarose activated with metal chelates    <cit> . in the resulting enzyme-agarose complex , the enzyme was immobilized and properly oriented using native histidine rich regions  <cit> . finally, nox was immobilized at alkaline ph values onto agarose activated with glyoxyl groups  where the enzyme was immobilized through its lysine rich regions, resulting in very intense covalent attachments  <cit> . immobilization yields and recovered activities depended on the respective immobilization protocol . gentle covalent immobilization on cnbr-ag and reversible immobilization on ida-cu2+-ag, resulted in 100% of immobilization yield and 80% of expressed activity. conversely, nox was not quantitatively immobilized on on gx-ag, and around 40% of the enzymatic activity was lost during the immobilization process . when thermal stability was analyzed for each insoluble derivative, the immobilized enzyme always showed an increase in enzyme stability relative to soluble preparations. immobilization on gx-ag matrixes yielded the most stable nox preparation. contrarily, the non-covalent immobilization via metal-chelate binding in imac-material led to low stabilization factors, even lower than the gentle covalent immobilization on cnbr-ag .

a 6bcl agarose was activated with different functional groups as methods described in order to immobilized nox through different chemistries, giving each one different properties to the final insoluble preparation. b immobilization yield was calculated as follows; Ψ  = * <dig> c expressed activity was calculated; ae  = /* <dig> 

solid-phase biocatalyst re-activation
recently, our group has developed new strategies for the reactivation of industrially relevant enzymes immobilized by covalent attachment  <cit> . the ability to reactivate biocatalysts for use in additional operation cycles has provided a new avenue of research focused on biocatalyst reuse on an industrial scale. since gx-nox was the most stable derivative, that preparation was subject to different inactivation/reactivation cycles. inactivation was carried out under high dioxane concentration , weak acidic ph  and 37°c, mimicking a harsh set of conditions where all enzyme activity was lost, even in the case of the stabilized derivative. the inactivated gx-nox was incubated in sodium phosphate buffer at ph  <dig> for several hours in order to recover the biocatalyst's initial activity. this insoluble derivative fully recovered its initial activity in less than  <dig> h, and reactivation was found to be quantitatively effective for at least three cycles . the reactivation of nox was more efficient when the enzyme was immobilized on gx-ag, due in large part to the rigidity and robustness provided by the immobilization chemistry.

kinetic resolution of rac-1-phenylethanol
nox was used as re-cycling partner of a secondary alcohol dehydrogenase from thermus thermophilus , for the kinetic resolution of rac-1-phenylethanol at 55°c and ph  <dig>  ttadh enantioselectively oxidizes 1--phenylethanol to acetophenone  <cit> , reducing nad+ to nadh. in figure  <dig> is shown how the bi-enzymatic system was able to oxidize the substrate reaching 99% of enantiomeric excess of 1--phenylethanol at 50% of conversion. the cofactor re-cycling system has allowed the addition of only  <dig> % mol of nadh relative to substrate. the total turnover number of nadh was  <dig> in each reaction cycle, however it is worth noting that this value could be increased either by decreasing the cofactor concentration or by increasing the substrate concentration. in terms of productivity,  <dig> mg of immobilized nox on gx-ag was able to recycle  <dig> μmol of nad+ per hour under the conditions described here. the same result was observed when the reaction was carried out with the reactivated nox derivative. herein we have validated a multi-enzyme system which may be used for kinetic resolutions of a wide variety of secondary alcohols.

 <dig>  discussion
we have purified and characterized a variant nadh-oxidase from thermus thermophilus hb <dig>  this enzyme oxidizes nadh to nad+, utilising oxygen as an electron acceptor and a flavin cofactor as an electron mediator, to yield hydrogen peroxide as a product. the amino acid sequence of this nox enzyme presents  <dig> % identity to a similar enzyme isolated from t. thermophilus hb <dig>  however, the new nox variant presented  <dig> -fold higher catalytic efficiency than its counterpart from the strain hb <dig>  a difference that is likely related to the three divergent residues found at positions  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . noteworthy, the reported sequence for nox also differs from the sequence published for the hb <dig> strain by a single amino acid change at position  <dig> , suggesting either an annotation error at the original sequence  <cit>  or an adaptation of the strain to the laboratory conditions. because samples of the hb <dig> strain obtained from other laboratories did not contain such mutation, it is tempting to speculate that higher nadh-oxidase activity might enhance bacterial fitness in the very rich tb medium routinely used in the laboratory, where an excess of reducing power  is likely to occur. in any case, we have found a potential target on nox primary sequence to further optimize its catalytic performance by protein engineering.

steady-state kinetic parameters were calculated for purified nox with three different cofactors, nadh, fmn and fad. analyses of the results, revealed one main difference between this nox and that from the hb <dig> strain, the catalytic efficiency of nox towards nadh was higher than what it was reported for that one from the hb <dig> strain. currently, mutagenesis experiments are being undertaken in order to shed light on the specific role of the three residues that differ between both proteins on the catalytic activity.

we also described practical thermal hyperactivation of this enzyme under limited conditions of flavin cofactor. this insight suggests a more active nox conformation at high temperatures, resulting in higher affinity for the flavin cofactor. this beneficial conformation and associated good specific activity can be fixed and retained in further downstream enzyme applications even at low temperature. the nature of this thermally induced conformational change is not clear at present. we suggest that it could be due to enhanced binding of the flavin cofactor, since it was only observed under conditions in which the flavin cofactor is limiting. similar hyperactivation effects after high temperature incubation have been described for other thermophilic proteins also likely due to conformational reordering of particular regions of the protein missfolded during expression at low temperatures  <cit> . whatever the reason, this feature gives the nox described here a high potential for industrial use in nadh recycling in redox reactions. in this sense, we have shown its use coupled to a dehydrogenase for alcohol oxidations at mild temperatures without a requirement for exogenous addition of flavin cofactor, making the process much more cost-effective.

thinking on these applications, we immobilized the nox in a broad number of surfaces. in the literature, different immobilization protocols have been used for the immobilization of nadh oxidases especially in the biosensors field  <cit> . from our experiments, covalent attachment of nox to an agarose support activated with glyoxyl groups resulted, to the best of our knowledge, in the most thermostable nadh-oxidase preparation reported so far. this gx-nox derivative shows at the same time irreversible binding of the enzyme and a likely homogeneous protein orientation because preferential covalent binding occurs through the lysine richest regions  <cit> . these properties related to the immobilization chemistry are the basis for the successfully application to a large number of enzymes, all of which achieved a high stabilization factors  <cit> .

in addition to the high stability of the insoluble biocatalyst, nox can also be successfully reactivated once it has been fully or partially inactivated. here, we have presented the first report of protein reactivation for immobilized nox on highly stabilized derivatives. moreover, these derivatives can be efficiently reactivated several times by incubation on phosphate buffer after inactivation cycles in  <dig> vol % dioxane. an explanation for this could be based on the fact that organic solvents drive enzyme to local distortion rather than a global unfolding  <cit> . these local distortions may be located on the surface of the enzyme because organic solvents may strip the external water layer essential for enzyme activity  <cit>   or might occur at a higher scale by unfolding internal domains of the proteins because penetration of the solvent to the hydrophobic core . as multipoint covalent immobilization limits severe unfolding  <cit> , the enzyme can be easily reactivated simply by elimination of the organic solvent. the same behavior was found for other enzymes like lipases  <cit>  and even for other thermophilic oxidoreductases such as glutamate dehydrogenase from thermus thermophilus hb <dig>  <cit> . in this last example, recovery of active quaternary structure was achieved, making a breakthrough in solid-phase enzyme reactivation protocols for multimeric enzymes.

finally, this highly stable and heterogeneous biocatalyst was applied as cofactor recycling partner of a main alcohol dehydrogenase from the same thermophilic source, to kinetically resolve pharmaceutically relevant compounds such as 1-phenylethanol. expectedly, the selectivity of the main alcohol dehydrogenase was extremely high  <cit>  and cofactor recycling by nox allowed reaching the maximum yield using only  <dig> % mol of cofactor, which means that one mol of cofactor was recycled up to  <dig> times per reaction cycle under the conditions studied here. moreover, since this heterogeneous biocatalyst is highly stable and can be re-used for many cycles, the total turnover of such catalyst can be increased. in addition, and still to be tested, coupling of a catalase to the system should improve the global stability of the enzymes involved in the process. the catalase would be able to, in-situ, eliminate the hydrogen peroxide formed as byproduct by nox. as a result there would be decreased accumulation of such compound capable of inactivating the protein biocatalysts, which would lead to further optimization of both conversion rate and final yields.

CONCLUSIONS
the high re-usability of immobilized nox encouraged us to develop new bi-enzymatic systems where nad+ recycling is needed. the thermophilic nature of nox and its ability to be reactivated make feasible the use of this catalyst in redox biotransformation coupled to h2o <dig> removal systems, p.e catalase. this catalyst has been successfully applied as re-cycling system to the kinetic resolution of secondary alcohols at high temperatures. further, protein engineering studies need to be done to improve nadh-oxidase performance at lower temperatures, in order to couple it to mesophilic alcohol dehydrogenases.

