BACKGROUND
erv-ls are retroviral elements  lacking the envelope gene  and exhibiting homology to the class of human endogenous retroviruses designated as herv-l by  <cit> . similar retroelements have been identified in several eutherian groups , but their incidence in metatherians and monotremes is not known at present. they presumably arose from successful germ-line infection by foamy-like viruses, but when or how many times this might have occurred during the course of eutherian evolution is unknown. from the perspective of evolutionary biology it is of great interest that some classes of ervs are known to retain original functions, including the capacity to produce infectious viral particles  <cit> . others have gained novel regulatory functions in the mammalian genome  <cit> . formation of the human placenta may depend on expression of a herv-w element env gene  <cit> . human immunodeficiency virus  shares specific functionally homologous sequences with endogenous retroviruses, suggesting the possibility that recombination with ervs could change the properties of exogenous retroviruses  <cit> . thus, ervs may serve as a variable pool from which exogenous viruses may diversify. exogenous retroviruses may have originated from ervs and erv-ls in particular may represent an intermediate between retrotransposons and exogenous viruses  <cit> .

comparison of erv-l polymerase  gene sequences from  <dig> mammalian species revealed erv-ls that have expanded in copy number and remained active over long periods of time  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of these sequences demonstrated that primates and rodent erv-l sequences are both diverse and, with few exceptions, monophyletic, whereas carnivore and ungulate erv-l sequences were polyphyletic. the phylogenetic picture reflects the particularly robust expansion of the primate and rodent erv-l complement. importantly, the primates and rodents were the only groups that included erv-l sequences with protein coding potential and therefore potential transpositional activity. these points suggests that, if the history of active expansion of retroelements within a group can be deciphered, it might be possible to use this information in the same way that parasite data are conventionally used  <cit> , to perform tests of host phylogenetic relationships that are at least logically independent of other data sources. in this connection, the superorder uranotheria is of particular interest.

uranotheria  <cit>  is the most recent nomen for a constellation of relationships that has, in fact, been supported by the majority of ungulate specialists throughout the past century. simpson  <cit>  grouped proboscideans, hyraxes, embrithopods and sirenians under the group-name paenungulata, but was not certain of its monophyly. most other authorities have supported this clade, albeit with some variation in content, in the years since simpson's  <cit>  publication . mckenna and bell  <cit>  divided uranotheria into three major groups, hyracoidea, embrithopoda, and tethytheria. the last is further subdivided into sirenia and behemota; behemotans consist of proboscidea and desmostylia. only hyracoidea, sirenia, and proboscidea possess living members.

morphologically, there is considerable evidence that supports the association of proboscidea and sirenia as sister taxa to the exclusion of hyracoidea  <cit> , and little that appears to contradict it. fischer and tassy  <cit>  take the position that alleged hyracoid morphological resemblances to tethytheres are either convergences or misconstrued, on the argument that hyraxes are in fact perissodactyls or closely allied to them. this aspect of the fischer-tassy hypothesis is not supported by molecular data  <cit> . on the other hand, it must also be admitted that sequence data have not provided especially strong support for tethytheria   <cit> . in the most recent exercise in this arena, asher et al  <cit>  were able to recover tethytheria under certain conditions when fossil and morphological data were combined with sequence information, but not when sequence data were used alone.

to investigate whether erv-l and other retroelements may be useful in resolving phylogenetic questions involving uranotheres at multiple taxonomic levels, we utilized an erv-l polymerase gene  fragment using degenerate primers tested in other mammalian orders. extending our previous work  <cit> , we found that erv-l sequence diversity was high in all members of this group and that phylogenetic analysis of our data to a limited extent supported uranotheria as a distinct clade when sequences that lack coding potential are used. by contrast, sequences that are potentially active form separate monophyletic groups, indicating a more recent origin. thus, it appears that ancient ervs reflect the phylogeny of their host like classic genes and more recently active ervs will tend to be more similar to one another as opposed to their host.

RESULTS
among-clone comparisons
a ~ <dig> bp pcr product was amplified for african elephant, asian elephant, manatee, and rock hyrax. the products were cloned and  <dig> clones sequenced for each product. of the  <dig> sequences thus developed, only one asian elephant sequence had no homology to erv-ls and was removed from analysis . no identical sequences were shared among taxonomic groups. all nine asian elephant and all  <dig> manatee clones were unique. however, one asian elephant clone, designated max <dig> , was a recombination product of clone max <dig>  and clone max <dig> . whether this represents a pcr artifact or is a genomic recombination event is not known. however, it is not expected that recombinational pcr would be observed in modern undamaged dna  <cit> .

among the african elephant runs, four clones differed at 0– <dig> positions. as pcr errors probably account for these minor differences we assume only  <dig> unique erv-ls were discovered for this individual. similarly, the hyrax sample yielded  <dig> groups comprised of  <dig> identical sequences, while two other sequences differed at  <dig> positions. thus,  <dig> unique erv-ls were also obtained for procavia.

recovered sequences were compared to a mouse element with full coding potential in the gag and pol genes . twelve clones were in frame with no stop codons. however, only  <dig> of the total  <dig> were unique . this is surprising, as  <dig> sequences from  <dig> mammalian species previously revealed only  <dig> sequences with coding potential  <cit> . among the  <dig> sequences determined here,  <dig> unique sequences had coding potential among only  <dig> species. the observed sequence diversity and frequency of observed coding potential is consistent with active erv-l expansion in these four species and consistent with results with a smaller internal fragment from the same groups   <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis
a heuristic search of the entire uranothere erv-l data set yielded  <dig> equally parsimonious trees, a strict consensus of which  showed poor recovery of accepted clades within uranotheria and low bootstrap support at each node. while neighbor-joining analysis produces a tree with uranothere sequences as a monophyletic group, branch lengths in some cases were very short and bootstrap support under any method used was not statistically significant . on the assumption that sequences with potential rt activity may have been under different evolutionary constraints and may differ in their phylogenetic resolution, the sequences with no stop codons in the retrieved pol gene were analyzed separately from those with stop codons . those with potential rt activity grouped as distinct monophyletic groups, possibly reflecting their more recent activity and thus showing closer affinity to one another as opposed to other related erv-l sequences . those with stop codons showed a different picture with modest support for uranotheria as one might expect for single or low copy sequences that have been transmitted vertically over time . likelihood analysis of the data produced similar groupings, though with weak support, suggesting the associations found are not an artifact of the phylogenetic analysis methodology . however, me analysis did not produce statistically significant resolution for any erv group examined including non-uranothere ervs . poor resolution within uranotheria with all analyses could be due to several factors, although the likeliest is different ages of individual element copies. this is not unlike the situation with various sequences recovered from primates and rodents: some sequences reconstruct accepted ordinal groupings, while others do not. for example, in the study by bénit et al.  <cit> , one new world monkey sequence  grouped with two dog sequences and not with other primates. in other mammals, sequences  were dispersed in no evident pattern.

discussion
the most important finding resulting from this study is that elements that have undergone expansion–i.e. have remained transpositionally active–are the ones that are most likely to group monophyletically and those that have not tend to be consistent in their higher-level taxonomic distribution . thus, there are different elements within the same family demonstrating different evolutionary trajectories. it is reasonable to suppose that for some groups, such as rodents, primates, and uranotheres, continued expansion of active erv-l elements was tolerated by the host. by contrast, in other ungulate and carnivore lineages active elements were not inherited or were silenced early during their evolution and erv-l expansion did not occur. older elements tend to evolve as typical orthologous sequences. an advantage of the great diversity of elements is that with a single pcr, cloning, and determination of multiple clone sequences one retrieves multiple independent sequences with which to do phylogenetic analysis. in these regards, the uranothere evidence is consistent with results previously reported for primates and rodents in which older elements and elements that have undergone bursts of transposition were found coexisting. in each of these groups there is now good sequence evidence for retroelements that have retained coding capacity, which is of some interest since herv-l pol  is known to be expressed in specific tissue types  <cit> . this indicates that, in addition to potential transpositional activity, retroelements other than syncytin may have acquired biological functions important for their hosts.

CONCLUSIONS
in terms of our general results, elephants and the manatee were found to contain the most diverse sequences, while hyrax showed comparatively less diversity. this finding is consistent with results from our previous study involving extinct elephantids  <cit> . elements that have been investigated in other ungulates  do not yield monophyletic groupings and are represented by low copy numbers  <cit> , suggesting that expansion did not occur  in these taxa. although critical studies would have to be undertaken to demonstrate the matter conclusively, it appears that amplification and diversification of erv-l elements were independent events in primates, rodents and uranotheres.

although this study shows that the value of erv-ls for the narrow purpose of phylogenetic reconstruction is limited at higher taxonomic levels, erv-l is only one class among many different groups of ervs in mammalian genomes. some regions of ervs have been used successfully to reconstruct phylogenies at lower taxonomic levels  <cit> . additional transposable elements could serve as phylogenetic markers in a manner similar to erv-l in the present study, while providing multiple independent sequences to test ordinal level phylogenies.

