BACKGROUND
large-scale gene expression measurements by microarray technology are used to compare mrna levels in different experimental or biological conditions  <cit> . however, in an increasing number of cases, it seems far more relevant to compare differences in expression responses, rather than static expression levels. perhaps the most common situation involves the comparison between a wild type and a mutant organism. here, the mrna profile in any condition will differ between the two genetic backgrounds, but these differences will be a complex combination of the primary effect of the mutation and secondary effects of various kinds. e.g., the mutant may show growth defects, disease reactions, or compensating adjustments in its physiology. all of these make a direct comparison between the expression profiles problematic. in contrast, comparing how organisms of each genetic background respond to a common relevant stimulus can reveal regulatory mechanisms that are lost or gained by the mutation as well as shared or 'disregulated' responses. of course, the same approach is useful for other studies comparing gene expression in distinct types of background, e.g. between cell lines, tissues, or even organisms. in each case, comparing dynamic responses can provide more biological insight than a static direct comparison of expression profiles.

despite the importance of comparing expression responses in diverse backgrounds, accessible statistical techniques for this common analytical task are sorely lacking. usually, genes that are differentially expressed in either background are first identified independently and then compared in the form of venn diagrams that depict the overlap between the two sets of genes . this approach is very attractive because of its simplicity and immediate visualization. it is implemented in many commercial microarray analysis packages  and has also been used as an alternative to clustering techniques to identify similarities between experimental results  and to visualize general relationships among the functional annotations associated with lists of differentially expressed genes  <cit> . venn diagrams, however, have a number of limitations, most importantly the arbitrariness of the initial definition of changed genes. in particular, the content of the intersection of the two gene sets  depends critically on the selection threshold used in the initial definition of differentially expressed genes. another disadvantage is that differential responses in the two backgrounds are not further characterized, e.g. it is not obvious whether the difference of a gene's response between the two backgrounds is due to the "regulated/non-regulated" or "up-regulated/down-regulated" effect. more sophisticated statistical techniques have been used to approach this issue . each of these successfully addresses certain aspects of the problem, by reducing the dimensionality of the data or identifying consistent patterns of behavior across conditions. however, they all lack the intuitive appeal and simplicity of venn diagram visualization. here we present a simple alternative to venn diagrams that is based on similar concepts but provides more flexibility and an added degree of objectivity of the results.

RESULTS
the main underlying principle of our method  is the idea that expression changes in two backgrounds can be represented by a vector in a cartesian plane . various sectors of the plane will correspond to various prototypical behaviors of genes: genes that respond the same in both backgrounds, genes that react in opposite directions, or genes that are changed only in one of the backgrounds . like venn diagrams, va is not a method to detect differentially expressed genes, but rather a technique that arranges response patterns in an informative way for further study.

if there are replicate experiments, as is generally the case in microarray studies, we calculate the representative "average" vector vrep by  determining the individual vectors v, where the vector v represents the comparison of the i-th pair of experiments ;  calculating the average length of these vectors, , where |v| denotes the length of the vector v;  calculating the sum of the unit vectors pointing in the same direction as the individual pairwise vectors, ; and finally  determining the representative vector by combining the length  and direction information , .

the length of the vector  indicates the average strength of the response and can be used to filter out genes that show little response in either background. the direction of the vector describes which prototypical behavior comes closest to the behavior of this particular gene. to decide on the assignment of a particular gene to a response prototype, one can calculate the angle between the representative vector and the various possible prototype vectors  as cosα = vrep·vprototype/,  <dig> ≤ α < 180°, where vrep·vprototype is the scalar product of the two vectors and |vrep| ≠  <dig>  the gene is then assigned to the prototype closest to it .

the length of the sum vector  indicates the level of consistency with which the gene shows the assigned behavior type . if in the individual pairwise comparisons the vectors point in widely varying directions, they will cancel out and the sum vector will be relatively short . if, however, the behavior is fully consistent, the length of the vector will be maximal.

it is clear that the vector approach generalizes to multi-dimensional cases, i.e. to comparisons between more than two backgrounds. however, the number of possible prototype behaviors increases rapidly, as n = 3k -  <dig>  where k is the number of dimensions.

by randomly sampling from the measured expression values and calculating the sum vector lengths for these random data  one can estimate the null distribution of the sum vector length. this is done by randomly assigning the original expression values within each replicate to other genes. all consistency between replicates and, thus, between experimental backgrounds should then be lost and the resulting |vsum| values will be those that are expected if no consistency is present. this can be used to assign a p-value to the assignment of genes to behavior prototypes . this value, calculated by the procedure described above, will be a non-parametric estimate of the real p-value, and the exact value will vary slightly in each run of the method, unless the same random sampling is used each time.

additional file  <dig> shows the results of vector analysis applied to a simulated dataset, where the response type of each gene is known . three replicates for each experimental background were created by drawing random expression values from normal distributions with variance  <dig> and a mean of  <dig>  - <dig>  and  <dig> for unchanged, down-regulated and up-regulated genes, respectively. in this small illustrative example,  <dig> % of regulated genes are assigned the correct response type. the remaining genes are assigned one of the neighboring types. genes that are unchanged in both conditions are also assigned to the closest response prototype, but none of these achieves a significant consistency p-value. of course, in a real-world application unchanged genes would usually be filtered before applying vector analysis, because otherwise they will be assigned arbitrary angular and location values that add noise to the results. if va is applied to genes that are not changed at all, it will always assign these genes to "incorrect" response classes, and even when the consistency p-value of va is used, some of these genes will reach significance simply due to multiple testing. therefore, va is usually applied only to genes that are significantly changed in at least one experimental background, based on any of the standard methods for the detection of differentially expressed genes. however, the filtering does not have to be very strict and the results of va may still yield interesting trends for borderline cases, as shown in the example below.

one of the properties of this dataset is that very few genes show a strong expression response in any background. only one out of  <dig> genes has an l-value larger than  <dig> , and only  <dig> genes have l-values larger than  <dig> . thus, a venn analysis based on significantly changed genes would be all but impossible. the vector analysis, in contrast, identifies  <dig> genes with consistency p-values smaller than  <dig>   and  <dig> genes with p-values smaller than  <dig>  . it thus reveals the presence of consistent response patterns even among genes with very slight absolute expression changes.

among the  <dig> most significant genes, with p-values <  <dig>  and vector lengths >  <dig> , more than half  are up-regulated in both mutant and wild-type . the remaining  <dig> genes show various background-specific responses. none of them shows an "opposite" response pattern, an observation that is highly significant . this is in agreement with the known biology of the coi <dig> mutant, which will lose certain regulatory mechanisms that are important in nutrient starvation, but will not to reverse existing pathways. it is also in agreement with the overall correlation between the average expression pattern in the two backgrounds . importantly, the same pattern is already evident in the complete dataset , where genes assigned the "opposite" prototypes are clearly depleted. the presence of a detectable signal is also confirmed by the distribution of sum vector lengths in the real data compared to randomly sampled data . this indicates that even for very noisy data vector analysis is able to make meaningful assignments to response patterns.

using the two parameters of the method  allows the flexible dissection of the observed expression in the two experimental backgrounds. at the same time it is possible to assign the most likely response pattern even to genes that show little absolute expression change.

in contrast to venn diagrams, which can only be used to compare genes that are reliably identified as responsive, vector analysis assigns all genes to behavioral categories. also note that these categories are not fixed, but can be adjusted as appropriate for any experiment, by simply changing the boundaries of the sectors. also, genes can be sorted by their angular distance from any reference gene , to generate lists that are sorted by closeness of genes to a particular response pattern.

CONCLUSIONS
vector analysis provides a flexible, easy-to-use, and intuitive approach to the comparison of gene expression patterns in different experimental backgrounds. while it does not supply the detailed statistical insights available by alternative classical statistics approaches such as anova, it excels in terms of simplicity and straight-forward interpretation. in this respect vector analysis compares favorably with the venn diagram technique which is currently in wide-spread use for this common and ubiquitous task, but lacks the flexibility of vector analysis, in particular for noisy data.

