BACKGROUND
locusts are an excellent model organism for analyses of phenotypic plasticity in behaviour and other traits  <cit> . plastic phenotypic responses to crowding are expressed to varying degrees among insects in the orders coleoptera, lepidoptera, hemiptera, and orthoptera  <cit> . the expression of phase polyphenism, in which individuals can undergo extreme density-dependent changes in behaviour, physiology, colour and morphology, is a defining feature of locusts   <cit> . among this complex suite of traits, behaviour is the first to respond to changes in local population density and lies at the heart of swarm formation and migration  <cit> . locusts reared under low population density conditions develop into the shy and cryptic solitarious phase, whereas rearing at high population density results in the highly active and aggregating gregarious phase. as local population size increases, patchy resource distributions in a habitat tend to concentrate solitarious phase locusts. cues associated with contact among individuals on these resources mediate the process of phase change, referred to as gregarization, and cause initially solitarious phase locusts to become attracted rather than repelled by others  <cit> . a positive feedback loop is then established that can drive an initially solitarious population into the swarming gregarious phase  <cit> .

along with major advances in our understanding of locust behaviour and ecology, substantial progress has been made toward understanding the neurophysiological mechanisms underlying the process of behavioural phase change  <cit> . however, unravelling the molecular genetic basis of the shift from solitarious to gregarious behaviours remains the "final frontier" in locust research  <cit> . in recent years, insight into the putative functions of specific candidate genes involved in phase polyphenism has been obtained through gene expression profiling analyses under different density conditions  <cit> . moreover, rahman et al.  <cit>  applied the differential display pcr method  <cit>  for locust brain tissue, the findings of which were confirmed by semi-quantitative reverse transcription pcr. the differential display pcr method systematically detects changes in mrna profiles without the need for any prior knowledge of genomic information of the study organism. functional genomics resources have also been developed for key locust species that will further foster the exploration of non-hypothesis driven high-throughput gene expression data resulting from microarrays  <cit> . therefore, it is reasonable to expect gene expression studies to become increasingly prominent in analyses of locust phase polyphenism. these techniques will likely be extended to other non-model taxa provided they bear sufficient genetic similarity.

although at least  <dig> grasshopper species show elements of density-dependent phase polyphenism, our understanding of locust behaviour is primarily based on studies of the desert locust, schistocerca gregaria, and to a lesser extent, the migratory locust, locusta migratoria  <cit> . the australian plague locust, chortoicetes terminifera, is one of australia's most significant agricultural pests and has recently emerged as a new model of considerable interest for studying the transition between the two behavioural phases. despite the lack of striking changes in colour and morphology, which are seen so prominently in l. migratoria and s. gregaria, c. terminifera was recently shown to exhibit full density-dependent behavioural gregarization within days of crowding  <cit> . therefore, the quantification of density-dependent transcriptional responses in c. terminifera might be particularly suited to identify the suite of genes underlying locust behaviour plasticity, as it may avoid confounding transcriptional changes associated with the expression of additional density-dependent traits seen notably in other locust species  <cit> . furthermore, because the ability to change phase from solitarious to gregarious in response to increased population density has evolved multiple times within the grasshopper family acrididae and resulted in a phylogenetically heterogeneous group of 'locusts'  <cit> , comparison of differential gene transcription across c. terminifera, l. migratoria and s. gregaria may provide insights into the evolution of gregarious behaviour and mass migration  <cit> .

reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction  is the most reproducible and sensitive method available to measure mrna transcription levels for individual genes, and is often used to confirm results from high-throughput systems like microarrays. however, the quality of results is directly related to data normalization that eliminates template heterogeneity due to variations in initial sample amount, mrna recovery and integrity, and reverse transcription efficiency  <cit> . the most common normalization technique uses internal standards, mainly housekeeping genes, so called because their transcription occurs in all nucleated cell types since they are necessary for cell survival  <cit> . the expression of housekeeping genes is often presumed to be stable across experimental procedures and cell types. despite this assumption, numerous studies have shown that such housekeeping genes can be differentially expressed, thereby compromising their use as stable internal standards .

to avoid bias from normalization, the stable expression of candidate reference genes should be validated under specific experimental conditions. the use of a suite of multiple stably-expressed reference genes is currently the gold standard  <cit> . to this aim, statistical approaches have been developed to determine the best-suited genes for normalization from a panel of candidate genes in a given set of biological samples . accordingly, studies of the transcriptional stability of reference genes are becoming more common. yet, to our knowledge, the only insects for which suites of reference genes have been validated and published are those of a few model organisms, namely apis mellifera  <cit> , tribolium castaneaum  <cit>  and bombyx mori  <cit> , as well as those of bombus terrestris and lucorum  <cit> , liposcelis bostrychophila  <cit> , and s. gregaria  <cit> .

the study of van hiel et al.  <cit>  in the desert locust, s. gregaria, provides an initial set of reference genes to be evaluated for rearing density-controlled experiments in locusts. the authors validated seven reference genes for their stability during development in brains, which are of critical importance to the neuronal and neuro-endocrine processes involved in behaviour. however, the stable expression of these genes across the different rearing density treatments that must be imposed for analyses of density-dependent phase polyphenism in locusts has not yet been examined. in the present study, we used the s. gregaria mrna sequences from van hiel et al.  <cit> , supplemented with data on l. migratoria  <cit> , which is a member of the same subfamily as c. terminifera , to identify partial sequences for  <dig> orthologs of putative housekeeping genes in c. terminifera. we evaluated the stability of these genes in neural tissue as candidates for normalization in rt-qpcr assays to study transcriptional-changes involved in the initiation and maintenance of density-dependent behavioural phase change in the australian plague locust. we then applied our rt-qpcr normalization in studying the variation in expression across treatment groups of the gregarious phase-specific gene identified by rahman et al.  <cit>  in brains of s. gregaria. this gene which was found to be dominantly expressed in crowded gregarious phase locusts  <cit> , shares high homology with the gene that encodes the ca2+ binding glycoprotein sparc . it modulates cell adhesion, is essential to mesoderm development and affects mobility  <cit> . the final overall goal in this study was to develop an accurate and comprehensive method of rt-qpcr for use in studies of locust phase polyphenism that complies with miqe recommendations for essential quality information  <cit> .

RESULTS
sample purity and concentration
rna integrity was confirmed using denaturing gel electrophoresis and visualisation of intact rrna subunits of 28s and 18s. the rrna bands from c. terminifera samples were ~ <dig>  and  <dig>  kb, the former showing greater intensity. the 28s rrna  of most invertebrates dissociates into two subunits under denaturing conditions due to the breaking of a phosphodiester bond in the primary structure, referred to as the 'hidden break' by ishikawa  <cit> . it is likely that the site of the hidden break in the 28s molecule is determined by the size of the 18s rrna   <cit> . at least one of the 28s fragments resulting from the hidden break is expected to have the same or similar electrophoretic mobility to 18s rrna. our gel banding pattern suggests that the intense  <dig>  kb band contains the 18s rrna and a smaller fragment of the 28s rrna while the larger fragment of the 28s molecule is  <dig>  kb. formaldehyde  agarose gels of the  <dig> c. terminifera total rna samples can be seen in additional file  <dig> 

rna quantities were assessed with a nanodrop nd- <dig> spectrophotometer  and ranged between  <dig> and  <dig> ng μl- <dig> of total rna. interestingly, pooled brains and thoracic ganglia from long-term crowded samples yielded 40% more total rna than those from either the isolated or  <dig> h-crowded groups . this could possibly result from larger brain sizes of 5th instar nymphs reared under long-term crowded condition as recently shown by ott and rogers  <cit>  in the desert locust. all samples were assumed adequately free from protein contamination and  salts since they showed 260/ <dig> and 260/ <dig> nm ratios higher than  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. additional file  <dig> provides further details about total rna sample purity and concentration.

expression level and pcr efficiency
six out of the  <dig> pcr reactions led to unexpected melt temperatures and were discarded. figure  <dig> shows that all candidate reference genes except 18srrna were moderately abundant, with cq values averaging from  <dig> for ef1a to  <dig> for rpl <dig>  expression of 18srrna was high in the tested samples, with cq values averaging  <dig> . the maximal standard deviation of cq values for the three replicates was  <dig>  over all biological samples and primer pairs . table  <dig> shows the efficiency of rt-qpcr amplification for each primer pair. all but one slope of standard curves were - <dig>  to - <dig> , which translates in pcr efficiencies to  <dig> -  <dig> fold increases per cycle. the exception was actin with a slope of - <dig> , i.e. pcr efficiency of  <dig>  fold increase per cycle. the mean square errors of regression were between  <dig>  and  <dig> , below the recommended threshold of  <dig> . the standard deviations of the estimated pcr efficiencies are reported in table  <dig> from duplicated standard curves. all but one standard deviations were below  <dig>  . standard deviation reached  <dig>  for sdha .

size: size of the cdna amplicon; tm: melt temperature of the pcr amplicon averaged over the  <dig> biological samples and  <dig> technical replicates; primer: primer concentration in μm; e: in-run pcr reaction efficiency  computed from the standard curve of a serial dilution included in the same plate as for samples s <dig> to s <dig> and using the formulae 10-; error: the mean square error of the standard curve; sd: standard deviation of the pcr efficiencies estimated from duplicated standard curves .

potential for gdna amplification
genomic dna amplicons were sized on an agarose gel following  <dig> cycles of pcr amplification using a taq polymerase from qiagen, a melting temperature of 58°c, and  <dig> ng of template. the melting temperatures  and cq values were determined by quantitative pcr on a lightcycler  <dig> instrument  as detailed in the main text and on  <dig> ng of genomic dna. # means that primers span an exon-exon boundary. alignments of complementary and genomic dna sequences can be found for actin, gapdh, and ef1a in additional file  <dig> 

any potential genomic dna amplification of ef1a and gapdh genes can be detected through the melt temperatures, which markedly differed from that of cdna amplicons. in addition, gdna cq values for both genes were ≥  <dig> cycles larger than the highest observed cq value from our diluted cdna samples . the pcr inefficiency and different amplicon identity may result from partial and non-specific annealing although one primer spans exon-exon boundaries for both genes . in contrast, 18srrna and rpl <dig> primers amplified gdna and cdna fragments of similar size and melt temperature. gdna cq values were similar to those from our diluted cdna samples, which makes these two genes susceptible to potential gdna contamination in rt-qpcr. nevertheless, none of the nort samples were found to amplify these two genes in the present study. this is perhaps because the gdna concentration was too low to result in a detectable product and thus all the samples were considered as non-contaminated.

expression stability
rankings are based on individual values and average values by stepwise exclusion for normfinder and genorm, respectively. a the best combination of two reference genes in terms of a paired stability value. in normfinder, the best paired stability value is determined from the gene with the best individual stability value in combination with another gene. in genorm, the best paired stability value is reached after stepwise exclusion of the least stable genes. increasing values indicate decreasing stability.

gene expression of a target gene
in order to apply the selected set of reliable reference genes, we analyzed the relative expression of a target gene in the nymphal brains of c. terminifera under different crowding conditions. we designed forward and reverse primers  for rt-qpcr using primer sequences conserved within the sparc orthologs for l. migratoria  and s. gregaria . size  and singularity of pcr product was confirmed with gel electrophoresis and sequencing. pcr reaction efficiency with sparc rt-qpcr primers at  <dig>  μm was  <dig>  . no change in sparc gene expression could be detected when comparing long-term or  <dig> hour crowded insects to solitary insects . these results were obtained by using ef1a and arm as reference genes and in-run pcr efficiency estimates. using actin and ef1a for normalization gave similar p-values and expression ratios.

discussion
knowledge of mrna transcription levels in response to crowding is central to understanding the molecular mechanisms and evolution of density-dependent phase polyphenism in locusts. now that high-throughput systems are becoming more widely available, gene expression studies and in particular the use of rt-qpcr will become even more important for molecular genetics and evolutionary research in locusts. however, successful rt-qpcr experiments require multiple, carefully validated, reference genes to allow for reliable data normalization and determination of differentially expressed genes.

in this study, we identified eight appropriate reference genes that show invariant expression in neural tissue of the australian plague locust, whether reared in a solitary state or exposed to different durations of crowding. all of the genes we evaluated were classified as stably expressed as each presented with genorm stability indexes well below the cut-off of  <dig>   <cit> . in this study, we provide a comprehensive assessment of these reference genes for use in subsequent rt-qpcr assays.

amongst the eight candidate housekeeping genes evaluated, actin and ef1a were selected as the most stable pair by both genorm and normfinder. although vandesompele et al.  <cit>  recommend the use of at least three reference genes for reliable normalization, the pairwise variation analysis in genorm indicated that there is no need to include more than two genes. if we assume that stability is likely to be consistent across locust species, our results may serve as a posteriori validation of the use of actin as a reference gene in previous studies of rearing density effect on locust gene expression patterns  <cit> . when comparing our results to the study of reference genes in brains of the desert locust, s. gregaria  <cit> , we see that ef1a was also validated as stable with age in brains of fifth- instar nymphs and adults of the desert locust, s. gregaria. in contrast, actin was excluded for normalization of transcriptional studies in brains of ageing adults. interestingly, despite being amongst the most abundant proteins in all eukaryotic cells, with key roles in cell motility and cytoskeleton maintenance, actins have been shown to vary in transcript levels with growth and ageing, at least in mammals  <cit> . the different ranking of the actin gene across studies underlines the necessity for validation of the candidate reference genes prior to an experiment utilizing different treatments.

the 18s ribosomal subunit was classified as the third most stable gene in our study . however, caution should be exercised when using 18srrna as a reference control. first, as ribosomal subunits are not polyadenylated they cannot be exploited in purified mrna samples, i.e. in reverse-transcriptase reactions primed with oligo-dt. this was addressed in this experiment by using random hexamer primers only. second, the high abundance of rrna molecules compared with target mrna transcripts, as revealed here by relatively low cq values for 18srrna, makes it difficult to subtract the baseline value in fluorescence data analysis  <cit> . in the present study, accurate fluorescence treatment was only possible by a large dilution of the rt-qpcr template . furthermore, because 18srrna is so abundant, representing up to 80% of cellular rna, it is expected that variations from sample-to-sample in initial sample amount, mrna recovery and integrity, and reverse transcription efficiency, will be more difficult to detect. furthermore, 18srrna is likely to experience rt-qpcr kinetics that are different to those of less abundantly expressed genes  <cit> . as a consequence of these factors, 18s rrna can reduce the sensitivity to detect variation in relative levels of expression  <cit> . because it is more likely to be expressed at a comparable order of magnitude as the investigated targets, we suggest that arm will be a best suitable third normalizer in gene expression studies of locust neural tissues that address either the initiation or the maintenance of phase differences.

in our study, the two least stable genes were gapdh and sdha that code for the metabolic pathways enzymes, glycolysis and citrate cycle, respectively. kristensen et al.  <cit>  showed in drosophila melanogaster that genes involved in metabolic processes are differentially expressed in response to heat stress. in particular, both glyceraldehyde  <dig> phosphate and succinate dehydrogenases were down-regulated at 36°c versus 25°c. this indicates that housekeeping metabolism is a dynamic process that can be regulated under different physiological states, thus challenging the usefulness of genes involved in metabolic processes in normalization. crowded conditions themselves might be predicted to impose physiological stresses that can affect gene transcription. accordingly, heat shock proteins, which are synthesized in response to stress in insects and act as molecular chaperones to mediate numerous cellular functions, have been shown to be up-regulated in heads of crowded gregarious phase migratory locusts  <cit> .

rt-qpcr reactions showed a linear concentration-dilution relationship and were highly efficient, as every cycle of reaction amplification increased the amount of dna template by  <dig> - <dig> fold. the two exceptions were armadillo and actin primer pairs which respectively showed a moderate and low  <dig>  and  <dig>  fold increase per cycle. an exponential amplification of  <dig> , as retrieved for most of primer pairs, is needed when using the delta-delta-cq quantification model as originally described by livak and schmittgen  <cit> . however, the most common efficiency-corrected methods currently in use for relative quantification  <cit>  do not assume that all targets amplify with the same optimal pcr efficiency. instead, efficiencies must be calculated prior to quantification, be reproducible and preferably be validated in each target gene rt-qpcr run. our reaction efficiencies were shown to be reproducible, and therefore should be the same between standards and all of the samples in each of the future qpcr assays. however, we suggest to adopt the more conservative approach of avoiding low efficiency primer pairs , which would suggest ef1a and arm as the best combination of two reference genes. these reference genes do not present any risk of misleading gdna amplification.

we applied the use of ef1a and arm for accurate normalization in gene expression studies of locust neural tissue by studying the target gene sparc shown to be up-regulated in gregarious brains of desert locusts. we showed that  <dig> hours of crowding did not change the expression of sparc in brains and thoracic ganglia of the australian plague locust. similarly, no expression change was detected with longer crowding. similar results were found when using actin as sole normalizer following rahman et al.  <cit> . the discrepancy in sparc expression between this and earlier studies may have arisen from other differences in experimental procedures; in particular, neural tissues were dissected from 4- <dig> day old adults in rahman et al.  <cit> , as opposed to 2-day old 5th-instar nymphs in our study, and sparc expression is known to be developmentally regulated . we might also expect s. gregaria and c. terminifera to differ in the density-dependence regulation of the glycoprotein, as their high density gregarious phase express different suites of behavioural  <cit>  and morphological traits  <cit> . however, since the role of the sparc protein with respect to density-dependent changes in behaviour or any other trait remain unknown, this alternative cannot be examined further as part of this study.

the reference genes we selected for gene expression normalization will provide a promising starting point for further studies of density-dependent transcriptional changes in the australian plague locust. now that appropriate primers had been identified for a range of potential reference genes, validation tests for other gene expression studies involving experimental treatments other than rearing density can also be performed in a relatively straightforward manner. our findings should also facilitate the selection and use of suitable reference genes in the related migratory locust, l. migratoria, as the primers we used target the cdna sequences of this species too. the possibility also remains that the primer sequences presented in this study are conserved across other members of the oedipodinae which includes at least seven other species that show elements of density-dependent phase polyphenism  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we propose that ef1a and arm primer pairs evaluated here be used for accurate and reliable normalization of rt-qpcr results in gene expression studies in neural tissues of the australian plague locust under different rearing density conditions.

