BACKGROUND
the relative role of geology and ecology in driving lineage differentiation, and ultimately speciation, has been an important topic in evolutionary biology since the 19th century. at present, it is a thriving field of research aiming to disentangle the relative importance of glacial refugia, extrinsic environmental factors and species interactions, aided to the ability of locating species boundaries, phylogeographical breaks and hybrid zones  <cit> .

montane ecosystems are areas of high endemism, and the mechanisms driving this endemicity have been receiving increasing attention. for instance, endemism in tectonically active regions should reflect cladogenesis within the montane region, rather than the contraction of geographic range from a much larger region . additionally, climatic factors have been rejected as the only explanation for the species richness of taxa within small to medium-sized geographic ranges; thus, both geological and evolutionary processes must be considered  <cit> . molecular studies of montane mexican taxa often revealed complex phylogeographical patterns, and those high levels of genetic divergence suggest an underestimation of the level of endemism in the mexican highlands, implying that more surveys in other co-distributed taxa are needed to achieve a better understanding of the evolutionary drivers of diversification in these regions  <cit> .

what is clear at the present time is that the evolutionary history of many meso- and north american taxa is linked to the severe geological  and environmental changes that occurred during the neogene and quaternary periods  <cit> . the challenge now is to distinguish the relative contribution of each factor to the observed phylogeographic pattern. the number of studies that have been conducted in the mexican endemic-rich area of the northern sierras is lower than the number of studies of the trans-mexican volcanic belt  . therefore, one of the main contributions of the present work is to investigate the biogeographic role of the sierra madre occidental  using an endemic freshwater species. the smoc may have acted as either a barrier where current admixture of lineages can occur, as a corridor for range expansion or as a centre of diversification, promoting allopatric differentiation.

biogeographic role of the sierra madre occidental
the smoc is a large volcanic plateau in western mexico that extends parallel to the pacific coastline for more that  <dig> km from the us-mexico border  to the tmvb . the topography of the northern sierra madre is characterised by a high average elevation . in contrast to other north american mountain systems, the topographic relief of the smoc is not the product of elevated mountain ranges, but rather of incised canyons. the western edge is quite steep, while the eastern topographic gradients from the sierra madre into the central mexican plateau are relatively smooth  <cit> .

the smoc is thought to form an important corridor of dispersal for tropical flora and fauna moving in response to climatic change  <cit> . this mountain system is one of the  <dig> biogeographic provinces of mexico and one of the five biogeographic provinces of the so-called mexican transition zone, mainly defined by the plant and animal taxa that are found above  <dig> m. this province has the highest nearctic influence  <cit> .

the smoc is the result of cretaceous-cenozoic magmatic and tectonic episodes related to the subduction of the farallon plate beneath north america and to the opening of the gulf of california. during the oligocene, extensional tectonics  began in the entire eastern half of the smoc, migrating towards the west during the miocene  <cit> . the resulting post-oligocene river capture has been inferred from geological data from the southern flank of the tepic-zacoalco rift , although more recent piracy phenomena have been reported in other areas  or suggested by phylogeographic studies .

to the best of our knowledge, the phylogeography of ichthyofauna endemic to the smoc has not been thoroughly investigated, although population genetics surveys have been conducted for oncorhynchus chrysogaster  and poeciliopsis sonorensis  <cit> . as pointed out by recent literature  <cit> , there are only a limited number of surveys on the genetic structure of endemic species from the north and mesoamerican mountains .

we consider two alternative biogeographic scenarios. given the fact that the smoc acts as a biogeographic barrier for many taxa, a plausible first hypothesis would be that the phylogeographic pattern of campostoma ornatum would result from the current admixture of formerly west and east lowland lineages isolated during the pleistocene interglacial stages  <cit> . if so, we would expect to find major lineages located on the northwestern and southeastern slopes and an altitudinal gradient of haplotype diversity. a second putative role for the smoc would be as a centre of diversification, related to a working hypothesis of a highland distribution of c. ornatum predating the quaternary ice ages. under such a scenario, deep genetic and morphological divergences between the study species would have been shaped by geological processes rather than by climatic oscillations. additionally, extensional tectonics causing river piracy  would cause a mismatch between the actual conformation of river drainages and genetic patterns.

study species
to study the biogeographic role of the smoc on its ichthyofauna, we selected the mexican stoneroller, campostoma ornatum, as our model organism. the mexican stoneroller is endemic to the central and northern sectors of the smoc and its northern fringes . it is found on both slopes of the smoc: in the bravo and conchos rivers, as well as in the casas grandes and santa clara  interior drainages and the upper parts of the yaqui, mayo and fuerte north-western pacific river basins. the southernmost basins where c. ornatum is present are the interior nazas and aguanaval rivers and the pacific piaxtla river basin  <cit>  .

the widespread distribution of c. ornatum is thought have been shaped by tectonics  and climatic changes   <cit> . its distribution area  coincides with a biodiversity hotspot, the the madrean pine-oak woodlands  <cit> .

several cyprinid species for which deep intraspecific genetic divergence has been previously reported exist in large areas severely influenced by both tecto-volcanic activity and climatic changes  <cit> . in fact, some of those widespread species have been split into more than one taxon, in light of their genetic divergence and morphological differentiation  <cit> . this was the case for campostoma anomalum, which was previously regarded as a complex of three widespread and morphologically divergent subspecies, whose five distinct evolutionary lineages warranted species status  <cit> . the species campostoma ornatum, also with a wide distribution range and morphological variation, is also likely to show deep intraspecific genetic differentiation because populations from southern drainages  show a differentiated morphotype  <cit>  and there is remarkable endemicity in the ichthyofauna of the nazas river  <cit> .

conservation perspective
phylogeography also has an applied perspective from the conservation point of view. the genetic and morphological information obtained in the present work will be examined to define, if appropriate, evolutionarily significant units  within campostoma ornatum. the need to preserve the loss of campostoma lineages restricted to areas where aquatic biodiversity is imperilled was already highlighted  <cit> . in addition, the populations of the mexican stoneroller in the usa declined during the 20th century  <cit>  and there were plans to perform reintroductions from mexico  <cit> .

at the present time, an esu is essentially acknowledged to be a population or a group of populations that merit the separate management or priority of conservation because it is highly distinctive, according to the following criteria:  reproductive isolation and adaptation,  reciprocal monophyly and  "exchangeability" of populations. concordance across multiple data types  is, of course, desirable . defining conservation units in endemic species may be of particular interest in densely populated countries, such as mexico. this is because environmental problems concerning the use of water rapidly arise in semiarid regions, such as northwest mexico  <cit> , where the demand for water resources has dramatically increased in recent decades  <cit> .

in the present study we aim to infer the evolutionary history of c. ornatum throughout its distribution area in order to determine the role of the smoc on the evolutionary history of c. ornatum and to disentangle the action of tecto-volcanic processes vs. climatic change. to do this, we applied phylogenetic and population genetic methods to sequence data obtained for a mitochondrial gene  and two nuclear fragments  from  <dig> to  <dig> locations within the distribution area of c. ornatum. in addition, we included several meristic characters to first corroborate the morphological variation pattern previously observed  <cit>  and second to investigate the putative association between genetic and phenotypic data. in line with our main objective, we also addressed the following question from the conservation perspective: do any of the populations/lineages sampled in different drainages deserve to be categorised as an  under the adaptive evolutionary conservation  framework  <cit> ?

RESULTS
genetic diversity
sixty haplotypes were obtained by sequencing the cytb gene in the  <dig> samples collected in the current study . these haplotypes were defined by  <dig> variable sites within a 1110-bp sequence fragment . twenty-three of those sites were singletons, and  <dig> substitutions were parsimony informative. twenty-two changes involved amino acid replacements, and  <dig> were synonymous. overall, haplotype diversity  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , nucleotide diversity  =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the average number of nucleotide differences  =  <dig>  and tajima's d = + <dig>   .

acronyms used for each location as well as number of individuals from the same site sharing haplotype are indicated in parentheses.

standard deviations after symbol : n, number of individuals; nh, number of haplotypes; s, number of segregating sites; h, haplotype diversity; r, allelic richness after rarefaction; π, nucleotide diversity per site; and k, average number of nucleotide differences. the two largest values for each variable are highlighted in bold, whereas the two minimum ones are marked in italics.

a  <dig>  >p >  <dig> 

b minimum number of individuals required to perform the test = 4

n, number of individuals; nh, number of haplotypes; s, number of segregating sites; h, haplotype diversity; r, allelic richness after rarefaction; π, nucleotide diversity per site; and k, average number of nucleotide differences, the two largest values for each variable are highlighted in bold, whereas the two minimum ones are marked in italics.

results for fu's  and ramos-onsins & rozas'  tests for detecting population growth are also shown. values close to significance are displayed underlined.  

we sequenced the s <dig> nuclear gene in  <dig> specimens from  <dig> locations, representing all surveyed river basins. twenty-eight of these individuals had between one and seven heterozygous positions. after haplotype reconstruction,  <dig> variants were defined by  <dig> variable sites  along the  <dig> bp of the final alignment . two of the variable sites were singletons, and  <dig> substitutions were parsimony informative. overall, haplotype diversity  was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , nucleotide diversity  =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the average number of nucleotide differences  =  <dig>  and tajima's d = - <dig>  . fourteen sites showed insertion/deletion variation. indel polymorphism was estimated in four indel events and haplotypes . when heterozygous positions are coded as unknown but gaps are kept as the fifth state, the number of haplotypes decreases to  <dig>  defined by  <dig> variable sites . haplotype diversity  was reduced to  <dig>  ±  <dig> , nucleotide diversity  =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the average number of nucleotide differences  =  <dig>  and tajima's d = - <dig>  . three of the variable sites correspond to singletons, and  <dig> substitutions were parsimony informative.

the populations from santa clara  and el olote  were the most diverse, as measured by the number of haplotypes, gene diversity and allelic richness . seven populations, scattered along the fuerte, mayo, nazas, yaqui and conchos basins, contained only one haplotype . divergent haplotypes were found in cabullona  and agua prieta , both in the yaqui river basin, as shown by the number of segregating sites  and average number of nucleotide differences  . the possibility of admixture of lineages led us to increase the number of sequenced individuals at these two sites to  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively. when genetic diversity parameters were calculated according to the phylogroups indicated by the 95% sp unconnected subnetworks , phylogroups vi  and viii  were the most diverse, whereas phylogroup v  was the least diverse .

twenty-two of the  <dig> individuals for which the rag <dig> nuclear gene was sequenced had between one and three heterozygotic positions. after haplotype reconstruction,  <dig> variants were defined by  <dig> variable sites along the  <dig> bp of the final alignment . no gaps were found. overall, haplotype diversity  was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , nucleotide diversity  =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the average number of nucleotide differences  =  <dig>  and tajima's d = - <dig>  . one variable site was a singleton and  <dig> substitutions were parsimony informative. eight substitutions corresponded to synonymous changes, with the other four implicating amino acid replacements. if heterozygous positions were coded as unknown, six haplotypes were obtained for the  <dig> individuals mentioned above. these haplotypes were defined by six variable sites . two of these sites were singletons, and the remaining four substitutions were parsimony informative. two changes involved amino acid replacement, and four were synonymous. overall, haplotype diversity  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , nucleotide diversity  =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , the average number of nucleotide differences  =  <dig>  and tajima's d = - <dig>  .

phylogenetic reconstruction
phylogenetic hypotheses based on cytb  and s <dig>  recovered two highly supported main clades. the first group included the atlantic drainage of conchos, the interior drainages of santa clara, casas grandes and the western pacific drainages yaqui, fuerte, sonora and mayo. a second clade clustered the southern populations of c. ornatum: the interior drainage of nazas and aguanaval rivers as well as the piaxtla basin . however, the phylogenetic tree based on rag <dig>  did not reveal such a monophyletic group for this "southern" group of populations, even after several other north american cyprinids were used as outgroups.

within the northern lineage, several incongruities were present among the three loci. the nuclear loci showed a large basal polytomy for all groups, as expected for fewer variable markers. the better resolved mitochondrial topology , largely congruent with all of the analyses conducted , showed a large polytomy forming three groups: one included populations within the yaqui and sonora drainages; a second group comprised populations within the conchos, fuerte and santa clara drainages; and a third group was formed by populations within yaqui and casas grandes drainages. this pattern did not recover the geographic pattern of the drainages, as only the santa clara river drainage conformed to a monophyletic group. all of the other drainages showed mixed haplotypes , and the southern population showed mixed haplotypes between drainages.

applying the 95% statistical parsimony  criterion to the mitochondrial dataset results in eight unconnected subnetworks . haplotypes differing by up to  <dig> mutations could be connected, with 95% confidence that multiple substitutions did not occur at any particular nucleotide position. overall, subnetwork viii  was the most differentiated, as revealed by the fact that it remained unconnected from the other seven subnetworks until a step limit of  <dig> was enforced. overall, haplotype cua <dig>  from subnetwork viii, was the most basal, as it has the fewest number of substitutions, when compared to the root .

most of the subnetworks were composed of haplotypes found in more than one drainage; only santa clara   and ojo de agua   contained private haplotypes not shared with any other subnetwork or basin . although subnetworks iii and v were composed of haplotypes found in only one basin , haplotypes from conchos also appeared in subnetwork i, whereas haplotypes from yaqui were also present in subnetworks vi and vii . we found that haplotypes from the tomochic and papigochic sites  grouped in a star-like shape, as did haplotypes from the casas grandes  and ignacio zaragoza  populations .

several divergent lineages were found in two particular locations: some haplotypes from cabullona  and agua prieta   formed subnetwork v, whereas other haplotypes from cab and pri were connected to different river basins . this points to a distinct evolutionary history for each of those mtdna lineages currently sympatric within the yaqui river basin.

as a conservative measure, we calculated the 95% sp network for the s <dig> nuclear gene considering the heterozygous sites as unknown   and with the heterozygotes separated into the different reconstructed haplotypes . differentiation of the nazas-aguanaval-piaxtla river basin  was clearly revealed in both cases , as individuals from these sites formed one of the two unconnected subnetworks . subnetworks  <dig> and 1'  were formed by four major groups of haplotypes: santa clara, sonora, conchos-fuerte and yaqui-casas grandes-mayo. within this subnetwork, santa clara was the most differentiated haplogroup, separated by five mutational steps with respect to the bas haplotype . these results held regardless of whether gaps were considered as a fifth state.

the differentiation of the nazas-aguanaval river basin was also clearly revealed by the 95% sp network calculated for the rag <dig> marker. however, it must be noted that santa clara displayed a similar extent of divergence with one intermediate haplotype . again, sequences of inferred alleles used to calculate figure 5b are available from the authors upon request.

the estimated age of the most recent common ancestor  of the northern and southern lineages was  <dig>  mya . the diversification events within the main northern lineage were dated back to the lower pleistocene .

morphology
morphological character values registered in the present study are consistent with the variation pattern obtained by prior literature  <cit>  throughout the range of c. ornatum, particularly the counts in lateral line , predorsal  and the circumferential scales . the most significant result is the distinction between the southern  and northern  lineages, as revealed by 54- <dig> lls  vs 62- <dig> , 25- <dig> prds  vs 29- <dig>  and 44- <dig> circs  vs 50- <dig>  . despite the high inter-drainage and inter-population variation recorded, this morphological pattern supports the deep genetic divergence between the nazas-aguanaval-piaxtla basins and the northern drainages . in contrast, morphological variation within northern group was not congruent with the genetic phylogenies inferred. for instance, specimens from santa clara basin  are clearly differentiated from the other northern drainages, regardless of the surveyed genetic marker . however, their morphological variation appeared overlapped with regard to other lineages within the northern group, e.g., the three surveyed variables fall within the range found for conchos drainage .

population genetics
most of the total variation can be explained by the divergence between sampling sites  . Φst-values were all significant when pairwise comparisons between each phylogroup and between each river basin were tested . additionally, there was a high degree of distinctiveness between locations across river basins as revealed by significant pairwise Φst -values . congruently, most of the non-significant values corresponded to intra-basin comparisons , but some locations belonging in different drainages also had Φst-values that were not significant . drainage into the atlantic  or to the pacific ocean  explained much of the genetic variance.

   
  
  
*** p <  <dig> . value in italics corresponds to Φst.

samples from the piaxtla, aguanaval and nazas river basins clustered together and were clearly separated from the other localities at the lowest k-value used for samova. the population groupings resulting from this analysis at different k values closely match the genealogical relationships among haplotypes . we selected k =  <dig> and k =  <dig> as the best groupings, as revealed by the patterns obtained. the clearest rise in Φct values was observed for k =  <dig>  which mostly coincided with major lineages obtained in the phylogenetic trees . the Φst-values for the k =  <dig> arrangement were all significant, with the highest value resulting from the comparison of nazas-aguanaval-piaxtla with yaqui2-casas grandes , whereas the largest decrease in Φsc was observed when k =  <dig>  fct values reached the plateau after k =  <dig> . this partition of the data revealed different lineages within the yaqui, conchos and nazas river basins, i.e.,             . the Φst-values for the k =  <dig> arrangement were all significant for the comparisons involving nazas  <dig>  and all other populations, including the piaxtla river samples .

therefore, we analysed the demographic history of mtdna lineages , rather than sampling sites or samova groupings. this way, we could infer which lineages had experienced expansions, instead of trying to infer demographic expansions in the contemporary populations containing haplotypes of mixed ancestry. neutrality tests applied to each phylogroup revealed no deviations from neutrality due to population expansion. the only lineage with fs and r <dig> statistics close to significance was the one composed of subnetwork v  . the mismatch distribution analysis for this phylogroup was consistent with the sudden expansion model  and showed a unimodal distribution that closely fit the expected distribution .

discussion
our genetic and morphological results unambiguously showed two well-differentiated evolutionary groups within c. ornatum, supporting prior preliminary investigations  <cit> . the first lineage is located in the northern river drainages , whereas the other lineage occurs in the southernmost drainages of the species' area of distribution . the large number of mutation steps between the two lineages exceeded the 95% parsimony limits for the cytb and s <dig> genes, a result indicative of a long history of isolation between these clades. such an allopatric fragmentation dated back to the pliocene , as revealed by the bayesian coalescent analyses. the absence of a sharp differentiation between the western  and eastern  lineages, together with the lack of an altitudinal gradient of haplotype diversity  lead us to discard a recent  origin for the observed phylogeographic pattern.

in the light of this, and following the proposal of distinguishing between competing models of diversification for north and mesoamerica  <cit> , we can emphasise tecto-volcanic processes as the crucial factors influencing the evolutionary history of c. ornatum, rather than recent habitat fluctuations caused, for instance, by alternating glacial/interglacial stages. the genetic pattern we observed allowed us to infer common river piracy phenomena.

southern group
the most plausible biogeographic scenario for the separation of northern and southern groups  is an early pliocene vicariant event that split a widespread common ancestor. according to our dating, the allopatric fragmentation between the northern and southern lineages took place around  <dig>  mya . this scenario is also supported by the high genetic diversity found in phylogroup v  , which is congruent with a high number of female founders followed by long term population stability. observations from the southern lineage specimens examined in the present study  are in agreement with prior findings  <cit> , as they showed a differentiated morphotype distinguished by higher counts in the lateral, predorsal and circumferential scales, as well as a deeper body. such a genetic and morphologic differentiation warrants a taxonomic revision likely involving the description of a different taxonomic entity .

the existence of an ancient paleosystem related to the nazas river has been put forward in prior literature in light of the distribution of its ichthyofauna and herpetofauna  <cit> . numerous fish species are endemic to the nazas river  <cit> , which may be indicative of a independent evolutionary history of those species in isolation. recent molecular surveys also support the existence of an ancient isolation of the conchos river system and the nazas, aguanaval, mezquital rivers, a vicariant event that has been dated to ca.  <dig> mya based on the divergence between the two groups of the genus cyprinodon   <cit> . the ancient connection and disruption of the nazas palaeosystem with the conchos river is well supported by the distribution of conspecific species in the gila, cyprinella, ictiobus and cyprinodon genera  <cit> . thus, to the best of our knowledge, the presence of c. ornatum in the aguanaval and piaxtla rivers is caused by a recent dispersal event from nazas river, as revealed by the phylogenetic trees, the cytb network and Φst results. this hypothesis is also in agreement with the biogeographic scenario postulated for semi-aquatic snakes of the genus thamnophis  <cit> .

northern lineage genetic structure and demography
a complex, reticulate biogeographic history in time and space emerged within the northern c. ornatum populations, following a clear pattern of taxon pulse episodes  <cit> . this model assumes that species and their adaptations arise in "centres of diversification" and that distributional ranges of taxa periodically fluctuate around a more stable, continuously occupied centre. this general biotic dispersal may be interrupted by the formation of barriers, producing episodes of vicariant speciation. breakdown of those barriers produces new episodes of biotic expansion, setting the stage for yet more episodes of vicariance  <cit> . at this point, it is worth noting the dispersal ability of our model species. we assumed the mexican stoneroller to be a sedentary species. its limited active dispersal may putatively be enhanced by environmental factors, such as predation or abiotic change, as has been described for other congeneric species  <cit> .

fuerte and conchos
although the fuerte and conchos river populations form a well-differentiated group , pointing to a long evolutionary history in isolation , a recent dispersal event from the fuerte to conchos river systems is evident. we base this argument on four lines of evidence:  the urique population  shares a haplotype with the bocoyna population  ,  both locationns have non-significant Φst values,  the position of the uri population in the phylogenetic tree  and  the concordance of the pattern in mitochondrial subnetwork i with the hypothesis of recent  divergence  <cit> . the close proximity between the headwaters of conchos and fuerte river basins makes highly likely the occurrence of a stream capture event between them, as suggested by  <cit> . other species co-distributed between these basins, such as codoma ornata, gila pulchra and catostomus plebeius  <cit> , may have experienced the same dispersal event.

guzman endorheic basin
all markers revealed that the santa clara population is the most divergent . this result disagrees with the existence of the hypothesised ancient pluvial lake palomas  <cit> , which would have covered much of the guzman basin systems and would have become fragmented into a series of isolated, endorheic rivers, lakes and springs during the upper quaternary . this event would have formed the current guzman basin, which include the mimbres, casas grandes, santa maria and santa clara river endorheic basins  <cit> . our molecular dating showed more ancient episodes of isolation for both the santa clara ) and the casas grandes ) populations . moreover, the latter was more closely related to samples from the bavispe river sub-basin  than to samples from santa clara.

the close relationship between the fish fauna from the yaqui tributaries and the casas grandes system can be attributed to an episode of dispersal from the casas grandes to the yaqui river. this hypothesis is supported by the position of the yaqui river samples  in the phylogenetic tree  and network , as well as by their low genetic diversity. such a connection/dispersal event between yaqui and casas grandes is also supported by  the occurrence of other co-distributed species  and  the finding of very closely related species in each of those river basins .

yaqui basin
thus far, the yaqui river supports the most diverse c. ornatum populations. haplotypes found in this northern basin are found in three different mitochondrial subnetworks   and their supported clades , which was confirmed by the nuclear dataset. subnetworks v and vi are mainly composed by haplotypes occurring at the yaqui tributaries and diverged from the other clades around  <dig> mya  . this indicates an initial and ancient vicariant event between the yaqui river and its contiguous basins , followed by episodes of dispersal and subsequent isolation.

concerning descriptors of genetic diversity, the mitochondrial subnetwork vi had the greatest number of haplotypes, segregating sites, haplotype diversity and average number of differences . in light of this, we suggest a dispersal event from the yaqui to the mayo river, an event supported by the position of the mayo populations  in the phylogenetic tree. moreover, the la tauna population  shares a haplotype with the concheño  and basaseachic  populations, both from the mayo river, and also shows a non-significant pairwise Φst value, which may be indicative of recent gene flow. faunal exchanges between the yaqui river and surrounding areas have been previously reported  <cit> . in fact, it has been argued that dispersal between the yaqui and its contiguous basins was, putatively, a reason for the high fish biodiversity in the yaqui river  <cit> .

the yaqui river system hosts three divergent haplogroups  that occur in sympatry at the cabullona and agua prieta locations . one of those haplogroups clusters with haplotypes found in the casas grandes river forming subnetwork vii. haplotype cab <dig> falls within the second haplogroup , closely related with haplotypes form the tomochic and papigochic sites . the third lineage  is composed by only two haplotypes and shows a mean genetic divergence of p =  <dig> %, also suggesting a relatively long isolation. interestingly, the terapa population , also belonging to the yaqui river basin, shows a high amount of divergence with respect to other yaqui populations . these results are, again, congruent with episodes of isolation in different tributaries of the yaqui river, followed by a secondary dispersal from some isolated demes to other yaqui tributaries. we postulate this hypothesis as the most likely explanation for the presence of those three divergent mitochondrial lineages at cabullona and agua prieta.

sonora basin
haplotypes from the ojo de agua  site, a small spring located at the sonora river basin, belong to a separated subnetwork  and show large genetic distances  with other members of its monophyletic group . this may be indicative of relatively long period of isolation, starting around  <dig>  mya . in addition, the low values of genetic diversity reported for these samples could be caused by a reduction in effective population size, as is expected due to the small size of the sampled area.

implications for conservation and taxonomy
in the light of our genetic and morphologic results, we hereby define three esus  within c. ornatum corresponding to the following groups:  the southern lineage,  the northern lineage and  the yaqui river basin. while acknowledging that the yaqui belongs to the northern lineage, we define this third sub-hierarchical esu due to the existence of three deeply divergent lineages at agua prieta. here, the term sub-hierarchical does not infer subordination but rather a frame of reference on a phylogenetic continuum  <cit> . at present, only two of the sampled localities are currently protected by mexican legislation , although the bas sampling site is close to the basaseachic falls national park. therefore, the definition of these three esus shall promote the conservation of the evolutionary processes shaping the genetic pattern of c. ornatum throughout its range.

CONCLUSIONS
we found populations of c. ornatum with a complex, reticulate biogeographic history with repeated events of isolation and dispersal, which is consistent with the taxon pulse theory. this complex history could be related to the dynamic tecto-volcanic activity that has occurred in the region since the early pliocene. both genetics and morphology revealed a strong differentiation between the southern and northern populations of c. ornatum. in light of this, a taxonomic revision is necessary to clarify the taxonomic status of the two well-differentiated groups within campostoma ornatum. the differentiation between the northern and southern taxa was likely due to the isolation of the paleosystem that connected the nazas with other northern river basins during the pliocene. in addition, we determined the presence of three very divergent mitochondrial lineages occurring concurrently in the northern agua prieta stream . we postulated that episodes of isolation and the subsequent admixture of lineages from different sources could explain the co-occurrence of these lineages at yaqui. in addition, three esus are proposed that cover the full range of the mexican stoneroller. the pattern obtained for campostoma ornatum paves the way for a future comparative phylogeographical study aimed at disentangling the evolutionary factors that shape the genetic structure of this species and its populations in the northwest of mexico.

