BACKGROUND
cancer metastasis is spread of a tumor from its primary organ to other part or non-adjacent organs. during the last several decades, development of cancer treatment and surgical technology has greatly increased survival rate of cancer patients  <cit> , but treatment of metastasis still remains above of medical capability. once cancer cells have been disseminated to distant organs through lymph/blood vessels, they always have a potential for re-colonization to form secondary tumors. furthermore, the newly generated tumors already have genuine ability to form second metastasis  <cit> . from these reasons, metastasis is the cause of about 90% of deaths from solid tumors. the biology of metastasis has been studied for more than  <dig> years since stephen paget first proposed the 'seed and soil' hypothesis  <cit> . during or after the complex genetic changes in normal cells' tumorigenesis, a small portion of tumor cells acquire additional abilities. it is generally accepted that a tumor cell has to go through a lot of obstructions and overcome harsh conditions  <cit> . for example, the new environment hardly supplies the metastasized tumor cells with hormones or ligands which are indispensable for cellular growth and proliferation. it means that metastasize tumor cells need to rearrange their genetic contents to live without those signalling proteins. tumor cells also face with physical barriers including basement membranes , extracellular matrices  and vessel walls. in this case, some cells who secured higher motility, ability for detachment survival and ability to change their physical/biological characteristics through epithelial-mesenchymal transition  get favorable opportunities to win a competition among the other tumor cells and move on to the next metastasis barriers. there are many other chemical/physical barriers in whole metastasis procedures including intravasation , high fluid pressure in vessels, scattered immune cells, and extravasation . micrometastasis is a microscopic secondary tumor resulted from a set of primary tumor cell's success in hurdling all of the barriers above. forming an outgrowing tumor in the secondary site is extremely hard because the entire hurdling events are a series of long odds. even though a micrometastasis settles down in the new site, it usually dies from the inharmonious environment surrounding the cell or lies dormant due to the lack of suitable growth factors. so, the metastasized tumor cells in the secondary site have been chosen by selective pressures to have all the abilities for metastasis  <cit> . sometimes, these winner cells are called 'decathlon champions'.

many researchers have tried to explain metastatic procedures in the genetic level either in small scale experiments or from large scale expression data. wang et al identified  <dig> gene signatures using  <dig> lymph node negative breast cancer expression data  <cit> . they used unsupervised clustering to classify good and bad prognosis. tomlins et al tried to identify gene sets which are related to prostate cancer's progression using the 'molecular concept map'  <cit> . their result showed state related 'molecular concepts' from normal prostate tissues to pin , pca , and metastasis. edelman et al  <cit>  used gsea  <cit>  analysis with  <dig> prostate samples consist of  <dig> benign,  <dig> pca, and  <dig> metastatic tissues. they proposed several gene sets which are significantly changed in the step of n → p , and p → m . in these genetic level studies, researchers succeeded in clearly representing metastasis related gene sets or pathways, and in validating their results with classification tests.

as returning to the nature of metastasis biology, however, two substantial questions are emerging especially on the sample comparison step. first, do the metastasis samples really have metastasis characteristics? in wang's work, the samples in the metastasis class are not actually metastasis samples; they are primary tumor samples which later turn out to show bad prognoses. usually in other work, the samples used for representing metastasis are tumor samples from the very organ where the primary tumor occurred. the only difference is that the patients where the metastasis samples are from had metastatic tumors in their other organs. it is seriously doubtful whether the sample of a part of primary tumor has metastatic abilities; maybe cells with metastatic abilities already moved out to other organs, and only the other cells without the abilities have remained. second, have other metastasis independent features been eliminated in the comparison between two samples from two distinct organs? in the case of comparing a sample from a primary tumor in an organ with another sample from metastasis tumor in another organ, there should be several elements that affect the result of the comparisons, such as tissue specificity, tissues' environmental viability, and a subtype of cancer. it is hardly expected that a result gene set represents metastatic characteristics only; large parts of the gene set might have been selected for another reasons.

in this paper, we present how to alleviate the noise effects and the lack of information in metastasis gene finding procedures using multiple and controlled analyses. we used a large scale expression profile database with rich clinical information – expo  <cit>  . with the clinical information, samples are categorized into several distinct sets. we investigated each set and tagged it with its intrinsic characteristics – metastatic ability, tissue specificity, and organ dependent viability. any two combinatorial sets can be chosen for further comparisons, and the result would represent various information depends on the differences of the selected sets' characteristics.

methods
we describe the data sets and scoring functions in this section. first, the expression database and preprocess procedures are explained. second, methods for converting the probe level expression values to gene and context scores are described.

data preparation
expression profile database
the expo  database is an archive of tumor samples with detailed clinical information. the igc  has established a uniform system for obtaining and processing tissue samples for molecular characterization studies. currently the expo database obtained  <dig> tumor samples  and provides the expression data through the ncbi's public gene expression database  <cit>  . there are lots of clinical attributes associated with gene expression data such as patient's age, gender, ethnic background, tobacco use, alcohol consumption and familial history of cancer. furthermore, cancer specific information including pathological and clinical tnm stages, cancer grades, primary tumor sites and relapse information is also available. this standardization of both microarray platform and clinical description greatly contributed to users conveniences.

database construction
although the expo database provides a lot of useful information with great level of standardization, the large size and the text based format  make it less convenient to analyze the data freely. to settle these problems, we constructed a relational database using the expo contents . firstly, we extracted clinical information from soft formatted flat files using parsers. this information was uploaded into a data table . the data table part was kept in a separated storage divided into a single gsm entry. secondly, we constructed a web-based database  in which a user can fetch required data using sql query statements . finally, we built a program for automatic generation of input files used in gsea analyses .

experimental design
class definition
using the relational database and the gsea analysis preparation program, we set up four data classes of different organ and metastatic abilities. the main concept of the analysis describes colon cancer's metastasis to liver. the organs, colon and liver, were selected due to the relative sufficiency of sample numbers than those of the other organs. the four classes are named a , b , c  and d  respectively. corresponding locations of four tumor classes were depicted in figure  <dig>  for entry details with clinical information, see additional file  <dig> 

class a
 <dig> samples have been assigned to class a using the below query from expo relational database.

select * from expo where source = 'liver' and primarysite = 'liver' and histology not like '%metastatic%'

from the query result, the gsm <dig> sample was removed as it turned out to be a relapsed cancer. finally, class a has  <dig> primary liver tumors without any relapse and metastasis and collected from liver.

class b
 <dig> samples have been assigned to class b using the below query.

select * from expo where source = 'liver' and primarysite = 'colon' and histology like '%metastatic%'

the histology phrase ensures that the primary colon tumor has metastasized to liver. without the phrase, the secondary liver cancer might be thought to be another independent primary liver tumor after the primary colon tumor occurred.

class c
 <dig> samples have been assigned to class c using the below query.

select * from expo where source = 'colon' and primarysite = 'colon' and histology not like '%metastatic%' and pathologicalm = '0'

the pathologicalm field denotes the doctor's decision about the tumor's metastatic aspect.

class d
 <dig> highly heterogeneous samples have been assigned to the class d. we extracted  <dig> non-liver metastatic tumors that are originated from colon.

select * from expo where primarysite = 'colon' and source ! = 'liver' and source ! = 'colon' and histology like '%metastatic'

from the  <dig> query results, two samples  were removed due to the adjacency of the metastasized organs . the remaining samples' secondary tumor sites included ovary, lung and bladder.

class definitioncharacteristics of each tumor class were assessed in four criteria – metastatic ability, colon tissue specificity, liver tissue specificity and viability in liver environment. for example, class a has no metastatic ability and no colon tissue specificity but it has liver tissue specificity and liver's environmental viability, whereas class b has metastatic ability, colon tissue specificity  and viability in liver's environment but no liver tissue specificity.

differently expressed genes from two distinct classes represent characteristic gaps between those classes . when we compare the class a with b, the result genes are expected to contain three kinds of characteristic differences – metastatic ability , colon tissue specificity  and liver tissue specificity . so, if a gene α was up-regulated in class b, we expect that the gene α plays a role in metastasis or colon tissue related activities.

'o' is marked when a certain comparison is expected to show differences in a specific context. 'x' is marked when there is no difference.

scoring and analysis
differently expressed scores have been calculated based on a t-test. a score siab, gene i's enrichment in class a compared with class b can be obtained from the below equation.

 sabi=μai−μbiσai2na+σbi2nb 

where μ is the mean, n is the number of samples, and σ is the standard deviation. if the siab score is bigger than  <dig>  the gene i is up-regulated in class a.

gathering class combinations with a consistent context gives an overview of specific characteristics. we named the series of class combinations a context vector. for example, a metastasis context vector of gene i is defined as below.

 vmi =  

where siba = -siab, sida = -siad, sidc = -sicd.

each element of the metastasis context vector denotes how far a gene i was up-regulated in the metastatic tumor sample in contrast to another primary tumor sample. the bigger the each element's value, the higher dependency on metastasis the context vector indicates. likewise, we can define other three context vectors – colon tissue context vector, liver tissue context vector and liver viability context vector.

 vci=vli=vvi= 

because we cannot jump to a conclusion that each element belongs to a specific characteristic, we need to justify the consistency of the element's directionality. for example, siab is used in three context values .

a high score of siab can be explained in one of the three hypotheses below;

i. gene i is down-regulated in metastatic tumors

ii. gene i is down-regulated in colon tissues

iii. gene i is up-regulated in liver tissues

now, we check whether the gene i has been up or down-regulated in other class combinations. if the siac, and siad score were also high, all of the elements in the liver viability context vector vli have plus values indicating that the hypothesis iii – gene i would be up-regulated in liver tissues – would be correct. we define the consistency factor c.

 cvi={+10− <dig> 

the final score of gene i's dependency on a specific characteristic τ is,

 f−cvτi∏x|vτxi| 

where vτi is a context vector of gene i on the characteristic τ, cvτ i is a consistency factor of the vector vτi.

RESULTS
we scored  <dig> genes using the function described in the last section. total  <dig> probe sets from an affymetrix u <dig> plus  <dig>  chip were matched to their corresponding genes using gsea v <dig> program's collapse dataset tool. in the case of many to gene matching, we used the maximum value of the probes. enrichment scores have been calculated for six comparisons , and their differently expressed genes were denoted using six heat maps. the heat map of a↔b is shown in figure  <dig>  remaining heat maps are shown in additional file  <dig> 

for each gene, the scores for dependency on a specific characteristic, f were calculated for four τs – characteristics. for example, the scores of gene hpn  with respect to the four characteristics  were  <dig>  - <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> respectively, which can be interpreted like the hpn gene is not related to metastasis, but it is closely related to the cellular viability in liver as klezovitch et al has reported  <cit> . top genes for each characteristic were identified. we will discuss the top genes and their reliability case by case.

colon and liver tissue
as described in the section on experimental design, the context vector for colon is exactly the minus signed liver context vector, because any tissues used for the sample data were colon tissues or liver tissues, exclusively.  <dig> genes from total  <dig> genes scored zero  in these characteristics. ripk <dig>  scored highest by  <dig>  and klhl  gene scored lowest by - <dig> . scores were re-scaled for more convenient readability . mean score was  <dig>  with standard deviation  <dig> . top  <dig> genes for all characteristics are shown in table  <dig>  we used the tiger database   <cit>  to validate the result genes' tissue specificity. in colon's case, top  <dig> genes were all highly regulated in colon compared to liver. tmprss <dig>  and hlxb <dig>  were registered to the tiger colon specific gene list. but in liver's case, no gene in the top  <dig> liver score list was registered to the database.


                              characteristic
                              gene
                              score
                              description
all genes are ranked by the final characteristic score. functionally unknown genes or hypothetical genes are denoted by '-' in their description columns.

we concluded that extracted colon/liver tissue specific genes do not contain any universal tissue specific genes. instead, the result includes genes relatively up or down-regulated than in the other tissues. but this result is enough to be used to offset any bias caused by the tissue differences.

liver viability
the same analysis was applied to the liver viability characteristics. mean score was  <dig>  with standard deviation  <dig> . surprisingly,  <dig> of  <dig> top genes were all registered to the tiger's liver specific gene database . including alb , fgg  and serpina <dig> , all the top genes were well known as liver specific genes. despite fgg and hp/hpr  are significantly up-regulated in the tissues from liver environment, their liver score were all zero. in the case of fgg, the deg score from a↔b was - <dig>  making the final score  <dig>  similarly, hp/hpr's zero score was due to the minus deg score in a↔b.

the differences of two liver-related scores need to be examined. one seeks to find any signs coming from liver tissue's characteristics, while the other from liver's environments. because the liver context vector and liver viability context vector shares two elements, siac and siad, we could pay attention to only siab, sibc, and sibd elements. in the result, we found siab hardly catches liver specific genes. even though the b sample came from colon tissues, we could see its expression pattern simulated that of liver tissues. cancer cells go through increased genetic and epigenetic mutations, and sometimes their genetic instability helps by providing variety and perpetuity to themselves. during the metastasis procedures, colon cancer cells that acquired invasion and metastasis abilities possibly acquire activation of liver specific genes before or after they form micrometastasis. the tissue specific gene list of tiger database has been established using est  tags from sample tissues. so, the genes in the list can be identified properly not by the tissue originality but by the activity of core genes, which enables the cell to live in a liver. it is well shown in the score sibc; even though b and c are both from colon cells, their liver specific genes are mostly up-regulated in b. in the mean time, we cannot stop concerning the possibility that all the samples collected from liver tissues contain surrounding normal liver tissues, making the entire results more ambiguous.

metastasis
the result shows top  <dig> up and down-regulated genes in metastasis samples . mean score was  <dig>  with standard deviation  <dig> . unfortunately, any biological processes of top scored gene mgc <dig>  were not discovered. pla2r <dig>  is known to acts as a receptor for phospholipase spla2-ib and also bind to snake pa2-like toxins. binding of spla2-ib induces various effects  <cit>  including activation of mapk cascade to induce cell proliferation and inflammatory reactions which are well known metastasis procedures by increasing cellular motility and angiogenesis  <cit> . trem <dig>  is also known to have a role in chronic inflammations and stimulate production of constitutive chemokines and cytokines  <cit> . on the other hands, ptplb  is significantly down-regulated in all metastasis samples. the main function of ptplb is not well discovered so that the direct relation to metastasis is hard to find. but ptplb is known to interact with bap <dig>  <cit>  which is involved in casp8-mediated apoptosis  <cit>  which is an important pathway in tumorigenesis and metastasis resistance  <cit> .


                              class
                              gene
                              b vs. c
                              liver viability
                              difference
                              liver and metastasis dependency
the result of a naive comparison between a metastatic tumor  and a primary tumor  is shown in the upper row. this comparison is expected to represent not only metastatic ability but also liver environmental viability. normalizing with the liver environmental viability related genes successfully eliminated many genes not selected for metastatic characteristics in the result of our methods .

to prove the enhancement of the result we compared two gene lists from b↔c and post-processed b↔c with our method. b↔c  is a commonly used comparison for extracting metastatic signatures. as shown in the table  <dig>  a result from b↔c also contains liver viability characteristics as well as metastasis characteristics. so we normalized both of the b↔c and liver viability scores and found gene sets whose b↔c scores are high but liver viability scores are low. because the liver viability context vector already contains sibc, we modified the context vector removing the element. as we expected, the pearson correlation of two scores was  <dig>  indicating that large parts of b↔c comparison result is due to the liver viability characteristics. as shown in table  <dig>  almost half of the top scored genes merely from the b↔c comparison were liver specific genes. but there was no liver specific gene in the top  <dig> gene list in modified results. all the top  <dig> genes including colec <dig> , fgg , art <dig> , alb , and hp  were removed in the modified result. instead, metastasis candidate genes including aoah  <cit>  , epo  <cit>   and mar <dig>  were newly included. we are expecting the other genes would be validated further.

CONCLUSIONS
we suggested a new method for identifying metastasis related genes from a large scale database. the proposed method attempts to minimize the influences from other factors but metastasis including tissue originality and tissue viability by confining the result of metastasis unrelated test combinations. we presented tissue specific and tissue viability related genes, and validated them using tissue specificity database, tiger. finally, we presented metastasis candidate genes by calculating differences of metastasis and liver viability normalized scores. we would like to expand the experiments to other tissues using remaining records of the databases and further validate the result by constructing classifiers.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors' contributions
sk developed the fundamental idea of the work, performed experiments, validated the results, and wrote the manuscript. dl evaluated and revised the idea, and supervised manuscript processes.

supplementary material
additional file 1
entries of four tumor classes with their clinical information

click here for file

 additional file 2
six heat maps of inter-tumor class comparisons

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by the korean systems biology program  and the national research lab. program  from the ministry of education, science and technology through the korea science and engineering foundation. the efforts of the international genomics consortium  and expo  are greatly acknowledged. we would like to thank chung moon soul center for bioinformation and bioelectronics for providing research facilities.

this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics volume  <dig> supplement  <dig>  2009: second international workshop on data and text mining in bioinformatics   <dig>  the full contents of the supplement are available online at .
