BACKGROUND
an individual’s inbreeding coefficient is defined as the probability that any randomly chosen allele at a homologous locus carried by the individual is identical-by-descent  and equals the coancestry between its parents  <cit> . following wright  <cit> , the inbreeding coefficient for an individual can be calculated and is the expected proportion of the genome that is ibd. the advent of dense single nucleotide polymorphism  marker panels allows for alternative molecular inbreeding metrics to be estimated. the molecular inbreeding value calculated from the genomic relationship matrix  <cit>  is the probability that the two alleles carried by an individual are identical-by-state  and is adjusted based on the snp allelic content  <cit>  and represents the realized proportion of the genome that is homozygous. an alternative way of measuring inbreeding involves genomic runs of homozygosity . the roh is a useful measure of inbreeding given its ability to distinguish between chromosome segments that are ibs and ibd. long roh segments have low probability of having arisen by chance, and are more likely to be stretches of two homologous chromosomes within the same individual descending from a recent common ancestor  <cit> . keller et al.  <cit>  found that roh based inbreeding estimates are preferable to pedigree derived metrics and other measures of genomic inbreeding, since they correlate strongly with the homozygous mutation load. as a further advantage, roh measures can be tailored to distinguish between inbreeding arising from a recent common ancestor  or more distant common ancestors .

high levels of inbreeding result in a reduction in fitness and overall performance at the phenotypic level, due to individuals carrying a large number of deleterious recessive mutations and/or the reduction in frequency of the superior heterozygotes  <cit> . this reduction is referred to as inbreeding depression and is seen mostly in characters connected with reproductive capacity or physiological efficiency, although any trait under selection can show some degree of inbreeding depression . inbreeding depression is associated with the degree of dominance that exists for a trait and it has been shown that larger negative estimates of inbreeding depression are associated with higher estimates of dominance variance  <cit> . furthermore, by constructing founder-specific partial inbreeding coefficients, inbreeding depression has been shown to be heterogeneous across founders  <cit> . as a consequence, a region of the genome that is derived from an ancestor potentially gives rise to varying levels of inbreeding depression in different progeny. utilizing dominance as a proxy for characterizing regions that impact inbreeding depression has been utilized previously  <cit> , but is computationally demanding and requires large samples sizes. recently, alternative ways to characterize inbreeding depression have been proposed. for example in swine  <cit>  and dairy cattle  <cit> , a roh metric has been utilized to characterize the impact of regions contained within a roh on economically important traits. the use of genomic information to identify regions that impact inbreeding depression allows for the possibility to distinguish between animals with the same inbreeding coefficient, but that differ in the number of regions that when homozygous cause a reduction in fitness. additionally, the combination of multiple regions that individually have a minor effect on inbreeding depression, but when combined cause a major reduction in fitness may provide clues as to the previously identified non-linear relationship of inbreeding depression  <cit> . the use of machine-learning algorithms that utilize regression trees  <cit>  allows for snp-by-snp interactions to be characterized and is computationally efficient. tree based learners have been used previously to identify epistatic interactions between snp for residual feed intake in dairy cattle  <cit> .

longer roh segments ) instead of short  and moderate  segments have been shown by simulation to have a higher correlation with the homozygous mutation load when the effective populations size is low   <cit> . this has been confirmed with real data by pryce et al.  <cit> , who found that longer roh were associated with a reduction in milk yield that was independent of the proportion of the genome that was homozygous in the holstein breed. however, the roh has also been utilized in studies conducted to identify regions that have a high roh frequency that is most likely due to directional selection  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that there are some regions where long stretches of homozygosity have a favorable impact on economically important traits due to the region having undergone strong directional selection based on the additive genetic value of the region, although this has yet to be validated using real data.

characterizing the homozygosity across the genome and its impact on inbreeding depression in dairy cattle is advantageous due to the large number of cows that are currently being genotyped and the large number of fitness  and performance  traits being measured. specifically, characterizing these regions with the jersey breed is worthwhile given the higher levels of inbreeding and smaller effective population size when compared to the holstein breed  <cit> . therefore, the first objective is to identify regions that have an impact on inbreeding depression in us and au jersey cows using a roh metric. the second objective is to determine the relationship between additive effects and the roh status of a snp.

RESULTS
characterizing regions impacting inbreeding depression
two cow populations born in the us and au were utilized to identify regions that when homozygous cause a reduction in milk , fat  and protein yield  and an increased calving interval , which is the interval between consecutive calvings and a measure directly linked to fertility. phenotypic information for the au population was provided in the form of yield deviations and equivalent variable for us population were calculated after adjusting their phenotypes  for fixed effects. the roh status of a snp  was defined based on whether the snp was within an roh of at least  <dig> mb in length . a two-stage analysis was performed within each population to estimate the effect of the roh4mb status of a snp on milk yield and fertility traits. the first stage involved generating residuals from an animal model that accounted for the additive effects captured by the estimated breeding value  of the individual. the second stage involved using the residuals from the first stage as a phenotype and regress these on the roh4mb status utilizing a single marker regression and gradient boosted machine . significance was declared by using a permutation test based on  <dig> samples  <cit> . the identification of epistatic interactions between the roh4mb status of a snp was carried out by counting the number of times two snp were a descendent pair as described by yao et al.  <cit>  and outlined in fig.  <dig>  the significance of the frequency of a descendent pair and variable importance value was then declared based on a permutation test   <cit> .fig.  <dig> an example of a regression tree generated by gradient boosted machine algorithm based on the run of homozygosity of at least  <dig> mb status of a snp . the split point for a particular snp  and the subsample bin an observation falls into based on the genotype value is outlined below each circle. two snp that are within the same branch of a tree, such as a-b, a-d, b-d, a-c, a-e and c-e, are referred to as descendent pairs and may indicate epistatic effects and would be tagged as an interaction. the snp that are not within the same branch of a tree, such as snp pairs b-c, b-e, d-c and d-e, are referred to as non-descendent pairs and may indicate independent additive genetic effects and not tagged as an interaction



the single marker regression and gbm analysis identified multiple regions that have a significant effect when contained within a roh of at least  <dig> mb across multiple traits and populations. a complete list of the regions along with their significance level is outlined in table  <dig> for the us and au populations. additionally, the negative log of the p-value from the permutation analysis across the genome based on the single marker regression analysis for all traits are presented in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and additional file 2: figure s <dig> for us and au, respectively. within a population, the following regions had an effect across multiple traits including bta <dig> , bta <dig>  and bta <dig>  for the us population and bta <dig> , bta <dig> , bta <dig>  for the au population, although no regions were identified that were significant in both populations. a complete description of genes closest to the snp with the highest significance based on the single marker regression analysis is outlined in additional file 3: table s <dig> table  <dig> regions of the genome associated with a run of homozygosity of at least  <dig> mb for milk and fertility traits across countries

countrya

aau refers to australia and us refers to united states


bbta refers to chromosome and the region and location are in mb build umd  <dig>  


creferrs to the location with regions with the highest significance based on single marker regression analysis

*p-values were generated based on a permutation test  for each analysis



multiple regions of the genome were found to display potential interactions based on their frequency as descendent pairs. a complete list is outlined in table  <dig>  the majority of the significant descendent pairs were associated with at least one snp that also had a large variable importance score. a gene network analysis was employed to determine if two interacting snp were within the same network and associations were found including shared protein domain as well genetic interactions.table  <dig> genomic regions that potentially display pairwise epistatic interaction based on the high frequency of it being descendent pair for milk and fertility traits across countries

countrya
btab

aau refers to australia and us refers to united states


bbta refers to chromosome and the region and location are in mb build umd  <dig>  

*p-values were generated based on a permutation test  for each analysis



relationship between additive effect and roh4mb status of snp
we further characterized the relationship between the additive and roh4mb effects of a snp. estimates of the additive marker effect of each snp were obtained using a whole genome marker regression on the yield deviations, using the bayesian lasso of park and casella  <cit> . the roh4mb effect of a snp was estimated by regressing roh4mb of a snp on the same phenotype as single marker regression and gradient boosted machine and therefore the additive effect explained by the ebv was removed from the phenotype. the relationship between the additive and roh4mb status of a region was characterized based on the variance of genomic estimated breeding values  based on  <dig> kb overlapping windows. the  <dig> largest regions based on their absolute covariance were characterized across all traits and countries.

the relationship between the additive effect, roh4mb effect and their covariance is outlined for my in figs.  <dig> and  <dig> for us and au, respectively. the remaining traits are outlined in additional file 4: figure s <dig>  additional file 5: figure s <dig>  additional file 6: figure s <dig>  additional file 7: figure s <dig>  additional file 8: figure s <dig> and additional file 9: figure s <dig> for fy, py and ci across both countries. as illustrated by figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  the covariance sign between roh4mb status and the additive effect of a snp is heterogeneous across the genome. regions on bta <dig> , bta <dig> , bta <dig>  and bta <dig>  had a positive covariance between the additive and roh4mb effect of a snp across both populations. it is worth noting that although there are regions with high roh4mb across both populations this does not necessarily imply that they are the same  run of homozygosity, instead just confirms that across both populations the region has a similar relationship with the additive genetic value of the individual. furthermore, within these regions the estimate of the roh4mb effect was positive for the majority of the regions, such that it is beneficial for a snp to be within a long stretch of homozygosity likely resulting from the region having undergone strong directional selection, which was confirmed by howard et al.  <cit> . the majority of the regions with the largest absolute covariance value across traits were positive, which is not surprising due to a low frequency of roh4mb status for regions with a large roh4mb effect  in comparison to the regions that displayed a large positive covariance .fig.  <dig> plot of additive genomic estimated breeding  variance, covariance between the additive genomic estimated breeding  and roh4mb based genomic estimated breeding value and roh4mb based genomic estimated breeding value variance across the genome for milk yield on the united states dataset. the region from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb on bta <dig> were removed surrounding the dgat mutation in order to make visualization more informative

fig.  <dig> plot of additive genomic estimated breeding  variance, covariance between the additive genomic estimated breeding  and roh4mb based genomic estimated breeding value and roh4mb based genomic estimated breeding value variance across the genome for milk yield on the australian dataset. the region from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb on bta <dig> were removed surrounding the dgat mutation in order to make visualization more informative



discussion
characterizing regions impacting inbreeding depression
a single marker regression and an ensemble learning method, gbm, were utilized in the current analysis to characterize regions that have an impact on inbreeding depression based on a roh metric. in order to determine how similar the results were for the single marker regression and gbm analysis, a rank correlation based on snp used across both analysis was estimated within each trait and population. the variables utilized in the correlation were the significance value for single marker regression and the variable importance score for gbm. the rank correlation across traits and population ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . a rank correlation of less than unity is not surprising given that the importance score from the gbm analysis captures both the roh4mb effect of the snp and its epistatic interactions with all other snp.

there were no regions in common across the usa and au populations that had a significant impact on inbreeding depression. interbull correlations  <cit>  of ebvs between the us and au are below unity , indicating that at the additive genetic level, a genotype by environment interaction exists. the equivalent for non-additive effects is unknown, however current results suggest the potential for a genotype by environment interaction to exist at the non-additive genetic level too. alternative reasons for the lack of concordance between the two populations may be due to a different population history, resulting from a different set of founder sires and or breeding objectives. the introgression of us germplasm in au genetics is relatively recent and occurred around  <dig> years ago  <cit> , therefore it is not surprising that the two populations might have a different set of influential sires. an alternative method to characterize the genetic differences across the population is to conduct a principal component analysis on the genomic relationship matrix. a principle component analysis was conducted previously by howard et al.  <cit>  on a subset of the cows utilized in the current study and the variance explained by the first principle component was  <dig> , which illustrates slight differences across the populations.

in order to determine if regions obtained from the two-stage analysis show some degree of dominance using the actual  phenotype an estimate of the additive and dominance effect of snp declared as being significant were estimated. actual phenotypes were only available for the us dataset and therefore only snp that were declared significant within the us population were utilized. the dominance p-value across all snp for the us population was below  <dig>  for  <dig> out of  <dig> snp , although only  <dig> snp would be significant at the  <dig>  level based on the bonferroni multiple correction factor. in our analysis, the residuals from the  <dig> stage analysis were corrected for the individuals’ ebv. it is worth noting though that some of the residual may still contain an additive genetic component, thus creating a partial confounding in subsequent analyses. the average accuracy of the estimated breeding values  in our data was  <dig>  and  <dig>  for py and ci, suggesting that the ebv correction does provide a reasonably good measure of the additive breeding value of the individual. in order to confirm that additive effects from snp information were not within the residual from the two-stage analysis, the correlation between yield deviations that were corrected for the additive snp effects estimated from the lasso model and the residual from the two-stage were computed for the us population. the correlations between the two measures for protein yield and calving interval was  <dig>  and  <dig>  and is displayed graphically in additional file 10: figure s <dig>  based on the dataset used in the current study the two-stage approach provided a more flexible and computationally less demanding way to investigate inbreeding effects, although these regions need to be validated in other populations and fine mapped to identify the possible gene/causative mutations.

the animals used in the study had multiple production records and therefore the regions characterized in the currently study result in a reduction in performance and/or fitness of the animal, but are not lethal or individually do not have a large impact on fitness. furthermore, individuals that are homozygous in these regions actually have a chance of being allowed to stay in a herd, unlike when lethal or large effect mutations exist, due to the animal having a small likelihood of being born alive. furthermore, it has been argued that the ability for a population to purge deleterious homozygous mutations is greater for large effect and/or lethal mutations and is not as effective for mutations with minor effects  <cit> . from this the need to introduce alternative metrics that characterize the effect of region-specific stretches of homozygosity and are less reliant on the assumption that two individuals with the same inbreeding value, also have the same level of inbreeding depression. the use of functional inbreeding metrics that allow for the identification of individuals that are homozygous in areas that have no impact on an economical trait has the potential to allow for greater flexibility in managing herds/populations at the genomic level. one such example could be based on region-specific measures of the effect of homozygosity in order to generate the expected reduction in performance due to inbreeding and/or the probability of being culled at a given parity. the effectiveness of using regions specific inbreeding effects to minimize inbreeding depression while maximizing the genetic gain in a population has yet to be fully understood and should be considered in future research. additionally, the use of roh based metrics to manage population diversity and curb inbreeding depression could have even greater potential in small population due to a lack of power in these populations to estimate the dominance effect, using the more traditional metrics.

we identified regions with a putative multiplicative effect for all traits. a further network analysis was able to identify networks shared between two interacting snp. the existence of roh4mb by roh4mb interaction between two loci would generate non-linear epistasis in the form of diminishing  or reinforcing  epistasis  <cit> . a few regions that displayed interactions based on the gbm analysis were found to share network associations. to determine if the descendent pairs resulted from a dominance by dominance interaction, a traditional parametric linear model was fitted using the actual phenotype as a response variable that included both snp additive and dominance effects and their interactions. none of the dominance-by-dominance interactions terms were significant across snp interactions. it should be noted though that linear models are greedier than non-parametric models and that a larger number of observations might be needed in this case to confirm potential associations. albeit the ability to detect roh4mb by roh4mb interaction in the current population is relatively low given the small number of animals our analysis provides a blueprint that can be easily replicated, and as the number of genotyped cows increases this approach could become more powerful.

relationship between the additive and inbreeding depression effect of region
the relationship between the additive and roh4mb effects based on their gebv covariance was characterized across the genome for multiple traits. the regions on bta <dig> , bta <dig> , bta <dig>  and bta <dig>  have been previously found to be under positive directional selection . it should be pointed out that this analysis as described in the previous section could be hampered by the fact that a portion of the additive genetic value might still be contained in the residuals, thus causing a positive covariance. the region on bta <dig> has been found in multiple selection signature studies across a variety of cattle breeds such as jersey , angus , nellore cattle  <cit>  and fleckvieh  <cit> . the region is gene dense with multiple olfactory receptors, which detect and identify a wide range of odors, providing a cue for the animal to interact with its environment. the region on bta <dig> contains the growth hormone receptor gene , which has been associated with milk yield and composition  <cit>  and has been shown previously to be under positive selection  <cit> . the positive covariance between the additive and roh4mb effect for regions most likely undergoing positive directional selection is expected to be due to the favorable allele being driven towards fixation and therefore in this situation homozygosity at this particular region is beneficial to the animal. it is expected that regions that reduce the fitness of the organism to be at a low frequency, which was seen in the current study. due to this the majority of the population does not have the haplotype therefore the ability to precisely estimate the covariance is limited. this may partly explain the fact that the majority of regions with the largest absolute covariance value across traits were also beneficial.

with the current study we have shown that regions that impact inbreeding depression are variable across populations. the causes of this heterogeneity are manifold: potential lack of power, from a different number of founder individuals, to varying numbers of influential sires in the previous generations, different mating programs or selective goals over time. interestingly in the current study the majority of the regions identified were at a low frequency. this is important since the power to estimate effects when the frequency of the region is low is reduced and most regions of small effects would be missed by only using a single population. due to this, a population may not show an effect based on the current set of animals utilized, but over time the frequency may increase and the power will be sufficient to estimate it. therefore if a region has been shown to be sensitive to long stretches of homozygosity in other populations then long stretches of homozygosity in a population under study should be further investigated. this is also one of the primary limitations of using medium density genomic data, given that the majority of variants impacting inbreeding depression are probably carried at low frequency and these would be in low ld with the ones used in snp assays. nevertheless, identifying regions across multiple countries capitalize on the fact the roh regions differ across populations as confirmed by howard et al.  <cit>  using the same populations.

furthermore, the a priori knowledge on the impact of a region when it is contained within a long stretch of homozygosity can be utilized in mating schemes in order to constrain homozygosity at specific regions while allowing homozygosity at other regions. previous research has used methods that constrain relationships averaged across the genome , although this study confirms that the effect of a region on inbreeding depression is dependent on the genomic region and more importantly some regions are advantageous when homozygous.

CONCLUSIONS
genomic regions across multiple traits were found to be associated with roh4mb on bta <dig>  bta <dig> and bta <dig> for the us population and bta <dig>  bta <dig>  bta <dig> for the au population. furthermore, multiple potential epistatic interactions were characterized. the regions on bta <dig>  bta <dig>  bta <dig> and bta <dig> displayed a large positive covariance between the roh4mb and the snp effect and these regions have been previously found in signatures of selection studies. this provides evidence that the effect of a region being homozygous is dependent on the genomic location. future work should investigate the effectiveness of incorporating location specific inbreeding effect into mating designs using simulated and real data.

