BACKGROUND
numerous whole genome sequence projects have been completed or are in progress, spanning a wide range of species among different orders. the genome sequences are providing novel insights into evolution and gene regulation that would have been impossible without these large-scale sequencing efforts. while a variety of sequencing strategies have been applied, the most common currently in use and the strategy chosen for the bovine genome relies mainly on whole genome shotgun  sequencing and assembly of the sequencing reads based on sequence similarity overlap. the bovine assembly will be supplemented by a much lower coverage of sequence from large-insert clones  to provide connections between non-overlapping sequence contigs that represent chromosomal locations in close proximity to one another. a more comprehensive build of the genome sequence adds information from physical and genetic maps to wgs and bac sequence to order contigs on a larger scale. an intermediate level of resolution and a critical check on the accuracy of the other methods can be provided by determining if the proper orientation, order, and spacing of exons in known expressed genes are maintained in the build. this approach requires knowledge of expressed transcript sequence to compare to the genome build.

another use of transcript sequence is in annotation, a key to the utility of whole genome sequencing. previous full-length cdna sequencing projects have established the importance of experimentally derived mrna sequences to produce gene models that establish accurate exon-intron boundaries  <cit> . these projects provided vital information about alternate splice forms of gene products that generate variation in form and function thought to be a key contributor to diversity in expression and phenotype. flic sequences also assisted in discriminating between alternative splicing and gene duplication or pseudogenes, a procedure that is difficult and error prone if based solely on clustered est sequences.

the other main use of flic sequences has been generation of predicted protein sequence, providing a resource to support proteomic approaches and comparative analysis to reveal details of protein function. this goal requires accurate reconstruction of cds portions of the bona fide transcripts expressed in the target tissues, which may be problematic with clustered est as mentioned above.

the present effort was undertaken to support all of the potential uses of bflic data. the international bovine genome sequencing consortium  <cit>  led by baylor college of medicine recently released the second, 6-fold coverage genome assembly . refinement of the assembly will be facilitated by incorporating bflics in the gene modeling and assembly process, similar to their utility in the assembly of genomes of other organisms. the bflics will also support efforts at ncbi and ensembl to derive accurate gene models, and derive predicted protein sequence databases. in this sense, the present study is similar to previous full-length cdna projects carried out for humans  <cit> , mice  <cit> , and other species  <cit> . however, a different approach was used to generate the data than in previously described efforts, as the first step of this project employed sequencing of pooled-tissue, normalized libraries  <cit>  that had not been constructed by procedures to enrich for full-length clones, since such procedures could potentially introduce bias that would decrease the diversity of observed mrna. moreover, a primary goal of the project was to develop a method to consistently select full-cds clones from these libraries based on comparison of the single-pass, 5' end sequences to the human reference sequence  <cit>   mrna database.

this report characterizes the sequences of bovine full-cds clones selected with a method using 5' end est sequence data as input. this method efficiently identified apparent bovine homologs of human refseq mrna sequences, collected the full insert sequence, and annotated the resulting bflics with geneids, product, repetitive elements, and predicted protein sequences. the method described should be particularly useful for generating full-cds and predicted protein sequences for organisms with mature databases of sequence from other species in the order  but not included in complete genome sequence projects. the success of the method was characterized by comparison of the bflic sequences to human refseq mrna and mammalian utrdb,  <cit> . because the investigation was initiated prior to release of the assembled bovine genome, direct comparison between bovine genomic and bflic sequence was problematic.

without available genomic or full-cds cdna sequence, it is common practice to rely on gene clusters such as unigene  <cit>  or tigr gene indices  <cit>  for transcript predictions. these computational derived consensus assemblies containing open reading frames  are generated from single pass reads through cdna libraries. these clusters provide a very important resource for putative gene models and products. the tigr bos taurus gene index  was compared to bovine full-cds sequences to confirm the existence of experimentally determined transcripts in the computed clusters. this characterization of gene clusters to full-cds sequences may assist investigators to interpret the significance of their searches against gene cluster databases.

RESULTS
strategy for bovine full-cds selection and sequencing
the overall strategy for bflic processing is depicted in figure  <dig> and is similar to an approach recently described for chicken bursal lymphocytes <cit> . single pass 5' reads from bovine clones from five pooled-tissue, normalized est libraries  <cit>  were compared to human refseq transcripts to identify potential full-cds clones so each selected clone was associated with a human refseq and geneid. these est libraries were chosen because they were generated by the usda labs collaborating on this project, so the clones were readily obtainable, and they represented over 70% of the total est sequences in genbank at the time the project was initiated.

the majority of clones were selected to represent unique loci as defined by human geneid, and in cases where multiple est clones were available for a given geneid the clone with the longest predicted clone length was chosen. additional criteria were also used relative to the predicted length of insert based on human cdna length, in order to avoid clones of relatively short insert length. specifically, clones were selected in size categories between  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp. a minority of clones were then chosen that were redundant to previously targeted geneid to ascertain the impact of alternative splicing on est cluster-based sequence databases. this clone selection yielded full-cds bflics cdnas with 80% efficiency, which was limited in part by the method of library construction that incorporated a digestion with restriction enzyme noti following second-strand cdna synthesis to generate a compatible cloning site on the 3' end of the cdna  <cit> . of the 20% failures, 45% are due to noti sites within the transcript sequence that caused premature termination of the cdna representations of the transcripts. this is a much higher rate than anticipated based on the average occurrence of noti sites in genomic dna and probably reflects a higher percentage of cytidine  and guanosine  in mrna sequence . hopefully, recent advances in cdna library production that avoid this type of difficulty will reduce the incidence of truncated clones in future efforts.

putative full-cds flics selected were sequenced with a "primer walking" procedure in which each sequence read was used to design a primer to extend sequence in the 3' direction. the reads were assembled into contigs, screened for polya tail and vector, and compared to the human refseq transcripts after every walk. once the 3' end of the insert was encountered , the contig was manually checked for low quality base calls; 5' and 3' finishing primers were used to improve these low quality regions before they subjected to annotation. for each bflic, the translated longest orf  of the bflic was compared to the refseq protein database using blastp. the bovine protein-human protein comparison served as consistency check with respect to the annotators' association of the bflic to human refseq. the bflic nucleotide sequence comparison to human refseq protein sequence  exposed potentially artificial frameshifts/insertion/deletions if present. only when there was agreement between the annotators' annotation and the computational comparisons were the bflics submitted to genbank.

summary and length distributions of the bflics
comparison of bflics to human refseq mrna and protein
the protein sequence lengths translated from the full-cds bflic cdss range in length from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids  . in general, the bovine proteins lengths are similar to that of their human homologs. the relationship between homologous bovine and human proteins is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  where the distribution of bovine protein lengths is plotted versus their fractional difference from human protein homolog lengths. figure  <dig> shows that the most common occurrence is when the bovine and human protein homolog lengths are the same, this occurs with 44% of bovine full-cds clones. seventy-five percent of the bovine full-cds clones code for proteins within +/- 7% their human homolog protein lengths. bovine proteins that are shorter than their human homologs constitute  <dig> % of our submission, while those that are longer constitute  <dig> %. these results show that while 75% of the bflics code for proteins identical or nearly identical in length to their human homologs, the remaining bflics tend to be shorter than their human homologs rather than longer. comparison of the "short" bflics to the human genome and message sequence show reveals no obvious preference for internal vs. 3' terminus exon excision/change in the "short" bflics. the tendency towards shorter bflics may be due to a cloning bias towards shorter inserts resulting in the selection and sequencing of shorter bflic isoforms. alternatively, this tendency may reflect fundamental differences in gene structures between human and cattle orthologs and/or paralogs. the possibility that some of these short bflics are associated with pseudogenes cannot be eliminated.

comparison of bflics 5' utr to mammalian 5' utr – verifying cds start statistics
the differences in bovine protein length relative to their human homologs could be an indication of systematic errors in the clone picking algorithm, sequencing, or annotation procedures. since the bovine clones were selected to have a high degree of homology within the region of the human message surrounding its initiation codon atg, differences in clone length should be attributable to truncation/extension of the cds and differences in the 3' and 5' untranslated region . the incorrect determination of cds start in the clone selection step, sequencing errors generating frameshifts and/or insertions/deletions, and misidentifying cds start in the annotation process could all contribute to the misidentification of the extent of cds, and by inference, the 5' utr. comparisons between full-cds bflic and mammalian 5' utr length distributions would show a bias towards larger or smaller bovine 5' utr if the bovine cds start was systematically chosen too far upstream or downstream of its actual position. figure  <dig> shows that bovine and mammal 5' utr length distributions are very similar throughout the range of 5'utr lengths. because only  <dig> sequences were sequenced, relatively few bovine full-cds clones were found with 5' utr lengths >  <dig> nt. this comparison indicates that start methionines weren't systematically misidentified skewing the 5' utr lengths, but rather, is consistent with previously annotated 5' utr mammalian sequence.

comparison of bflics to mammalian kozak consensus sequences
the vertebrate initiation codon context is ccatgg  <cit> , with the initiation atg codon underlined. the consensus sequence in figure  <dig> shows that the most highly conserved position is  <dig> nucleotides upstream from the start codon. this consensus sequence exhibits the expected behavior, with the most highly conserved position, being an a,  <dig> nucleotides upstream from the start codon at position - <dig>  the comparison of bovine consensus start logo to the human consensus start logo in iacono et al.  <cit>  reveals a high degree of similarity. this comparison shows that although there is less conservation at positions - <dig> and - <dig> in cattle, there is roughly equal conservation at positions - <dig> and + <dig> in cattle and human. moreover, the relative preference for every nucleotide base from positions - <dig> to + <dig> is identical between cattle and human. this high degree of similarity may be surprising, especially since the kozak sequence is not strictly conserved in eukaryotic mrnas  <cit> . bovine clones were selected for sequencing based on their close homology to human near the cds start, so it shouldn't be the surprising that sequences were obtained that were similar to human near the cds start. the conservation of the bovine kozak consensus sequence suggests that, as with the 5' utr analysis, start methionines weren't systematically misidentified, but rather, is consistent with previously annotated human transcripts.

alternative splicing
multiple clones were selected for  <dig> loci, ranging from  <dig> clones for a single locus  to  <dig> clones for  <dig> loci. comparison of full-cds bflics to human message, protein, and genomic suggests alternative bovine transcripts exist for five loci, psmd <dig> , bcl2l <dig> , nme <dig> , zdhhc <dig> , hyal <dig> . figure  <dig> shows the comparison of the 3bov112d <dig>  and 2bov3d <dig>  to human refseq nm_ <dig>  this shows a gap in the coverage of 3bov112d <dig> on the human refseq cds while 2bov3d <dig> completely covers the human cds. in figure  <dig>  where the full-cds bflics are compared to human genomic, it is observed that an exon is present in 2bov3d <dig> that is absent in 3bov112d <dig>  alternate splicing has been observed for these five loci in humans.

comparison of bflics to tigr btgi
the sequences from all est libraries used for this study have been previously incorporated into the tigr btgi. this presented an opportunity to verify the tcs  constructed with single pass reads of source clones by comparing them to contigs built from multi-pass full-length sequencing of the same source clones.

the tcs of tigr btgi  were compared to the full-cds bflics using blat <cit> . a threshold of  <dig> or more identities, 1/ <dig> the size of our shortest bflic, was chosen to minimize short matches. after the identities threshold was applied, a total of  <dig> distinct tcs were found to be similar to  <dig> of the original  <dig> bflics. if only bflics that are members of tcs were considered,  <dig> tcs were found to be similar to  <dig> distinct bflics. if there was a further constraint that only matches between a  tc and it's  member source clones be considered, then  <dig> distinct tcs were found to be similar to their source member bflics. in the latter analysis,  <dig> tc can match multiple bflics, but not vice versa. this number is quite close to the  <dig>  the number of distinct loci associated with our  <dig> bflics generated in the annotation pipeline.  <dig> full-cds bflics are not members of a tc.

the analysis of the blat similarities between the tigr btgi and bflics is complicated by the fact that because multiple tcs can represent a single locus by virtue of alternative splice forms, mis-assembly, or other aspects of shared gene structure, a single bflic may be similar to multiple tcs besides its parent tc. accordingly, the blat analysis was segregated into two groups. the first group  was the comparison of the bflics to all  <dig>  tcs, where in general, and given our blat threshold, a bflic will be similar to more than  <dig> tc. this comparison results in blat hits to  <dig> tcs. the second group  was a comparison of  <dig> full-cds bflics to only those tcs that the bflics are members of, a smaller set  of tcs than the first group. group b tcs represent the minimum number of tcs that span the "transcription potential" of  <dig> bflics.

in order to quantify how well the tcs cover the bflics, the number of bflics matched by tcs at different fractional coverage levels was determined. fractional coverage of a bflic by a tc = number of identities in the blat match/bflic length.

single pass 5' and 3' reads for  <dig> full-cds bflics were previously incorporated into the tigr btgi. the 5' and 3' single pass reads for  <dig>  were assembled into the same tcs, while  <dig>  single pass end reads were placed in different tcs. using the admittedly limited dataset of  <dig> bflics, it is observed that about 1/ <dig> of the tcs were self-consistently constituted from their source clone sequences. it is likely that the tcs not self-consistently constituted were assembled without adequate data linking the two ends from the single source clone.

CONCLUSIONS
the bovine transcript sequences described here presently represent the largest publicly accessible resource of annotated full-cds bflics.  the comparative genomics approach employed for clone selection and the database driven sequencing and analysis pipeline provides a mechanism to target and produce full-cds bflics for specific loci that are represented in available cdna libraries. the full-cds bflics are being incorporated in the ncbi build of the bovine genome. the approach described here should be adaptable for producing full-cds flics for other organisms, and is particularly appropriate for those organisms without available flic sequences but with 5' end est sequences. analysis of the bflics with respect to tigr btgi shows that about 1/ <dig> the bflic sequences are well represented by the tcs, while a smaller fraction of the remaining bflic aren't well represented by any single tc. smaller bflics are more easily represented by a single tc in the tigr btgi than longer bflics. as tcs grow larger than  <dig> nucleotides, they become increasingly dissimilar from their flic counterparts, and therefore become increasingly less suitable as evidence for basing an accurate gene model on. the full-cds bflic kozak consensus sequence and 5' utr length distribution is consistent with prior human and mammal transcript data. the genome complexity exhibited by the alternatively spliced bflics correspond to human loci that also exhibit alternatively spliced human transcripts. these results only hint at the bovine genome's inherent complexity. these bflics and their annotations provide a significant starting point to investigate the bovine genome and gene expression.

