BACKGROUND
human intrauterine growth restriction  causes a reduction of fetal growth rate and frequently derives into low birth weight  <cit> . worldwide, more than  <dig> million children suffer this last syndrome, representing a global prevalence of  <dig> %, from which 95% occurs in low and middle income countries . birth weight is widely accepted as a prognosis factor of fetal and neonatal health  <cit>  but although not all low values for this feature are pathological, it is mostly associated to iugr in lmics  <cit> . as a consequence, it seems to produce a higher risk of neonatal and perinatal mortality, aging metabolic diseases and neurocognitive disorders  <cit> .

in most polytocous species, each newborn in a litter will differ in size and weight. however, random variation in these measurable biological traits is not remarkably diminished by reducing genetic variation using inbred strains or reducing environmental variability through standardized husbandry in laboratory animals. it is propose that processes during early embryogenesis may cause this intangible variance  <cit> . in pigs, litter size, parity, age of sow and season at conception were observed to only explain 20% of within-litter variation in piglets birth weight, meanwhile factors such as embryo genotype or epigenetics that affect embryo and fetus development would be responsible of most of heterogeneity  <cit> . moreover, pathological low birth weight has been correlated with a risk of metabolic syndrome    <cit>  and most dohad studies have used birth weight as an entry criterion to explore its long term effects. however, to date there is scarce evidence to suggest that naturally  occurring low birth weight may have a negative long term effect, and we lack data on the subsequent characteristics developed by each sex.

in the current study, we examined natural birth weight variations in inbred mice  to determine how a single genotype in a similar environment may give rise to different phenotypes at birth. microsomia was concretely assessed, which is present in those individuals with weight at birth below the 10th percentile of the colony. we also analyzed the mechanisms that give rise to the phenotypic changes of these naturally produced small mice and compared the transcriptional profile of the liver at birth in normal, microsomic  male and m female mice. any observed phenotypic differences among these inbred mice are mostly epigenetic because, by definition, genetic variation has been eliminated and environmental changes have been reduced. although the underlying mechanisms of fetal programing are still unknown, epigenetics has been suggested as one of the possible explanations for links observed between intrauterine risk factors and metabolic syndrome development. the mechanisms whereby an event that occurs early in life may have long term effects on the phenotype of an organism many years later are only now starting to emerge  <cit> . understanding such processes will help to develop preventive and treatment strategies for common diseases such as type 2-diabetes or cardiovascular disease.

RESULTS
microsomic growth adaptation in newborn inbred mice
c57bl/6 n and cd- <dig> males and females were mated under conditions of standardized husbandry and individuals from the resulting litters were measured at birth. about 10% of the newborn animals were significantly smaller and weighed less  than genetically identical animals in the same litter. this suggests an intrauterine factor-driven growth alteration or the normal consequence of random phenotypic variability. no differences were detected in the mean standard deviations of birth weights recorded for  <dig> litters of outbred  versus inbred line  . at weaning, the m mice also weighed significantly less than their litter siblings  .

to examine the phenotypic response to a high-fat diet , mice were fed a normal diet  or a diet rich in lipids from weeks  <dig> to  <dig> of age . at the end of this period, significant weight and size differences were observed between the m and the control normal birth weight animals, regardless of sex and diet  . however, these differences were significantly more pronounced throughout the entire life span of the mice in animals receiving the high-fat diet . in order to assess anatomical variations derived from both diet and corporal condition , weight of 90 weeks old mice as well as their organs were recorded . interestingly, liver, which plays an important role in metabolism and thus in the potential hfd outcome, didn’t show any significant variation between m and c mice for both diets, regardless of sex. several differences were found in other organs, however they lacked apparent correlation with the considered conditions. these results suggest a metabolic regulation pathway present in the m mice that renders them more resistant to obesity than control mice when given a diet rich in lipids. moreover, unlike controls, m male mice on high-fat diet for 18 weeks recovered a similar weight to that of m not given a high-fat diet. the lack of catch-up growth in our mice model  indicates the animals had not suffered nutrient restriction since at the time of weaning and well into adulthood, microsomic mice were always lighter in weight and shorter in length.in order to assess the presence of metabolic syndrome, a glucose tolerance test and systolic blood pressure  measurements were performed at 6 months of age, a life span in which mice are considered to have reached the adult age. when subjected to a glucose tolerance test, m mice recovered normal glucose levels faster than controls . moreover, the area under curve  was significantly reduced for both diet groups of animals , suggesting an adaptive response of glucose levels in m animals. similar results were recorded in sbp irrespective of diet although differences were greater for m males than m females relative to their respective controls .both m and c mice were maintained for 2 years to assess the possible appearance of any disorders with a late age of onset. however, no differences in age-related pathologies were seen between c and m mice. figure 3g and 3h shows survival rates in males and females of control  and microsomic  mice fed with both normal diet and lipid rich diet during 24 weeks . survival rate of c and m animals was similarly high for both genders  while c + hfd mice have a significant decrease in comparison with m + hfd mice. both groups fed with hfd have a significant decrease on the survival rates in comparison with normal diet.

to determine whether birth weight variation originates during the preimplantation or fetal period, birth weight variations were compared after the simultaneous transfer of in vivo produced good quality embryos  of different age and developmental stage  and the simultaneous transfer of in vivo produced embryos  of the same age  but different developmental stage  . birth rates were 81% versus 57% in first and second experiments respectively. thus, the rate was reduced when embryos of different quality were transferred. after weighing mice from  <dig> litters for both experiments, we observed that only the transfer of embryos of the same age though different developmental stage gave rise to a higher coefficient of variation  in body weight at birth , and that the transfer of selected good quality embryos comprising 3-day-old morulas and 4-day-old blastocysts led to reduced birth weight variations, suggesting the preimplantation origin of this alternative developmental program.

microarray analysis: overall results and validation
to evaluate gene expression variations in normal and m animals, a microarray analysis of liver from newborns was performed. liver was selected since it is one of the relatively more homogeneous organs that can suffer the effects of an abnormal environment  <cit> . in our case, the effects of a putative developmental malnutrition that could lead to microsomia would have certain transcriptional effects in this organ, since it is an important step in nutrient metabolism and detoxification. moreover, the absence of significant liver weight variation due to the common fat accumulation in the hfd group supported the possibility of gene expression changes in order to prevent it. hence, liver is one of the best candidates to assess whether this phenotype has an intrauterine environmental origin. the mouse agilent microarray system used covers  <dig>  unique genes and  <dig>  lincrnas. twelve expression datasets  were obtained and the following calculations were performed according to the genespring gx  manufacturer’s instructions. after selecting genes according to their p-value  of significance , these genes were further filtered to remove those whose expression was below a threshold, based on median normalized intensity values, which was considered to be the no-change threshold . four pairwise comparisons were performed: 1) control  males vs m males; 2) c females vs m females; 3) c males vs c females; and 4) m males vs m females.

in total,  <dig> differentially expressed genes  were detected for m vs c females, most of which were upregulated in m females  . for m vs c males, we detected  <dig> degs, also mostly upregulated in the m group , suggesting a more complex regulation in females . some degs were common to m mice groups, such as the epigenetic regulator trim <dig>  which was upregulated in m females while downregulated in m males in comparison to their respective controls. the pbx <dig> and retinoic acid pathway genes  were also differentially expressed in the two experimental comparisons, with m animals showing greater expression in both comparisons. further important degs such as chd <dig> and ncor <dig> were specifically upregulated in m males compared to c group and hdac <dig>  igf- <dig>  tgfb <dig> and c-met were upregulated in m females compared to c mice.

to validate the array results,  <dig> genes were chosen for rt-pcr analysis in independent samples: three pluripotency related genes , two trophectodermal markers , one gene associated with dna methylation , one gene involved in polyamine biosynthesis , and four genes related to nutrient homeostasis . no differences were observed between the real time pcr and array results .

gene ontology
the gene ontology classification system  was used after enrichment score  analysis  to classify genes according to biological function and corresponding cell components  <cit> . for m vs c males, genes involved in translation and steroid metabolic process were upregulated in mice with microsomia while transcription regulating genes were downregulated. golgi apparatus and ribosomal genes were upregulated while nuclear genes were downregulated . for m vs c females, genes involved in the processes cell proliferation, transcription regulation, tissue morphogenesis, gland morphogenesis and skeletal system development were upregulated while purine metabolism, pyrimidine metabolism, mrna processing, m phase cell division and condensed chromosome were downregulated. nuclear and cytoplasm genes were upregulated while ribonucleoprotein complex, chromosome and non-membrane-bound organelle genes were downregulated . the results of comparing c males vs c females with m males vs m females are indicated in .

discussion
in this work, we report an inbred mouse model of naturally occurring low birth weight, of non-genetic origin, and with no detrimental long term effects. the low birth weight produced at parturition is here ascribed to natural preimplantation developmental variability. interestingly, newborn male and female mice with m increased differentially their weight in response to a high-fat diet. this particular feature of m mice contrasts with the long term negative effects of a low birth weight observed in other studies on small animals addressing the dohad theory  <cit> . in addition, we noted that m animals receiving a high-fat diet were more resistant to acquiring an overweight phenotype and have higher survival rates than controls. curiously, liver didn’t undergo weight changes due to fat accumulation, a feature which is relatively common in certain types of hfd  <cit> . consequently, several transcriptional alterations could be happening that could explain this feature. moreover, the different metabolic programs detected with respect to genetically identical littermates suggest epigenetic alterations in these m animals. differential total weight gain was also observed when considering sex, indicating a divergent physiological mechanism between males and females  <cit> . this observation was confirmed by gene ontology analysis. indeed, in m males, only a few post-transcriptional modifications and enrichment in metabolic genes and the corresponding organelles  were observed, suggesting protein-based adaptation. in contrast, a larger number of processes were overrepresented in m females, highlighted by nuclear gene enrichment and the downregulation of chromosome condensation.

to better understand the molecular basis of non-genetic microsomia, a microarray experiment was conducted on the liver of newborns. microsomic females showed a significantly higher number of degs than m males compared with their respective controls , supporting more complex metabolic changes in females. among the degs detected, the important epigenetic regulator trim <dig>  was found in both sexes. also known as kap <dig> , the gene trim <dig> is ubiquitously expressed throughout development  <cit>  and is a critical regulator of this process. some authors have attributed to this protein an important role in epigenetic control whereby it physically attaches itself to several histone methyltransferases   <cit> , synergistically triggering the methylation of transposons  <cit> . in mf, trim <dig> was upregulated along with hdac <dig>  compared to cf, which suggests a change in the epigenome as the mechanism for the alternative metabolic program. this observation is consistent with the findings reported by another study in which epigenetic changes in histones induced by a trim <dig> heterozygous deletion were linked to weight variations at birth  <cit> . this latter study also revealed a high predisposition of female trim <dig> heterozygous mice to impaired glucose tolerance. moreover, we have observed in a previous work persistent epigenetic changes and glucose intolerance phenotypes in animals born after embryo in vitro culture, including m animals showing improved glucose tolerance over controls  <cit> . a more efficient use of glucose could therefore explain why the m animals in the present study weighed less during the whole experiment, regardless of sex or diet.

ingenuity pathway analysis of deregulated genes revealed that epigenetic-mediated trim <dig> upregulation in mf mice could lead to the upregulation of several markers that could explain this phenotype  such as igf- <dig>  and c-met proto-oncogene. igf- <dig> has been identified as an important factor for developmental growth  <cit> . our results for mf indicated the overexpression of this gene in offspring compared with controls . these data are in line with published results, whereby elevated hepatic igf- <dig> mrna and plasma igf- <dig> levels were attributed to an attempt to compensate for a reduced hepatic and body size at birth  <cit> . moreover, this marker has been also related to epigenetic modifications in h3k <dig> histone  <cit> , thereby supporting our hypothesis of this type of modification in our model.

the proto-oncogene c-met is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase cell surface receptor for hepatocyte growth factor , which is mainly involved in cell proliferation and tumor expansion  <cit> . in the liver, c-met regulates a large number of molecular pathways related to its plasticity  <cit> , thus the high expression levels observed for this gene in mf  could be attributed to an adaptation process. this finding together with the fact that no c-met transcription variation was detected in microsomic males, could support the idea of a more complex adaptation process in females. importantly, this gene has also been associated with skeletal muscle atrophy in mice  <cit> , providing an alternative explanation for the low weight shown by these animals at birth. in addition, c-met has been recently related to the capacity of the liver to regulate blood glucose levels, inducing hepatic uptake and inhibiting output  <cit> . thus, the lower auc obtained in the glucose tolerance test could be explained by the synergistic reduction of blood glucose and igf- <dig> levels.

curiously and contrary to the case in females, trim <dig> was downregulated in m males compared with cs . chd <dig>  was also found to be upregulated as were other components of this epigenetic protein complex, namely ncor <dig>  and pbx <dig>  . chd <dig> is a helicase dna binding protein required to maintain the open chromatin of pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells  <cit> . this protein associates with the promoters of active genes to maintain the current transcriptional profile  <cit>  in response to epigenetic changes such as methylations  <cit> . in the same line, ncor <dig> co-repressor protein has been identified in histone-deacetylase  complexes with a role in chromatin structure modulation  <cit> , and pbx <dig> has been described to regulate the activity of the epigenetic coactivators hdacs and histone acetyltransferases  <cit> . these data again support the hypothesis of epigenetic alterations provoking the altered gene expression profile of microsomic animals.

ingenuity pathway analysis of deregulated genes indicated that some members of the retinoic acid  canonical pathway were upregulated in microsomic animals of both sexes   in comparison to their respective controls . several early studies revealed that nuclear receptors such as retinoid x receptors  and thyroid hormone receptor , translocate to the nucleus and associate with nuclear corepressors such as ncor <dig> or ncor <dig>   <cit> . as mentioned before, these nuclear receptors recruit hdac, resulting in histone deacetylation, chromatin compaction, and silencing of target gene expression  <cit> . hence, in the case of m males, the ra pathway could be mediating the epigenetic changes needed for the correct adaptation to intrauterine environment variations in collaboration with the upregulated ncor <dig>  interestingly, numerous research efforts have revealed a feed-forward mechanism of ra synthesis mediated by hox-pbx <dig> during certain stages of development  <cit> . although interactions of the hox-pbx <dig> system with dna were found to be dispensable for ra to control the transcription profile  <cit> , a possible role of pbx <dig> in regulating imprinted genes is supported by the present findings. thus, in our model of m males, it could be that pbx <dig> enhances the activity of the ra pathway by increasing ra synthesis, triggering as a consequence some epigenetic changes in cooperation with ncor <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
the concept of early life programing is widely accepted, but for a complete picture of dohad we have to understand the different mechanisms of adaptation. indeed, our work reveals that a low birth weight is not always an indicator of intrauterine nutrient restriction, and that it could be the consequence of stochastic epigenetic variation. numerous studies have consistently found evidence of this stochastic epigenetic variation as the driving force for developmental and evolutionary adaptation  <cit> . thus, raised in an identical environment, many loci with highly variable dna-methylated regions have been identified in the liver and brain of newborn isogenic mice, as well as in the human liver. these loci are associated with development and morphogenesis, and with the functional property of expression. correspondingly, it has been reported that a range of random variability in quantitative biological traits, for example body weight at 3 months, may originate from early embryo development  <cit> . here we confirm that phenotypic variation in preimplantation embryos could be the origin of the random variability of certain measurable biological traits, such as the natural variation in birth weight observed in our inbred mice. we hypothesize that, in early embryos, phenotypic variation is a strategy aimed at maintaining fitness  in a changing environment. this type of adaptive response or plasticity is called anticipatory or predictive adaptation as opposed to immediate adaptation  and comes into play because the early preimplantation embryo lacks the time, organs and/or physiological tools to immediately adjust its phenotypic development to a new challenging environment. sex differences detected between early embryos could also be related to sex differences in microsomic adaptation  <cit> . moreover, we describe here a microsomic epigenetic model based on natural embryo variability that is able to avoid diabetes and/or metabolic syndrome. upregulation of the ra pathway  together with a putative increase in the synthesis of its main agonist  via the hox-pbx <dig> complex, suggest an epigenetic regulation mechanism whereby abnormal blood glucose levels, high sbp and obesity could be prevented or reversed. hence, it becomes clear that mammalian early embryos undergo large scale reprograming of dna methylation patterns with the potential to create epigenetic diversity among cells and individuals  <cit> . this could be important for cell fate decisions in development and for creating phenotypic diversity in early embryo development.

