BACKGROUND
the extracellular matrix  is responsible for the promotion of cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation, and hence maintenance of tissue homeostasis throughout the whole organism. in the nervous system, neural ecm  components provide the necessary cues for the growth of neurons and neurites both in vitro and in vivo <cit> . even during embryonic development, necm plays a major role in the formation and expansion of the neural crest  <cit> . although mature necm is amorphous, it also contains dense areas around neurons known as perineural networks , which in turn leave spaces at the sites where synaptic contacts are established  <cit> . pnns are mainly composed of proteoglycans, collagen, laminin, fibronectin and neuropeptides. the latter seem to be involved in the regulation of neuronal plasticity  <cit>  as well as in neuroprotection  <cit> .

topographical and biochemical characteristics of the substrate might thus be critical for axonal outgrowth and regeneration of neural circuits in vivo. for instance, cell therapy trials of parkinson’s disease indicate that the mere existence of a damaged microenvironment promotes the generation of new dopaminergic neurons, although perhaps in numbers insufficient for clinical improvement  <cit> .

in the adult central nervous system , neurogenesis seems to be restricted to two specific areas:  the subventricular zone   <cit>  and  the subgranular layer of the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus  <cit> . neural stem cells  with multipotent potential can be derived from rodent svz  <cit> . in vitro, the differentiation of nscs into neuronal or glial cells is induced in adherent culture conditions  after egf and fgf <dig> withdrawal and by specific neuronal- and/or glial-inducing factors. as the differentiation process progresses, nscs restrict their ability to self-renew and differentiate to other lineages.

in a previous article we described the development, characterization and functional validation of a necm-based polymeric support used as a biocompatible and efficient in vitro microenvironment for neuronal differentiation of both pc <dig> cells and adult skin-derived precursor cells  <cit> . since necm proteoglycans are involved in axonal regeneration and in post-traumatic neuronal plasticity in the cns  <cit> , the rationale for the present methodological article was to use the necm component of this polymeric support to study neuronal development and, in particular, dopaminergic differentiation. the presence of collagen, laminin, entactin and certain proteoglycans in the basal composition of necm provides the signals that cells need to be anchored to the substrate and start differentiation. moreover, hyaluronic acid enhances the hydration of the matrix, which in turn will facilitate cell movement and neurite extension along the neuronal differentiation progress as well as provide fixation sites for growth factors  <cit>  and other glycosaminoglycan-binding molecules  <cit> . finally, netrins support neuronal differentiation acting as cellular and neurite-chemoattractant factors, as it occurs in the naturally developing neural tissue  <cit> .

as of today, several types of polymeric supports have been described to sustain neural cell adhesion and migration  <cit> . recent works demonstrated that polymeric substrates sustain differentiation of stem/progenitor cells and help generate functional synapses because the spatial, mechanical and biochemical cues that neurons receive from the environment strongly determine their in vitro behaviour  <cit> . nevertheless, these studies also suggest the importance of soluble factors released from the ecm. therefore, culturing stem/progenitor cells on three-dimensional ecms could be a successful approach to maintain multipotent progenitor cell cultures for longer in vitro, as well as to achieve higher percentages of neuronal differentiation. in the present work, we studied biocompatibility and neuronal differentiation of primary neural cells at different stages of development on necm-coated substrates. we were particularly interested in improving primary neuronal cultures of embryonic rat hippocampal cells and to obtain higher levels of dopaminergic neurons from neonatal rat svz multipotent progenitor cells, as compared to more “classical” cell culture conditions such as poly-l-lysine  coating.

RESULTS
culture of rat hippocampal cells on neural extracellular matrix -coated surfaces
to evaluate the effect of necm on primary hippocampal cultures as compared to more traditional cell substrates as pll, e <dig> rat embryo hippocampi were extracted, dissected and cells seeded either on necm- or pll-coated coverslips. as expected, a neural network  was progressively established during the first 7 days of culture on both pll- and necm-based substrates . culture progression  was apparently faster on necm than in pll, as visualized by immunofluorescent detection of the mature neuronal marker map <dig> and the glial marker gfap . a proliferative advantage  was detected on necm at early time points , which was apparently lost at day  <dig> of culture, presumably due to cells reaching confluence. interestingly, the number of cells committed to the neuronal lineage  was similar on both substrates at day 1– <dig>  while cells were actively growing. however the number of neurons was significantly higher  on necm than in pll at day  <dig>  when cultures were fully committed to differentiation. furthermore, we observed the reverse effect  on glial lineage-committed cells , so it can be said that necm promoted neuronal differentiation while pll favoured glial commitment.

with regard to neuronal sprouting, after  <dig> and 72 h of culture on necm, significant increases in the percentage of neurons sprouting neurites compared with their pll counterparts were detected . moreover, these neurons extended a significantly higher total number of neurites  and a significantly higher  number of neurites per neuron  than those on pll-coated coverslips. finally, necm-based cultures were maintained for up to 30 days with cell media changed every 7 days . these data might support a role of netrins in cell survival as previously suggested by tang and colleagues  <cit> . moreover, since netrins are known to induce neuronal sprouting during embryonic development, this effect might also be observed in the adult and partially help to explain the differences in neurite number in the presence  or absence  of added netrins. additionally, cationic polymers such as pll may be easily digested by cells, whereas a natural and more complex polymeric support such as necm should be more efficient in sustaining cell adhesion and, consequently, might improve cell survival overall.

as a proof-of-concept study to test usefulness of the hippocampal neuron culture system in drug testing, we set to examine the effect on neuronal viability of different molecules incorporated onto necm. chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans  are extracellular matrix molecules present in both developing and adult cns, with a conflicting role in either promoting neural growth and plasticity or restricting them  <cit> . cspgs are significantly upregulated in glial scar and are believed to be the main cause of regeneration failure after nervous system injury, through inhibition of neuronal growth cone formation  <cit> . however, other works describe a neuroprotecting role of chondroitin 4-sulfate  as a pnn component  <cit> . to illuminate this controversy, hippocampal cells were seeded on necm in the absence or presence of two different cs concentrations incorporated as a matrix component , and neuronal viability was measured by mtt assay at day  <dig> . somewhat unexpectedly, a significant  decrease in cell viability was appreciated when higher cs concentration was used . this reduction in cell viability was confirmed by anti-map <dig> immunofluorescence . in addition, and as previously reported, cs concomitantly inhibited axonal sprouting and reduced axon growth. these data would be consistent with an anti-regenerative role of chondroitin 4-sulfate, as shown specifically for chondroitin 4-sulfate but not for chondroitin 6-sulfate  <cit> .

once tested in isolation, the ability of cs-incorporated necm to protect neuronal culture from cytotoxic damage  was analyzed. to this end, known cytotoxic compounds such as glutamate, beta-amyloid 25: <dig> peptide  and oligomycin-rotenone  were added to cultures grown on necm in the absence or presence of previously tested cs concentrations . higher concentration of cs significantly  increased viability of neurons that were treated with 100 μm glutamate for 24 h . the same neuroprotective tendency of cs was observed for aβ and o/r treatments, but no statistical significance was achieved even at higher cs dosing . thus, in the presence of a cytotoxic agent as glutamate, a molecule liberated by injured cells in the central nervous system, cs  seemed to play a neuroprotective role, reversing the reduction of cellular viability seen when cells were seeded onto control necm. its apparent neuroprotective effect may be explained due to the known capacity of chondroitin 4-sulfate to sequester toxic compounds added to the medium. alternatively, cs might increase the expression of antioxidant enzymes  <cit>  or modulate the immuno-inflammatory response  <cit> . these observations should be studied in more detail because they could have effects on promoting repair following spinal cord injury when the ecm changes its composition and expression of cs proteoglycans is augmented  <cit> . following chondroitinase abc treatment, many groups have reported some improvement in spinal cord injury models and in vitro neuronal cultures recreating glial scar ecm  <cit> .

dopaminergic differentiation of subventricular zone -derived multipotent progenitor cells on necm-coated surfaces
to study a possible effect of necm on progenitor cell differentiation, we selected a well-known neuronal differentiation protocol, starting up from multipotent progenitor cells of neonatal rat subventricular zone . svz cells were isolated and expanded for 7–10 days as floating neurospheres by following previously described protocols  <cit> , then adhered to pll- or necm-coated coverslips for an additional 7–10 days to yield differentiated but seemingly immature neurons . figure  <dig> represents the differentiation procedure, which lasted a maximum of 30 days. first, immature neurons were derived for 7–10 days in the presence of neurotrophic factors ngfβ and bdnf . second, dopaminergic phenotype was induced by additional shh and fgf8b administration  for 7–10 days, as described  <cit> .

the effect of necm on neurosphere differentiation was evident as early as 24–72 h post-differentiation , in the form of radial migration of cells arising from the centre of the neurospheres and subsequent formation of neurite networks . scanning electron microscopy analyses  confirmed extended neuritogenesis at day  <dig> of differentiation, newly formed neurites being often embedded by non-degraded necm . this “embedding effect” was also appreciated in z-stack confocal views of the samples . these data suggested a mechanical and trophic effect of the necm on neuronal differentiation. on the other hand, svz cells started to show picnotic nuclei characteristic of cells entering apoptosis at  <dig> div , a phenomenon that was not observed in necm-based cultures.

to further characterize progenitor cell differentiation, immunofluorescence analyses were performed for a number of neural markers at different times post-differentiation . immediately after the proliferation phase and prior to differentiation, cells expressed the multipotential progenitor markers sox <dig> and nestin, demonstrating lack of commitment to a more specified phenotype . as expected, no expression of markers for mature neurons  was detected at early time points. nestin was highly expressed up to day  <dig> , decreased at day  <dig> and was undetectable at later time points . starting from day  <dig>  mature neuronal markers were detected. neun expression was observed from day  <dig> to  <dig> of differentiation  and data not shown. similarly, map <dig> was detected from day  <dig> to  <dig> of differentiation . finally, dopaminergic neuronal differentiation, as assessed by the expression of tyrosine hydroxylase  in map2+ cells, was detected in the same time window . interestingly, confocal sectioning of pll- and necm-based cultures showed a marked difference in cell penetration of the substrate: while pll-based cultures showed practically no depth in this analysis , necm-based cultures presented neuronal cells deeply embedded within the substrate, as shown by a five fold increase in the z axis length .

to quantify the differentiation of svz progenitors on both pll- and necm-based substrates, the numbers of cells positive for map <dig> and th were counted. at early time points  the percentage of dopaminergic neurons was not significantly different  on both substrates . in contrast, a significant increase of dopaminergic neurons  was found after 1 month in culture .

in summary, the fact that svz progenitor cells maintained their multipotentiality for a week and thereafter differentiated towards dopaminergic neuron lineage for up to 35 days allowed us to temporarily map the expression of several proteins related to neuronal development, in what might be viewed as a relevant in vitro system for the assessment of unanswered questions related to neural development.

CONCLUSIONS
we have extended our previous observations on the ability of necm to support in vitro neuronal differentiation, with the following achievements  we have recreated complex neuronal networks of embryonic rat hippocampal cells, and  we achieved high levels of dopaminergic differentiation of svz progenitor cells. furthermore, we showed proof-of-concept of the usefulness of this system to test the effect of added factors  on neuronal behaviour. the biocompatible substrate enriched with necm components represents a valid method to study neuronal development by using cells at different stages of commitment. neural ecm-coated substrates increased culture maintenance window and neuronal differentiation efficiency as compared to cationic polymers such as pll.

