BACKGROUND
age-associated learning and memory impairment is a signature of the normal aging process in humans and animals of diverse phylogenetic background  <cit> . in contrast to age-associated neurodegenerative diseases, functional decline due to normal brain aging involves subtle physiological changes in neuron and neuronal network function rather than a widespread loss of neurons  <cit> . understanding these processes is essential to develop effective strategies to deal with the problems associated with old age. yet, molecular and cellular dimensions of the normal brain aging are still incompletely understood. in the current study we continue our exploration of the hypothesis that declining performance of the aging brain is associated with a reduction in neuronal electrical excitability resulting from oxidative stress occurring at the level of the neuronal plasmamembrane. the neuronal plasmamembrane, due to its high poly-unsaturated fatty acid  content, is particularly prone to non-enzymatic oxidative insult  <cit> . moreover, the idea that oxidative stress is an important agent of biological aging of the brain has substantial support  <cit>  and a growing body of evidence suggests that a progressive decline in intrinsic electrical excitability of aging neurons is a significant aspect of the problem  <cit> .

in our studies we use the pond snail lymnaea stagnalis as model system of age-associated memory impairment  <cit> . gastropod mollusks like lymnaea have a relatively simple nervous system containing many identified neurons and precisely mapped, functionally characterized neuronal circuits that allow one to trace the neural basis of whole animal behavioural and physiological functions to the level of single neurons and synapses  <cit> . in the current study we utilize an established and widely studied classical appetitive reward-conditioning paradigm involving chemosensory conditioning of the animals’ feeding behaviour  to investigate neurophysiological correlates of age-associated changes in learning and memory abilities  <cit> . the neurobiological substrate of lymnaea’s feeding behaviour and important details of the mechanisms of plasticity underlying the expression of appetitive long-term memory  are known in detail  <cit> . specifically, the expression of associative ltm depends on presynaptic facilitation arising from a behavioral conditioning-induced persistent depolarization of a pair of state-controlling serotonergic interneurons, the cerebral giant cells  that play a permissive role in feeding behavior but have no direct role in the generation of the rhythmic feeding pattern  <cit> . the persistent depolarization affects the synaptic outputs of the cgcs within the cerebral ganglia. this underlies the presynaptic facilitation of the sensory pathways to the feeding command interneurons. one of its consequences is that throughput of peripheral chemosensory afferent information to the feeding circuit is altered  <cit> .

our previous work has linked age-associated appetitive ltm impairment in lymnaea stagnalis to a reduction in intrinsic excitability of the cgcs  <cit> . this change in cgc response characteristics is of a magnitude likely to upset the cells’ control functions and, possibly, their ability to express the behavioral conditioning-induced persistent depolarization underlying appetitive ltm in this model system  <cit> . recent studies have linked age-associated decline of electrical excitability of another identified lymnaea neuron to lipid peroxidation  <cit> . these studies also indicate that this neuro-physiological effect of age is reversible by treatment with the lipophilic anti-oxidant α-tocopherol   <cit> . alpha-tocopherol is the main anti-oxidant agent operating in the lipid bilayer domain and a cell’s primary defense against the progression of lipid-peroxidation. the current study examines whether the finding that treatment with α-tocopherol reverses electrophysiological phenomena associated with old age can be extrapolated to the cgcs and whether such correction is sufficient to restore appetitive learning and memory capability of old lymnaea to the level typical of young animals.

to this end we compared learning abilities and cgc electrophysiological parameters of old ltm-impaired animals that were put on a α-tocopherol enriched diet with similar animals that were fed a standard diet with a lower α-tocopherol content. in addition, mindful of the notion that ltm deficiency in this model possibly arises from a failure of serotonin release by the cgcs, we tested the impact of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor  fluoxetine on the same electrophysiological and behavioural parameters in old ltm-impaired animals. the data we present here reveals an intriguing difference in α-tocopherol’s and fluoxetine’s ability to reverse electrophysiological and behavioural effects of age. our data suggests that restoration of neuronal electrophysiological response characteristics to a young mature condition alone is not sufficient to return appetitive behavioural plasticity of senescent animals to the receptive state of younger animals. as discussed, the data provides arguments that lipid peroxidation-dependent non-synaptic as well as lipid peroxidation-independent synaptic factors play a role in this model system of age-associated learning and memory impairment.

RESULTS
age-associated appetitive ltm breakdown correlates with failure of behavioural-conditioning induced cgc depolarization
our central hypothesis holds that age-associated appetitive ltm failure involves a decline in electrical excitability of the cgcs resulting in a loss of these cells’ capacity for learning induced persistent membrane depolarization. to assess this idea, ltm of junior and senior snails was evaluated using a single-day, multi-trial, non-aversive appetitive-conditioning assay  followed by electrophysiological evaluation of cgc excitability in the isolated cns.

junior  and senior  snails were assigned at random to two test groups. one group was submitted to behavioural conditioning by means of paired application of amyl acetate  and sucrose . animals treated this way will be denoted by the abbreviation cs + ucs throughout the text. the second group functioned as control for stimulus application. in this case the ucs stimulus was replaced by application of water . animals treated in this manner are signified by the abbreviation cs + ds.

as observed in our previous study  <cit> , there was a significant interaction between age and behavioural conditioning . this interaction arose from the fact that junior, but not senior animals displayed robust conditioned feeding responses after conditioning  compared to their aged-matched controls .

electrophysiological assessment of the cgcs in these animals after training revealed substantial differences in resting membrane potential and spontaneous activity between test groups . spontaneous action potential activity differed significantly between junior and senior animals but not between the behaviourally conditioned animals and their aged-matched controls .

on average, the resting membrane potential of cgcs was more hyperpolarized in senior cns’s than that of their junior counterparts independent of their behavioural training status . moreover, comparison of resting membrane potentials measured in cgcs of cns preparations from behaviourally conditioned  with their respective control groups  within each of the age groups, showed that cgc resting membrane potential of conditioned  junior snails was more depolarized compared to the junior control  animals . in contrast, behavioural conditioning had no effect on cgc resting membrane potential in senior snails . together, these data are consistent with the ideas proposed by kemenes et al.  <cit>  that training-induced depolarization of the cgc is an element of ltm in this appetitive learning model and point towards breakdown of this mechanism as a factor in appetitive ltm impairment observed in aged snails.

dietary supplementation of α-tocopherol reverse effect of age on cgc excitability but fails to rescue appetitive ltm
the data presented above show that appetitive ltm failure in aged animals is associated with a very prominent reduction in action potential activity in the cgc’s. previous studies suggest that the suppression of action potential activity observed in aged lymnaea neurons is associated with a trend towards more prominent action potential accommodation linked to progressive lipid peroxidation  <cit> . as a consequence neurons can no longer support sustained periods of elevated spiking activity. thus, stimulus response characteristics of lymnaea neurons likely change with age, possibly to the extent that mechanisms of activity-dependent plasticity are affected. since treatment of aged isolated cns’s with α-tocopherol overturned the age-associated drop in neuronal excitability we tested this compound’s efficacy in restoring appetitive ltm function of old animals. for this purpose,  <dig> aged animals were fed a α-tocopherol enriched diet for two months while another group of  <dig> animals was fed the same diet without additional α-tocopherol. behavioural assessment confirmed that all animals were ltm deficient prior to dietary intervention . spontaneous background rasping frequency declined slightly but significantly over the course of the two month dietary intervention due to an, at this moment unknown cause. importantly, this effect was independent of the dietary composition the animals were fed . contrary to our expectations, dietary supplementation of α-tocopherol failed to restore ltm function in these aged animals . 

yet, intracellular recordings performed on isolated cns’s dissected from these same animals after completion of the behavioural trials revealed a positive effect of diet on action potential activity of cgc’s  and cgc resting membrane potential . no evidence was found of an effect of behavioural conditioning on either cgc spiking activity  or resting membrane potential . thus, feeding aged animals a α-tocopherol enriched diet appears to restore excitability and resting membrane potential of old cgcs to a condition found in young ltm-competent animals, but failed to rejuvenate appetitive ltm functionality.

aged animals do normally not show any motor and/or chemosensory deficits  <cit> . however, it is possible that dietary supplementation with α-tocopherol affects chemosensory and/or motor functions. to test this possibility a separate set of aged animals were fed an α-tocopherol enriched diet for two months while a control group was fed the same diet without additional α-tocopherol. subsequently, we determined the feeding response upon sucrose application and measured by means of extracellular recording techniques the activity of afferents in the superior lip nerve in a semi-intact preparation before and after amyl acetate application.

figure <dig> shows that dietary supplementation with α-tocopherol did not affect sensory perception of amyl acetate. application of amyl acetate  induced an immediate and significant increase in electrical activity of the afferents in the superior lip nerve. this effect was similar in both treatment groups . in addition, examining rasping responses after sucrose stimulation in intact animals showed that diet had no effect on chemosensory or motor function. that is, while none of the animals responded with rasping movements after application of the disturbance stimulus , application of sucrose  induced a robust feeding response in both α-tocopherol fed animals  and their controls . thus, dietary supplementation with α-tocopherol does not affect feeding network related chemosensory or motor functions.

fluoxetine treatment reverses effects of age on appetitive ltm and cgc excitability
the data presented in the preceding sections are consistent with conclusions of kemenes et al.  <cit>  that cgc depolarization is both a necessary and sufficient condition for the expression of appetitive ltm in non-senescent animals  <cit> . however, the above observation that dietary intervention succeeded in recreating the electrophysiological conditions in old animals normally associated with appetitive ltm, yet did not restore ltm functions suggest a failure of additional mechanisms involved in depolarization-induced presynaptic facilitation of cgc terminals in old animals. this idea is consistent with evidence presented by patel et al. that cgc excitation-secretion coupling characteristics change with age  <cit> . prompted by the latter authors evidence that the ssri fluoxetine appears to reverse this effect of age, we tested this compound’s ability to reverse the effects of age on appetitive ltm function and cgc electro-physiological characteristics of old ltm-impaired animals.

in these experiments  <dig> senior animals received before behavioural conditioning a single 50 μl injection of fluoxetine in their body cavity to create an effective hemolymph concentration of fluoxetine of ~100nm. a second group of  <dig> senior animals subjected to the same experimental protocol received vehicle-only injections . behavioural and electrophysiological assessments of these animals proceeded as described previously.

fluoxetine-treated behaviourally-conditioned  animals displayed robust conditioned feeding responses, while no such response was observed in the vehicle-only injected conditioned animals or all unconditioned  animals . importantly, fluoxetine injection had no effect on spontaneous baseline rasping frequency . however, it is still remotely possible that fluoxetine-treated behaviourally-conditioned  animals increased their feeding movements due to non-associative effects. if this is the case, one would expect after training an increase in the number of rasps due to for instance handling, changing environment and/or upon application of a  solution. yet, comparing the feeding response upon ds application  before and after training indicate no significant changes in the number of rasps in the unconditioned  or the conditioned  animals in either of the two treatment groups . together, this clearly indicates that handling, a change in environment nor the application of a solution  induces non-associative feeding responses. thus, only in  conditioned animals  and only application of the conditioned stimulus is capable of evoking a significant increase in rasping movements.

electrophysiological assessment of cgc excitability proceeded after completion of the behavioural evaluation . these tests revealed that injection of fluoxetine caused a selective increase in spontaneous electrical activity in behaviourally conditioned animals . that is, mean cgc spiking activity was significantly raised above the levels in the other test groups in the fluoxetine-treated behaviourally conditioned animals only . in addition, fluoxetine induced a marked depolarization of cgcs in both behaviourally conditioned and disturbance control animals that was not observed in their vehicle-treated counterparts .

discussion
in the current study we show; 1- a single session, five trial classical appetitive reward-conditioning procedure induced robust associative ltm in mature animals in the first quartile of their lifespan but failed to induce such memory in animals in the last quartile of their lifespan; 2- appetitive ltm formation correlated with resting membrane potential depolarization of modulatory interneurons  with a critical function in the expression of appetitive ltm; 3- cgcs of senior animals fired significantly fewer action potentials and were significantly hyperpolarized relative to their younger counterparts in cnss dissected from both behaviourally conditioned and control animals; 4- dietary supplementation of senior animals with α-tocopherol reversed the effect of age on action potential activity and resting membrane potential of cgcs in a behavioural conditioning-independent manner yet failed to restore appetitive ltm function; 5- injection of senior animals with the ssri fluoxetine reversed the effect of age on resting membrane potential of cgcs in a behavioural conditioning-independent manner while raising cgc electrical activity in behaviourally conditioned animals and restored appetitive ltm function.

relation to previous work on appetitive ltm conditioning in lymnaea stagnalis
the current data are consistent with and corroborate several previous observations. first, by reproducing the results from an earlier study  <cit> , the current data demonstrate that appetitive ltm impairment is a recurrent and reproducible phenomenon in aging lymnaea. moreover, the current results corroborate kemenes et al.’s conclusion that cgc depolarization is a key factor in the expression of ltm in non-senescent animals  <cit> . also, the observations that senior cgcs are electrically less excitable, with substantially lower action potential activity as compared to their junior counterparts and that this reduced electrical activity can be reversed by treatment with the lipophilic anti-oxidant α-tocopherol duplicates results we obtained on a different type of identified neuron in lymnaea <cit> . thus, the current data support our idea that declining electrical excitability due to oxidative stress in the neuronal lipid-domain is a defining feature of the neurophysiology of aging in these snails. lastly, our finding that fluoxetine treatment reversed the effect of age on cgc electrophysiology and appetitive ltm function complements patel et al.’s observations that cgc’s synaptic functions change with age  <cit> .

neurophysiological mechanisms of age-associated appetitive ltm impairment
the data presented here provide compelling evidence that cgc synaptic terminals are a key locus of the weakening appetitive ltm performance of aging lymnaea. moreover, our results suggest that this phenomenon has multiple dimensions. for instance, it is clear that chemosensory behavioural conditioning of old animals does not induce the delayed-onset, persistent depolarization of the cgcs critical for the presynaptic facilitation underlying expression of appetitive ltm  <cit> . although the precise neural and signal transduction pathways involved in this process are still under investigation, it appears that behavioural-conditioning invoked camp/pka-dependent recruitment of a persistent ttx-insensitive na+ current ) is the first and critical step in a multi-tiered process leading to the facilitation of cerebral-buccal interneurons relaying peripheral chemosensory information to the buccal feeding circuit  <cit> . it is evident that this mechanism fails in old animals. although we currently do not know for sure why this happens, some scenarios appear more likely than others. for instance, there is little evidence for peripheral chemosensory deficits in old animals this study,  <cit> . therefore, although we can at this time not entirely exclude a role for primary chemosensory insufficiency as an explanation for age-associated appetitive ltm impairment it seems highly unlikely. likewise, in contrast to other investigators working with this model system  <cit> , we never found any evidence for major motor deficiencies in the feeding behaviour of old animals  <cit> . nonetheless, the notion that primary chemosensory and motor functions of the buccal feeding complex appear to be essentially spared over the course of aging does not exclude the possibility that old animals integrate chemosensory information in a different fashion and relay this information in a different way to the feeding network. in fact, the literature does provide some precedents for that idea  <cit> . moreover, such a scenario also appears consistent with the dramatically diminished excitability of aged cgcs, although it is not immediately evident how to reconcile this hypothesis with the observation that α-tocopherol did not restore ltm function in senior animals despite reversing the effects of age on cgc excitability.

mechanisms of cgc membrane depolarization
we show that both dietary supplementation of α-tocopherol and injection with fluoxetine caused depolarization of cgcs in aged animals. because of their very different biological activities, this effect likely involves different mechanisms. as a chain-breaking lipophilic antioxidant α-tocopherol has the ability to intercept lipid peroxidation cascades and prevent further oxidation of the plasma membrane  <cit> . our previous work has implicated lipid-peroxidation as a starting point for as yet incompletely understood mechanisms involved in the control of neuronal excitability  <cit> . for instance, various species of ion channels involved in the regulation of neuronal excitability are subject to redox-modulation  <cit> . alpha-tocopherol could thus directly affect intrinsic excitability of neurons by interfering with ion channel oxidation status. alternatively, because of its amphiphilic nature and structural asymmetry, α-tocopherol has the capacity to effect plasma membrane architectural changes, particularly changes in membrane curvature  <cit> . membrane curvature is a variable in many membrane-associated processes including ion channel gating that could be a factor in the electrophysiological effects of α-tocopherol described here  <cit> . in addition, although we have not yet fully identified the signalling pathways involved, our own work indicates that α-tocopherol can intervene in neuronal lipid signalling processes that are apparently associated with reduced excitability of aged neurons  <cit> . thus, α-tocopherol likely operates primarily on plasmamembrane- or lipid signalling-associated determinants of intrinsic neuronal excitability  <cit> . fluoxetine on the other hand, may induce cgc membrane depolarization by augmenting autoregulatory feedback mechanisms. the cells express one or more of the gi-coupled serotonin receptor subtypes that in the case of serotonin-dependent presynaptic facilitation of sensory pathways in the aplysia californica gill-withdrawal reflex model have been implicated in the closure of s-like k+ channels  <cit> . parenthetically, there is some evidence that these channels, members of the  <dig> transmembrane,  <dig> pore-region  family of background k+ channels are directly inhibited by fluoxetine and its metabolites  <cit> . it should be noted however that recent studies suggest that fluoxetine’s spectrum of pharmacological activities in the lymnaea nervous system extends beyond the compound’s “classical ssri activity.  <cit> . therefore, further studies are required to examine the mechanisms through which fluoxetine ameliorates the effects of age on neural- and behavioural plasticity in this model system.

why does dietary supplementation of α-tocopherol fail to alleviate age-associated ltm impairment while it did reverse the effects of age on neuronal excitability?
one of the remarkable aspects of our results is the differential ability of α-tocopherol and fluoxetine to reverse both electrophysiological and behavioural effects of age. that is, the results show that dietary supplementation of α-tocopherol successfully reversed the effect of age on cgc resting membrane potential and electrical activity but failed to alleviate ltm impairment in old animals whereas a single injection of fluoxetine reversed both electrophysiological and behavioural effects of age. alpha-tocopherol’s inability to restore ltm function in senior animals is particularly puzzling since experimental depolarization of cgcs in semi-intact preparations from, presumably, non-senescent animals was shown to be sufficient to replicate the effect of behavioural conditioning on feeding network responses to peripheral chemosensory stimuli  <cit> . thus, we are left with the conclusion that in lymnaea neurons, treatment with α-tocopherol may reverse low-excitability conditions associated with old age but does not bring about facilitation of neurotransmitter release while fluoxetine is, at least in the case of the cgcs, apparently capable of both. we currently have no definitive explanation for this dissimilarity. it is possible that fluoxetine, being a ssri, augments cgc synaptic efficacy through enhancing postsynaptic serotonergic mechanisms. in addition, as discussed above, it is possible that fluoxetine induce cgc membrane depolarization by augmenting autoregulatory feedback mechanisms. that is, there is some evidence suggesting that serotonin acts as an excitatory autotransmitter in cgcs through mechanisms analogous to the serotonin-dependent presynaptic facilitation of sensory pathways previously described in the aplysia californica gill-withdrawal reflex model  <cit> . also, the literature hints at an alternative presynaptic mechanism. that is, shomrat et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that serotonin facilitates induction of activity-dependent long-term potentiation in octopus vulgaris. in addition, hart et al.  <cit>  recently implicated synapsin, a protein critical in the regulation of vesicle recruitment and pre-synaptic neurotransmitter release, in 5-ht-dependent long-term presynaptic facilitation in sensorimotor synapses of the gastropod aplysia californica through the modulation of vesicle release mechanisms. this finding is particularly interesting in the context of the present study, since patel et al.  <cit>  reported that fluoxetine reverses age-associated effects of neurotransmitter release by cgcs. although it is not yet clear through which mechanism synapsin promotes secretory vesicle release probability, these two studies suggest that, in contrast to α-tocopherol, fluoxetine promotes presynaptic facilitation of cgcs and thereby improves ltm function in our aged animals through a depolarization-independent presynaptic mechanism. one of the intriguing implications of this idea is that synapsins may be a target for treatment of age-associated cognitive impairment. further studies are needed to answer this question and to examine whether this principle can be generalized to different types of chemical synapses.

an alternative explanation for α-tocopherol’s failure to reproduce the presynaptic facilitation of cgc synaptic terminals required for the expression of appetitive ltm in old animals worthwhile considering centers on the possibility of an age-associated breakdown of background ca2+ signalling mechanisms. modulation of neurotransmitter release through variation of presynaptic resting membrane potential proceeds through small changes in intracellular free ca2+ concentrations arising from subthreshold activation of voltage-gated ca2+ channels  <cit> . there is evidence suggesting that a similar mechanism may contribute to presynaptic facilitation in lymnaea cgcs  <cit> . changes in intracellular ca2+ homeostasis are quite a common symptom of neuronal aging  <cit> . it is therefore possible that the differential effectiveness of α-tocopherol and fluoxetine in restoration of appetitive ltm in old animals could be a reflection of the fact that the former depends mostly on background ca2+ signalling mechanisms whereas the latter, as discussed above, may not.

taken together, whereas the current data establish the cgc as a major neurophysiologic correlate of age-associated ltm dysfunction in lymnaea and does reiterate the significance of lipid oxidation in neuronal excitability decline with age, it is evident that further investigations are needed to resolve exact causal relations between one and the other.

CONCLUSIONS
although we have not yet identified the precise molecular mechanisms, our data leaves little doubt that the cgcs are a locus of age-associated ltm-impairment in lymnaea. as such, our study identifies failure of experience-induced, depolarization-dependent presynaptic facilitation of the cgcs as a very probable neurobiological correlate of this memory defect. moreover, the current results further underpin the conclusion from our previous work that lipid-peroxidation, likely through activation of phospholipase a <dig> , is a pivotal factor in the gradual decline in neural- and behavioral plasticity associated with the normal aging process  <cit> . it is important to recognize that we do not stand alone in this conclusion. the significance of lipid-peroxidation in aging in phylogenetically quite diverse model systems has been acknowledged for a long time  <cit> . moreover, recent reports explicitly associate pla2-activity with age-associated cognitive deficits and neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> . thus, we believe that the phenomena described here reflect the actions of universal, evolutionary conserved mechanism of neuronal aging originating in lipid peroxidation. it is evident from the work presented here that lymnaea’s feeding behavior and underlying neural system provides a superbly traceable model to dissect the neurobiological substrate of learning and memory impairment associated with normal aging.

