BACKGROUND
myzostomida graff,  <dig> is a clade of marine annelid worms with around  <dig> described species. most spend their adult lives living on or inside crinoid echinoderms; about a dozen species are associated with ophiuroids and asteroids; two occur on black coral   <cit> ; and one has been recorded from a sponge  <cit> . myzostomids occur in shallow subtidal to abyssal depths throughout all of the world’s oceans, but are mainly found in shallow-water tropical reefs where crinoid diversity is greatest  <cit> . myzostomids possess a variety of body plans and lifestyles in which they steal food from or directly consume the host . those that live on the surface of the animal are mainly disk-shaped or elongated; they use their chaetae to hold onto the host while inserting their proboscis into the host’s food groove to steal food  <cit> . these external types may “mimic” the host by possessing similar colors and/or having appendages that resemble parts of the crinoid, for example, extensions that look like pinnules . other myzostomids reside in galls  or cysts  along the host’s food grooves, or within the host’s mouth, digestive system, coelom, or gonads . those living on the outside of the animal and within galls, cysts, the mouth, and digestive track are presumed to be stealing the host’s food, while those within the coelom and gonads are believed to be eating the host directly  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
diversity of myzostomida. 
myzostoma capitocutis , free-living. 
myzostoma eeckhauti nomen nudum  , free-living. 
pulvinomyzostomum inaki nomen nudum  , found in or near mouth. 
mesomyzostoma sp. , resides within the host’s coelom.

asteromyzostomum grygieri nomen nudum  , recovered externally with mouth pierced through body wall. 
notopharyngoides aruensis , found in mouth. 
protomyzostomum roseus nomen nudum  , found within the host’s coelom. 
myzostoma divisor , free-living.

notopharyngoides platypus , resides permanently in cysts. 
contramyzostoma bialatum , resides permanently in cysts. 
myzostoma longitergum , free-living. . endomyzostoma neridae nomen nudum  , lives within galls. a, d, i, k—raja ampat, indonesia. b, j—madang habor, papua new guinea. c—costa rica. e, h—antarctica. f—lizard island, australia. g—monterey, california. l—dili, east timor. scale bars 1 mm ;  <dig>  mm ;  <dig>  mm .



though once controversial, molecular and morphology analyses now support myzostomids as part of the annelid radiation, but the relationship of myzostomida to other annelid groups remains unresolved . three published phylogenies have treated relationships within myzostomida. the first two are based solely on morphology  <cit> , and the most recent is based on molecular data  from  <dig> taxa  <cit> . grygier  <cit>  and lanterbecq et al.  <cit>  revealed problems with the classification within the group, though no changes from the system proposed by jägersten  <cit>   have yet been made. the molecular phylogeny of lanterbecq et al.  <cit>  recovered two major clades, one composed of gall-, cyst-, and mouth-dwelling taxa associated with crinoids, and the other including mostly free-living taxa, along with cyst, mouth, and internal forms. based on this phylogeny, they proposed the ancestral state for myzostomida to have been an external form found on crinoids and argued for independent emergences of gall, cyst, and internal forms  <cit> .table  <dig> 
classifications of myzostomida graff, 1877



previous classification
revised classification
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
previous classification  shown in left column. classification as revised here, with the number of currently described species for each genus, shown in the right column. * indicate groups with no molecular data available. ^ denote paraphyletic/polyphyletic taxa based on the molecular phylogeny in figure  <dig> 



the variety of life histories combined with dependence on an echinoderm host makes myzostomida an interesting lineage in which to explore the evolutionary effects of obligate symbiosis and relationships with their echinoderm hosts. signs of suspected myzostomid infestations have been found on fossilized stalked crinoids from the early jurassic  <cit>  and possibly as far back as the silurian  <cit> . a previous coevolutionary analysis of sixteen hosts and myzostomids recovered significant cophylogeny  <cit> .

in this paper we sample a substantially broader range of myzostomid species with accompanying dna sequences, allowing a reassessment of the phylogeny and evaluation of symbiotic lifestyles, host specificity, and host affinity. we revise the classification of myzostomida accordingly and re-examine congruence between the phylogeny of myzostomids and their hosts.

RESULTS
phylogeny of myzostomida
additional file 1: table s <dig> lists the nominal species and terminals used to assess myzostomid phylogeny, including the genes sequenced for this study and those obtained from genbank. the maximum parsimony  and maximum likelihood  results for each gene partition are summarized in additional file 1: table s <dig>  results from individual genes were basically congruent with each other, and with the combined data analyses , and are not shown here. the aligned sequence data from the four genes  yielded a concatenated ‘complete’ dataset of  <dig> characters with  <dig> parsimony informative sites and  <dig> variable, but uninformative, sites. the ‘restricted’ dataset  had  <dig> characters, with  <dig> parsimony informative sites and  <dig> variable, but uninformative, sites.

the ml and bayesian analyses of the complete  and restricted  datasets gave the same tree topology . endomyzostoma perrier,  <dig>  formed a well-supported clade sister to all other myzostomids. within this latter clade, asteromyzostomum jägersten,  <dig>  was found with high support as sister to protomyzostomum fedetov,  <dig>  and this clade was then sister to the remaining myzostomids found on crinoids. myzostoma cirripedium graff,  <dig>  a free-living form on a stalked crinoid , was sister to the well-supported clade of pulvinomyzostomum jägersten,  <dig> and the remaining myzostomids. the placement of myzostoma cirripedium requires that it be placed in a new genus, eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. . pulvinomyzostomum, with type species pulvinomyzostomum pulvinar , formed a clade  with two other undescribed myzostomid species. pulvinomyzostomum inaki nomen nudum  has the same lifestyle as p. pulvinar , while pulvinomyzostomum messingi nomen nudum  is a free-living form on its stalked hyocrinid host.figure  <dig> 
phylogeny of myzostomida. maximum likelihood  tree inferred from the concatenated four-gene dataset, all positions included. symbols near nodes refer to bootstrap  and jackknife  support scores and posterior probabilities , for ml, maximum parsimony , and bayesian analyses, respectively. an asterisk indicates nodes with >90% bootstrap and jackknife support and > <dig>  posterior probability. other scores are represented bs/jk/pp. a hyphen is given for nodes not recovered in mp or bayesian analyses. colored boxes surround clades delimited in the taxonomic revision provided herein. photographs correspond to underlined taxa. scale bars 1 mm. specific names written in plain text are for species described in a separate publication – summers & rouse, in press. these names are disclaimed for nomenclatural purposes under iczn  <dig>  and are not made available through this publication.



the mp analysis of the complete dataset yielded  <dig> most parsimonious trees, length  <dig>  the mp analysis of the restricted dataset yielded  <dig> most parsimonious trees with a tree length of  <dig>  the mp results were similar to each other and largely congruent with the ml and bayesian analyses, but the grade of taxa shown in figure  <dig> with respect to myzostomatidae, was instead a grade with respect to endomyzostoma . also, the three species forming the pulvinomyzostomum clade in the ml and bayesian analyses were not monophyletic in the mp results. two basic topologies were considered for the interpretation of the transformations, the first ml- and bayesian- based  and the second mp-based .

with regard to the relationships within the well-supported myzostomatidae, all mp, ml, and bayesian analyses showed myzostoma leuckart,  <dig> as paraphyletic with the genera contramyzostoma eeckhaut & jangoux,  <dig>  hypomyzostoma perrier,  <dig>  mesomyzostoma remscheid,  <dig> and notopharyngoides uchida,  <dig> nested inside . relationships in the mp analyses varied among the species of myzostoma in the various shortest trees for the complete and restricted analyses and between these analyses and the ml and bayesian analyses. this is reflected in the poor support for many of the nodes across myzostomatidae . what all analyses did show was that myzostoma australe rouse,  <dig> was the sister group to all other myzostomatidae.

the ml and bayesian analyses presented a monophyletic hypomyzostoma as a poorly supported sister-group to a well-supported mesomyzostoma clade , as did some mp trees, though with poor support. hypomyzostoma has the type species h. folium , which was not available for this study. however, based on morphology and following lanterbecq et al.  <cit> , we apply the name hypomyzostoma to the clade comprising four nominal species , h. jasoni nomen nudum , h. nanseni , and h. fasciatum ).

all results recovered contramyzostoma as polyphyletic, with c. sphaera eeckhaut, grygier, & deheyn,  <dig> as the sistergroup to myzostoma cf. viride, and c. bialatum eeckhaut & jangoux,  <dig>  the type species of the genus, as sister to another clade of myzostoma species. notopharyngoides was also consistently polyphyletic, with n. aruensis  and n. platypus  well separated and sister groups to different clades of myzostoma.

with regards to family-ranked taxa, the concatenated ml and bayesian analyses  returned four of the current families as clades: asteromyzostomatidae , protomyzostomatidae, pulvinomyzostomatidae, and mesomyzostomatidae , though the latter taxon rendered myzostomatidae paraphyletic. the mp analyses did not recover what is delineated as pulvinomyzostomatidae in figure  <dig> as a clade . the concatenated ml, bayesian, and mp analyses recovered endomyzostomatidae as polyphyletic . endomyzostoma formed a clade that was sister to all other myzostomid terminals  and is here retained as endomyzostomatidae, while the two terminals of contramyzostoma were nested within clades composed primarily of myzostoma . myzostomatidae was recovered as paraphyletic , owing to the placement of contramyzostoma  and mesomyzostoma  among the various myzostomatidae terminals, and these taxa are now referred to this family. figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  indicate the revised family taxon memberships and names.

lifestyle transformations
most myzostomids live externally on their host following a period of development in a cyst . this condition evidently arose once in both the ml/bayesian and mp topologies, and is found in eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. and myzostomatidae . gall-forming myzostomids were recovered as a single clade within endomyzostoma. adult cyst-dwelling myzostomids were recovered in both endomyzostoma and myzostomatidae. in endomyzostoma, these cyst-forming taxa were a clade. three other adult cyst-dwellers  were distributed across myzostomatidae, each sharing a most recent common ancestor with a form that transitioned from a cyst to an external adult life. in all of these cases, this ancestor was estimated to have been cyst to free-living . two taxa found in the mouth or digestive tube were in pulvinomyzostomum and one in myzostomatidae , each arguably arising from a cyst to free-living ancestor . host-eating forms were within asteromyzostomum , protomyzostomum , and mesomyzostoma . for both ml/bayesian and mp topologies, internal host-eating was most likely the plesiomorphic condition for mesomyzostoma  and possibly asteromyzostomum + protomyzostomum clades .figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood transformations for myzostomid lifestyle. number and symbols near nodes refer to proportional likelihood estimations. an asterisk indicates nodes with an estimated proportional likelihood of >95%. other scores are provided in order of most likely states and separated by a forward slash when applicable. see figure  <dig> regarding non-italicized names.



patterns of host use and specificity
figure 4a shows transformations for general host type. association with asteroids and ophiuroids is restricted to asteromyzostomum and protomyzostomum, respectively. eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. resides exclusively on stalked crinoids, and the sequenced myzostomatidae only inhabit feather stars. endomyzostoma and pulvinomyzostomum infect both stalked and feather star crinoids. the ml/bayesian topology suggests a stalked crinoid was the ancestral host for myzostomida , with one transition to asteroids , one to ophiuroids , and three transitions to feather stars . transformations on the mp topology suggest a feather star crinoid as the ancestral host , with one transition to asteroids, one to ophiuroids, and two or three transitions to stalked crinoids . six most parsimonious reconstructions  were found for host type on both ml/bayesian and mp topologies, the variation due to unresolved nodes for asteromyzostomum and protomyzostomum.figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood transformations for general host type  and host type by major clade . symbols near nodes refer to proportional likelihood estimations. an asterisk indicates nodes with an estimated proportional likelihood of >95%. symbols, scores, and non-italicized names as in figure  <dig> 



figure 4b shows the maximum likelihood transformations for major host clades, which mostly correspond to family-level classification of crinoids and also include asteroidea de blainville,  <dig> and ophiuroidea gray,  <dig>  isocrinid stalked crinoids are hosts to gall-endomyzostoma and cyst-to-free-living eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen., while pulvinomyzostomum messingi nomen nudum is found on a hyocrinid stalked crinoid. among feather stars, species of antedonidae norman,  <dig> host two pulvinomyzostomum taxa and two myzostomatidae taxa. myzostoma australe is found on a ptilometridae ah clark,  <dig> and m. divisor grygier,  <dig> and myzostoma josefinae nomen nudum  on zenometridae ah clark,  <dig>  comatulidae fleming,  <dig>  mariametroidea ah clark,  <dig>  and tropiometridae ah clark,  <dig> all host taxa within myzostomatidae. the large number of mprs for both ml/bayesian and mp topologies  suggest multiple scenarios regarding switches among major host clades, especially at the family-level for myzostomids. within myzostomatidae, both topologies suggest two transitions to association with comatulidae, three to four switches to mariametroidea, and one or two inhabitations of tropiometridae.

additional file 1: figure s <dig> presents the distribution of host specificity on the ml/bayesian topology. occurrence on only one host is most common, and is present in all families except eenymeenymyzostomatidae n. fam. the  <dig> mprs suggest that infestation of more than one host arose multiple times independently.

comparison of myzostomid and host phylogenies
figure  <dig> shows associations among myzostomids and their hosts . the host was known for  <dig> of  <dig> myzostomid terminals . additional file 1: table s <dig> lists the nominal species and  <dig> terminals used to estimate the host phylogeny. the mp and ml results for the concatenated datasets and each gene partition are provided in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the overall phylogeny of the 69-myzostomid phylogeny was congruent with that recovered for all included terminals. for hosts, there were four major well-supported clades: stalked crinoids , asteroids and ophiuroids, one family of feather stars , and all other feather stars .figure  <dig> 
associations of myzostomids with their echinoderm hosts. tanglegram of  <dig> associations among host  and myzostomid  phylogenies. symbols near nodes refer to bootstrap  and jackknife  support scores, for ml and maximum parsimony  analyses, respectively. symbols, scores, and non-italicized names as in figure  <dig> 



most clades of myzostomids were associated with specific clades of hosts . exceptions include pulvinomyzostomum , notopharyngoides aruensis, mesomyzostoma , and endomyzostoma . endomyzostoma species are known from all the crinoid groups referenced here  and along with pulvinomyzostomum and mesomyzostoma, are likely considerably undersampled.

parafit analysis of myzostomids and their hosts rejected the null hypothesis of random association . three of the  <dig> individual links were significant  . jane analyses under default settings led to  <dig> reconstructions  for the ml/bayesian-rooted topology . duplication with host switch was most used , followed by 29– <dig> losses,  <dig> failures to diverge,  <dig> co-speciation events, and 9– <dig> duplications. the mean costs were estimated as  <dig>  for random associations and  <dig>  for random parasite topology.

discussion
taxonomic implications
this molecular study incorporated  <dig> myzostomid terminals representing six of the eight subfamilies and nine of the  <dig> genera. previously, lanterbecq et al.  <cit>  offered the only hypothesis for myzostomid evolution based on molecular data. they incorporated three genes  for  <dig> species from nine myzostomid genera, and recovered taxa associated with ophiuroids  within mesomyzostomatidae  <cit> , a family otherwise containing species living in the coelom and gonads of crinoids. they also found mesomyzostomatidae and a terminal attributed to asteromyzostomum  nested among free-living terminals of myzostomatidae  <cit> .

our results recovered four of the families as monophyletic: asteromyzostomatidae, protomyzostomatidae, pulvinomyzostomatidae, and mesomyzostomatidae . mesomyzostoma was recovered within myzostomatidae as in the phylogeny of lanterbecq et al.  <cit> , but asteromyzostomum and protomyzostomum were instead recovered as a well-supported clade sister to pulvinomyzostomum and myzostomatidae. we sequenced recently collected asteromyzostomum specimens from the same locality and host species and protomyzostomum specimens from similar hosts to those used in lanterbecq et al.  <cit> . since the previously sequenced material was old and the amplified sequences were short and very similar to other reads amplified in the same study, we suspect that these previous sequences are inaccurate. amended identifications for these, and other specimens sequenced in lanterbecq et al.  <cit>  are provided in the caption of additional file 1: table s <dig> 

molecular results from ml, mp, and bayesian analyses recovered both myzostomid families that have more than one genus, endomyzostomatidae and myzostomatidae, as paraphyletic. we restrict endomyzostomatidae to include only endomyzostoma and transfer contramyzostoma to myzostomatidae . eeckhaut and jangoux  <cit>  assigned contramyzostoma to endomyzostomatidae based on its cyst-dwelling lifestyle . contramyzostoma possess a salivary gland arrangement resembling that of myzostoma, and grygier  <cit>  suggested their morphological affinity to myzostomatidae. also, cyst forms of endomyzostoma may be gonochoric and have been found with dwarf males, while those of myzostomatidae are generally simultaneous hermaphrodites and have long protrusible penes to inseminate mates in nearby cysts . to make myzostomatidae monophyletic, mesomyzostoma  is also moved to this family , resulting in mesomyzostomatidae becoming a junior synonym of myzostomatidae. to accommodate myzostoma cirripedium graff,  <dig>  a species recovered well outside all other members of myzostoma, eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. and eenymeenymyzostomatidae n. fam. are erected here .

this study recovered four genera including more than one terminal as monophyletic , one genus as paraphyletic  , and two genera as polyphyletic . although myzostoma is clearly paraphyletic, this genus will not be revised here. the type species for myzostoma is m. cirriferum leuckart,  <dig>  which was recovered as part of a relatively basal grade of terminals in myzostomatidae . there was little support in this region of the topology and there was conflict among the various ml, bayesian, and mp analyses. revising the membership of myzostoma to make it monophyletic based on figure  <dig> would restrict the genus to just a few species, and so require name changes for all the remaining species currently in the genus. we refrain from doing so until a more robust phylogeny is obtained.

the polyphyly found here for the cysticolous contramyzostoma  and notopharyngoides  is not unexpected. the morphology of contramyzostoma sphaera differs considerably from the type species, c. bialatum, and eeckhaut et al.  <cit>  only tentatively assigned it to this genus. as we are not fully revising the taxonomy within myzostomatidae, we simply remove c. sphaera from the same genus as c. bialatum and refer to it as myzostoma sphaera. sequenced taxa of notopharyngoides differ in the location of the proboscis as well as where they live on the host. the proboscis is ventral in n. platypus, which resides in cysts on the oral surface, and dorsal in n. aruensis, which occupies the mouth. we did not have sequences of the type species, notopharyngoides ijimai , which has a dorsal proboscis, and we thus leave notopharyngoides as polyphyletic pending further study.

evolution of lifestyles
taxa that steal the host’s food  were recovered as a grade . mouth and digestive-system dwellers  and permanent cyst forms within myzostomatidae  were arguably derived from cyst-to-free-living ancestors. these permanent cyst-forms may have arisen via paedomorphosis, since, as far as is known for myzostomid development, free-living forms initially develop in a cyst  <cit> . observations of mouth-dwelling taxa are consistent with a free-living myzostomid relocating to a stationary position in the mouth. females of pulvinomyzostomum pulvinar occupy the stomach, esophagus, and mouth, while smaller males are found either on the body of the female or free-living on the host  <cit> .

forms in which the adults consume the host directly have arguably arisen either twice independently  – in the ancestor of asteromyzostomum and protomyzostomum  and in the ancestor of mesomyzostoma  – or three times . finding and studying internal myzostomids requires dissection of the host, and their diversity is likely considerably undersampled. lanterbecq et al.  <cit>  considered internal and external host-eaters, gall and cyst food-stealers, and some stationary free-living forms as parasites; as a result, they suggested multiple independent switches to ‘parasitism’. although all myzostomid forms could be called parasites, differentiating host-eaters and food-stealers as done here reduces the emergence of host consumption  to two or possibly three times during the evolution of myzostomids.

the morphology and lifestyle of the ancestral myzostomid form is not clear, especially when the closest annelid relative remains elusive. likelihood estimates for the ancestral node for the ml/bayesian-rooted topology were split between gall and cyst-to-free-living forms, with cyst and internal forms also likely. based on this transformation, a free-living lifestyle  arose once on a deep-sea stalked crinoid . when considering the mp-rooted topology, a free-living form is estimated for the ancestral node, as suggested in previous studies  <cit> .

patterns of host associations
high host specificity and phylogenetic conservatism in host use was observed , the latter likely contributing to the non-random pattern of associations among hosts and myzostomids. myzostomids have a planktonic larval stage  <cit> , and their crinoid hosts may occur in multi-species assemblages in close physical proximity  <cit> . these two factors make this result surprising, suggesting that myzostomids are restricted to certain echinoderms and switch mainly to evolutionarily related hosts. such a pattern of phylogenetic conservatism in host use is widespread among a variety of parasites and hosts, including gall-inducing insects , brood parasites , fish parasites  <cit> , and many others . specificity in this system may be promoted through a number of mechanisms. myzostomids may only be capable of infesting certain echinoderm groups, but little is currently known about recruitment and subsequent development of myzostomid larvae. in experimental studies, eeckhaut and jangoux  <cit>  observed the host crinoid  expelling myzostoma cirriferum larvae from its food grooves using its podia and also regurgitating ingested larvae. they did find that m. cirriferum larvae could recruit onto the crinoid at a specific developmental stage. a comparative study of recruitment and reproductive success across a range of myzostomids and their hosts could be a first step in understanding whether or not myzostomids are equally capable of infesting a range of crinoids, or rather if they have specialized tactics for better success on certain species.

examination of the co-phylogenetic structure of myzostomida and their hosts does not support strict topological congruence. although the global null hypothesis of independent association using parafit was rejected, only three links out of the  <dig> associations were significantly concordant. these links were for myzostomids associated with asteroids and ophiuroids. rather than a signal of ‘co-speciation,’ this congruence is likely an artifact of the small number of known asteroids and ophiuroids that are infected by myzostomids. in event-based analyses, host switches and duplications were mostly used to reconcile the myzostomid and host trees, numbering 40– <dig> compared to  <dig> for co-speciations. acknowledging that event reconstructions are best used for exploratory purposes rather than explanatory ones , the high number of events other than ‘co-speciation’ and the discordance found for the majority of links using distance methods, leads us to infer that this system is not a model of strict phylogenetic ‘co-speciation.’ global concordance could have resulted from a number of mechanisms, including, but not limited to, host tracking, vicariance, and co-speciation . inferring the mechanisms underlying this pattern requires experimental follow-up.

taxonomic changes
eenymeenymyzostomatidae n. fam. summers & rouse
included genera. eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. summers & rouse.

eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. summers & rouse
type species. myzostoma cirripedium graff,  <dig> – sagami bay, japan, 218 m.

etymology. this name was chosen for its assonance .

remarks. to accommodate myzostoma cirripedium graff,  <dig>  a species recovered well outside all other members of myzostoma, eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. and eenymeenymyzostomatidae n. fam. are erected here. eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. is currently monotypic. sequences for this species were referred to as endomyzostoma n. sp.  <dig> in lanterbecq et al.  <cit> . myzostoma metacrini mcclendon,  <dig> is a junior synonym of e. cirripedium. other potential members of eenymeenymyzostoma n. gen. include ten other free-living myzostomid species described from stalked crinoids ); molecular data are not currently available for these taxa.

endomyzostomatidae perrier, 1897
included genera. endomyzostoma perrier, 1897

remarks. endomyzostomatidae as previously delineated  was recovered as polyphyletic in the molecular analyses . to make endomyzostomatidae monophyletic, it is restricted here to include only endomyzostoma. contramyzostoma is transferred to myzostomatidae and the placement of mycomyzostoma is uncertain until specimens are sequenced.

myzostomatidae beard, 1884
included genera. contramyzostoma eeckhaut & jangoux, 1995; hypomyzostoma perrier, 1897; myzostoma leuckart, 1827; mesomyzostoma remscheid, 1918; notopharyngoides uchida,  <dig> 

remarks. to make myzostomatidae monophyletic, contramyzostoma  and mesomyzostoma  are transferred to this family. this results in mesomyzostomatidae becoming a junior synonym of myzostomatidae.

contramyzostoma eeckhaut & jangoux, 1995
type species. contramyzostoma bialatum eeckhaut & jangoux, 1995

remarks. the two previous members of contramyzostoma, c. bialatum and c. sphaera were not recovered within a single clade. to eliminate this polyphyly, we remove c. sphaera from the same genus as c. bialatum and refer to it as myzostoma sphaera. as myzostoma remains non-monophyletic , contramyzostoma will likely incorporate more members once this genus is resolved .

note concerning specific names
specific names written in plain text within this work are disclaimed for nomenclatural purposes under iczn  <dig>  and are not made available through this publication.

CONCLUSIONS
increased sampling and re-examination of previous work revised previous hypotheses concerning the systematics and evolution of myzostomida, as well their relationship to their hosts. contrary to previous reports of multiple switches among lifestyles  <cit> , we found two or three transitions between food-stealing and host-eating. taxa that dwell within the mouth or digestive system and some permanent cyst forms are arguably derived from cyst-to-free-living ancestors – possibly the result of a free-living form moving to the mouth and paedomorphic retention of the juvenile cyst. we recovered clades of myzostomids delimited more or less by their host-association. phylogenetic conservatism in host use was observed for related myzostomid taxa, suggesting that myzostomes can only inhabit certain, and in most cases related, hosts.

