BACKGROUND
indigenous chickens kept under village, scavenging production systems represent 97% of the chickens farmed in ethiopia
 <cit> . in this system, micro- and macro-parasitic infectious diseases, combined with limited extension and veterinary services, are major constraints to village chicken production. poor management and limited resources hinder the development of chicken production by reducing outputs and by predisposing to disease outbreaks
 <cit> .

coccidiosis, caused by species of the apicomplexan parasite eimeria, is a major cause of mortality and morbidity in chickens worldwide, but clinical manifestations are not uniform across production systems. endemic infections and long term exposure without treatment in broiler production systems can result in reduced feed conversion efficiency and growth rate, and in extreme cases lead to tissue damage in the intestinal tract, promoting secondary infections with opportunistic pathogens
 <cit> .

coccidiosis is reported to be a major disease impacting ethiopian village chickens
 <cit> . eimeria oocysts have been detected in up to 61%
 <cit>  of faecal samples collected from indigenous village chickens in central ethiopia, with six of the seven valid eimeria species known to infect the chicken identified by microscopy
 <cit> . however, the advent of molecular techniques has demonstrated that microscopy and post mortem identification of eimeria parasites can lead to incorrect identification of parasites
 <cit> . the correct speciation of parasites is important due to the immunological and pathogenic variation across the genus
 <cit> . microscopy was therefore carried out to determine the prevalence of eimeria genus parasites in indigenous village chickens in two regions of ethiopia, complimented by molecular characterisation to identify the eimeria species circulating.

RESULTS
detection of eimeria oocysts in faecal material
of the  <dig> faecal samples examined microscopically, eimeria oocysts were detected in  <dig>  52-59%). the prevalence reported in this study is comparable to the  <dig> %  previously reported in ethiopian highland areas
 <cit> . the detection of eimeria oocysts was significantly higher in october  compared to may . no significant differences were found in prevalence at region or village levels. all faecal samples detected positive for eimeria oocysts were collected from chickens with no overt signs of clinical diseases. as birds were randomly selected from within the household flock and presence of clinical disease was not a criterion for bird selection, the absence of overt disease in our sample suggests that the prevalence of clinical coccidiosis is rare compared to the prevalence of eimeria carriage. furthermore, the high prevalence of oocyst shedding detected in apparently healthy birds is strong evidence that the detection of oocysts alone in chicken faecal samples should not lead to a definitive diagnosis of coccidiosis. quantitative identification to the species level is clearly required to account for species-specific pathogenicity.

there was evidence of moderate clustering of oocyst positivity in faecal samples collected from chickens within a single family-flock. estimates of intraclass clustering coefficient  for household indicated  <dig> %  or  <dig> %  of the variation in the presence/absence of oocysts is due to variation within households. these values are consistent with those reported for some “highly contagious” infections by otte & gumm
 <cit> , such as newcastle disease , but are lower than those for other “highly contagious” infections, including infectious bursal disease  and bovine viral diarrhoea . interestingly, they are somewhat similar to the icc values reported for eimeria spp in cattle . hence, the icc estimates in this study suggest that although the bulk of the variation in detection of oocysts occurs because of variation within birds, evidence of clustering of positive birds within households may suggest a role for exposure to particular risk factors for birds within household flocks – identification of these may suggest useful targets for control interventions. further analysis found no evidence of clustering at higher spatial scales . however, molecular characterisation revealed species-level variation between regions . hence, while there was no evidence of a difference in the prevalence of oocysts in faecal samples between regions, there was evidence of variation in the prevalence of some species, perhaps suggesting regional differences in exposure to in risk factors associated with the birds, their management and/or location-specific environmental and ecological factors.

in addition to the repeat cross sectional study, faecal samples were collected from  <dig> chickens during both sampling periods. eimeria oocysts were detected in the faeces of  <dig>  chickens at both time points,  <dig>  at one time point  and  <dig>  at neither of the time points. this finding is consistent with prolonged sub-clinical re-infection  in almost one-third of the birds. within this subset of samples, the prevalence of eimeria oocysts was greater following the wet season in october  compared to may  and this is in line with similar observations described for eimeria in commercial chickens in pakistan
 <cit> . the prevalence of eimeria oocysts in this subset in october was not significantly different to that of the randomly selected birds at the same time . the prevalence of eimeria oocysts in the october sample for birds that were negative in may was 73%  compared to 58%  for birds detected positive in may. however, this difference was not statistically significant . this may imply that previous detection of oocysts does not impact the likelihood of detecting oocysts five months later, perhaps suggesting infection with different species or immunologically distinct strains.

molecular characterisation of circulating eimeria species
eimerian genomic dna was detected in  <dig> of the  <dig> samples tested . seven species of eimeria were detected . regional comparisons show differences in the predominant circulating species; eimeria praecox was found in 95%  of samples tested from horro and e. maxima was found in 60%  of samples tested from jarso. eimeria praecox is widely considered to be among the least pathogenic eimeria species that infect the chicken, although recent reports of a pathogenic isolate illustrates the risk posed by such a high prevalence of this species
 <cit> . the high prevalence of e. maxima in jarso may be relevant to the birds found to be positive on both sampling occasions since, while highly immunogenic, this species is commonly characterised by strain-specific immunogenicity
 <cit> . there is evidence in the data to support this hypothesis; previous infection  appeared to have no protective effect in jarso, with prevalence in october of 65%  among birds negative in may compared to 58%  for those positive in may . whilst still not statistically significant, there was some evidence of a greater effect of past infection in horro, where e. praecox predominated, with a prevalence in october of 83%  among birds negative in may compare to 59%  for those positive in may . eimeria mitis was only found in samples collected from jarso . although the haemorrhagic species considered to be highly pathogenic were not the most frequently isolated species , highly pathogenic species were detected in almost half of all samples .

samples were collected from  <dig> indigenous chicken faecal samples in two regions of ethiopia . the frequency of detection of multiple and single eimeria species infections among  <dig> of these  <dig> which were each known to come from a single bird are also presented.

1considered to be highly pathogenic
 <cit> .

2significantly different .

of the  <dig> samples where eimeria oocysts were detected,  <dig> were known to be collected from individual birds, the rest included fresh chicken faeces sampled from the environment and may have included faeces from more than one bird. of these  <dig> samples, more than one eimeria spp was detected in 64% . species frequencies in co-infection are presented in table 
 <dig>  eimeria praecox was the most common species and detected in 46% of single infections and 74% of co-infections in this study. the frequency of species presence in mixed infections was strongly correlated with overall prevalence of that species  suggesting that there was no species predilection for co-infection, except that due to prevalence. there was evidence for spatial clustering of patterns of co-infection within each of the two study regions , however, this was less obvious when e. mitis and e. praecox were excluded from the analysis , suggesting much of the spatial variation in patterns of co-occurrence was due to the different prevalence of e. mitis and e. praecox between the two regions.

in this study, the isolation of eimeria oocysts was not associated with overt clinical disease. however, eimeria species with a high pathogenic potential  but the role of eimeria species in this mortality is yet to be determined. furthermore, where additional contributory factors co-occur, such as malnutrition or co-infection with other pathogens, even low oocyst infections may cause significant disease . although several eimeria control measures, such as vaccines and anti-coccidial drugs, are available in developing countries, these may not be suitable for low-input rural poultry production systems. changes in the management of poultry and improved nutrition are, however, recognised as economical and effective ways to reduce the adverse effects of non-viral diseases. the birds in this study were kept in a variety of ways, but the majority were housed either within the family dwelling or the kitchen building at night, where they would perch on the rafters or partitions, or on the floor. purpose-built housing or perches were rarely seen, although most households provided a nest box for hens with chicks. removal of faeces was done as part of daily household cleaning, and these were used by some households for crop fertiliser. practical ways to reduce disease transmission could include improving hygiene measures such as prevention of overcrowding, disposal of sick and dead birds and regular removal of excreta, provision of improved housing with elevated perches for adult birds and separate overnight shelter and feed provision for chicks from older birds
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, eimeria spp oocysts may be frequently detected in faecal samples from village chickens in ethiopia in the absence of overt clinical signs. furthermore, while there was no evidence of a difference in the prevalence of oocysts in faecal samples between regions, there was evidence of variation in the prevalence of some species, perhaps suggesting differences in risk factors associated with the birds, their management and/or location-specific environmental and ecological factors. importantly, we identified eimeria species that have high pathogenic potential circulating in apparently healthy adult ethiopian indigenous village chickens. further investigation of the role of eimeria spp in both clinical disease and subclinical effects on production are required to better understand their impact and whether interventions to reduce the burden of these organisms in village poultry may offer benefits, or even impact negatively by disrupting endemic stability.

