BACKGROUND
flax  is a unique plant which is a valuable source of fibre and oil. flax raw materials are applicable in many industrial branches: medicine, pharmacy and cosmetics. it is estimated that around 20 % of flax cultivation loss is a result of fusariosis. these diseases caused by fusarium species fungi contribute to the lowering of yield, grain and fibre quality. the highest pathogenicity towards flax was exhibited by f. oxysporum f. sp. linii, which causes flax wilt  <cit> .

the plant cell wall is the first physical barrier to pathogen infection. during the first stages of infection, pathogens secrete enzymes that degrade the cell wall: pectinases, cellulases and hemicellulases. their first aim is degradation of pectin, which results in loosening of cell wall structure and thereby enables digestion of the following polymers: cellulose and hemimcellulose  <cit> . during the colonization in plants, antifungal compounds are generated: phytoalexins, pr proteins, small antifungal peptides and reactive oxygen species . pr proteins are locally accumulated in the infection sites, in the adjacent tissues and also in non-infected tissues, which provides plant resistance to subsequent infections. being part of the plant systemic response, these genes are not activated immediately after the pathogen attack, though their analysis was sufficient to establish the initial stage of the infection  <cit> .

the plant cell wall is a dynamic structure, composed of polysaccharide polymers  and non-polysaccharide polymers  and proteins   <cit> . cell wall composition is strictly regulated in the different types of cells during their growth, development and plant response to abiotic and biotic stress factors  <cit> .

cellulose consists of long, non-branched microfibrils composed of β- <dig> -glucose chains, which are transversely connected with hydrogen bonds and van der walls forces. there are two types of cellulose structure: highly polymerized and ordered and less polymerized, loose and amorphous  <cit> . the parameter that describes cellulose structure is the crystallinity index , determining the content of crystalline form in the cellulose  <cit> . during cellulose biosynthesis, the key role is played by a large protein complex that is anchored in the cell membrane and consists of six subunits, each subunit consisting of six proteins   <cit> .

hemicelluloses comprise heterogenic polysaccharides with low molecular mass. there are five different classes of hemicelluloses: xyloglucans, xylans, mannans, glucomannans and β- glucans  <cit> . regarding the diversity of hemicellulose classes, many enzymes which belong to the protein family of glycosyltransferases are involved in the synthesis of this heterogenic polymer . in the process of degradation of hemicelluloses many enzymes take part, inter alia endo-β- <dig> -xylanase, exo-xylanase, β- <dig> - xylosidase, α- <dig> - xylosidase, α-arabinofuranosidase, α-glucuronidase, endo- β-mannase, β-mannosidase and β-glucosidase  <cit> .

pectin is a complex of polysaccharides, whose main constituents are molecules of galacturonic acid   bound with α- <dig> -glycoside bonds. additionally, there are rhamnose, arabinose, xylose, galacturonic acid and galactose. there are four structural types of pectin called pectin domains: homogalacturonan , xylogalacturonan , rhamnogalacturonan i  and rhamnogalacturonan ii   <cit> . around  <dig> enzymes, including glycosyltransferases, methyltransferases and acetyltransferases are involved in pectin biosynthesis. the most important are udp-d-galacturonate 4-epimerase   <cit> , α- <dig> -galacturonosyltransferase , xylosyltransferase of rhamnogalacturonan ii   <cit> , xylosyltransferase , arabinosyltransferase , galactosyltransferase , xylosyltransferase  <cit> , and methyltransferases . in the process of homogalacturonan hydrolysis, the following enzymes participate: exo- and endo-polygalacturonases , pectin lyase and pectate lyase , pectin methylesterases and pectin acetylesterases; in the hydrolysis of rhamnogalacturonan i: rhamnogalacturonan hydrolase, rhamnogalacturonan lyase, rhamnogalacturonan rhamnohydroxylase, rhamnogalacturonan rhamnohydrolase, rhamnogalacturonan galacturonhydroxylase and rhamnogalacturonan acetylesterase; and in the hydrolysis of xylogalacturonan: exo-polygalacturonase and endo-xylogalacturonan hydroxylase  <cit> .

during pathogen infection pectin de-esterification plays a key role in the plant defence responses. pectin de-esterification leads to the generation of free carboxyl groups, altering ph in the cell wall and enabling aggregation of polyuronates to the gel structure, which results in changes in the porosity of the cell wall  <cit> . additionally, this process enables hg degradation by pectin polygalacturonases, pectin lyase and pectate lyase  <cit> . the level of methyl esterification of pectin determines the sensitivity of plants to the pathogen infection. the high content of methylated residues of galacturonic acid in hg corresponds to the increase of plant resistance  <cit> . moreover, the level and pattern of methyl esterification of pectin influence the activity of polygalacturonases, which are responsible for the generation of short fragments of homogalacturonan chains, which are oligogalacturonides , endogenous molecules of elicitor activity that play a crucial role in the pathogen defence response by enhancing the plant natural response .

lignin comprises a complex of aromatic polymers, which is mainly localized in the secondary cell wall of vascular plants. there are three types of lignin polymers: g lignins , s lignins  and h lignins , which are composed of respective monolignols : coniferyl alcohol, synaptic alcohol and p-coumaric alcohol  <cit> . lignification is a dynamic process consisting of generation of lignin polymers and their embedment in the plant cell wall  <cit> . this process consists of the following stages: monolignol biosynthesis in cytosol, transport of monolignols to the cell wall and polymerization in order to generate the lignin complex. the lignin synthesis pathway is a route of the phenylpropanoid pathway. many enzymes participate in these reactions: phenylalanine ammonia lyase , 4-coumaric acid:coenzyme a ligase , hydroxycinnamoyl-coa shikimate/quinate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , caffeoyl-coa o-methyltransferase , catechol-o-methyltransferase , cinnamoyl coa reductase , synaptic alcohol reductase , cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase, cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase, p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase and ferulate 5-hydroxylase  . in the cell wall monolignols are activated by oxidation and generate stable monolignol radicals, which are able to bind to the growing lignin polymer. reaction of monolignol oxidation is catalysed by peroxidases , laccases  and other phenolic oxidase  enzymes which are also responsible for lignin degradation  <cit> .

by strengthening the cell wall, lignin provides a better barrier to pathogen attacks. the increased lignin synthesis resulting from biotic stress factors results from phenylpropanoid pathway stimulation and from lignin polymerization  <cit> .

development of genetic engineering enabled generation of genetically modified plants characterized by increased resistance to pathogen infections. flax that was more resistant to f. oxysporum and f. culmorum infection was generated by overexpression of genes involved in pathogenesis   <cit>  and genes of secondary metabolites .

it is justified to perform research on cell wall components in order to discover their significance for plant resistance to pathogens.

the aim of this study was to estimate the role of flax cell wall polymers in response to fusarium oxysporum. the significance of cell wall polymers  was elucidated by analysis of the expression level of genes implicated in the metabolism of these compounds and by the analysis of the corresponding metabolites in flax in response to pathogenic fungi.

RESULTS
phenotypic analysis of flax seedlings incubated with fusarium oxysporum
in order to determine the role of cell wall polymers in flax in the response to a pathogenic strain of fusarium oxysporum infected flax seedlings were incubated with the fungus for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h. in the subsequent incubation period the transferred plants were photographed . the first phenotypic changes of the flax seedlings were observed within 24 h after the transfer. cotyledons of the seedlings remained green, while the adventitious root tips became necrotic and the necrosis progressed with the incubation time. initially, after 24 h only a few root cells became necrotic, while after 48 h the necrotic changes were observed in most of the roots. despite this, the cotyledons remained green and firm f. oxysporum mycelium was not observed on the surface of the ms medium. the last incubation period analyzed was 48 h after transfer, as at this stage the plants retained their green color and turgor, thus enabling activation of its defence mechanisms. in the consecutive hours of incubation the progress of the infection contributed to weakening and wilting of flax seedlings ; therefore their detailed analysis was abandoned.

expression of pr genes increased in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
in order to determine the earlier stages of infection we investigated the changes occurring during  <dig> and 12 h of incubation with the pathogen. we determined the levels of mrnas of pr genes, because it is known that the genes are strongly expressed in plants in response to pathogen infections. changes in pr gene expression in flax infected with a pathogenic fusarium oxysporum fungus strain are presented in fig.  <dig>  the analyzed genes were characterized by an unchanged expression level in 6 h of incubation  or with lower expression  followed by an increase in the subsequent hours of incubation in the case of β- <dig> -glucanase  <dig>  the level of expression of β- <dig> -glucanase  <dig> increased during the period of incubation . a similar expression pattern was found for the chitinase gene. the level of its transcript increased from  <dig> -fold in 12 h to  <dig> -fold in 36 h and dropped to  <dig> -fold in the control. the analysis of β- <dig> -glucanase  <dig> revealed the smallest changes in the expression in comparison to the other pr genes tested. however, compared to the control the level of mrna of this gene increased  <dig> -fold in 12 h,  <dig> -fold in 24 h,  <dig> -fold in 36 h and 2-fold in 48 h of incubation with f. oxysporum.fig.  <dig> relative expression of pr gene transcripts in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in expression levels of pr genes  in flax seedlings treated with pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h after inoculation were presented as relative quantity  relative to reference gene  in relation to control . the data were obtained from real-time rt-pcr analysis. the data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



expression of cellulose metabolism genes changed in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
in the next step we analyzed changes in the levels of mrnas of genes involved in cell wall polymer metabolism and determined their quantities in flax seedlings infected with a pathogenic strain of f. oxysporum. polysaccharide  and non-polysaccharide  polymers were investigated.

analysis of expression of genes of the synthesis and degradation of cellulose  in flax incubated for 48 h with a pathogenic f. oxysporum strain is presented in fig.  <dig>  cellulose synthesis genes were characterized by a twofold expression pattern. in the first group  the expression levels were lowered , while in the second group  the expression was first reduced  to increase  <dig> -fold for both genes . among the levels of mrnas of cellulose degradation genes, the expression of the cellulase  <dig> gene decreased  and then increased  <dig> -fold in 48 h of incubation with f. oxysporum. the expression of cellulase  <dig> initially increased  <dig> -fold  and then decreased .fig.  <dig> relative expression of cellulose metabolism gene transcripts in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in expression levels of genes: cellulose synthesis  – panel a and cellulose degradation  – panel b in flax seedlings treated with pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h after inoculation were presented as relative quantity  relative to reference gene  in relation to control . the data were obtained from real-time rt-pcr analysis. the data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



cellulose content increases in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
analysis of cellulose content revealed a 20 % increase in flax seedlings incubated for 48 h with fusarium oxysporum compared to non-infected seedlings . the amounts of cellulose did not change in the remaining hours of incubation of flax with the pathogen.fig.  <dig> content of cell wall polymers in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in cellulose  and lignin  amount as well as the content of uronic acids and monosaccharides in hemicellulose  and pectin  in flax seedlings treated with pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at 48 h after inoculation relative to control flax  were determined by spectrophotometric methods. k1sf – 1 m koh soluble fraction; k4sf – 4 m koh soluble fraction; wsf – water soluble fraction; csf – cdta soluble fraction; nsf – na2co <dig> soluble fraction. data represent the mean ± sd from four independent measurements. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



expression of hemicellulose metabolism genes changed in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
results depicting changes in the levels of expression of genes involved in hemicellulose synthesis  and degradation  in flax incubated with a pathogenic strain of f. oxysporum are presented in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> relative expression of hemicellulose metabolism gene transcripts in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in expression levels of genes: hemicellulose synthesis  – panel a and degradation  – panel b in flax seedlings treated with pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h after inoculation were presented as relative quantity  relative to reference gene  in relation to control . the data were obtained from real-time rt-pcr analysis. the data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



the expression of tested genes of hemicellulose synthesis decreased. the decrease  of ggt gene expression was observed during the whole time of incubation of flax with the pathogen , while reduction of gmt gene expression was noted in 6 h , in 36 h  and in 48 h  and in xxt gene expression in  <dig>   <dig> and 36 h, to  <dig>   <dig> and 80 %, respectively. a decrease in expression level was also observed in some of the genes participating in the process of hemicellulose degradation. the level of expression of the xyn gene was lowered in all analyzed incubation periods of the incubation of flax with f. oxysporum . a decrease in the expression level was also noted for xylb and gs, and for xylb it was constant , while for gs the reduction in the expression intensified during the incubation . the ms gene was characterized by an initial decrease in the expression by 20–35 % in  <dig>   <dig> and 36 h and  <dig> -fold increase in 48 h. another pattern of expression after incubation with f. oxysporum was observed for the xyla gene, whose expression increased  <dig> -fold in 6 h, in 12 h it decreased to 78 %, and in 24 h it increased again  <dig> -fold. the last among the analyzed genes of hemicellulose degradation, gs, was characterized by an increased level of expression ranging from 2-fold in 6 h to  <dig> -fold in  <dig> and 48 h of incubation of flax with f. oxysporum.

hemicellulose composition changed in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
hemicellulose contents were characterized by total simple sugar and total uronic acid contents in different hemicellulose fractions of cell wall  in flax seedlings infected with f. oxysporum for 48 h. total uronic acid  and total simple sugar  contents remained unchanged in the seedlings after f. oxysporum infection and the content was 1 mg/g fw and 17 mg/g fw, respectively. changes in uronic acid  and simple sugar  contents were observed in particular hemicellulose fractions. uronic acid content decreased in the k1sf fraction and increased in k4sf after the infection. a similar association was noted for simple sugars. in addition, analysis of the simple sugars in both fractions indicated an increased contribution of the k1sf fraction to total hemicellulose.

expression of pectin metabolism genes changed in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
changes in expression levels of the genes of pectin synthesis  and degradation  in flax incubated with a pathogenic strain of f. oxysporum for 48 h  are presented in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> relative expression of pectin metabolism gene transcripts in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in expression levels of genes: pectin synthesis  – panel a and degradation  – panel b in flax seedlings treated with pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h after inoculation were presented as relative quantity  relative to reference gene  in relation to control . the data were obtained from real-time rt-pcr analysis. the data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



in the majority of the analyzed genes of pectin synthesis  a decrease in their expression was observed  upon pathogen treatment in all the incubation times. expression of the arad gene was reduced to 50–30 % in  <dig>   <dig> and 36 h, but in 48 h it increased  <dig> -fold compared to the control. the gae gene was characterized by a variable pattern of expression of which in  <dig> and 24 h a 40 % decrease, while in  <dig> and 48 h a  <dig> -fold and 2-fold increases was noted. expression of pectin methylesterases changed over the time of incubation with f. oxysporum and in 24 h a  <dig> -fold increase for pme <dig>   <dig> -fold increase for pme <dig> and 2-fold increase for pme <dig> were observed. moreover, the expression of pme <dig> increased  <dig> -fold in  <dig> and 48 h, the expression of pme <dig> increased  <dig> -fold in 6 h, but fell to 60 % in 12 h and the expression of pme <dig> decreased to 68 % in 6 h and increased  <dig> -fold in  <dig> and 36 h. expression of pg, pal and pl genes initially decreased  and then increased  <dig> -fold for pg,  <dig> -fold for pal and  <dig> -fold for pl in 48 h of incubation.

pectin composition changed in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
pectin content was evaluated based on the analysis of uronic acid and simple sugar contents. because uronic acids are the main structural components, the pectin assay is often based on the analysis of these constituents. in order to perform detailed evaluation of pectin content, all simple sugars in consecutive pectin fractions of cell wall  must be assayed. uronic acid content should be analyzed and need not be omitted because of partial qualitative analysis of pectin.

total uronic acid content  and simple sugars  did not change in flax incubated for 48 h . however, uronic acid contents in particular pectin fractions of cell wall differ, indicating their higher content in the csf fraction in the control seedlings  and in the wsf fraction in the seedlings infected with f. oxysporum  . the content of uronic acids in the nsf fraction did not change after the infection . differences were observed in simple sugars in pectin fractions between the infected and control flax seedlings . after infection with f. oxysporum the content of simple sugars in the wsf fraction increased by 10 % compared to the control, but did not change in the csf fraction and decreased in the nsf fraction.

lignin metabolism gene expression increased in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
analysis of lignin metabolism gene expression  in flax seedlings incubated for 48 h with a pathogenic strain of f. oxysporum is presented in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> relative expression of selected genes of phenylpropanoid pathway transcripts in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. changes in expression levels of phenylpropanoid metabolism genes: phenylalanine ammonia lyase – pal, 4-hydroxycinnamoyl : coa ligase – 4cl, chalcone synthase – chs, p-hydroxycinnamoyl coa : quinic/shikimic acid transferase – hct, caffeoyl-coa o-methyltransferase – ccoaomt, caffeic acid/5-hydroxyferulic acid 3/5-o-methyltransferase – comt, synaptic acid dehydrogenase – sad, hydroxycinnamic alcohol dehydrogenase – cad, glucosyltransferase – gt in flax seedlings treated pathogenic strains of f. oxysporum  at  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h after inoculation were presented as relative quantity  relative to reference gene  in relation to control . the data were obtained from real-time rt-pcr analysis. the data represent the mean ± standard deviations from three independent experiments. the significance of the differences between the means was determined using student’s t test 



among all the analyzed genes, four  showed the same expression pattern during the incubation with f. oxysporum compared to the control. their expression increased from 6 h of the incubation to reach the maximum in 24 h  and decreased in 48 h to a level equal to the control , a level below the control  and a level above the control . similarly, although shifted in time, the pattern of expression was characteristic for the gt gene, whose expression reached a maximum in 36 h . pal gene expression was initially lowered to 40 % in 6 h, and increased gradually to reach a maximum in 48 h . 4cl gene expression was decreased to 40 % in  <dig> and 12 h and to 80 % in 48 h. analysis of the last of the genes of lignin metabolism  showed a  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold increase in mrna level in  <dig> and 48 h, respectively, and a 30 % decrease in 12 h of incubation with f. oxysporum.

lignin content decreases in flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum
lignin content was assayed in flax seedlings incubated with f. oxysporum for 48 h, and the results are presented in fig. 3f. the infection caused a decrease of lignin content in flax seedlings by about 20 % in comparison to the non-infected seedlings.

infrared spectroscopy of cell wall of flax infected with fusarium oxysporum confirms results of biochemical analysis of cell wall components
analysis of infra-red spectroscopy of the cell wall of flax infected with f. oxysporum was performed to determine the structure of the cell wall and verify the results of cell wall polymer content assay obtained with spectrophotometric methods.

the infection of flax seedlings with f. oxysporum influenced the composition and structure of the cell wall. infrared spectroscopy spectra of the infected and non-infected flax seedlings are presented in fig.  <dig>  based on the spectra changes in the cellulose, pectin and lignin contents and changes in cellulose structure were determined in the studied samples. the cellulose content was 40 % higher after the infection with f. oxysporum compared to the non-infected seedlings . cellulose structure was determined based on the analysis of appropriate bands. integral intensities of bands at  <dig> and 988 cm− <dig> corresponding to asymmetric vibrations of ν indicate changes in the length of cellulose chains, which were shorter in the infected flax seedlings . integral intensities of bands in the range of 3400–3425 cm− <dig> correspond to intra-molecular vibrations o-h × × × o and in the range of 3290–3315 cm− <dig> correspond to inter-molecular vibrations ν . the analyzed results show changes in the arrangement of cellulose chains in flax seedlings after infection with f. oxysporum and a 60 % higher number of hydrogen bonds compared to the non-infected seedlings. infected flax seedlings display increased the crystallinity index by 16 %, indicating a more organized cellulose structure in the cell wall of the infected flax seedlings. higher crystallinity also suggests lower reactivity of cellulose, lower water absorption and higher plasticity of cell walls.fig.  <dig> ir spectrophotometry analysis of the cell wall structure and composition of flax seedlings infected with fusarium oxysporum. the ir spectra of samples from control flax seedlings , seedlings after f. oxysporum infection . a changes in cellulose content presented as differences in the integral intensities of the bands at 1455 cm− <dig> , 1319 cm− <dig> , and 1161 cm− <dig> . b changes in the structure of cellulose  presented as differences in the integral intensities of the bands at 1058 cm− <dig>  and 988 cm− <dig> . c changes in cellulose structure presented as differences in the integral intensities of the bands at 1230 cm− <dig>  corresponding to δ   and 625 cm- <dig>  corresponding to γ . d changes in pectin content presented as differences in the integral intensities of the bands at 1735 cm− <dig> , 1655 cm− <dig>  and 1609 cm− <dig> . e changes in lignin content presented as differences in the integral intensities of the bands at 1337 cm− <dig> , 1260 cm− <dig>  and 1245 cm− <dig> 



changes in pectin and lignin contents determined by the analysis of differences in the integral intensities of bands at  <dig>   <dig> and 1609 cm− <dig> for pectin  and at  <dig>   <dig> and 1245 cm- <dig> for lignin  confirm a significant decrease of pectin and lignin contents after infection with f. oxysporum.

discussion
nowadays the research on host-pathogen interaction is of great interest to enable amelioration of plant defence mechanisms.

the current literature describes only the importance of pectin during plant infection and omits other polysaccharide polymers of the cell wall. the research aim of this study was to determine the significance of polysaccharide polymers and lignin during different stages of infection of a pathogenic strain of fusarium oxysporum. it was suggested to approach this whole scientific problem and pay attention to different polymers and not to omit the possible interaction in the described process.

in order to examine the different stages of flax infection by f. oxysporum, flax seedlings incubated with the pathogen were collected after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 48 h. the choice of incubation period was established experimentally based on the phenotype of infected plants, determining the last incubation time and the pr gene expression whose level significantly increased in plants infected with pathogens . expression of genes of β- <dig> -glucanase and chitinase in flax incubated with f. oxysporum were induced after 12 h, and their level increased in time. the results indicated that in the 12 h of incubation in spite of the lack of phenotype changes, the pathogen infected the plant and induced a systemic response. in order to examine the first stage of infection comprising pathogen penetration to the root cells and activation of the defence mechanism by the host, the 6th hour of incubation was chosen as the first hour.

the first analyzed polymer in flax infected with f. oxysporum was pectin, the main aim for pathogen in the initial stages of infection. pectin methylesterases remove the methyl group from homogalacturonan, resulting in loosening of cell wall structures, enabling pectin degradation by polygalacturonases and pectin lyases, and also cellulose and hemicellulose by cellulases and hemicellulases  <cit> . it is then suggested that during the first stage of infection the methylation level of pectin plays the main role. highly methylated pectin causes higher resistance to plant infection. in plants, there are endogenous pectin methylesterases that take part in many physiological processes, in which rearrangement of the cell wall is necessary.

analysis of three isoforms of pectin methylesterases showed that during the first stage of infection expression of pme <dig> increased, pme <dig> decreased and pme <dig> did not change. these results indicate that pme <dig> probably does not take part in the infection process, but is involved in other physiological processes, although its level increased after 24 h of incubation. pme <dig> is involved in infection, and the alteration of the expression level of pme <dig> is putatively caused by a pathogen. a previous study confirmed that infecting fungi can influence the increase in pme gene expression  <cit> , and silencing of a specific pme gene, which depends on the pathogen, led to an increase in plant resistance  <cit> . nevertheless, the initial increase in pme <dig> expression can be explained by the purposeful plant strategy which aims to loosen the structure of pectin to release oligogalacturonides  in order to elicit a plant defence response. transgenic strawberries with overexpression of one of the isoforms of pectin methylesterase were characterized by increased resistance to botrytis cinerea infection, which was explained by the release of oligogalacturonides from the cell wall  <cit> . summing up, the observed decreases and increases in expression of pme <dig> and pme <dig> genes are probably caused by plant defence mechanisms in response to the ongoing infection: initially by maintaining high pectin methylation and then by its rearrangement and/or release of elicitors .

biochemical analysis of pectin in seedlings after flax infection with f. oxysporum confirmed its rearrangement, which was observed after 48 h in spite of no changes in the total content. possibly, the activity of endogenous pectin methylesterases of fungi and endogenous pectin methylesterases of flax induced by the pathogen lead during the progressing infection to demethylation of pectin, and then to loosening of its structures by exogenous polygalacturonases and pectin lyases. pectin rearrangement revealed an increase in the water-soluble fraction and lower content in the cdta fraction with a simultaneous lack of change in its content in the fraction bound with the cell wall. loosening of pectin structure is a result of breaking ion bonds by the activity of fungal enzymes  <cit> .

lowered mrna levels of genes of polygalacturonase and pectin lyase from the first stage of infection  until the moment when the cell necrosis of roots is more advanced results from the presence of exogenous fungal genes , which comprise a form of defence against excessive pectin degradation. in contrast, the decrease in the expression level of most genes of pectin synthesis during the whole infection process might result from redirection of transcription to other genes, which are necessary in abundance during infection. loosening and rearrangement of pectin made accessible other polymers of the cell wall to exogenous fungal enzymes: hemicellulases and cellulases. pathogens degrade polysaccharides in order to ensure themselves the nutrients, mainly glucose. hemicellulose is responsible for the strengthening of the cell wall  <cit> , but until now no participation in the plant response to pathogen infection has been documented. fusarium oxysporum caused a reduction of the expression level of genes of hemicellulose synthesis at the first stage of infection of flax seedlings. similarly, most genes of hemicellulose degradation were observed to exhibit a lowered expression level. such changes might be explained by the altered transcription profile in plants that undergo pathogen infection. probably, plants redirect their transcription potential to other genes necessary during pathogen-derived stress. despite the lowering of expression of genes of hemicelluloses metabolism, their content did not change, and only slight lowering of the hemicellulose fraction soluble in 1 m koh was observed.

analysis of gene expression of cellulose metabolism in flax seedlings infected with f. oxysporum revealed a decrease in mrna level of three isoforms of cellulose synthesis genes  in all studied incubation times. two other isoforms of cellulose synthase and two isoforms of cellulose degradation genes responded to infection weakly or unspecifically. a decrease in expression of genes of cellulose synthesis was previously described only in arabidopsis thaliana infected with botrytis cinerea and revealed the involvement of genes of this polymer in the response to pathogen infection. such a phenomenon was explained by modulation of transcription, but the hypothesis has not been confirmed yet  <cit> . a previous study showed that arabidopsis thaliana with silenced cellulose synthase genes is characterized by increased resistance to ralstonia solanacearum and plectosphaerella cucumerina infections  <cit> . regarding the difficulties in explaining the role of cellulose synthases in plant resistance to pathogens, the content and structure of cellulose was studied. the quantitative spectrophotometric analysis revealed an increase in cellulose content in seedlings infected with f. oxysporum for 48 h. similarly, infrared spectroscopic analysis of the cell wall of infected seedlings showed a significant increase of cellulose with a 60 % increase of hydrogen bonds in cellulose and a 16 % increase of cellulose crystallinity. increased crystallinity of cellulose means a more orderly structure, which is characterized by lower activity, lower water absorbance and increased plasticity of the cell wall. it is then deduced that the increase of cellulose crystallinity is an additional barrier of plants generated during infection, which impedes host cell wall polymer digestion by pathogen enzymes.

alteration of cellulose crystallinity in the cell wall of seedlings infected with the pathogen is difficult to explain. it is suggested that it was due to rearrangements of hemicelluloses. despite the lack of expression of most genes of hemicellulose metabolism, one of them exhibited strong activation during infection. the mrna level of α-galactosidase increased at the first stage of infection, and then was increasing during the period of infection. putatively, this enzyme that cuts off galactose from galactomannan indirectly enabled generation of hydrogen bonds in cellulose and thereby led to the increase of its crystallinity. this hypothesis needs further research and confirmation. according to other authors  <cit> , enzymes that degrade hemicelluloses in the cell wall and release galactose can directly contribute to the alteration in cellulose crystallinity.

lignin’s involvement in pathogen infections is well known and described in the literature. increased lignin biosynthesis results from stimulation of the phenylpropanoid pathway, while the lignification process is induced by reactive oxygen species, present in great amounts during pathogen infection  <cit> . increase in expression of genes of the phenylpropanoid pathway and direct genes of lignin synthesis was observed in wheat infected with fusarium graminearum and puccinia triticina  <cit>  and in cotton infected with verticillium dahliae  <cit> .

expression of genes of the phenylpropanoid pathway  was strongly induced during the later stages of seedling infection with f. oxysporum and increased during the time of infection. these changes were observed after 12 h of incubation, similarly in the case of pr genes, suggesting their involvement in the systemic flax response. at the initial stage of infection of f. oxysporum , genes of lignin synthesis – hydroxycinnamic alcohol dehydrogenase and synaptic alcohol dehydrogenase –were characterized by a significant increase of mrna level. the results suggest that lignin synthesis occurs quite fast in order to strengthen the cell wall, but may be limited by the accessibility of substrates. biochemical analysis and ir spectrometry of the cell wall of flax seedlings after 48 h of infection with f. oxysporum revealed a slight decrease in lignin content. perhaps this short time from the infection onset is not sufficient to show alteration in this polymer. in cotton infected by pathogenic fungi, despite the significant increase of expression level of genes of lignin metabolism, from 12 h, changes in lignin content were observed after several days following infection onset  <cit> .

summing up, analysis of the expression level of genes of polymer cell wall metabolism in flax infected with f. oxysporum enabled us to distinguish two group of genes that responding differently to infection. the first group consisted of strongly reacting genes, whose expression levels were increased over 5– <dig> times: genes of lignin synthesis  and genes involved in pathogenesis . they were characterized as systemic response genes, because despite the significant expression level increase, genes responded later , and the maximum expression increase was mostly at 48 h. the second group of genes comprised genes slightly induced. they participate in the metabolic response, and their activation is connected with activity of elicitors  generated as a result of cell wall digestion by fungal enzymes. in this group there are genes whose expression level increased , decreased, and genes with different, often unspecific expression alterations. the first subgroup consisted of other lignin synthesis genes, the β-glycosidase gene , and β- <dig> -glucanase  <dig>  in the second subgroup of genes with lowered expression level were genes of pectin metabolism , hemicellulose metabolism  and cellulose synthesis . the last subgroup, which exhibited different changes in expression, consists of other genes including pectin, hemicellulose and cellulose metabolism. it is suggested that genes that respond weakly to pathogen infection are only transcriptional noise and they do not take part in plant defence mechanisms.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study confirm that polymers of the cell wall participate in the flax response to fusarium oxysporum infection through the changes in expression of their genes and rearrangement of cell wall structure. although the role of pectin and lignin has been widely studied and the literature provides much information, our studies confirmed the contribution of pectin and lignin to the infection process through the loosening of the pectin structure and the increase at mrna levels of genes participating in lignin synthesis. we provided new information about the role in the pathogen infection of cellulose and hemicellulose, which are expressed by changes in their structure rather than their content, as well as in the profile of their transcriptome. our preliminary studies encourage further research to precisely determine the mechanism of participation of cellulose and hemicelluloses in the infection process.

