BACKGROUND
variation in crop development due to genotype and environment strongly impacts yield. increases in crop production efficiency are needed on a global basis because of projected expanding human populations coincident with regional decreases in area of arable land  <cit> . "an understanding of crop responses to environment will provide the fundamental basis for developing methods for achieving these increases in efficiency" . plants interact with environment in both chemical and physical ways, but we have very little systematic understanding of how the plant responds chemically during development and in developmental response to environment  <cit> . this lack of knowledge of the broad changes in metabolite patterns during development limits our efficiency to manipulate the cellular or molecular aspects of plant development with intent to influence yield or sustainability of production.

recent advances in plant metabolomics, that is large-scale phytochemical analysis of plants  <cit> , are paving the way for identifying broad changes in metabolite patterns. metabolomics has typically been used to characterize the comprehensive changes due to specific environmental or genetic perturbations  <cit> . gas chromatography-mass spectrometry  methods currently are being used in many of the metabolomics studies and can provide an accurate and reproducible quantitative and qualitative assessment of a large complement of the metabolome  <cit> . a potential disadvantage of the gc-ms methods lies in the serial processing of samples. the time required to analyze large sample numbers can be lengthy for some studies.

many samples are needed to characterize quantitative aspects of developmental variation. in these situations, methods that use parallel processing of samples to allow high-throughput assay would complement the traditional comprehensive, but serial, procedures, such as gc-ms. a potential disadvantage of the parallel processing methods lies in their dependence on predetermination of the metabolites to be assayed, which presents a possible bias in observed metabolite patterns.

the use of biomarker metabolites is common in many biological fields, including clinical chemistry. foyer et al.  <cit>  have recently proposed the use of certain amino acids or combinations of them as biomarker metabolites of several metabolic processes or states of plants. in the clinical-chemistry approach, the metabolites are typically chosen based on their diagnostic value, whereas in our study an approach was sought that combined the advantages of the diagnostic approach and the comprehensive metabolomic approach. the comprehensiveness is approached when the set of biomarkers captures much of the variance of the metabolome. the diagnostic value is approached through interpretation of the pattern of the biomarkers relative to each other, and the shifts or distortions in this pattern under various conditions. we anticipate that a biomarker metabolite set constructed through data reduction methods will substantially overlap or capture biomarker sets developed through knowledge of plant physiology.

representatives from clusters of metabolites can probably capture much of the metabolite variance of a metabolomics study because multiple correlations among metabolites are commonly observed in metabolomics studies  <cit> . if a set of representatives could be identified for which:  the elements  represented much of the metabolite variance within a study potentially impacting the improvement of crop production efficiency,  the elements were relatively independent of each other, and  the elements were common and found in any typical plant sample, then the resultant set of biomarker metabolites could be used in comparative screening of metabolite patterns of plant developmental periods, of plant response to specific environmental factors, or of genotypes in set conditions, and could provide a complementary tool of the comprehensive metabolomic technologies and of diagnostic biomarker approaches.

metabolite composition is expected to vary consistently in response to development and environment. core primary metabolites are known to provide good metabolite discrimination between genotypes  <cit> . this is expected because their quantities are typically affected by many genetic changes, i.e. they are involved in highly regulated activities. also likely would be an effect on their quantities due to developmental change partially triggered by the internal programming influencing development, and by the need for certain metabolic transitions to occur with a change in growth pattern  <cit> . many of these core primary or central metabolites show significant change in response to environmental conditions  <cit> . knowledge of variation in central metabolism is furthermore considered fundamental for the progress of metabolic engineering  <cit> , indicating a broad belief in its consistent and impacting variation. primary and central metabolites need to change differentially in development and in response to environment because of biological reasons, and have been demonstrated to do so in a variety of organisms . in addition, a fair amount of general knowledge and assay procedures exist for these metabolites. the likelihood of meeting the three requirements itemized in the above paragraph was considered good, if the following simple procedure was used: 1) partition the variance in metabolites of the developmental event into independent components, 2) ensure that the variation within each of the major components was represented, and then 3) identify a minimal set of central  metabolites that satisfied these conditions.

the utility of a biomarker metabolite set for a developmental study depends on the ability of the biomarkers to provide a snapshot of an aspect of plant development. the ability of the biomarkers to faithfully represent the pattern of variation among the tissues sampled at various locations within the plant and at different plant ages provides a type of internal validation. an appropriate representation of the pattern of relationships among the tissue samples of this study is the set of correlations, based on the metabolite data, existing among them. the reliability of the biomarker metabolite set to capture the metabolite variance can thus be based on the ability to discern the same pattern of relationships among the tissues based on the correlations among them relative to the relationships based on correlations utilizing a more comprehensive metabolite dataset.

if a reliable, validated set of biomarker metabolites could be developed, then a final objective was to provide a demonstration of the type of output from comparative screening of metabolite patterns.

the metabolomics dataset used for development of the proposed biomarker metabolite set examined metabolite composition during initial tiller development of rice . tillering is a major yield component of rice, as well as of wheat and many of the other small grains, because the number of tillers per land area strongly influences the number of panicles  per land area. tiller initiation is sensitive to genotype and environmental effects. environmental factors affecting tiller initiation include most known to affect plant developmental events, such as radiation quantity and spectral quality, adequacy of nutrition, extent of oxidative stress, and presence of growth inhibitors. a longer-term goal of our project is to understand the commonalities and differences in how these factors affect tiller initiation, so that schemes can be developed to minimize their effects and increase the consistency and manipulability of rice tillering and thus rice crop yield and quality.

RESULTS
first, some interpretation is provided of the principal components of the metabolite space in rice tiller development. this includes some examination of the patterns in metabolite loadings on principal component  <dig>  next, the results from a metabolite clustering based on the ranked principal component loadings are provided. this section includes the resulting selection of the biomarker metabolites, and a check of their relative independence. the next section discusses the physiological relevance of the biomarker metabolites with a focus on their loadings on the top three principal components. after this, some internal validation is provided by analyzing the reliability of the biomarker set to represent the pattern of metabolite variation observed among the tissues. an external validation is then provided by testing the ability of individual biomarkers to predict the changes in concentration of other metabolites in response to an environmental variable. finally, a type of output from comparative screening of metabolite patterns is demonstrated.

interpretation of principal components of the metabolite space in rice tiller development
the metabolite profiles from the rice tiller development study were redistributed into independent subsets through the application of principal component analysis of the metabolite space . principal components in standardized centered metabolite space were determined, thus the results are based on analysis performed on the magnitude and pattern of the variation in concentrations of the individual metabolites . the first five principal components, which explained 83% of the total metabolite variance , were evaluated in this study.

the first pass at interpreting the principal components involved plotting the scores against the two developmental variables of days post-emergence and height of the sample's mid-section . if a principal component was strongly influenced by development, then its score would be expected to demonstrate a pattern of change with respect to both developmental variables. such a pattern was observed in the plots of principal component  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> scores . if a principal component was strongly influenced by environment, independently of development, then the scores would be expected to demonstrate a pattern of change relative to days post-emergence but not height of the tissue section at sampling. an example of a possible environmental variation that could have an influence only on days post-emergence would be change in photosynthetic radiation intensity on the day of harvest due to variation in cloud cover. such a pattern was observed in the plots of principal component  <dig>  . the tendency of the main influence on principal component scores' variations to alternate among two main categories  of influences is not unusual .

patterns in metabolite loadings on principal component 1
patterns in metabolite loadings on principal component  <dig> suggested some metabolite variation could be interpreted via well-known metabolism. for example, ireland  <cit>  discusses the primary routes of nitrogen flow in amino acid synthesis in plants. a number of the involved amino acids were also relatively strong – positive or negative – contributors  on the principal component  <dig> of our study. about half of the relatively strong  were amino acids, including those indicated by ireland, indicating that patterns of metabolites observed in relation to plant developmental or environmental factors can sometimes be related to well-known metabolism. for principal component  <dig> in this study, several of the relatively strong positive loaders  are fairly close in metabolic space to glutamate, which is a relatively strong negative loader, and thus somewhat distant from them in our metabolite space. glutamate and aspartate, for example, are separated by a single metabolic step – the glutamate:oxaloacetate aminotransferase  <cit> .

these same four metabolites opposing glutamate in the principal component  <dig> loading in metabolite space  have been proposed as a biomarker metabolite set of the relative rate of photorespiration in many c <dig> crop species based on physiological understanding  <cit> . photorespiratory activity usually increases with advancement in leaf development  <cit> , and would be expected to increase during the developmental period in this study. the high positive loadings of the photorespiration markers on principal component  <dig> supports this expectation because principal component  <dig> scores tend to increase with development, thus these high positive loaders are increasing in relative concentration during development also. the metabolic links among these amino acids, or of the biomarker metabolite set capturing their behaviour along with those of other metabolites in more dimensions of the metabolite space, will be of interest in interpreting the metabolite variance present in tiller initiation and early development in rice.

metabolite clustering based on ranked principal component loadings
metabolite selection was initiated via k-means clustering into  <dig> clusters based on ranked loadings on the three top principal components. clusters representing  <dig> of these  <dig> combinations were found. from  <dig> of these clusters, representative metabolites were selected based foremost on their proximity to the center of the cluster and nextmost on their perceived commonality as a metabolite. for four of the remaining ten desired combinations, a metabolite from a neighboring cluster was considered sufficiently close to be useful when it had loadings on the first two principal components categorically identical to that sought and with "near-miss" location in loadings on principal component  <dig>  no representative metabolites were found for the remaining six combinations. the strongest pattern in common among the six unfilled combinations is that only one has a strong negative loading on principal component  <dig>  in other words, because of the tendency of principal component  <dig> scores to increase with development  , a representative metabolite could almost always be found in this study when a requirement for that metabolite was to possess a large specific proportional decline in its concentration during development relative to other metabolites. the resultant set of metabolites and the combinations they represent are illustrated in table  <dig>  an additional data file  lists the metabolites that were used in the principal component analysis and subsequent clustering, and have been at least partially or tentatively identified. the actual ranks based on loading values on the top three principal components are provided.

the distribution of the pearson correlation values of pairwise comparisons among the selected biomarker metabolites was determined. the systematic method used to select the biomarker metabolites would be expected to yield a range of pearson values. for example, a metabolite picked from a cluster of metabolites with strong negative loadings on principal components  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  would be expected to have a fairly positive correlation with citrate , not much correlation with galactose , and a strong negative correlation with uracil . the mean pearson value was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and the dispersion was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   , indicating a satisfactory – relatively independent – distribution of biomarker metabolites based on their correlations.

interpretation of physiological relevance of biomarker metabolites in relation to their principal component loadings
the biomarker metabolites presented here were selected partially based on their range of loadings on the top three principal components, and any interpretation of their physiological relevance starts with an examination of physiologically relevant groups of them contributing in common to a particular principal component.

the principal component  <dig> score tends to increase with development , thus the relatively high proportion of amino acids among the biomarkers with strong negative loading on principal component  <dig>  is consistent with other observations of a decrease in amino acid contents of leaves during development  <cit> .

the biomarkers present in the tricarboxylic acid cycle  are all strong negative loaders on principal component  <dig>  this component tends to vary more with days post-emergence than with the more strictly developmental variable of height of sampling of the tissue. these results suggest the tricarboxylic acid cycle is subject to coarse control in response to the environmental factor/s influencing principal component  <dig> values.

a strong opposition exists between the positive- and negative-loading biomarkers on principal component  <dig> with respect to the nitrogen content of the metabolites. nearly all of the positive-loading biomarker metabolites are nitrogen-containing – glutamate, leucine, phenylalanine, pyroglutamate, thymine, uracil and valine; the sole exception is trans-aconitate. trans-aconititate is the stable form of aconitate and is capable of being formed from cis-aconitate  <cit> . nearly all of the negative-loading biomarker metabolites are sugar or organic acid, non-nitrogen compounds – galactose, mannose, trehalose, carbonate, malate, oxalate and shikimate; the sole exception is gamma-amino butyric acid . among the higher plants, gaba is the most widely distributed of the amino acids in which the amino group is not in the alpha position  <cit> .

reliability of the biomarker set to represent the pattern of metabolite variation observed among the tissues
if the resultant set of biomarker metabolites captures much of the metabolite variance in development as obtained through the metabolomic profiling, then we should be able to "flip" the analysis around and detect natural patterns of tissue relationships that relate to development, and possibly environment, based on their biomarker metabolite concentrations.

in order to evaluate the biomarker metabolite set for ability to consistently detect patterns in metabolite distributions among the tissues during development, we compared the set of all correlations among the sampled tissues based on the standardized and centered concentrations of the  <dig> biomarker metabolites vs. the set of all correlations based on the values of the five principal components that explained most  variance in the original metabolomics data set. figure  <dig> is a scatter plot of the pairs of values for these two data sets. these metabolite concentrations are standardized and centered in the figure because our study was mainly interested in the magnitude and pattern of the variation in the metabolites during development. the correlation values plotted in the figure have also been transformed to a z-scale to bring out the accuracy  in the ability of the biomarker metabolite set to mimic the pattern among the tissues, and with reasonable precision .

the biomarker metabolite set was determined to be reliable  in capturing the metabolite-based relationships among tissues present in this particular study of the advent of tillering in rice. we chose to not try to explain any more of the variance of the original dataset because our objective was to develop a biomarker metabolite set to detect patterns among the tissues during development, but we could not, using biological reasoning, explain any of the principal components after principal component  <dig> in terms of patterns among tissues during development. thus, using only the first five principal components served as a way of filtering out noise  <cit>  in the comprehensive dataset. this helps avoid overfitting of the data  <cit> .

external validation of the biomarker metabolite set
the proposed biomarker metabolite set gains value if used in comparative screening, but its use in comparative situations requires some confidence in its transferability to different situations. partial confidence is provided by the internal validation described in the above section, which indicates the set was well-constructed, and also by some natural groupings of metabolites associated with the detected principal components. full confidence, however, requires a demonstration that the set is transferable. an external validation was developed by re-analysing the data of sato et al.   <cit> , which is a capillary electrophoresis  – mass spectrometer: ce-diode array detector metabolomics study of rice leaves, with an emphasis on the day/night transition . pairs of metabolites were identified, in which one member of a pair is a biomarker metabolite that they also measured in their study, and the other member of a pair was a metabolite measured by sato et al. for which a metabolite had a definitive pairing with the biomarker metabolite. the changes in the day/night ratio in metabolite concentration were compared for the members of each pair that could be constructed. for the six pairs that could be used in the validation,  <dig> predicted a higher day/night ratio with a higher day/night ratio being observed for each of them,  <dig> predicted a lower day/night ratio with a lower ratio being observed for it, and one predicted no change in day/night ratio with a higher ratio being observed. the results indicate that the biomarker metabolite set is likely  to be useful in some other situations, for which these primary and central metabolites would be expected to change in a highly regulated manner, because the tested biomarkers worked well as predictors in the different environmental situation of the day/night transition in leaves.

example output from comparative screening of biomarker metabolite patterns
a possible way of presenting the results of a biomarker metabolite study is provided in figure  <dig>  in which four of the tissue sections representing a developmental range in the tillering study are profiled with respect to biomarker metabolite variation. clearly, these biomarkers of metabolite change in the tillering study change in definable ways. some  tend to increase in concentration during development, others  decrease, and others exhibit a more complex pattern. the combination of these patterns reliably reflects the changes in the comprehensive metabolomic profile, and provides a fresh view of the biology of this developmental event. the presentation of metabolite variation based on biomarker variation allows viewing in a single chart whereas the variation of the original  <dig> metabolites  cannot be easily captured in a single chart. in contrast, the presentation of the variation in only one or a few metabolites fails to capture the broader patterns of change in composition that the presentation of the variation in the biomarker metabolites provides. the distortions in the shape  in the biomarker metabolite space can be captured graphically and/or mathematically and evaluated as an approximation of the change in the comprehensive set of metabolites.

applicability of biomarker metabolite set for comparative screening
tillering is an important, well-regulated developmental event in cereal crops and many other grasses. the ability to capture the metabolite variance of this developmental profile using a small set of common metabolites as biomarkers suggests the ability to capture a large portion of it in other plant developmental events using the same set of biomarker metabolites. these metabolites are typically involved in heavily regulated metabolic activities, and it comes as no surprise that they can be useful as biomarkers in plant development. differences in the use of various metabolic pathways need to occur in different developmental or growth response events, but these are differences in degree. some of these differences can help modulate the different developmental or growth response events  <cit> . the interrelationships among the biomarker metabolites would be expected to change in consistent ways in response to change in development, genotype and environment. comparisons of the changes in the interrelationships of the biomarkers  under various conditions will provide new information about plant physiological response in development and in response to environment. the biomarker metabolite set cannot be optimal for any set of conditions, but is likely to be fairly robust in capturing physiologically real differences among them, while being responsive to eventual metabolic interpretation.

CONCLUSIONS
variation in crop development due to genotype and environment greatly impacts yield, yet the community's understanding of the quantitative biochemical variation in plant development is small.

this paper has presented an approach to developing a biomarker metabolite set that captures much of the metabolite variation present in a comprehensive metabolomics set of a plant developmental event, tillering, in rice. the resulting biomarker set is intended to provide some of the advantages of a metabolomics approach and of the use of one or a few diagnostic metabolites.

the approach uses simple and commonly available multivariate statistics, namely principal component analysis and k-means clustering, to assist with the biomarker metabolite selection. the resulting set of  <dig> biomarkers was shown to be reliable in capturing the metabolite variance in the comprehensive metabolomics study and valid for predicting metabolite changes observed in another metabolomics study, while capturing variation that has reasonable potential to be related to well-known metabolism.

the selection of the biomarker metabolites was further constrained to primary or central or common metabolites. because the selected metabolites are common among diverse organisms and often have specific assay procedures already developed , the biomarker set is amenable to future assay via high-throughput technologies, and in application to diverse situations. the biomarker metabolite set can serve as a basis for comparative screening of metabolite patterns of plant developmental periods, of plant response to specific environmental factors, or of genotypes in set conditions.

