BACKGROUND
how and when genes are expressed is an important topic in contemporary life-sciences research. over the past decades, supported by a steep increase in the quality of omics technologies, many new insights on gene-expression regulation were gained with respect to promotors, enhancers, and a large variety of trans acting factors such as, transcription factors and mirnas. furthermore, by adjusting for instance rates of transcription, splicing, polyadenylation, nuclear export, ribosome access, and transcription elongation, gene expression can be timed in a precise fashion. a cell thus has a broad repertoire to realize a fine-tuned system of transcription dynamics that allows for localized, synchronized and timely expression of needed transcripts and proteins. given the fact that the transcription elongation is on average about 2 kb/min  <cit> , genes can be switched on in the order of minutes. hence, studying transcriptome dynamics can be a challenge, also given de complexity of the cellular mechanisms plus the now widely appreciated additional regulatory roles for rna other than just being a messenger between dna and proteins. scientists studying transcriptome dynamics favour embryogenesis as an experimental system, because it provides a biological system in which rna plays an important role in many of the regulatory processes. for example, cells can respond to differences in morphogen concentrations and via this realize a highly localized gene expression .

a well-studied model organism in this context is zebrafish . in the past decade a number of studies has been published that provides much insight in the overall processes of early embryogenesis. these studies entail; global inventories of the zebrafish transcriptome in early embryogenesis ; dynamics of small  <cit>  and long  <cit>  non-coding rnas; differential isoform usage pre and post mzt  <cit> ; the start of zygotic gene expression  <cit> ; transcription and translation dynamics during the maternal-to-zygotic transition   <cit> ; the role of polyadenylation in rna stability  <cit> ; the diversity in 3’ utrs during development with respect to alternative polyadenylation  <cit> ; the dynamics of the methylation state of the zygotic genome  <cit> ; and changing chromatin signatures around mzt  <cit> . complemented with extensive in-situ experiments this has resulted in a rapidly increasing insight of the complex transcriptome dynamics in early zebrafish embryogenesis. an aspect that has not been studied comprehensively yet, is the behaviour of transcriptomes in individuals and the behaviour of individual gene expression during embryogenesis. besides our own study on individual unfertilized zebrafish eggs  <cit> , all of the studies mentioned above were based on pooled samples and quite dispersed time points. the usage of a poly-a+ protocol in some studies sometimes complicates the interpretation of the results, given the fact that many maternal rnas lack a poly-a tail.

to investigate the transcriptome at the level of an individual, we performed a high-resolution time course gene-expression experiment, in which on average one embryo per minute was measured from late blastula to mid gastrula stages, covering about three hours developmental time. in total  <dig> individual embryos were interrogated. the start of this series is well after the onset of the mzt, which implies that the vast majority of maternal mrna in the embryo is replaced by zygotic mrna. we should, by employing a poly-a+ protocol, be able to gain insight into the embryonic transcriptome program and its dynamics. at the same time, we anticipated that we might be able to pinpoint the exact starting and/or stopping points of individual genes. given that genes usually operate in pathways that are organized as cascades, knowing consecutive starting points might help reconstruct embryonic pathways. based on our previous findings in zebrafish eggs  <cit>  that maternal gene expression has a significant mother-specific component, we introduced nine spawns in our experiment.

our finding here showed an extremely tight embryonic transcriptome program over all individual embryos and we succeeded in defining a clear gene-expression profile for each of the  <dig>  expressed genes. this allowed us to classify the gene-expression profiles in ten biologically interpretable classes, including genes that, during this embryonic stage become activated or are switched off. the resolution of our time course was such that we were even able to identify several oscillating genes. similar to what we observed in our study on unfertilized eggs  <cit> , were the clear spawn-specific effects on gene-expression in many of the expressed genes.

as our aim was to investigate transcriptome dynamics; we did not analyse the behaviour of genes in biological pathways. this should be done by relevant experts in the domains these genes are involved. as we were able to pinpoint the starting and stopping of genes, we feel that our dataset might prove to be a valuable resource for biological experts by their attempts to unravel and reconstruct cellular pathways. besides the transcriptome data, we also provide an intuitive web-resource for convenient access to the expression profiles of all expressed genes: http://rnabiology.nl/dr-browser.html.

RESULTS
experiment set-up
gene expression in early zebrafish development is quite dynamic, as can be inferred from the many differentially expressed genes  found in studies with up to eight developmental sample points covering early embryogenesis . especially from the mid blastula stages onward to the early gastrula stage, characterized by the formation of the yolk syncytial layer and the morphodynamic loss of symmetry followed by progressing epiboly plus cellular differentiation and cell migration  <cit> , many genes are switched on, off, or show other differential expression. because studies on embryogenesis typically use quite distant sample points, as well as pools of staged embryos , it is still quite unclear what the expression dynamics, including the inter-individual transcriptome differences, are of each gene in this embryonic phase.

hence, we designed and executed a high-resolution time course experiment with many individual zebrafish embryos. using microarray technology, the gene expression of  <dig> individual zebrafish embryos in a developmental period ranging from 40% epiboly  to 80% epiboly  was measured . thus, we effectively measured the embryonic transcriptome via, on average, about one embryo per minute during this period. in this developmental period the onset of the zygotic transcription that in zebrafish roughly coincides with the mid blastula transition   <cit>  is tightly coordinated with the clearance of maternal transcripts  <cit>  and from the late blastula stage onwards maternal transcripts are reported to be almost entirely cleared  <cit> . hence, it is assumed that from late blastula phase onward, embryos primarily contain zygotically expressed transcripts. these mrnas also should have a regular poly-a tail, which can be short or absent for maternal rnas. therefore, we used a poly-a+ protocol for our microarray analysis, thereby focusing on zygotic mrnas. moreover, the increasing epiboly provided us with a crude, gradual phenotypic marker of embryonic development. as fertilization took place at different time points due to the multiple pushes by which the mothers released their eggs and because there are significant differences in developmental speed between embryos, it is impossible to use timed samples to obtain a developmentally-ordered sample series. thus, a crude phenotypic marker was needed for the basic ordering of the embryos based on their developmental progress. the percentage epiboly of a sample was determined by measuring the epibolic distance, from the animal pole to the progressing epibolic border, in the photographs of each embryo at the time of sampling . spawns from nine different zebrafish pairs were used . all but one microarray  passed the minimum criteria for quality assessment of microarrays, therefore  <dig> samples were used in the further analyses.fig.  <dig> individual transcriptomes were established of  <dig> embryos from  <dig> different spawns  in a developmental stage ranging from late blastula to mid gastrula . the developmental stage was samples with an average of one embryo per minute. each embryo was photographed and several metrics were recorded . here ten embryos are shown with increasing epiboly from left to right




epiboly-expressed genes
transcriptome analysis typically starts with determining which genes are expressed somewhere during the investigated developmental stage. in our experiment, we identified  <dig>   expressed transcripts and  <dig>   non-expressed transcripts, which translates into  <dig>   ensembl-defined expressed and  <dig>   ensembl-defined non-expressed genes . as expected, epiboly-expressed genes show a significantly higher expression than the non-expressed genes .

like reported before, pathway over-representation analyses revealed that gene expression in epiboly is rather focused on basal cellular processes such as splicing, translation or cell cycle  and not so much on cellular signalling such as ligand-receptor interaction or cell adhesion. most over-represented pathways were also found for maternal rnas as present in zebrafish eggs, which is to be expected given the high overlap with maternally-expressed genes. however, this does not fit well with the generally-accepted theory that maternal rna is only used for the pre-gastrula development, then is subsequently cleared and replaced by zygotic rna that is specific for gastrula development.table  <dig> top  <dig> over-represented kegg pathways associated with the non-expressed  and expressed  genes in this time series and their associated p-values. the ie rank column gives the rank of the pathway in an overrepresentation analysis of respectively non-expressed and expressed genes in a study on individual non-fertilized zebrafish eggs  <cit> 




a strict embryonic gene-expression program
as measuring the percentage epiboly is quite error prone, for instance due to the orientation of the embryo under the microscope, plus the known fact that the increase of epiboly does not proceed at a constant pace during embryogenesis  <cit> , we applied a bioinformatics procedure to determine the actual developmental ordering of the selected embryos. after data normalization, a developmental order for the embryos was established based on a training subset of continuously increasing gene-expression genes. we checked this approach by also establishing a developmental order using a training subset continuously decreasing gene-expression genes. we are confident that this approach is effective, because these independently obtained developmental orders are quite similar . more importantly in both cases all test genes exhibited less variance over the whole developmental course as compared to the basic epiboly-estimated order . the developmental order aligns almost perfectly with the principal component’s first axis  in a pca on all  <dig>  epiboly-expressed ensembl genes . this implies that during this developmental period gene-expression is quite strictly regulated. it also appeared that the variation  decreased at the end of our time course as an indication of even more strict regulation . the striking strict gene-expression regulation becomes apparent in the gene-expression plots of the ordered embryo samples . there are many genes that show an extreme consistent gene expression over all embryos . also, most expressed genes show limited variability and small distance to a fitted line : 96% ≤  <dig>  dtfl . these findings are even more amazing, if one realizes that the depicted samples are individual embryos from different spawns, selected on different days, and analysed individually by a complex laboratory technique. apparently, there is quite a remarkable precise developmental program in place for gene expression during this embryonic development phase.fig.  <dig> a principal component analysis  plot of the expression levels of the expressed ensembl genes. the variance explained by the components is indicated between brackets as percentages. the colouring of the embryos is by developmental order 


fig.  <dig> tight gene-expression regulation in the late blastula and early gastrula stages in zebrafish embryogenesis. a density of the median distance to a fitted lowess line  of all expressed ensembl genes. b-d three examples showing the profiles of genes with an increasing dtfl.  <dig> % of all expressed genes have a dtfl <  <dig> 




this is underlined by the fact that we were able, by just visual inspection of all gene-expression profiles, to identify four genes that displayed a clear oscillatory gene expression during this embryonic development: deltac, her <dig>  her <dig>  and her <dig> . all four genes are reported as oscillating genes, although usually in a later embryonic stage  <cit> . these findings demonstrate that the ordering of embryonic samples it quite good and that the transcriptome organizations, even over embryos and spawns, is extremely regulated.fig.  <dig> categorization of gene-expression profiles in the late blastula and early gastrula stages . a  <dig> profile types are distinguished. n, number of genes. b examples for each type of gene-expression profile




types of gene-expression profiles
because the observed gene-expression profiles in our high-resolution time-course are quite distinct, it is possible to analyse the transcriptome dynamics by categorizing these profiles. for this, we defined ten overall types of gene-expression profiles, each of which represent a logical and biologically significant behaviour . as can be expected, these gene-expression profile types blend together, so we applied arbitrary thresholds to three modes of dynamic behaviour: up, down or oscillatory gene expression; to continuous or discontinuous behaviour; and to the observation of ‘starting’ or ‘stopping’ of gene expression in this developmental stage.

although this study covers about 3 hours of embryonic development and apart from the four oscillatory genes , we did not encounter any gene that clearly peaked within this period, neither up nor down. this means that during early gastrulation gene-expression in general changes rather gradually. also, about one-third of the expressed genes showed a constant expression profile , whereas one-third showed an increasing and one-third a decreasing gene expression. within the latter groups there are several genes that were clearly switched-on  or switched-off  during this embryonic stage. however, of the genes with changing expression, the gradually up  or gradually down  were most prevalent. if we examine the rate of change, it is clear that the starting  and stopping genes  have the steepest slope, on average respectively  <dig>  fc/hour  and  <dig>  fc/hour  and the lowest intensities .

for the starting  and stopping genes  the expression starting and stopping points are within this developmental stage. overall is seems that there are relatively more genes starting in the first half of this phase and more stopping in the second half . however, there are also many genes that have a considerable expression at the beginning of this phase. given that we know the rate of gene-expression increase , as well as the first expression level, we can extrapolate to a predicted starting point . this approach would place the far majority of gene-expression starting points before the moment of spawning. expression of type  <dig> genes does not change during this stage; here we used the maximum positive gene-expression rate we found in this study, to predict the starting point for the type  <dig> genes . again many gene-expression starting points are calculated well before spawning. so either the gene-expression rates in the earlier stages of embryogenesis are much higher than in the investigated stage, or there is massive polyadenylation of maternal mrna that result in poly-a+ mrna.

mother-specific gene-expression variation
during the analysis of our experiment, we noticed that a minority of the genes showed a clear multilevel expression profile . these genes, irrespective whether they have an overall increasing, decreasing on unchanged expression, are expressed at two or three expression levels, seemingly random throughout the time series . this seems an unlikely exception to the observed strict regulation of embryonic gene expression. it rapidly became clear that this phenomenon was related to spawns  . although there is a clear relation to spawn, it is not absolute as sometimes embryos from one spawn show different gene expression levels. it is obvious that maternal, and presumably paternal factors strongly influence the embryonic expression of these genes. moreover, close inspection reveals that this spawn-specific effect might be present in many more genes, as also genes without an obvious multilevel gene-expression profile exhibit this phenomenon . the importance of this effect became clear after we labelled spawn in the pca of all expressed genes: all spawns show a strong tendency to group together and some spawns almost completely separate on the pca- <dig> axis . this means that in addition to a tight overall gen-expression regulation, embryos have a spawn-specific regulation.fig.  <dig> multilevel gene-expression behaviour is highly spawn specific; examples of multilevel gene expression. a examples of genes with a two-level , a three-level  and a highly variable  expression. b the same genes are ordered first as spawn then by developmental order. c the same principal component analysis  plot of the expression levels of the expressed ensembl genes as in fig.  <dig>  but with a colour scheme for four spawns as indicated, while the remaining five spawns are marked by in grey. additional file  <dig> provides a pca plot with all spawns marked with a different colour




discussion
in this study we set out to investigate the transcriptome dynamics of early zebrafish embryogenesis with a comprehensive experimental set-up that interrogated individual embryos about every minute during the circa 3 h period during epiboly from late blastula to the mid gastrula stage. we did so, because most studies into  embryogenesis are typically using pools of staged embryos plus quite dispersed time points, and we reasoned that a high-resolution time course could provide much insight into the true dynamics of the individual genes of the embryonic transcriptome. the fact that we were able to identify several oscillating genes shows the value of our approach. we set-out to prove that it should be feasible to pinpoint the starting and stopping points of individual genes. we were able to do so for the genes that started or stopped during the epibolic stage. hence it is also possible to define consecutively starting, or stopping genes, which should be of great help reconstructing cellular processes and molecular pathways. in this study, we did not aim to unravel the role of individual genes nor that of the molecular pathways in zebrafish embryogenesis. this should be done by the appropriate experts on each molecular process. to facilitate them, we have not only uploaded our entire dataset to ncbi’s gene expression omnibus with accession number gse <dig> , but also set-up a web resource in which experts can conveniently investigate the expression profiles of the genes of their choice: http://rnabiology.nl/dr-browser.html in combination with the expression in zebrafish oocytes from our previous study  <cit> . to gain perspective, it is important that by interpreting individual genes, one is aware what the common transcriptome dynamics are for all genes during the same developmental stage.

to put our study in context, we compared our finding with three other studies: junker et al.  <cit>  on genome-wide rna tomography, which has one sample point  that overlaps with our time-course; aanes et al.  <cit>  of which the  <dig> -hpf sample point overlaps with the start of our time course; and our own study rauwerda et al.  <cit>  concerning maternal rna in zebrafish eggs. in general, the findings of the current study were in line with the previous studies . the genome-wide rna tomography by junker et al. provides an exciting opportunity to link the temporal gene expression data to embryonic location. given that genes primarily function in the context of a cellular network this would allow the decomposition of the temporal transcriptome data from multicellular embryos to clusters of genes that operate together in pathways or cellular mechanisms. it was possible to look into this, as the rna tomography data overlapped with one embryonic developmental sample point  with our data. a similar number of expressed genes , with 70% overlap in our study were found in the overlapping shield-stage samples from junker et al.  . hence, we clustered the tomography data in  <dig> spatial gene-expression patterns and analysed which pathways were overrepresented in these spatial expression clusters. genes of the kegg pathway “ribosome”, which also is overrepresented in our time course experiment, were indeed found to be overrepresented in the same spatial expression cluster . however, for many other overrepresented pathways from our expressed genes, we failed to find them back using the tomography data. we feel that the “ribosome” pathway probably succeeded as these genes are highly expressed. unfortunately, although the overall data of the tomography study is excellent, the data of the overlapping shield sample point is rather noisy compared to the other sample points, with only a few distinct gene-expression patterns. so, we believe that new tomography data could help decompose the whole-genome temporal transcriptome data, which could support the discovery of new pathways or new genes into known pathways.

in another comparison, also a high-percentage overlap  was found with the aanes et al.  study with also a similar relative gene expression for the overlapping genes per aanes-defined gene-expression clusters in both studies .

a comparison of the current results with our previous study  <cit>  on maternal rna revealed that 87% of the expressed genes were also found to be present as maternal rna in egg . given the assumptions that in epiboly almost all maternal rna is cleared and maternal rna primarily functions in the pre-gastrula development, this is in line with the finding of lee et al.  that 74% of the early-zygotically transcribed genes still had a maternal contribution. there is however, no clear relation between the expression level for each gene as observed in eggs and that at the late blastula stage . there is also no correlation between the genes that showed a distinct mother-specific effect in egg expression and a spawn-specific effect in epiboly expression. altogether, the clearance and subsequent transcription of these genes seems a complicated aspect of the mzt.

the most impressive result of the high-resolution embryonic time course is the extremely tight regulation of gene expression, even over different embryos from different spawns. a technical conclusion is that pooling of embryos for experimentation poses no problem, if the staging of the individual embryos is done properly. the observed spawn-specific differences will obviously be lost, if eggs from different spawns are combined. at the same time, if spawns are not evenly distributed between pools, spawn-specific gene-expression differences might lead to false positive differential gene-expression conclusions.

more importantly, the presence of such a tightly regulated embryonic program for transcription, which took us by surprise, signals a rather robust system that in essence is resilient to the differences at many cellular levels that must occur between individuals. notably, even though we classified the expressed genes into ten different types, virtually each individual gene has its own unique expression profile with respect to intensity, change and variability.

our unique experimental set-up also allowed us to identify the starting and stopping points of gene-expression at an omics scale. only several hundreds of genes appeared to be switched on or off during this period of embryogenesis, which seems to be quite a quite limited number given the multitude of developmental processes that occur. we must however consider that even though we found many genes expressed, we might miss out on several important developmental regulating genes as they could be below the detection limit of our experimental technique due to low gene expression or only be expressed just in a small fraction of the embryo cells. regardless, if we accept the premise that maternal rna is cleared previous to the gastrula stage, this means that, except for the identified  <dig> starting genes , all zygotic gene expression has to start prior to this embryonic stage. although for some genes the maternal and zygotic contributions can be deconvoluted on the basis of their 3’utr  <cit> , for many genes, polyadenylation of maternal transcripts and zygotic gene expression are confounded. so the expression levels and differences for each individual gene are a net result of those poly-a+ generating mechanisms, as well as specific rna-degrading mechanisms. collectively, the gene-expression changing rates are quite modest, on average about  <dig>  fc/h. they do not explain the observed gene-expression levels as extrapolation of present genes predicts for most of the expressed genes a starting point well before fertilization. as, besides the oscillating genes, no genes with peaking gene-expression were found, we conclude that gene expression in this embryonic stage is unexpectedly gradual, which might be the sign of a complex, strictly regulated system.

our final observation with respect to transcriptome dynamics concerns the spawn-specific gene-expression effects. much alike we observed in our oocyte study, we detected several genes with a substantial spawn-specific difference. moreover, it appeared that this property might be present in the majority, if not all genes, albeit often with extremely small differences. as the eggs in our previous study were unfertilized, we could identify this effect to be mother-specific. in the present study it is undoubtedly a mixed effect of several maternal and paternal epigenetic factors that collectively produce these differences in gene expression. this would also explain why in eggs multilevel expressed genes are almost always expressed at one level in all eggs of one mother, whereas in this study embryos from one spawn often show multilevel gene expression. although we were unable to model all the gene-expression differences between the embryos, it is clear that given the strict regulation of the transcriptome, they will be related. as such, the spawn-specific differences provide an additional layer of information that could support the understanding of transcriptome regulation in embryogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in our high-resolution time-course study, we determined that gene-expression in zebrafish embryogenesis from late blastula to mid-gastrula is tightly regulated and gene-expression changes are in general gradual with small fold changes. the fundamental processes that take place during this developmental period at the transcriptome level involve ~ <dig> genes that are switched on and ~ <dig> genes that are switched off. on top of, that some  <dig>  genes show increasing and  <dig>  genes show decreasing gene-expression, while  <dig>  genes show no change in gene-expression. the resolution of the experiment was so high, that we were able to clearly identify four known oscillating genes. additionally, it allowed us to precisely establish the expression starting and stopping points of several hundred genes. furthermore, we found  <dig> genes that show an obvious multilevel expression profile over the embryo’s. the different expression levels of these genes could be linked to the spawns the embryos originated from. the fact that we were able to identify the different spawns by their gene-expression variance over all expressed genes, underlines the importance of spawn specificity, as well as the tight regulation in different individuals. our unique experimental set-up of whole-transcriptome analysis of  <dig> individual embryos, provided an unparalleled in-depth insight into the dynamics of early zebrafish embryogenesis that we also made available to the scientific community.

