BACKGROUND
the first decade of this century has seen the rapid accumulation of vast genome-scale sequences, largely fuelled by the next generation sequencing technologies. although these massive amounts of data offer an unprecedented opportunity for addressing many fundamental questions in the field of biomedical science  <cit> , yet making sense of these raw sequences on their own represents a tremendous challenge. a large body of new protein sequences is awaiting functional annotations  <cit> , which trails far behind by the rate of genome sequencing. classically, sequence-function relationships for a protein are largely evident through looking at its structural properties. one of the most obvious structural properties for the protein is modular design, with domains forming distinct globular structural units. apart from structural units, 3d domains are also evolutionarily related. for example, the structural classification of proteins  database  <cit>  defines domains as the smallest unit of evolution. when it comes to function, however, we are accustomed to considering whole proteins despite the fact that very often domains can be functional units. as a matter of fact, domains can carry out many aspects of protein functions, and are widely used as functional predictors. among current methods for computational protein function annotation/prediction  <cit> , the structure-based methods are increasingly popular  <cit>  as more structures are and will be resolved experimentally and deposited digitally in the protein data bank   <cit> . without referring to detailed residual information of primary sequences, structural information at the domain level is closely relevant to biological functions. in principle, the coverage of functional annotations can be dramatically improved by in silico transferring known functions of proteins to those un-annotated proteins via their shared structures  <cit> . hence, generating domain-centric functional annotations is necessary to realize such automated protein function transfer/prediction.

scop domains defined at superfamily and/or family levels are decent choices regarding the above-mentioned three aspects  of protein modularity  <cit> . at the superfamily  level, domains are distantly related with evidence for common ancestry; within the same superfamily, domains are further divided into the family level wherein domains are often related by sequence similarity  <cit> . based on scop, the superfamily database uses hidden markov models to detect and classify scop domains at both the superfamily and family levels  <cit> . consequently, each protein sequence may be represented as a string of scop domains, called domain architectures  <cit> . to better understand the functional aspect of scop domains, recently we have also proposed a framework for automatically inferring the domain-centric annotations from the existing protein-level gene ontology  annotations, and thereafter deriving a list of go terms that are of most relevance to individual scop domains  <cit> . although they are useful in describing functionally independent domains, most domains may not just function alone. when surveying domain compositions of proteins in the latest version of the uniprot knowledgebase   <cit> , we find that up to 70% are predicted to be multi-domain proteins. in multi-domain proteins, two or more domains can combine together, thus conferring functional plasticity. the recombination of the existing domains in multi-domain proteins is considered as one of driving forces for gaining functions   <cit> . the combinations of two or more successive domains can be viewed as 'supra-domains' if they exist in different domain architectures  <cit> . in other words, supra-domain combinations can be found in different full-length domain architectures and act as larger evolutionary units greater in size than a single domain yet not necessarily a complete full-length protein architecture. given the combinatorial nature of supra-domains, their functions are not practical to characterize in a labor-intensive manner. supra-domains are far more difficult than individual domains to manually curate by looking at the functions of multi-domain proteins they reside in. motivated by these challenges, additional research is warranted to explore how domain combinations contribute to function diversifications. it also remains to show whether the previously proposed framework can be extended to infer go terms suitable for supra-domains in addition to individual domains. more importantly, there is a need to clarify the utility of go-annotated domains and supra-domains in function prediction and other aspects of functional mining.

in an attempt to address the questions mentioned above, we first generalized our previous framework for capturing go terms suitable for annotating both individual domains and supra-domains. using the concept of reverse engineering, at the core of this domain-centric approach is: if a go term tends to annotate a set of proteins containing a certain domain , then this term should also carry out functional signals for that domain . biologically, the resulting domain-centric go  annotations have carried on hidden functional signals buried under existing annotated proteins. methodologically, this resource has taken into account the structural organization of go by performing two types of statistical inference. because of these considerations, a domain  can be associated with multiple go terms  that are informative to annotate it, and thus allowing multiple associations between domains and go terms . since the inferred dcgo can preserve the input information at the protein level, to some extent our approach addresses the challenges like one-domain-many-functions and one-function-many-domains . with the dcgo annotations at hand, we then developed 'dcgo predictor' to predict functions of the target sequences in the cafa experiment, an international competition for automatic protein function and critical assessment  <cit> . finally, we derived meta-go terms  of different specificities, and showcased their related dcgo annotations to facilitate our understanding of functional implications in sequenced genomes. these results demonstrated the ability of the domain-centric solution towards function predictions and functional genomics.

RESULTS
a domain-centric go approach to automatically infer go annotations for individual domains and supra-domains
the structural domain information of a protein is closely relevant to biological functions it has. to reveal the extent of functional signals carried by protein domains , we developed a domain-centric gene ontology  approach , a generalized extension to our previous proposal  <cit> . briefly, the implementation of this approach started from high-coverage domain architectures and high-quality go annotations for proteins , resulting in the correspondence matrix between domains/supra-domains and go terms. based on this matrix, two types of statistical inference  were performed while respecting the directed acyclic graph  of go; these dual inferences aimed to ensure that only the most relevant go terms could be retained. a false discovery rate   <cit>  was then calculated to measure significance of inference, while a hypergeometric score  used to indicate the strength of inference. finally, we propagated the inferred go terms to all their ancestors, generating the complete go annotations for a domain/supra-domain. the middle panel in figure  <dig> gives an account of analytic details, while the right panel illustrates an example of how to infer possible associations between a supra-domain ' <dig> '  and a go term 'go:0019827' . the full results for this example are accessible at  <cit> . from this link and the figure  <dig>  we can see a significant association between the supra-domain and the go term . interestingly, among the two domains constituting this supra-domain, only 'set domain' is associated with 'stem cell maintenance' , but not for 'beta-beta-alpha zinc fingers'. this example clearly shows the necessity of associating two or longer supra-domains with go terms, as functional units can consist of more than one domain acting together or acting at an interface between domains.

the resulting dcgo resource is available at  <cit> , wherein the 'browse' navigation on the left provides two options for accessing the resource. the first one is a scop-orientated option to obtain a list of go terms annotated to individual domains , such as 'triosephosphate isomerase '  <cit> . the second option is a go-orientated view to list those domains/supra-domains annotated by a go term, like 'serine-type peptidase activity'  <cit>  and 'stem cell maintenance'  <cit> . such displays, if combined with a species tree of life , can greatly facilitate evolutionary analyses of either an individual domain of interest or sets of domains annotated by a go term of interest.

1bp = biological process, mf = molecular function, cc = cellular component; 2the number of annotatable domains/supra-domains; 3the number of go terms used to annotate; 4the total number of domain-centric go annotations; 5annotation density is defined as the observed  divided by the theoretical ; 6a total of  <dig>  distinct domains at scop family  level; 7a total of  <dig>  distinct domains at scop superfamily  level; 8a total of  <dig>  possible supra-domains.

cafa function prediction using go annotations of both individual domains and supra-domains
to maximize performance, protein function prediction should integrate different kinds of predictive features  <cit> , including the primary sequence for blast comparisons and non-sequence relevant features such as expression levels, sub-cellular localizations and protein-protein interactions, to name but a few examples. rather than to train a multi-feature classifier or make consensus annotations, here we aim to show the contribution made to function prediction by the single-method dcgo direct annotations. viewing domains as functional units renders the  function prediction of poorly annotated proteins with known/predicted domains fairly straightforward. it was achieved via 'dcgo predictor'  <cit> . the implementation first considers the domain composition of a target protein, and subsequently transfers any go annotations of its residential domains/supra-domains to the target. the predictive score  is calculated to reflect the confidence of such predictions/transfers. we applied 'dcgo predictor' to target sequences provided in the cafa experiment . briefly, go terms for mf and bp were predicted for these targets , resulting in a list of terms along with a predictive score for each of targets. then, these predictions were evaluated by the precision-recall  analysis against gold standard true annotations manually curated in a period of more than one year. finally, all individual target pr-rc values were averaged to produce pr-rc values for each of the eukaryotic sets or the whole sets for eukaryote .

we first examined the pr-rc curves of our prediction using both domains and supra-domains for eukaryotic sets . considering purely domain information is used, dcgo predictions were remarkably successful in recovering true functional annotations. our prediction yielded the best results for euk_set <dig>  which is consistent with the highest percentages of annotatable domains/supra-domains. we also found that using go terms in mf  outperformed using those in bp , indicating that molecular functional aspect is more relevant to describing the domains/supra-domains. interestingly, limiting the prediction to the individual domains only slightly reduced performance when plotting pr-rc curves for the whole eukaryotic sets . further examination of domain compositions of these eukaryotic targets reveals that only one-third of the targets were of multi-domain proteins, which is far less than the average of 70% for eukaryotic proteins . we expect that the inclusion of supra-domains would lead to much better function prediction if a more representative set of multi-domain targets were to be included. when applied to prokaryotic sets , surprisingly we observed a similar overall performance to the eukaryotic sets . this observation partially implies that the dcgo approach is not so sensitive to the sequences of different origins as long as these sequences to be predicted are not so atypical in terms of domain content they have.

'dcgo predictor' is not just computationally efficient, but brings additional understanding to the annotation at a sub-protein resolution. using modular domains is not just conceptually more intuitive, but easier to implement than other more complex methods. for example, we have extended the generalized domain-centric approach to other interpro signatures  <cit> . the additional domains in interpro further improve the predictive performance described above . notably, the revised version of 'dcgo predictor'  is more discriminative than the old version  that used the fdr to calculate p-scores. as shown in additional file  <dig>  the old version misses the 'higher precision but lower recall' part of pr-rc curves. this is because the fdr does not discriminate between high-scoring predictions . conversely, h-scores differ between the top predictions.

the derivation of meta-go terms and their application to functional genomic analyses
the 'dcgo predictor' for function prediction in the cafa experiment validates the quality of this dcgo annotations resource. to extend the usefulness of the resource, we generated meta-go terms . similar to the concept of go slims  <cit> , these meta-go terms contain a subset of terms appearing in dcgo annotations but allow for a grain-specific view of the content. they were obtained by partitioning go according to specificity measured in the form of information content . as summarized in the bottom panel of figure  <dig>  meta-go terms were divided into four levels of increasing specificity: highly general, general, specific, and highly specific. in agreement with the pyramid-like shape of the go hierarchy, increasing specificity led to an increase in the number of go terms in all cases. for a given ontology and a given specificity, we also noticed that there existed a similar number of go terms, suggesting comparable compositions of meta-go terms for individual domains and supra-domains.

since the derived meta-go terms provide a grain-specific overview, restricting their related dcgo annotations  is particularly useful for go term enrichment analysis. this kind of enrichment analysis is commonly employed for interpreting transcriptome data , and can be generally applied to any large-scale dataset if provided with knowledge-specific annotations. to reveal the functional insights into newly sequenced or yet-to-be-annotated genomes, we viewed their domainome  as functional carriers and performed enrichment analysis using meta-go terms and domain-centric annotations. so far, we have applied such functional genomic analysis to all sequenced eukaryote genomes provided by the superfamily database. as a proof of principle, analysis of a recently sequenced and rapidly evolving animal lineage, oikopleura dioica  <cit> , showed that the enriched go terms were diverse, representing a wide spectrum of functions involved in energy metabolism, organ/tissue development, responses to stress/stimulus, cell communication and signal transduction . these functional implications are not only consistent with our previously identified over-represented domains   <cit> , but also provide a possible direction for future studies to clarify these observations in greater detail. in a second case, we analyzed three unicellular genomes . these genomes are phylogetically located at the animal-fungal boundary and thus afford an important look at the origin of the multicellular animals  <cit> . as listed in additional file  <dig>  these genomes shared quite a similar profile of go enrichments, including metabolic processes, catalytic molecular function, and cellular organelle . catalytic function and related metabolic processes appeared to a reasonable result of a large number of catalytic domains observed  <cit> , which is becoming the focus of considerable research  <cit> . the functional involvement of mitochondrion was probably reflective of the importance of mitochondrial genomes in putting themselves as an out-group to animals  <cit> . in the near future, we will extend these functional genomic analyses in a context of a species tree to reveal functional trends in the course of eukaryotic evolution. other than the genomic data stored in superfamily, user-submitted domains are also supported for enrichment analysis. this 'dcgo enrichment'  <cit>  can provide the interpretations for a predefined list of domains of interest, for example, a list of unusual domains found in a genome as compared to other genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we present a domain-centric go approach of using protein-level annotations and structural information to detect functional signals inherent in the residential domains/supra-domains. under this principle we have developed 'dcgo predictor' as a functional annotation tool and we demonstrate its utility for protein function prediction in the cafa experiment. since 'dcgo predictor' was not conceived as a competitor for the many multi-feature classifiers trained to perform on the cafa test, its relative success as a single direct method justifies its unique value. the generality of the method has allowed us to include many other biomedical ontologies in addition to go, and allows it to be adopted more widely by other domain databases such as those in the interpro consortium.

using as a functional annotation tool, we demonstrate its utility for protein function prediction in the cafa experiment, and this kind of domain-centric functional information should be incorporated into any future studies of genome annotations. we also generate meta-go terms of different specificities and showcase their use for domain-based functional genomics. these results have already provided us and others  with a resource to understand the >  <dig> million  sequences, both structurally and functionally.

