BACKGROUND
dna methylation involves the conversion of cytosine to 5-methylcytosine, which results from the action of dna methyltransferases   <cit> . dna methylation occurs in different sequence contexts in different organisms. in h. sapiens and other mammals, it is believed that dna methylation occurs mainly in the cytosines of cg dinucleotides  <cit> .

in plants, dna methylation is critical for parental imprinting, the regulation of embryogenesis, transposon silencing and for seed viability  <cit> . it has been shown that different pathways are involved in the methylation of cytosines in three different contexts; cg, chg  and chh   <cit> . plants share some of the key elements of the dna methylation machinery with mammals, but additionally contain plant-specific pathways as well. plants can tolerate mutations in the dna methylation pathways, that are embryonic lethal in mammals , and therefore provide a powerful model system for the study of methylation.

the ability to measure dna methylation efficiently and accurately is essential for understanding the mechanisms of the processes that lead to dna methylation. various techniques have been developed to detect and quantify dna methylation. bisulfite sequencing is becoming the gold standard in methylation studies, since it provides both high resolution in sequence and a quantitative measure of dna methylation at specific loci  <cit> .

bisulfite sequencing involves bisulfite treatment of single stranded dna that converts unmethylated cytosines  into uracil while methylated c's remain unconverted. after treatment, the region of interest is pcr amplified, and the pcr product is cloned and sequenced. the pcr amplification of the converted c  will result in the replacement of uracil with thymine. by comparing the sequence of the bisulfite-treated dna with that of untreated dna, the methylation profile is determined: conversion of a c to t indicates non-methylated c's; in contrast, the absence of c to t conversion indicates protection by the methyl moiety of the c and hence methylation. in a standard bisulfite treatment, thus, several sequencing runs/clones are sampled per sequence. this makes the analysis of the data complex.

most of the extant web-based tools are designed specifically for mammals, and are, therefore, unable to detect methylation outside the cg context. currently, the only available tool for the analysis of bisulfite converted dna in plants is cymate  <cit> . although this tool provides ample analyses, kismeth provides additional useful features such as the ability to design primers for pcr amplification of bisulfite-treated dna, analysis of individual sequenced reads and facilitates the bulk analysis of the many sequences associated with bisulfite-treated methylation detection.

RESULTS
the c at any particular position may not be completely methylated in any given tissue, which is a measure of the intrinsic variability. in addition, bisulfite treatment can lead to incomplete conversion, which is the extrinsic noise introduced by the act of measurement. thus, in order to get a measure of the dna methylation level, a large number of individual clones of pcr products from multiple biological replicates need to be analyzed. kismeth is one of a few web-based programs that can perform such an analysis, especially for plants.

in this section, we describe kismeth, then its use in two pilot studies and conclude with a comparison to other tools that can be used to analyze bisulfite sequencing.

tool description
we describe here the two tools included in kismeth, the analyser of bisulfite sequencing data and the designer of bisulfite sequencing primers.

bisulfite sequencing analyzer
kismeth requires two fasta-format files, one file containing the reference sequence and the other containing the results of bisulfite sequencing. the reference sequence should be the minimal sequence  between the flanking pcr primers. there are no restrictions on the lengths of sequences other that the limits placed by the sequencing technologies, the software works well for hundreds of sequences, but very large numbers can lead to the website stalling  <cit> .

both files are uploaded on the front page shown in figure  <dig>  example files from the pilot study described in the application section are available through a link on the front page of kismeth. the question mark on the front page provides a manual  for the tool. kismeth will perform the analysis and return a synopsis table and graph, shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  summarizing the statistics for the sequence as a whole. the graph shows the fraction of methylation at each cytosine position along the reference sequence, allowing a quick estimate of the rates of methylation in different regions . the data underlying the graph, the methylation states of various kinds of cytosines in the sequence, is also available either for browsing on the web  or as downloadable comma separated value  files  which can be imported into spreadsheet programs.

in addition, two kinds of detailed reports, on a sequence-by-sequence basis, are accessible through the matches and dot plot links on the synopsis page . the detailed matches view highlights the various kinds of cytosines in the sequence and the result of the bisulfite treatment  allowing the user to study individual alignments to estimate the quality of the sequencing effort that can lead to mismatches . the dot plot shows only the cytosines as circles, colored according to the type of cytosine , with filled circles representing methylated cytosines and empty circles representing un-methylated cytosines . the program parameters, described in the algorithm section, can be changed on the front page of kismeth. kismeth also generates postscript files for various figures, which can be downloaded for use in publications.

bisulfite primer design
kismeth also provides the option to design primers for methylation analysis of a particular region. the link for the primer design program on the front page  leads to the primer design front page . here, the user can upload a reference sequence file, specify the length of the pcr product and the desired tm , and kismeth will provide a list of optional primers based on their predicted efficiency. the user can also choose to design primers for the reverse complement of the input sequence, and thus interrogate both dna strands. the results are presented as a table .

application of kismeth
we used kismeth to analyze data from two experiments in arabidopsis thaliana. the first study demonstrates the loss of dna methylation of an atmu <dig> transposon in a mutant background, leading to epigenetic reactivation  <cit> . the second study is of the global effect of argonaute- <dig>  which is necessary for chg dna methylation in a. thaliana  <cit> . our aim in these pilot studies is to demonstrate kismeth's ability to analyze such data in meaningful ways. the biology relevant to these pilot studies is described more extensively in other publications.

dna methylation of an atmu <dig> transposable element
our first pilot study was the use of kismeth to study methylation data for an atmu <dig> locus of a. thaliana . this transposon is epigenetically silenced by dna methylation  <cit> . a decrease in dna methylation <dig>  mutant background induces a genome-wide decrease in dna methylation  <cit> . the atmu <dig> locus shows a decrease of dna methylation in the ddm <dig> mutant background  <cit> .

we generated bisulfite data from wild type a. thaliana plants , and the ddm <dig> mutant for the atmu <dig> 5' terminal inverted repeat using pcr primers generated by the primer design tool in kismeth. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  changes are apparent in the overall methylation between cytosines of all sequence contexts in the ddm <dig> mutant.

using the matches link we can see that even though some of our clones had one or two mismatches, the overall quality was satisfactory. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  the dot plot shows that although there is an overall reduction of methylation in the ddm <dig> mutant, there are two clones in the ddm <dig> background that show wt-like levels of dna methylation.

the overall decrease in methylation that is evident in figure  <dig> can be the result of either a general reduction in methylation levels in each plant or cell, or a complete loss of methylation in some plants/cells and retention of wt levels in others. figure  <dig> clearly shows that the latter is correct.

to asses our background non-conversion level we used at2g <dig>  a gene that is known to be unmethylated in wt. we have provided the data in the example data sets that can be downloaded from the website, it does show that the effect we are seeing is not an experimental artefact.

role of argonaute- <dig> in dna methylation
as a second pilot study, to study global effects of the dna methylation pathway, we prepared genomic dna from a. thaliana wild type  and an rnai mutant ago4- <dig>  treated dna was then used for pcr amplification of mea-isr, a repetitive element  <cit> .

in our experiment, la-er and ago4- <dig> had  <dig> and  <dig> clones sequenced, respectively. these two sets of sequences were then analyzed using kismeth. the analysis generated by kismeth was in full agreement with what has been shown previously  <cit> .

in the wild type plant, high levels of methylated cs in cg, chg, and chh contexts were observed ; whereas those in ago4- <dig>  have a decrease in chg and chh methylation, with cg methylation unchanged . the dot plots shown in figure  <dig> agree with the observations from figure  <dig>  that there is a reduction in chg and chh methylation by comparing the graphs for the two datasets. thus, kismeth allows for a quick evaluation of biologically-relevant, global methylation changes.

advantages of kismeth
there are several programs designed to analyze bisulfite sequencing data, cymate  <cit>  is the web-based program that comes closest to kismeth in terms of functionality and applicability to plant data. we list a few user-friendly features in which kismeth differs from cymate.

• preparation of input sequences. kismeth does not require pre-alignments and the reference sequence must be uploaded separately from the clone sequences. cymate takes as input the alignment from clustalw of the vector-trimmed sequences, with the reference sequence always being the first one.

• interactive use of the browser. kismeth presents the results on the browser and alerts users to problems, while cymate sends the results via email, some errors, such as incorrect data formats, are indicated via the website.

• organization of reports and graphs. kismeth provides graphical output for various aggregate measures as well as raw data files in the form of downloadable, spreadsheet-compatible files whereas cymate provides only the dot plot and leaves some of the tables in log files.

• analysis of individual reads. kismeth provides a custom viewer  for the study of alignments of the clones against the reference sequence, finding non c/t mismatches and scoring the quality of each read separately, no such facility exists in cymate.

• design of primers. kismeth is the only tool for bisulfite primer design for plants.

CONCLUSIONS
in animals, dna methylation is involved in various developmental processes and its dysregulation can cause developmental abnormality and diseases including cancer  <cit> . in plants, it is critical for parental imprinting, the regulation of embryogenesis, transposon silencing and for seed viability  <cit> . detection and measurement of dna methylation has become an essential component for studying the biology of these processes. kismeth is a convenient tool for processing data from bisulfite sequencing, the most commonly used method to examine dna methylation. in all cases, appropriate controls that are not methylated need to also be studied to ensure that there are no systematic biases in the experiments.

though high-throughput techniques are being developed for the detection of dna methylation, their validation, for the most part, still relies on traditional bisulfite sequencing  <cit> . therefore, tools like kismeth are still essential for the study of dna methylation.

