BACKGROUND
human bone marrow derived stromal cells  and adipose-derived stromal cells  have made a significant impact on the field of regenerative medicine. within the field of cardiac regeneration, bmscs have been used frequently in clinical trials while the first clinical trials with ascs stimulated with vascular endothelial growth factor  is currently being conducted by our group  <cit> . bmscs are the most extensively investigated cell type, however adipose tissue has received increasing interest as a source of stem cells due to easier harvest, a larger yield of stem cells and the fact that ascs possess higher proliferative capacity compared to bmscs  <cit> . the rationale behind the potential benefit of using the two cell types has primarily been suggested on the basis of their immunoregulatory properties, paracrine profiles, and capability to differentiate into various cell types  <cit> . when investigating these properties and how to enhance them in vitro, the first change within the cells is found at the transcriptional level. this change is detectable by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction  analyses, which is the preferred method for detecting changes in gene expression  <cit> . however, the qpcr method is sensitive to several errors in the experimental setup that may affect results. these errors could occur at different stages throughout the experiment and encompass variations in the amount of starting material, nuclear extraction, rna integrity, cdna loading, reverse transcription, and qpcr efficiency  <cit> . thus, in order to compare qpcr results from different runs, or samples obtained from different tissues at various time points, a normalization step is necessary  <cit> .

the most widely used method for normalizing qpcr data is comparison to values from reference genes  analyzed simultaneously on the same material  <cit> . the abundance of the normalization candidate gene must be closely related to the total amount of mrna in the sample, in order to be able to correct for experimental errors  <cit> . in addition, it must exhibit stable expression during experimental conditions to be useful for normalization. often an invariant endogenous gene is used as a rg with a constant expression level across all samples and experimental treatments. if the rgs are not stable through the treatment it could obscure actual changes and produce artifacts that contribute to misleading results and incorrect conclusions, thereby leading to unreliable publications  <cit> . the attention regarding selection of suitable rgs has increased in the past decade, from the geometric mean normalization proposed by vandesompele et al., to experiment-specific rg investigations, and ultimately the “minimum information for publication of quantitative real-time pcr experiments”  guidelines  <cit> . the guidelines function as a universal checklist that investigators can follow, to produce the most reliable data when using qpcr  <cit> .

in the field of cardiac regeneration, it has been proposed that endothelium-committed cells greatly enhance cell therapy outcome  <cit> . ongoing clinical trials performed by our group serve to differentiate ascs and bmscs toward endothelial lineage for enhancement of angiogenic potential by stimulation with vascular endothelial growth factor   <cit> . this pro-angiogenic growth factor is known to promote endothelial cell proliferation, migration, and vessel permeability, and to differentiate bmscs toward endothelial lineage  <cit> . the impact of vegf treatment on ascs and bmscs is tested in vitro by the use of qpcr, where it is very important for both cell types to have established rgs that are stable through the vegf treatment. a suitable rg in ascs is not necessarily stable in bmscs, therefore, it is important to validate whether the chosen rgs can be used in both cell sources under specific experimental conditions. no studies comparing choice of rgs between ascs and bmscs have been conducted previously to the authors’ knowledge, which makes this study particularly interesting with regard to the ongoing debate of differences and similarities between these two cell types. through this study we provide a simple stepwise selection procedure for choosing the rgs with focus on the impact on the final outcome. for the purpose we use specially designed software genex, more specifically the algorithms normfinder and genorm  <cit> .

RESULTS
to be able to apply the qpcr on vegf pre-conditioned human mesenchymal stromal cells from the bone marrow and adipose tissue, a panel of rgs  from relevant literature was chosen to find the correct rg for normalization. after confirming rna purity, rna integrity, primer efficiency, and products , a stepwise elimination of candidate rgs was performed in order to select the best-suited rg from a list of acceptable ones.

information for the panel of selected reference genes with full name, ncbi reference sequence, forward and reverse primer sequences, and short description of cellular function.

rna and primer quality
rna purity was validated by excluding protein contamination with absorbance ratios of  <dig> - <dig>  at 260 nm/280 nm. rna integrity was confirmed by rin values of  <dig> for all donors . primers  for the qpcr were validated by dissociation curves  and by efficiencies  of 100% ±10% with a correlation coefficient r <dig> between  <dig>  and  <dig>  .

rg candidate selection
step 1: rg candidate expression levels
the rg candidate cq values were generally between  <dig> and 25 cycles, with no great difference between the vegf treatment group and the control group for either ascs or bmscs . the selected rgs should preferably be expressed in amounts close to those of the target genes. the raw data for the outliers provided us with cq values that were substantially lower than that of the gene of interest, as depicted in figure  <dig> presenting median cq values. reference genes with a substantially greater difference in abundance compared to the gene of interest are not suitable. it would be incorrect to perform an analysis on putative reference genes that are unsuitable to be considered. here our cutoff cq value difference is 10 cycles. in order not to reduce the initial panel of reference genes completely, we didn’t exclude more than the three genes mentioned at this stage.

we have investigated the impact of vegf treatment in terms of initiation of endothelial differentiation in ascs and bmscs, after which endothelial target genes such as vwf are expressed in relatively low amounts, and therefore detected around 30 cycles. since ef1-α, actb, and 18s rrna were the most abundant rgs in both ascs and bmscs, with cq values far from our target, they were removed from the panel . this initial exclusion resulted in the six rgs expressed in closest abundance to the target gene remaining for further analyses.

step 2: initial standard deviation-values from normfinder
normfinder selects the most suitable rg based on the standard deviations  for intragroup donor variation and intergroup treatment variation. this analysis was performed taking the group classification of treatment into account, in order to verify that the candidate rgs were stably expressed and not regulated by treatment. the rg candidates with a large bias, an intergroup sd reaching or exceeding  <dig>  were excluded , leaving tbp, ppia, ywhaz, and gusb for ascs and tbp, ppia, ywhaz, gusb, and gapdh for bmscs for the final analysis.

difference in mean expression of each gene between treated and untreated groups is shown as standard deviations  in unit cycles. genes were excluded at a cutoff value above  <dig> . those with a sd below the threshold value  were included considered for further processing. 18s rrna: 18s ribosomal rna, actb: beta-actin, ef1-a: elongation factor 1-alpha, gapdh: gluco phosphate dehydrogenase, gusb: beta-glucuronidase, ppia: peptidylprolyl isomerase a, rpl13a: ribosomal protein l13-alpha, tbp: tata box binding protein, ywhaz: tyrosine 3/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein. genes not indicated with a star  were deactivated in genex.

step 3: final output from genorm and normfinder
due to the selection in step  <dig>  the software should not regard the effect of treatment in the next step of the selection. this means that the final genex comparisons encompass both intragroup donor variation and intergroup treatment variation. according to normfinder ranking order, tbp was found to be the most stable rg candidate through the vegf treatment for both ascs and bmscs . the optimal number of rgs was two for ascs and four for bmscs based on the accumulated sds, which were reduced slightly by  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively when compared to the use of a single rg . in order to determine which rgs to use in combination we utilize intergroup treatment variation data calculated by normfinder using only the remaining genes from step  <dig> . the sum of the different possible combinations were calculated and compared. the chosen combinations of tbp and ywhaz for ascs and tbp, gapdh, ppia and gusb for bmscs yielded a rg variation sum closest to zero.

genorm uses pair-wise comparison and sequential elimination to select the pair of rgs with highest correlation, indicated by the average expression stability . tbp and gusb were found to be the best correlated rgs for ascs and ppia and gapdh for bmscs  with a cut-off level at  <dig> .

rg verification
we compared the effect of normalization to various rg choices on the expression of a gene of interest , vwf, to validate our procedure of stepwise elimination of rg candidates and to attain a final selection of the most suitable rgs for future vegf stimulation experiments. vwf was chosen as positive control since it has been shown to be upregulated in other experiments by the same treatment, namely serum-deprivation combined with vegf stimulation  <cit> . vwf was normalized to rgs from each selection step of our procedure. for both ascs and bmscs, ef1-α was chosen from step  <dig> while rpl <dig> was chosen from step  <dig>  from step  <dig>  the single best rg found and the optimal number of rgs found by normfinder and the two best correlated rgs given by genorm were evaluated. geometric mean of rg combinations were used, as suggested by vandesompele et al.  <cit> . for ascs, vwf was normalized to tbp, the geometric mean of tbp and ywhaz , or the geometric mean of tbp and gusb  . for bmscs, the normalization was also performed to tbp alone, to the geometric mean of tbp, ppia, gapdh, and gusb , to the geometric mean of ppia and gapdh  . additionally, vwf was normalized to the geometric mean of tbp and ywhaz on the basis of figure 6b.

poor results with normalization to eliminated rgs
for both ascs and bmscs, ef1-α was chosen from step  <dig> while rpl <dig> was chosen from step  <dig> and the single best rg found by normfinder, tbp, was chosen from step  <dig>  when comparing the fold difference in vwf expression for ascs, no significant increase was observed for vegf-treated ascs compared to controls, regardless of the rgs used for normalization. the trend in a slight upregulation of vwf was not investigated in depth, since this was not the aim of the study. for assessing our elimination procedure, comparison of the use of single rgs gave different results for the previously eliminated rgs compared to tbp. the variance in rpl <dig> results was markedly larger than the variance in tbp results, while ef1-α results showed a tendency of down-regulation of vwf, in contrast to results from all other normalizations. for bmsc, normalizing to any of the rg combinations or tbp alone included in step  <dig> of selection, proved vwf to be significantly increased by the vegf treatment. the results are not significant when normalizing to ef1α or rpl <dig>  and their variance was greater than that for tbp.

evaluating combinations of rgs
comparing the results from step  <dig> normalizations for ascs, tbp alone produced results almost identical to either of the two combinations. variance was lowest in tbp and highest in the genorm combination, yet still almost identical .

for bmscs, the fold expression increase obtained using tbp normalization was slightly below that for the normfinder combination of rgs, while the genorm combination resulted in a higher fold expression level . since the genorm combination is the two best correlated rgs and the normfinder combination was the best calculated number of rgs, we trust the expression level found using the normfinder combination to be the most precise.

we further investigated whether a combination of two rgs could replace the four rg combination suggested by normfinder for practical purposes. we found the geometric mean of tbp and ywhaz to be the combination with the closest related and nearly identical vwf fold change level, also with the lowest sem across samples . this combination was compared to the others in figure 6a. when comparing the results of vwf expression between the different rg combinations, only tbp is significantly different from the normfinder combinations. however, only the results using the combination of tbp and ywhaz, found from c <dig> in figure 6b, were significantly correlated with the normfinder combination.

discussion
we compared different rgs for qpcr to detect the most optimal rgs for human ascs and bmscs, as these cell types are currently used in clinical trials, where they are stimulated with vegf before injection into the myocardium of patients with chronic ischemic heart disease. when investigating the effect of the growth factor on the cells on transcriptional level, it is necessary to perform rg optimization for the production of properly normalized, reliable, and reproducible results.

the best single rg for both cell types in our experimental setup was tbp, which has been found to be stable through several other interventions using different stem cell lines or cancer cells  <cit> . tbp and ywhaz were found to be the best two-rg combination for qpcr analyses of vegf stimulation with serum deprivation in both ascs and bmscs.

only four rgs were included in the final analysis for ascs. it is noteworthy that the reduced panel from which an rg or combination of rgs was to be selected, were the exact same rgs that fink et al. have shown to have stable expression in ascs treated with hypoxia  <cit> . the other candidate rgs were excluded on the basis of having intergroup variation above the  <dig>  cycle cutoff or because their expression level was significantly higher in comparison to potential genes of interest. this excluded rpl <dig> which was found by several groups to be the most stable rg in mesenchymal stem cells through different treatments  <cit> .

though normfinder found the optimal number of rgs to be two , and genorm found gusb to be the rg best correlated with tbp , the difference between using tbp alone or in combination with gusb was minimal. the inclusion of gusb only leads to a reduction of  <dig>  in accumulated sd , and the variation in fold change of vwf between the two normalizations was insignificant . similarly, the combination of tbp and ywhaz, calculated from normfinder, would give the same results as tbp alone. the geometric mean of this combination even had a slightly lower variance compared with that of tbp and gusb. we suggest that tbp can be used alone or in combination with ywhaz or gusb for ascs in this experimental setup.

for bmscs, five rgs were included in the final analysis. the elimination explained earlier lead to the exclusion of ef1-α, which is considered to be a very stable rg, and the inclusion of gapdh, which has been shown to be rather unstable through different treatments  <cit> . genorm identified the best combination of two genes to be ppia and gapdh . however, the use of these two rgs leads to a higher accumulated sd , and their geometric mean produced a larger fold increase in vwf expression compared to the other combinations .

the fact that normalizing to the geometric mean of the two genes chosen by genorm produced a larger fold increase in vwf compared to the other combinations is an example of genorm calculating pair-wise correlation rather than stability when selecting the best suited rgs. the number of rgs to be used as suggested by normfinder was the combination of four genes. the use of two rgs would increase the accumulated sd by  <dig>  , but due to practical reasons we further analyzed combinations of two genes to find the normalization that would produce the most similar result for vwf expression . since tbp and ywhaz produced results closest to the combination of the four rgs calculated by normfinder and displayed the lowest sem, we obtain a combination of rgs similar to that for ascs, which could be useful in experimental setups. except for the use of tbp as single rg, none of the vwf expression results using the various combinations were significantly different from those using the four-rg normfinder combination. however, the use of the other combinations could still produce type  <dig> or type  <dig> errors due to skewed expression levels or high degree of variance. the c <dig> combination from figure 6b, tbp and ywhaz, was the only combination significantly correlated to the four-rg normfinder combination. this result is of course dependent on our choice of the four-rg normfinder combination as the most stable. in contrast to bmscs, the different rg combinations for ascs produced more similar vwf expression results. this could be due to the seemingly larger impact of the vegf treatment on bmscs, which could likewise have larger influence on the rg expression, compared to standard culture. we have recently investigated the effect of vegf treatment with serum-deprivation on ascs, and found that the treatment did not produce endothelial differentiation to the same extent as shown earlier on bmscs stimulated similarly  <cit> .

the importance of using a final goi-specific test as supplement to results from the software before choosing rgs is especially underscored by the bmsc results. simply following the results from genorm would have resulted in an overestimation of the vegf effect, which could severely bias an entire study. the software is very useful in the elimination process towards the goi-specific test, which is evident by our results with rgs eliminated in the earlier steps. the rg candidate ef1-α was eliminated early on in the selection process with an expression level far from that of vwf. for ascs, using ef1-α as an rg would be misleading while in bmscs there is a large variance. normalizing to rpl <dig> also results in a large variance for both cell types as expected, since it was eliminated early on for high intergroup variation. the fact that ef1-α and rpl <dig> would be unsuitable to use as rgs supports our rg selection procedure.

CONCLUSIONS
for reliable and reproducible qpcr analyses, selection of the correct rgs for a given experimental setup is of prime importance. we have presented a step-by-step procedure for selecting rgs, with emphasis on a follow-up test with a gene of interest as the final step in the selection process. genes were eliminated based on high intergroup variations, after which normfinder and genorm were applied for further selection, with a final comparison of vwf expression levels for optimal rg selection. we found that the combination of tbp and ywhaz as rgs is stable for normalization of vegf-stimulated ascs and bmscs.

