BACKGROUND
toxoplasma gondii is a widespread parasite of animals that causes opportunistic infection in humans  <cit> . the parasite is transmitted by cats, which serve as the definitive host and shed infectious oocysts in their feces  <cit> . oocysts undergo meiosis in the environment to form eight haploid sporozoites that are highly infectious to a variety of warm-blooded hosts  <cit> . oocyst contamination of food or water leads to infection of a variety of intermediate hosts, including accidental infection of humans through food or waterborne transmission  <cit> . rodents are commonly infected in the wild and likely constitute a major natural host for transmission to cats, thus completing the cycle  <cit> .

studies on the population genetic structure of t. gondii have revealed complex patterns that differ among geographic regions  <cit> . strains isolated in north america and europe largely comprise three highly similar clonal lineages  <cit> , with a fourth clonal variant found more commonly in wild animals in north america  <cit> . in contrast, strains in south america are genetically more divergent and appear to undergo more frequent recombination . the close ancestry of the three northern clonal lineages has led to the hypothesis that they originated from a small number of genetic crosses in the past ~ <dig>  yrs  <cit> . subsequently, the three predominant clones expanded from this bottleneck to occupy many regions and hosts in north america and europe, perhaps aided by human colonization  <cit> . in contrast, strains in south america date to a much older time period, and they have largely remained genetically isolated from those in the north  <cit> . intriguingly, all members of the northern clonal isolates contain a monomorphic variant of chria, consistent with their common ancestry  <cit> . in contrast to the rest of the genome where clonal lineages differ by 2-3% at the nucleotide level, chria differs by <  <dig> in  <dig>  bp among the clonal lineages. surprisingly this monomorphic version of chria is not restricted to northern isolates, but is also found in common south american lineages  <cit> . this unusual pattern has led to the suggestion that chria provides some fitness advantage in the wild  <cit> , although the basis for this success is not currently understood. analysis of a large number of isolates indicates that recombination of chria is infrequent with one of  <dig> distinct patterns being found repeatedly among different isolates: uniformly monomorphic, uniformly divergent, or chimeric with one end monomorphic and one end divergent   <cit> . remarkably, these chimeric versions of chria occur in multiple related clones that share the same pattern, suggesting they arose once and have since spread  <cit> . although this conserved pattern suggests an advantage to maintaining the monomorphic state of chria, it might alternatively be preserved because natural recombination in many t. gondii lineages is rare  <cit> .

reduced recombination and non-mendelian patterns of chromosomal inheritance have been described in other system where segregation of chromosomes can be influenced during meiosis by a variety of processes  <cit> . for example, sex chromosomes often show low levels of recombination as do some autosomal chromosomes such as chr <dig> in drosophila, which shows very low levels of polymorphism  <cit> . selfish genetic elements have also been described that distort segregation at meiosis, due to a process called meiotic drive, or to processes that affect the inheritance of offspring due to segregation distortion  <cit> . meiotic drive mechanisms typically affect the segregation of chromosomes during meiosis, while segregation distortion alters the production of gametes, and post-segregation distorters alter survival of offspring after meiosis  <cit> . among the better studied examples of segregation distortion is the drosophila sd system, which consists of a drive locus called sd and a responder locus called rsp   <cit> . the products of the sd and rsp loci are thought to interact to affect sperm development, favoring rsp insensitive alleles in the presence of distortion activating sd alleles  <cit> . the efficiency of segregation distortion systems can be enhanced by chromosome inversion, thus preventing breakup of the activating drive locus and the insensitive responder, which might otherwise be separated by recombination  <cit> . distorter loci are also frequently found in sex chromosomes that lack recombination, again preserving their preferential allelic pairing  <cit> . although such mechanisms of meiotic drive or segregation distortion have not been previously described in t. gondii, they might explain the unusual inheritance pattern of chria.

the sexual cycle in domestic cats has been exploited to develop experimental genetics in t. gondii by crossing different strains and developing genetic linkage maps based on the segregation of genetic markers among haploid progeny  <cit> . forward genetics based on quantitative trait locus mapping has been exploited to map the molecular basis of differences in virulence among representative clonal lineages in the mouse model  <cit> . natural recombinants among the clonal variants of t. gondii in the wild are rare, and yet when such events do occur they can dramatically shape the subsequent population structure  <cit> . consistent with this prediction, there is evidence that the forth clonal isolate in north america, a group called type  <dig>  has undergone recent recombination with type  <dig>  <cit> . additionally, hybrids are occasionally seen between the clonal types in north america  <cit> . however, there have been few examples of genetic recombination between distantly related isolates in the wild. this may simply reflect their geographic separation, but might also be due to a barrier to cross-fertilization. experimental crosses have shown that the clonal lineages undergo self fertilization with equal frequency as out-crossing  <cit> . the extent to which this occurs in more divergent lineages has not been examined. all of the genetic crosses conducted to date have been between the relatively closely related clonal lineages, all of which harbor the monomorphic chria. therefore, it remains uncertain whether genetic crosses between more divergent and clonal lineages are experimentally possible, and to what extent chria may influence the inheritance of progeny from such outcrosses.

in order to fairly consider alternatives for explaining the abundance of the monomorphic chr1a in nature, we sought to examine its pattern of inheritance among the progeny of an experimental genetic cross. we crossed the clonal type  <dig> strain me <dig>  <cit> , which harbors a monomorphic version of chria, with the type  <dig> strain vand  <cit> , which has a divergent version of chria  <cit> . previous crosses have taken advantage of sequence polymorphisms detected by restriction fragment length polymorphisms   <cit> , or hybridization to microarray probes  <cit>  to define allelic patterns in progeny from genetic crosses. these previous crosses of t. gondii identified both conventional single crossovers and what appeared to be short double crossovers  <cit> , although the relative low precision of the genetic map made it impossible to define the precise size of these intervals. such events may present either conventional double crossovers or gene conversion events, which have been described in a variety of systems  <cit> .

methods used to analyze previous genetic crosses of t. gondii were designed to distinguish polymorphisms between the closely related clonal lineages that are predominant in north america and europe and as such they are not widely amenable to analyzing more diverse strains. to develop a more versatile and unbiased genetic mapping strategy that is also capable of defining precise intervals of recombination, we employed nextgen sequencing  to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms  in the progeny of this new genetic cross. our findings reveal that chria does not influence the outcome of meiosis through a process of meiotic drive, incompatibility, or by acting as a sex chromosome. ngs-facilitated genetic mapping also uncovered an unexpectedly high frequency of small double crossovers that greatly increases the genetic diversity of recombinant clones, and may represent an important source of genetic variability in experimental crosses and in the wild.

RESULTS
generation of an outcross for t. gondii
we used a standard protocol to generate a genetic cross between the clonal type  <dig> me <dig> strain and the exotic strain vand, which is representative of a highly divergent south american genotype called haplotype  <dig>  <cit> . in brief, this involved generating chronic infections in mice and feeding infected mouse brains containing tissue cysts to susceptible cats and then collecting oocysts shed in the feces . before conducting the cross, we first passaged the parental strains through separate cats in order to collect fresh oocysts, as this process has been shown to increase fecundity and lead to greater success in crossing. we readily recovered oocysts of the me <dig> fluorodeoxyribose – resistant  parent. however, we failed to recover oocysts from attempts to passage the vand sinefungin –resistant  parent in several independent cats. this defect was not due to an inability of vand to form bradyzoites in chronically infected mice, but rather to a restriction in self-fertilization. previous studies have shown that selfing occurs when a single cloned organism is used to initiate cat infection  <cit>  and that it occurs as frequently as out-crossing when two different parasites are simultaneously co-inoculated in equal abundance  <cit> . remarkably, when both strains in the present study were co-fed to a cat, viable oocysts were obtained that gave rise to both parental types, as well as recombinants. we initially isolated clones by growth in snf and fudr to estimate recombination frequency and to obtain doubly resistant progeny. the recombination frequency closely agreed with the theoretical expected frequency of  <dig> %  . we also screened clones using pcr-rflp based makers, described previously  <cit> , thereby easily identifying additional recombinant clones . using these markers we also identified what appeared to be both parental types from oocysts obtained from the cross. following pcr typing of progeny, we chose  <dig> recombinant clones for further analysis, based on their initial genetic diversity .figure  <dig> 
development of the genetic cross. a) schematic representation of the genetic cross between type  <dig> vand and type  <dig> me <dig> strains. recombinant progeny were isolated either using dual drug selection or genotyping using eight rflp makers located on separate chromosomes. b) confirmation of recombinant progenies by pcr-rflp markers. markers are listed to the left, and restriction enzymes used in the digest to the right. v, vand snfr; m, me <dig> fudrr, clone names are indicated above the gel. –ve, negative control.


recombination frequency in the genetic cross between vand and me49


number of rarasites
a
b
c
d
e

atotal number of parasites added to  <dig> well plate. although the overall viability in this assay was low, the consistency across three replicates suggests that this did not affect the outcome.


bnumber of plaques formed in the absence of drugs at 7 days post-infection.


cnumber of plaques formed in the presence of fluorodeoxyuridine  at 7 days post-infection.


dnumber of plaques formed in the presence of synefungin  at 7 days post-infection.


enumber of plaques formed in the presence of both snf and fudr at 7 days post-infection.


dcalculation of recombination frequency = number of plaques formed in the presence of both drugs / the number of plaques formed in the absence of drugs ×  <dig> 

generation of a genetic linkage map
having shown that out-crossing between vand and me <dig> was experimentally feasible, we next explored the dynamics of chromosome segregation and recombination among progeny of the cross. in particular, we were interested in the inheritance patterns of chr <dig>  given the possibility that altered segregation might explain its abundance in the wild as an abundant haplotype. to generate a robust genetic map for this cross, we subjected both the parental strains and recombinant progeny to ngs using the illumina platform. sequence reads were mapped to the reference genomes for the me <dig> and vand strains, which were separately assembled and annotated as part of the t. gondii genomes consortium project . comparison of sequence reads from the recombinant progeny were used to identify snps and thereby determine the parental source of each variable position in the genome. a visual depiction of this read mapping is shown in figure  <dig>  where snps are plotted against the reference me <dig> genome, resulting in few variant positions from the me <dig> parental strain and ~ 30– <dig> snps/5 kb region for vand. recombinant progeny were easily identified as containing regions inherited from me <dig> vs. vand based on their snp profile .figure  <dig> 
snp density plots of genome sequence reads from
t. gondii
clones compared against the me <dig> reference genome. the top two panels represent the me <dig> and vand parental lines. the middle two panels represent two recombinant clones that show mixed genotypes that match me <dig> vs. vand in different regions. the bottom two panels show a me <dig> self-clone and vand self-clone. x-axis indicates the relative sizes of  <dig> chromosomes of t. gondii. y-axis indicates the number of snps per kb using a 5 kb sliding window. top row indicates the location of  <dig> genetic markers used to determine the recombinant clones. unk indicates unlinked and unmapped sequences.



to more precisely identify snps and estimate the recombination intervals, we used a new utility called redhorse, which is described in an accompanying software methods paper  <cit> . in brief, the redhorse software identifies putative recombination breakpoints by evaluating snps in each progeny clone and comparing them to the genotype of the parents. by mapping the transition point between parental genotypes it identifies conventional recombinations, as well as double crossovers, which were defined here as two recombination events occurring within a 5 kb region. most importantly, it also uses the physical position of polymorphisms in defining crossovers. redhorse was initially used to compare the me <dig> and vand reference genomes thereby identifying  <dig>  informative snps that differ between the parental clones and for which there was sufficient data to genotype >70% of the progeny. redhorse detected a total of  <dig> distinct conventional crossovers among the  <dig> progeny based on these markers. the recombination breakpoints, together with buffer markers from the ends of the chromosomes were used to generate a genetic linkage map using mapdisto . in addition, redhorse detected  <dig> positions where double crossovers between closely positioned markers, including some that occurred in multiple progeny ; the nature and significance of these are discussed further below.

the strategy used here for generating linkage maps has several advantages over previous methods. firstly, the availability of low cost ngs data allows whole genome polymorphism data to be rapidly acquired without prior knowledge of polymorphism, or the need to develop conventional probes such as microsatellites or rflps. similar to other studies that have used ngs data to generate genetic maps for wheat  <cit> , salmon  <cit> , and apple  <cit> , it was necessary to cull some of the sequence reads prior to generating alignments and mapping snps. this processing typically was required to accommodate repetitive or low complexity regions, which are inherently difficult to align with certainty. here we have used very strict criteria to map reads , lending high confidence to all of the snps and markers included. secondly, the precise cross over points can be mapped using transitions of genotypes defined by snps, including as described below, short double crossover regions. thirdly, the map is readily expandable to accommodate new progeny. for example, here we have used only the informative crossover points among  <dig> progeny to generate the map. additional snps between the parent strains occur in the merge data file generated by redhorse; however, since these differences are not informative among this set of progeny, they were not included in the map. if we were to add new progeny from this cross, it would be straightforward to identify new informative markers and expand the map accordingly. finally, this new cross will foster further linkage analysis of variable phenotypic differences  between divergent and clonal lineages of t. gondii. however, prior to undertaking such studies, it is important to establish the basic properties of segregation and recombination in this outcross, as these parameters will affect the ability to map complex phenotypes.

out-crossing and selfing frequencies
based on screening with pcr-rflp markers, we identified  <dig> clones similar to the me <dig> parent,  <dig> clones that appeared similar to the vand parent, and  <dig> that were recombinants. the expected ratios should be ~ 1:2: <dig> based on 50% self-mating, although in this case we observed a higher frequency of apparent vand self-clones, which as shown below may reflect the low density of markers used in this initial analysis. regardless, the presence of apparent vand genotypes contrasted sharply with the observation that vand was unable to self-mate when fed to a cat alone. this disparity suggests two possible scenarios: vand was unable to successfully self-mate in the cat, but was rescued by co-infection and underwent both self-mating and out-crossing or, 2) vand was rescued by out-crossing, and despite their appearance as products of self-mating, the putative self-clones were in fact recombinants. the later scenario seemed unlikely because these self-clones had a vand genotype at each of eight unlinked rflp markers. based on an expected 50% segregation of chromosomes from either parent, probability predicts that there would be  <dig> chance in  <dig> that actual recombinant clones would nonetheless have inherited the vand genotype at each of the eight markers analyzed .

to determine which of these two explanations was correct, we compared ngs of clones that appeared to inherit only me <dig>  or only vand  genotypes, respectively. all of the me <dig> predicted self-clones showed a uniform me <dig> genotype, confirming that each was indeed the product of self-mating . in contrast, six of the eight clones that initially appeared to be the products of vand selfing were actually recombinants, bearing small genomic regions that matched me <dig> . these regions corresponded to areas that lacked rflp makers, and hence they were undetected in the initial screen. only two of the sequenced clones had vand sequence at all loci defined by snps  consistent with the low fecundity of this strain when it was fed to cats alone.

interestingly,  <dig> of  <dig> previously misclassified vand recombinants inherited either all or part of chriii and chrviia from me <dig> . the elevated frequency of inheritance of chrviia from the me <dig> parent was significantly different from the expected 50/ <dig> ratio expected under random segregation , while the elevated frequency of inheritance of chriii was not quite significant, perhaps due to the small sample size . these findings suggest that the low fecundity of vand was rescued by inheritance of these regions of the me <dig> genome. the pattern of co-inheritance of chriii and chrviia from the me <dig> parent was also seen in many recombinants clones from the cross, although in this case the inheritance of chriii was significant , while that of chrviia was not . this pattern was strongest for chriii where  <dig> of  <dig> clones inherited all or part of this chromosome from me <dig> . curiously, the opposite is seen for chrib, where all clones inherited part, or all, of this chromosome from the vand parent, which was highly significantly different from the expected 50/ <dig> ratio of segregation . neither of the drug resistance markers used to isolate recombinant resides on any of these chromosomes, suggesting this pattern was unrelated to the selection imposed by drug administration, and may instead reflect increased survival in the cat. previous studies have shown that repeated passage of t. gondii can result in loss of cat transmission  <cit> . although the basis for this defect is unknown, our study suggests that loss of self fertilization can be rescued by out-crossing, which might be an important means of generating increased diversity in the wild. although we cannot precisely map the basis of the defect in vand in the present cross, future backcross studies could be used to identify factors required for efficient transmission in the cat.

it is uncertain why two clones of vand that appear to be the result of pure selfing were obtained from the cross, when feeding of vand tissue cysts alone to individual cats failed to result in detectable oocyst shedding. these two vand self-clones might have resulted from the selfing-defect being incompletely penetrant, resulting in low level shedding of viable oocysts that were not readily detected in some cats. alternatively, these vand self-clones may have arisen from rescue of the defect by formation of a hybrid diploid zygote , although the resulting genotype of these clones would require that all chromosomes were inherited from the vand parent, without crossing over. uniparental inheritance of chromosomes is commonly seen in genetic crosses of t. gondii <cit> , although the combined probability of this occurring on all chromosomes predicts this to be a rare event. infertile mutants have previously been described in plasmodium berghei: such mutants are typically defective in macro or microgametes, and thus can be rescued by crossing to wild type or compatible strains with compensating defects  <cit> . in contrast, the defect in vand lies downstream of fertilization as it was capable of forming both functional micro and macrogametes, based on the genotype of the apicoplast, which is maternally inherited .figure  <dig> 
comparison of the genetic recombination rates on chria vs. chrv. progeny from the genetic cross between vand snfr and me <dig> fudrr were genotyped by whole genome sequencing to identify single nucleotide variants. allelic patterns of the parental strains and  <dig> recombinant progeny are demonstrated at each snp locus by solid boxes . many chromosomes were inherited uniparentally without any apparent crossover and this pattern was similar on both chr1a and chriv, consistent with previous genetic crosses using t. gondii <cit> . we tested the frequency of inheritance of vand vs. me <dig> chromosomes and found that it did not differ significantly from the expected 50/ <dig> ratio under the assumption of random segregation . as such, mechanisms such as meiotic drive or segregation distortion can be ruled out, as there was no evidence to suggest that the monomorphic chria was preferred in the surviving progeny of the cross. additionally, although only a minority of progeny showed evidence of intra-chromosomal recombination, this frequency was not significantly different from that observed in previous genetic crosses  <cit> . double crossovers that occurred between closely adjacent markers were also seen in a number of progeny . by comparison with the inheritance of the maternally inherited apicoplast, chria showed no evidence of being inherited as a sex-determining chromosome as the frequency of maternal inheritance differ not differ significantly from the expected 50/ <dig> ratio .

another potential mechanism that might repress recombination across chria in the wild would be if it contained an inversion that disfavored recombination due to potential disruption of genes that function as paired alleles across widely distant loci. to evaluate this possibility, we aligned the independently assembled whole genome sequences of chria from me <dig> and vand and compared their coding capacity based on gene models and annotated genes in toxodb using mauve  <cit> . there was no evidence for any major rearrangement although small gaps were observed due to differences in assemblies, likely the result of repeats or low complexity regions that are hard to assemble . we also performed a similar analysis using nucmer  <cit>  to compare either chria, or the entire genomes of me <dig> and vand, again finding no major differences in the arrangement or content of the chromosomes . collectively, these data rule out several otherwise plausible mechanisms to explain the dynamics of chria: neither alterations in meiosis, differential survival of gametes, status as a sex chromosome, nor a recombination-repressing inversion can account for its widespread success in the wild.figure  <dig> 
chr1a conservation and recombination among different chromosomes in the genetic cross. a) plot of the annotated coding sequences  on chria  based on toxodbv <dig> . beneath this are the similarity plots for the independent assemblies of the me <dig> and vand genomes constructed using mauve . white bars reflect gaps in the assembly, typically denoted by “n”s in the reference sequence. b) comparison of the relationship between physical size and recombination frequency in centimorgans  for prior genetic crosses between clonal lineages  ) and between vand&me <dig> . comparison of the two curve fits revealed that the genetic distances of chromosomes  of the prior genetic crosses  were significantly higher than that of the present vand&me <dig> cross . c) comparison of the relationship between physical size and recombination frequency in centimorgans  for the vand and me <dig> genetic cross based on single conventional recombinations  and double crossovers . chromosome numbers are indicated on the plot.



rates of recombination
to compare the rates of recombination across the  <dig> chromosomes, we plotted the physical size vs. genetic distance for prior crosses between the clonal lineages and compared this to the current me <dig> × vand cross . in the case of the prior crosses, there was a linear relationship between the physical size of the chromosomes and genetic size  . in contrast, the linear regression fit for the present vand × me <dig> cross  did not significantly differ from a slope of zero . when the double crossovers from the present cross were analyzed, they showed a linear relationship with size, being especially frequent on larger chromosomes  . we compared the linear regression analyses shown in figure 4b to determine if they were significantly different. although the slope of the lines was not significant different, the previous crosses showed significantly higher genetic distances   when compared to the vand × me <dig> cross, indicating that the recombination rate was lower in the present cross. in the present cross, individual chromosomes had genetic sizes that ranged from  <dig>  cm  to  <dig>  cm  and recombination was especially infrequent on chrib, chriii, chrviia, and chrxii . the total genetic size of the present genetic map was ~ 350 cm, whereas previous genetic maps between the clonal lineages indicated a combined size of ~ 590 cm  <cit> . this low rate of recombination may reflect the higher divergence of the vand genome, compared to previous crosses between the type  <dig> me <dig> and clonal types  <dig>  <cit>  and  <dig>  <cit> . estimates of the ancestry of the clonal types suggest that a type 2-like strain was a parent for all three lineages  <cit> , hence they may share greater compatibility for recombination. it is possible that the divergence of vand represses recombination across certain chromosomes due to disruption of favorable pairing of alleles at distinct loci. however, when the double crossovers were combined with the singe events, the much larger genetic distances brought the combined rate to comparable levels .

small double crossovers contribute to genetic diversity
the relative rarity of single conventional crossovers was offset by an elevated frequency of double crossovers. we analyzed the size of these and found that they spanned less than 5 kb, and typically were less than 1 kb . by contrast, conventional crossovers typically only occurred over much longer distances. we plotted the distribution of all conventional single crossovers and double crossovers and found that they were relatively uniform across the chromosomes . however, some chromosomes that had few conventional crossovers showed evidence of multiple small double crossovers . small double crossovers were previously seen in data based on micro-array hybridizations  <cit> ; however, as they were not based on actual sequence data, it remained possible that they were artifacts. additionally, small double crossovers between adjacent markers were previously reported in genetic crosses of t. gondii analyzed using rflp-pcr based markers  <cit> . because the physical distances between such markers varied, and snp data between the markers was not available, it was not possible to precisely map the crossover points or accurately estimate their true sizes. although prior studies indicated that double crossovers occur at a higher frequency than expected, they are still much less common than conventional crossovers among the clonal lineages  <cit> . in contrast, they were the more frequent events detected in the present cross .figure  <dig> 
analysis of double crossovers. a) normalized histogram of double crossovers sizes. double crossovers were defined as two consecutive crossovers that occur within  <dig>  bp. the boundaries of the double crossovers were supported by at least six snps and the two boundaries were separated by at least five snps defining the crossover. the region sizes were counted in steps of 250 bp and normalized by highest count. b) location of single and double crossovers depicted by circos plot of the  <dig> chromosomes. the outside track plots the genes across the  <dig> chromosomes; top strand  - bottom strand . the inside track plots the positions of the double crossovers that occurred in single progeny  vs. multiple progeny . the second most inner track plots the positions of the conventional single crossovers . the second most outer track plots a histogram  of snps between vand and me <dig> per 10 kb rolling window, y-axis 0– <dig>  c) classification of the coding capacity of genes containing double crossovers. a total of  <dig> genes were identified that span a double crossover boundary. kegg/gene ontology annotations obtained from toxodb.org were grouped based on functional categories. chart represents percentage of the genes within each category.



we considered the possibility that in these apparent double crossovers might be artifacts of misaligned reads, especially in regions of low complexity and/or repetitive genomic regions. although the stringency of the read mapping and allele calling parameters used here was designed to remove such events, we analyzed all the double crossovers for repeats or other features that might indicate less reliable regions. even after strict filters were applied , we still found evidence for double crossovers including some specific regions that appeared to have undergone a double crossover in multiple progeny . to validate the double crossovers, we selected a subset of markers for pcr amplification and conventional sanger sequencing. in  <dig> of  <dig> cases, we were able to amplify the region  and verify by sanger sequencing that the double crossover occurred in the specific progeny . in one case, the same crossover was predicted to occur in three separate progeny in the same place, and this event was verified in one of these clones . although the mechanism of such a process is presently not clear, it may be driven by low complexity or repeat regions. indeed, when we relaxed the filters for 2× coverage, or regions that were found by repeatmasker, we found far more evidence for such double crossovers appearing in multiple progeny . at present, we cannot verify that these multiple events actually occur on a widespread basis due to the difficulty in unambiguously assigning reads from such regions. nonetheless, the majority of the double crossovers that occur in one progeny do not occur in such repeat prone regions and they appear to be authentic .

the nature of the events classified as double crossovers is not fully clear from the present studies as we are not able to obtain the separate products of a single meiosis and therefore cannot differentiate true double crossovers from gene conversions. based on their short size, , these events would be classified as gene conversions in most systems  <cit> . gene conversions typically occur by a double strand break repair process that occurs between regions of high homology  <cit> . in mammalian genomes, gene conversion events typically occur between paralogs, often involving a pseudo-gene conversion of an active gene, leading to genetic disease  <cit> . additionally, interallelic gene conversion is thought to contribute to increased allelic diversity, for example in human blood group  <cit>  and hla haplotypes  <cit> . although in some systems, motifs of alternating polypyrimidine or polypurine tracts, or simple repeats, have been associated with gene conversion  <cit> , we did not observe such patterns in the sequences surrounding the double crossover events detected in t. gondii. the absence of such patterns may reflect the fact that we filtered repeat regions, and hence we may have discarded evidence for gene conversions occurring on a wider scale.

regardless of the precise mechanism by which the short double crossovers are created in t. gondii, they are likely to be important for increasing genetic diversity following meiosis. for example of double crossover events detected in the current genetic cross, a majority occurred within genes . when we classified these gene using kegg and gene ontology annotations, they occur in a wide variety of genes encoding proteins involved in transcription, translation, nucleotide metabolism, membrane trafficking, and protein-protein interactions . hence, the exchange of allelic variants by this process may be an important component of diversity generated by meiosis. this process has likely been overlooked in previous genetic crosses and population studies due to lower resolution of markers and the short nature of these double crossovers. in both types of studies, phenotypes are often broadly inferred from the genotype across haploblocks of the genome. this broad categorization may overlook functionally important differences that diverge from the genome as a whole  <cit>  and this problem is magnified by the possibility of small blocks of recombination that elude detection. as such, future population and experimental genetic studies will be aided by genome-wide analysis of snps using the methods developed here.

evolutionary implications
on a broader evolutionary scale, the results of the present study provide insights about the evolutionary strategies of crossing vs. self-mating in natural populations of t. gondii. the efficiency of self-mating  <cit> , combined with the highly clonal population structure seen in regions such as north america  <cit> , might allow long range epistasis to develop, thereby suppressing intrachromosomal recombination. this pattern is seen in prior genetic crosses among the northern clonal lineages where chromosomes are often inherited uniparentally or with a single crossover  <cit> . the inheritance of large chromosomal blocks is also apparent in the ancestry of the northern clonal lineages in the wild  <cit> . in contrast to previously studied clonal lineages, vand exhibits very low levels of self-mating, which might be due to extended laboratory passage, as reported previously  <cit> . however, absence of self-mating might also represent a stable evolutionary strategy in situations where opportunities for out crossing are high. one such location is south america where wild isolates also exhibit an absence of self-mating, even when tested at early passage  <cit> . this pattern is expected to prevail within a population structure with substantial out crossing, as evident in south america  <cit> . the present experimental cross pits these two evolutionary strategies against each other. here the inheritance of single intact chromosomes was favored, regardless of the parent of origin, supporting the idea of long-range epistasis. interestingly, the observed low rate of conventional recombination was partially compensated for by the relatively greater frequency of double crossovers or gene conversion events, providing for increased genetic variability. our studies make several interesting predictions for future testing: out crosses between divergent strains with a history of recombination should show higher levels of conventional crossover. clonal lineages should resist intrachromosomal recombination in situations where they undergo out crossing. under such circumstances, short double crossovers or gene conversions may be the predominant means of introducing new genetic variation.

CONCLUSIONS
we report here on the first outcross between a divergent strain of t. gondii and a conventional clonal isolate that has been subjected to previous genetic crosses. ngs-based genetic mapping revealed that although out-crossings result in lower levels of recombination, this feature might be compensated for by the frequent occurrence of small double crossovers . these small double crossover events affected genes involved in diverse functions, thus serving as a previously unrecognized mechanism to increase diversity following genetic crosses. as they are small in size, such double crossovers would be missed in conventional mapping or associated studies, despite having potentially important biological influences. as such, these findings highlight the utility of high-resolution genetic maps based on whole genome sequencing. our studies also revealed that the lack of self-mating by the divergent strain vand was rescued by crossing with me <dig> and this was associated with inheritance of specific chromosomes. we have recently shown that other exotic lineages from french guiana have reduced fecundity in domestic cats, while domestic strains harboring the monomorphic chr1a are more efficiently transmitted by this route  <cit> . hence, out-crossing in the wild may be an important means of enhancing transmission of otherwise rare strains in the environment. our studies rule out meiotic drive, segregation distortion, or status as a sex chromosome, as mechanisms to explain the paucity of recombination and very low polymorphism on chria. by process of elimination, we conclude from these data that the success of chria in the wild is likely to do enhanced transmission in natural hosts, survival in the environment, or demographic factors that affect its spread in anthropized environments. combined with the ability of strains harboring this trait to cross-hybridize with rare variants in the wild, this may introduce new genes of considerable importance for pathogenicity into an otherwise fairly benign, yet common parasite.

