BACKGROUND
plant domestication is one of the most important events in human history. people still depend on the staple cereal crops that were domesticated more than  <dig> years ago in central america  <cit> , the near east  <cit>  and eastern asia  <cit> . in the initial domestication, the cultivated traits and genetic bottleneck may emerge in cultivars after over  <dig> generations  <cit> . reductions in genetic diversity have been found in cultivated rice  <cit> , maize  <cit> , soyabean  <cit>  and other crops  <cit> . however, several instances in which no decline in the genetic diversity of planted populations occurred serve as a reminder of how complicated the situation is  <cit> . the biological nature of the plant whether it is annual or perennial, along with clonal propagation or sexual breeding, all have an effect on the results of domestication  <cit> . differences in domestication activities, such as single or multiple domestication, also cause differences in the levels of genetic diversity in cultivars  <cit> .

both vital food plants and species that can be used for medicine or beverages, such as tea, have been domesticated for convenience. tea was used at least as far back as  <dig>  years ago in china  <cit> . it is one of the most popular beverages and has generated health, wealth and job opportunities throughout the world  <cit> . there are approximately  <dig> species in the genus camellia <cit> , but tea in its commercial beverage form is usually produced from c. sinensis  o. kuntze. since about  <dig> years ago when the first tea was introduced into europe  <cit> , c. sinensis has been gradually familiar to worldwide people. however, c. taliensis  melchior, an important plant for use in producing tea, has only been recognized outside of its native areas for a few decades  <cit> . several studies have investigated the genetic diversity of wild and planted trees of c. taliensis <cit> , and some have detected a reduction in chloroplast dna  diversity during domestication  <cit> . but none of these studies has given more details on the domestication origin of this plant. though c. sinensis is cultivated worldwide, there has been almost no genetic research conducted to answer the domestication questions of it, because the credible wild population of c. sinensis has been seldom found  <cit> . however, c. taliensis provides a unique opportunity to document the domestication origin of tea plants.

c. taliensis, a shrub or small tree  native to the subtropical mountain evergreen forests at altitudes of 1300–2700 m, is endemic from western yunnan province of china to northern myanmar  <cit> . it is generally distinguishable from c. sinensis by its glabrous or sparsely pubescent terminal buds and five-loculed ovary . c. sinensis has silvery-grey sericeous terminal buds and a three-loculed ovary  <cit> . in western yunnan where it is mainly found, c. taliensis is called ‘ye cha’  or ‘ben shan cha’  by the local people   <cit> . its leaf has been collected to produce beverage that is alike the tea from c. sinensis var. assamica but has its specific characteristic constituents  <cit> . the tea probably made from c. taliensis was recorded  <dig> years ago  <cit> , and this species has been cultivated throughout western yunnan at least for hundreds years  <cit> . however, many tea gardens of c. taliensis have been replaced by the gardens of c. sinensis var. assamica or disappeared, and the current cultivated plants of c. taliensis are mainly located in the lancang river basin and dali city  <cit> .

about a dozen years ago, due to the high price that ‘wild tea’ commanded in the local market, a large number of c. taliensis trees in the natural forest were cut down to collect leaves  <cit> . and the phenomena of directly domesticating wild c. taliensis trees by clearing out the other plants on a parcel of natural forest and keeping only specimens of c. taliensis  or digging out the wild trees and planting them in gardens  had been found locally. we call these directly domesticated trees as ‘recently domesticated’. the cultivated trees derived from the seeds that gathered in tea gardens are called ‘planted’  and trees lived in the natural forest are called ‘wild’ . unlike the cultivated traits such as non-shattering spikelet in rice  <cit> , tea plants do not have the clear morphological characters that may differentiate cultivated from wild trees. rigorous field investigations and local social surveys are implemented to differentiate between cultivated and wild form of tea plants.

the archaeological evidence is usually crucial to document the domestication origins  <cit> . however, the archaeological findings associated with crop origins are limited. widely used molecular genetics approaches such as microsatellites can now be used to determine domestication origins  <cit>  to produce a more detailed crop history  <cit> . it will provide an accurate outline of the domestication process when genetic analyses are consilient with ethnobotanical approaches in the research  <cit> . in the present study, we provide the analyses of genetic diversity and population structure in the wild, planted and recently domesticated populations of c. taliensis based on  <dig> nuclear microsatellite makers. we aimed to assess the relative levels of genetic diversity of c. taliensis compared to that of c. sinensis, which have been investigated using landraces and improved cultivars  <cit> . then, we discussed whether reduction of genetic diversity occurred in the planted populations of c. taliensis relative to the wild populations, and estimated the genetic consequence of domestication. finally, we addressed the geographical origin of planted trees, and tried to discuss more details about the domestication process. as an endemic tea source plant, knowledge of population genetics and domestication history of c. taliensis is of great importance for the effective conservation and utilization of the landraces and wild germplasm and to facilitate the genetic improvement of tea plants.

RESULTS
genetic diversity and variance
a total of  <dig> alleles were detected in  <dig> populations of c. taliensis for the  <dig> loci analysed . the average number of alleles per locus was  <dig> . there were  <dig> private alleles in nine populations, including  <dig> alleles in the wild group and three alleles in the recently domesticated group. there were no private alleles in the planted group , suggesting a common gene pool shared by planted and natural trees. the rare alleles   <cit>  accounted for  <dig>  of the total  <dig> alleles revealed in all loci.
c. taliensis


n
a
h


s

h


o

f


is

n


p

population means are followed by standard error in parentheses. n, number of individuals; a, allelic richness; h
s
, gene diversity; h
o
, observed heterozygosity; f
is
, inbreeding coefficient; and n
p
, number of private alleles.

c. taliensis showed a moderate high level of overall gene diversity  . for each population analysed, the highest level of genetic diversity was found in the yjd population , and the lowest in the jcw population . inbreeding coefficient  values of  <dig> populations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . the global fis was  <dig> , suggesting a low inbreeding rate in the populations of c. taliensis.

in the group comparison tests, the wild group contained the greatest number of rare alleles across all three groups: only nine were absent from the wild group, whereas  <dig> were absent from the planted trees  and  <dig> were absent from the recently domesticated individuals . there was no significant difference in the number of rare alleles between the planted and recently domesticated groups  . a was significantly lower  in the wild group  than in the planted  or recently domesticated  groups. hs was significantly higher  in the recently domesticated group  than in the wild group . the group comparison tests of a and hs indicated that wild populations had a lower level of genetic diversity compared with recently domesticated and planted populations. the observed heterozygosity  and fis showed no significant differences between the three groups . the genetic differentiation  was 70% higher in the wild group than in the planted or recently domesticated groups  , indicating the more genetic variation in the larger sample of wild group.

p
nr, number of rare alleles. all, comparisons performed between wild, planted and recently domesticated groups. sub, means the subsample comparisons: yxp and llp versus yxw and gsw, ojw and yjw versus ojd and yjd. parameter means are followed by standard error in parentheses. before ‘/’, there are values of yxw and gsw; and after it, there are values of ojw and yjw. *p <  <dig> , **p <  <dig> .

subsample genetic comparisons were performed between the selected adjacent populations. in terms of the number of rare alleles absent, there was no significant difference detected in yxp and llp versus yxw and gsw  or in ojw and yjw versus ojd and yjd . no significant difference was found in the comparisons to the other genetic parameters, including a, h
s
, h
o
, fis and fst , suggesting the similar levels of genetic diversity, inbreeding and genetic differentiation between adjacent populations.

in the analysis of molecular variance , no variation was found among wild, planted and primary domesticated groups, suggesting the same genetic basis of these groups. most of variation was detected within populations  and  <dig> % of variation was found among populations .
c. taliensis


p
genetic drift of each population
the mean f values of the wild populations ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>   with an average of  <dig> . the mean f values of the recently domesticated populations ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>   with an average of  <dig> . population yxp  and dlp  had the maximum and minimum mean f values, respectively, of the planted populations, and the average f value for this group was  <dig>  . the genetic drift values suggested that the genetic composition of the wild populations had changed about  <dig> -fold faster than that of the planted and recently domesticated populations since they diverged from the common ancestor.

ancestry analysis of the planted individuals
according to the Δk method  <cit>  using structure, the highest likelihood for k was  <dig> . three clusters were detected in the wild and recently domesticated individuals. cluster i of five populations  was located in southern yunnan. the other  <dig> populations that were located in western yunnan and the surrounding area were assigned into two clusters: cluster ii  was located in the northwest of this area, and the other nine populations were contained in the cluster iii . planted individuals with no prior information were assigned to the three clusters. the most proportion of the planted trees genomes  were assigned to the cluster iii, the less proportion of the planted trees genomes  were assigned to the cluster ii and the least proportion  to cluster i . it indicated that the trees of population dlp, cnp, fqp and yxp were genetically similar to the natural individuals from cluster iii and trees of population llp were genetically similar to those from cluster ii. however,  <dig> %- <dig> % of the genomes of planted trees were similar to those of cluster i. amova detected  <dig> % of variation among these clusters of the whole samples, suggesting a weak differentiation at such level of c. taliensis .

to illustrate further the phylogenetic relationship between wild, recently domesticated and planted populations, the neighbor-joining method was employed to reconstruct the phylogenetic tree of all  <dig> populations. population fqp and cnp were phylogenetically close with population nmw, population dlp was close with population ydw, population llp was close to population gsw and tcw, and population yxp was close to population yxw, mhw, ojd and ojw . combining the phylogenetic results with genotype assignment of planted trees, it was proposed that planted trees of c. taliensis might have been domesticated from the central forest of western yunnan, around the geographic area of tcw, gsw, ydw, nmw and yxw , and dispersed artificially to distant places.

discussion
genetic diversity of c. taliensis
microsatellites had a high variation in the tea plants  <cit>  as well as in other species of camellia <cit> . the high level of haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity was reported by the nuclear pal and cpdna rpl32-trnl in c. taliensis <cit> . in the present study, the overall gene diversity in c. taliensis   was lower than that reported for c. japonica   <cit> . the gene diversity of planted c. taliensis  was lower than that analysed in the cultivars and six of eight landraces of c. sinensis in japan   <cit>  but higher than that revealed in the chinese improved cultivars of c. sinensis   <cit> . the landraces and wild tea plants reported by yao et al.  <cit>  were comprised by several different species of camellia, which had higher gene diversity than c. taliensis.

outcrossing breeding system, long life cycle and large geographic ranges may play central roles in shaping the high genetic diversity of tea plants  <cit> . the lower genetic differentiation means the higher gene flow between populations  <cit> , indicating a majority of genetic diversity preserved within populations   <cit> . however, human activities are the additional factors that have been impacting the genetic diversity of tea plants and the adverse effects of encroachment of humans are increasing continuously. felling the wild trees of c. taliensis to collect leaves for producing the wild tea   <cit>  and further deforestation to make way for farming, grazing and construction have caused persistent and serious damage to natural sources of this tea plant  <cit> . the lower genetic diversity and the higher f values in the wild populations may indicate the stronger genetic drift due to these causes .

genetic consequence of domestication
the genetic drift analysis  and both the group and subsample tests showed a lower level of genetic diversity in the wild populations . did they reveal that the planted populations have an advanced genetic diversity, which was exceptive in the plant domestication  <cit> ? it is not possible to identify a real genetic consequence of domestication in the comparison of endangered wild populations  <cit>  and protected planted populations. the decline in genetic diversity of wild trees introduced by human activity may mask the genetic bottleneck in planted individuals. however, the recently domesticated trees that came directly from the natural forest may partly represent the wild plants that were free from damage. compared with the recently domesticated group, it indicates that the wild group has lost genetic diversity rather than the planted group has gained genetic diversity. furthermore, although the differences of genetic diversity between planted and recently domesticated groups were not significant, the little reduction of a and h
s
 and slight growth of f value in planted group would indicate a little but non-significant genetic bottleneck during the domestication, which suggests the complicated situation in the tea plants domestication .

the information from both the chloroplast and nuclear genomes helped us to comprehensively understand the consequence of domestication. cpdna rpl32-trnl intergenic spacer analyses showed a reduction of the genetic diversity during domestication with three planted populations and  <dig> wild populations of c. taliensis <cit> . the maternal inheritance cpdna analysis would suggest the limited seed sources of the planted c. taliensis during domestication. however, the analysis of cpdna does not always give results that are consistent with the results analysed by nuclear dna  <cit> . almost the whole cpdna variation  was distributed among c. taliensis populations, which was contrastingly different from the results detected by nuclear dna markers   <cit> . it may be rational to consider that the sampling number of populations will affect the comparison result of cpdna diversity between different groups  <cit> . the loss of cpdna diversity in the three planted populations compared with  <dig> wild populations may be partly derived from the much smaller number of planted populations.

tea plants have 5–10 years long life cycle  <cit> , and have been selected on the traits of leaf during their domestication. the artificial selection based on leaf characteristics may have less of an impact on the genomes of tea plants, especially as they are xenogamous plants and reproduce from seed. additionally, the gene flow among local planted, wild and recently domesticated trees would introduce introgression among different groups and reduce the genetic difference   <cit> . the planted population of dlp, which is located at the northern frontier of the natural distribution of c. taliensis , is recorded as having a long period of cultivation  <cit> . we did not find wild c. taliensis trees in the local forests in the dlp area. isolated from natural trees and long period of cultivation seem to be the major causes of the lowest genetic diversity and the highest drift values of population dlp among the planted populations . trees in population yxp had a high genetic diversity, which may be the result of gene flow between yxp and yxw. the tea garden from which population yxp was derived contained several cultivars of c. sinensis. mixed cultivation may have made genetic introgression between the two species more feasible  <cit> .

geographical origins of the planted trees
in the present study, both phylogenetic and assignment analysis indicated that the planted trees of c. taliensis may be derived from the central forest of western yunnan and dispersed artificially to distant places . four of five planted populations  came from this area, suggesting that c. taliensis has been mainly domesticated from the adjacent natural forests. this area has a long period of domesticating tea plants  <cit> . a legend of ‘dou cha’  could be heard in the village of population yxp. taking with the tea and seeds, people came from different places gathered in the village for the tea fight. the person who won the competition had to supply their elite seeds of c. taliensis to others for planting  <cit> . through these human activities, the landraces of c. taliensis had been selected and spread to the farther place. the artificial dispersal of landraces would explain the close genetic relationship between some planted trees in population yxp and the natural trees of cluster i in southern yunnan as well as the relationship between dlp and ydw .

most of the crops that spread worldwide due to their unique values were initially derived from the native habitats of their wild ancestors, which can be traced back through both archaeological and genetic approaches  <cit> . the in situ plant domestication process is still underway  <cit> . from the current activities of recent domestication, it may be reasonable to consider that the origin of planted trees of c. taliensis was not a single event but an extended multistage process in which wild trees added sequentially over hundreds of years. the non-significant reduction in genetic diversity of planted trees will support this inference . however, in the field investigation and local social survey, we found that a large number of endemic planted trees of c. taliensis had been replaced by the ecdemic improved cultivars of c. sinensis var. assamica in the late one hundred years  <cit> . it suggested that improved cultivars of tea were valued for their higher quality. in the last dozen years, the domestication of wild c. taliensis was principally owing to the high price of wild tea that had been hyped with the cultural values and it was claimed to be produced without using pesticide and chemical fertilizers  <cit> . it is hard to believe that people were willing to abandon the improved landrace in their gardens but introduce the wild trees from the natural forests frequently during hundreds of years. it is considered that the more likely process is the successive domestication in tea gardens and accompanied occasional introduction of few wild seeds or seedlings of c. taliensis.

conservation strategies and utilization in tea breeding
although the planted and recently domesticated populations had a greater genetic diversity, it is the wild populations that have preserved the most private alleles and rare alleles, making them the most important reservoirs of genetic variation . taking natural trees and planting them in private gardens or clearing out other shrubs and transforming a plot of wild forest into one’s own tea garden destroys not only wild resources of c. taliensis, but also the natural forest in general . without effective restriction, each individual action of initial domestication would add up to the substantial damage of common resources, not unlike the tragedy of the commons described by hardin  <cit> .

it is essential to conserve common natural resources, including wild tea plants, through efficient management. however, c. taliensis is an important landrace source that could generate new developments in tea breeding, for which wild genetic resources should be indispensable. the paradox of protection and production could be addressed through rapid reproduction from cuttings  <cit>  of wild trees. the planted trees of c. taliensis should also be protected for their selected genetic characteristics and endemic culture, and they will facilitate the further breeding of tea plants.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we firstly illustrated the domestication origin of a tea plant with genetic approaches. fourteen nuclear microsatellite loci detected a moderate high genetic diversity in c. taliensis. using the credible wild, planted and recently domesticated populations of this tea plant, we discussed the genetic consequence of domestication and geographic origin of the planted trees. group and subsample tests indicated that a little and non-significant bottleneck occurred during the domestication. the phylogenetic and assignment analyses suggested that the planted trees may have been domesticated from the adjacent central forest of western yunnan and dispersed artificially to distant places. as an important tea source plant in yunnan province of china, c. taliensis should be protected and utilized for their unique genetic characteristics, which are valuable for the genetic improvement of tea plants. our study will be helpful to distinguish the genetic results of different collection and domestication activities of tea plant, and will further give deep insights into the custom and history of tea domestication.

