BACKGROUND
bambusoideae are a lineage of perennial forest grasses  endemic to every continent except europe and antarctica  <cit> . the bambusoideae comprise  <dig> genera and approximately  <dig> species of bamboos  <cit> . bambusoideae are divided into two morphologically distinct habits: woody and herbaceous bamboos. while woody bamboos display a wide range of morphological diversity, they do possess multiple shared characteristics. the woody bamboo syndrome includes strongly lignified culms, specialized culm leaves, complex vegetative branching, outer ligules on the foliage leaves, bisexual flowers, and gregarious monocarpy  <cit> . these bamboos, some of which can quickly grow up to 45 m in height, serve as an economically important source of building materials and other products for cultures in central and south america, asia, africa, and australia  <cit> . their potential for rapid establishment combined with their extensive vegetative reproduction also make bamboos important ecologically as they can serve as forest habitats of their own and can affect the survival of sympatric woody species  <cit> . the gregarious, semelparous flowering patterns of woody bamboos and subsequent death of the parent plant can have ecological effects such as the increase in pest populations during the fruiting of melocanna baccifera in regions of india  <cit>  and the increase in eudicot sapling growth during the die-off of the dominant forest bamboo chusquea culeou  <cit> . this pattern of flowering is correlated with increased generation times in this group, which in turn is correlated in bamboos and other grasses with shorter branch lengths in phylogenetic analyses  <cit>  and fewer resolved nodes between certain closely related species.

herbaceous bamboos are characterized by shorter and more weakly lignified shoots, less vegetative branching, unisexual flowers, and annual or seasonal flowering patterns  <cit> . the flowering phenology of herbaceous bamboos is correlated with an increase in the substitution rates observed in chloroplast loci. this has at least two consequences relevant to bambusoid plastome phylogenomics. first, phylogenetic resolution and support within this group are likely to be increased due to higher numbers of informative sites. at the same time, long branches are produced with the potential for long-branch attraction artifacts between herbaceous bamboos and non-bambusoid outgroups. phylogenomic results can be more realistically interpreted taking these effects into account.

molecular studies have placed bambusoideae in the bep  clade of poaceae. a sister group relationship between bambusoideae and pooideae has been strongly supported  <cit>  although morphological synapomorphies have yet to be found that unite these two subfamilies. bambusoideae can be divided into three well-supported monophyletic tribes: the woody arundinarieae and bambuseae, and the herbaceous olyreae  <cit> .

the bambuseae are native to tropical areas in both the old and new world. this tribe comprises two clades that correspond to old and new world species  <cit> . phylogenetic studies that use plastid markers generally place olyreae as the sister group to bambuseae in well-supported trees  <cit> . olyreae are exclusively distributed in the new world except for buergersiochloa bambusoides, a species endemic to new guinea, and olyra latifolia, which is found widely distributed in africa/madagascar as well as in the new world  <cit> . however, the african origin of the o. latifolia population has been debated  <cit> . like the bambuseae, the arundinarieae include woody bamboos found in both the old and new world, with a basically laurasian distribution pattern, but unlike most bambuseae they are well-adapted to temperate environments.

although paraphyly of the woody syndrome in bambusoideae is well supported by tree analyses that use maternally inherited chloroplast phylogenetic markers  <cit> , this has been a subject of debate. network analyses have revealed that the phylogenetic placement of olyreae is less certain than previously reported  <cit> . this is also because to be consistent with the chloroplast phylogeny, the woody bamboo syndrome would have either evolved twice independently  or arisen once in the common ancestor of the bambusoideae and then subsequently been lost in the olyreae. a hypothesized single origin of the woody bamboo syndrome, which has been most recently supported by triplett et al.  <cit> , is evolutionarily more parsimonious than these scenarios.

in the past three years, full plastome phylogenomic analyses have been used to address evolutionary problems in the bambusoideae. these analyses have been variously applied in bambusoideae to resolve subfamilial relationships  <cit>  and investigate biogeographical patterns  <cit> . full plastome analysis can also provide enough information to resolve difficult interspecific relationships. this is an issue that is especially relevant to woody bamboos, which generally hybridize readily and exhibit very long generation times  <cit> . while studies such as kelchner et al.  <cit>  and triplett & clark  <cit>  have used selected chloroplast markers to infer maternally inherited evolutionary signal within bambusoideae, our objective is to use all coding and non-coding regions within the chloroplast to increase the number of informative sites. here, a full plastome phylogeny was generated using  <dig> tropical woody species,  <dig> temperate woody species and eight herbaceous species with  <dig> newly sequenced and  <dig> existing bambusoid plastomes plus two outgroup plastomes.

RESULTS
assembly and alignment of plastomes
read and contig assembly yielded complete plastomes for  <dig> bamboos and one ehrhartoid grass. plastome lengths ranged from  <dig> — <dig>  base pairs . lengths of each plastome region are reported in table  <dig>  a multi-plastome sequence alignment was  <dig>  bp in length after excluding one of the major inverted repeat  regions. removal of alignment columns containing gaps reduced the alignment length to  <dig>  bp. the sequence alignment containing only protein coding regions was  <dig>  bp in length and  <dig>  bp after removal of gapped positions. see table  <dig> for more information on sequencing techniques and results.table  <dig> 
ncbi nucleotide database accession numbers and lengths of regions and subregions for plastomes analyzed in this study



taxon
tribe
total length
lsc
a
ssc
b
ir
c
accession
voucher

acidosasa purpurea

arundinaria appalachiana

arundinaria gigantea

arundinaria tecta

ferrocalamus rimosivaginus

indocalamus longiauritus

phyllostachys edulis

phyllostachys nigra

phyllostachys propinqua

thamnocalamus spathiflorus

bambusa arnhemica

bambusa bambos

bambusa emeiensis

bambusa oldhamii

chusquea liebmannii

chusquea spectabilis

dendrocalamus latiflorus


guadua weberbaueri

hickelia madagascariensis

neololeba atra

olmeca reflexa

otatea acuminata

buergersiochloa bambusoides

cryptochloa strictiflora



lithachne pauciflora

olyra latifolia

pariana radiciflora

raddia brasiliensis

zizania aquatica

lolium perenne

alarge single copy region.


bshort single copy region.


cinverted repeat region.

lc, lynn clark; la, lakshmi attigala; sd, soejatmi dransfield; wz, weiping zhang; js, jeff saarela; pmp, paul peterson; jt, jimmy triplett; bi, bogor, indonesia; gm, g. mcpherson; mk, m. kobayashi; xl, ximena londoño; gcr, gilberto cortés rodríguez.
sequencing details for all plastomes newly assembled for this study



taxon
tribe
number of reads
library preparation method
sequencing method
mean coverage
number of scaffolded contigs

thamnocalamus spathiflorus

bambusa arnhemica

bambusa bambos

chusquea liebmannii

chusquea spectabilis


guadua weberbaueri

hickelia madagascariensis

neololeba atra

olmeca reflexa

otatea acuminata

buergersiochloa bambusoides



lithachne pauciflora

pariana radiciflora

raddia brasiliensis

zizania aquatica


unique plastome features
plastomes are highly conserved chromosomes in which gene content, structure, and arrangement are quite similar across poaceae  <cit> . when infrequent events such as large insertion/deletion  mutations or inversions do occur, they take on greater significance because of their rarity and therefore higher chance of indicating shared ancestry. four of these were observed here among bambusoid plastomes, in each case marking a single synapomorphic event in our phylogeny .

1) a  <dig>  bp insertion exclusive to sampled members of the parianinae  was found in the rpl23-ndhb intergenic spacer of the pariana radiciflora plastome, while the eremitis sp. plastome possessed this insertion plus an additional  <dig>  bp inserted on the 3′ end, giving the insertion a total length of  <dig>  bp . a query of the ncbi nucleotide database using blastn  <cit>  revealed the highest scoring hit to be mitochondrial sequence from ferrocalamus rimosivaginus, a member of the arundinarieae . subsequent blast hits were all of monocot mitochondrial origin. to confirm that this putative mitochondrial insertion is not the effect of an assembly artifact a pcr experiment was designed to amplify a region of approximately  <dig>  bp by priming within and upstream of the insertions in both parianinae. a second pair of primers were designed to amplify a region of similar size by priming within and downstream of the insertion in eremitis sp. note that this downstream region was not present in p. radiciflora. amplification of these regions in eremitis sp. produced two products that were both approximatelty  <dig>  as expected. amplification of the upstream region of p. radiciflora also showed a  <dig>  bp product while the downstream region yielded no amplification, again as expected . 2) a deletion of  <dig>  bp unique to the represented members of the subtribe guaduinae  is also located in approximately the same region. 3) the alignment also revealed a 150 bp inversion in the trnd-psbm intergenic spacer exclusive to all sampled members of the subtribe olyrinae . 4) an insertion in the rps16-trnq intergenic spacer of approximately 500 bp was located in all members of arundinarieae sampled in this study .figure  <dig> 
relative positions of putative mitochondrial insertions in the
pariana radiciflora
and
eremitis
sp. plastomes. a diagram of the region in buergersiochloa bambusoides is also included to illustrate an example of a typical grass plastome without the insertion. solid bars represent relative gene positions, striped bars represent intergenic regions and thin lines represent gaps that were introduced to preserve downstream alignment. note that this figure is not drawn to scale.



full plastome phylogenomic analysis
phylogeny estimation of full plastome sequences using maximum-likelihood  and bayesian inference  generated trees with identical topologies. an annotated phylogenomic tree that includes all of the taxa can be found in figure  <dig>  all nodes were supported in the bi analysis with a posterior probability of  <dig> . these trees supported monophyly of arundinarieae, bambuseae, and olyreae with bambuseae forming a well-supported sister relationship with olyreae. note that this is unlikely to be an artifact of long-branch attraction because the long-branch olyreae associate with short-branch bambuseae rather than the long-branch outgroup taxa. the shimodaira-hasegawa  test  <cit>  allowed us to reject the alternative hypothesis of a monophyletic bambuseae + arundinarieae for the trees produced from these complete plastome sequences . the bambuseae diverged into two well-supported monophyletic lineages that represent neotropical and paleotropical woody bamboos. the neotropical bamboos segregated into two well-supported lineages, chusqueinae  and guaduinae. the two representative species of chusqueinae produced longer branch lengths than the rest of the woody bamboos with terminal branch lengths five times greater than those of the rest of bambuseae.figure  <dig> 
maximum likelihood phylogram for all complete plastomes. branch lengths are given in substitutions per site. the star indicates the hypothesized origin of the mitochondrion-to-plastid horizontal gene transfer event. the cross indicates the hypothesized origin of the 150 bp inversion in subtribe olyrinae. nodes are supported at a 100% maximum likelihood bootstrap score unless reported. all nodes were supported with a posterior probability of  <dig> .



the paleotropical bamboos displayed shorter branch lengths and lower support between the two sampled subtribes, hickeliinae  and bambusinae . bambusinae formed two well-supported clades: . the genus bambusa was resolved as monophyletic with 83% ml bootstrap support with very short branches and one internal node with 81% ml bootstrap support . the olyreae lineage demonstrated maximal support for all nodes with buergersiochloa bambusoides sister to olyrinae + parianinae, both of which are monophyletic groups. olyreae also displayed substantially longer branches than bambuseae with mean internal branch lengths  <dig>  times greater and mean terminal branch lengths  <dig>  times greater . arundinarieae was resolved into two well-supported clades: . arundinaria was strongly supported as monophyletic  with maximum support for intrageneric relationships. phyllostachys was maximally supported as monophyletic yet exhibited less intrageneric support  among the three species .

phylogenetic analysis of protein-coding regions
maximum-likelihood and bayesian analyses of protein-coding regions showed nearly identical topologies to the full plastome analysis, including a strongly supported bambuseae + olyreae . however, two differences at shallow nodes in the topology are present. the protein-coding analysis place dendrocalamus latiflorus in a position embedded within the genus bambusa contrasting with the sister relationship of d. latiflorus and bambusa recovered from the full plastome analysis. ferrocalamus rimosivaginus exhibits a sister relationship to the rest of the arundinarieae, which differs from its placement sister to the acidosasa + arundinaria clade in the full plastome analysis. additionally, seven previously recovered nodes are supported at lower ml bootstrap and posterior probabilities .

discussion
plastome tree topology
the monophyletic tribes, subtribes and genera retrieved here largely confirm those identified in previous studies. notably, the plastome tree topology demonstrates paraphyly of the entire woody bamboo syndrome and suggests two independent origins of these characters or a common origin of the syndrome followed by its loss in olyreae. the topology within olyreae is well-supported, which can be attributed, in part, to its higher substitution rate and increased informative sites that are likely caused by the short generation times of this annually flowering lineage  <cit> . the new world chusqueinae also exhibited a higher substitution rate in our ml analyses. while some species within chusqueinae flower as infrequently as once every 70 years, flowering intervals are extremely variable in this lineage  <cit> . chusquea spectabilis was formerly classified within the genus neurolepis, which has shorter flowering intervals correlating with higher altitude habitats  <cit> . although the phenology of chusquea liebmannii is not well known, its higher substitution rates suggest that it may also flower relatively frequently. the substitution rates of the annually flowering outgroups lolium perenne  <cit>  and zizania aquatica  <cit>  are also elevated and support the relationship between frequent reproduction and high substitution rates in the bep clade  <cit> .

the topology of olyreae in our tree agrees well with current taxonomy  <cit> . the three recognized subtribes  are sampled here and resolved as monophyletic groups with maximum support in our phylogenomic analyses. the deep divergence of buergersiochloa bambusoides is of note. olyreae have a contemporary distribution in the new world except olyra latifolia which, though largely neotropical is also widespread in africa/madagascar. another exception is b. bambusoides, which is endemic to new guinea. the biogeography of olyreae argues for a new world origin and radiation followed by limited long-distance dispersals. however, the position of b. bambusoides as sister to the remaining olyreae recovered in our analysis and many others contradicts this hypothesis. our topology suggests an old world origin followed by a new world dispersal and radiation with a long distance dispersal event for o. latifolia to africa/madagascar, likely via birds feeding on the pseudo-berries produced by this species  <cit> . other historical scenarios are more complicated invoking repeated dispersals and extinction events and are difficult to reconcile with the phylogenomic topology presented here.

low bootstrap support and short branch lengths that obscure intrageneric relationships within bambusa can be attributed to the relatively close evolutionary relationships of these species, which is reflected in high sequence similarity accompanied with a weak phylogenetic signal. plastomes from this genus share high sequence similarity  and fewer intrageneric synapomorphic mutations. the possibility of intrageneric hybridization as well as hybridization events between closely related genera soon after their divergence also presents an issue when the exact branching order of these species is considered  <cit> . the long generation time of the bambuseae could allow artifacts of hybridization to persist well after their divergences.

the phylogenetic position of greslania recovered in this study is notable . greslania includes three or four species endemic to new caledonia with similarities of reproductive morphology to hickelia  <cit> . the genus is taxonomically associated with the broadly-defined bambusinae  <cit> , but its phylogenetic position is somewhat more specifically defined by chokthaweepanich  <cit>  as sister to what is called the cdmnpps  clade. our well-supported phylogenomic placement of greslania, sister to neololeba atra , is consistent with the previous work. the australasian distribution of these taxa offers additional insights. the tectonic history of new caledonia placed it in longstanding isolation from australia for some  <dig> to 65 ma  <cit> . some endemic plants of new caledonia are late cretaceous relicts suggesting a distribution resulting from long-standing historical vicariance  <cit> . however, evidence of more recent geologic history of total submergences supports a contrasting view, that the new caledonian flora can be no older than 37 ma  <cit> . the phylogenomic position of greslania, embedded within the relatively young clade of paleotropical woody bamboos, which have an estimated age ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> million-years  <cit>  is consistent with the recent geological evidence and suggests a mid-tertiary long-distance dispersal from a neololeba-like ancestral taxon. further complete chloroplast sampling among the cdmnpps clade will be required to further refine the position of greslania.

horizontal gene transfer between organellar genomes and other unique plastome features
the full plastome sequence assemblies revealed a  <dig>  bp insertion of mitochondrial dna in the rpl23-ndhb intergenic spacer within the ir region of pariana radiciflora and a nearly identical insertion  in the same region from the closely-related eremitis sp., with an additional  <dig>  base pairs appended to the 3′ end giving the insert a total length of  <dig>  bp. a sequence similarity search using blast matched a  <dig>  bp fragment of the insertion in eremitis sp. to a region of the rps7-atp <dig> intergenic spacer in the mitochondrial genome of ferrocalamus rimosivaginus, a member of the arundinarieae. nearly the entire insert in p. radiciflora showed significant sequence similarity to the same region within the f. rimosivaginus mitochondrial genome. although a mitochondrial fragment from olyreae should exhibit high similarity to a mitochondrial genome from within the same lineage, only two mitochondrial genomes have been sequenced among the bambusoideae to date . because of the rarity of this type of intergenomic transfer  <cit> , several tests were conducted to verify accurate plastome assembly in this region. note that this putative insertion was originally assembled de novo using velvet  in both taxa. the insertion was embedded in contigs of  <dig>  and  <dig>  kbp in eremitis sp. and p. radiciflora respectively. mapping the two sets of reads to their respective assemblies that include the insertion produced a continuum of perfectly overlapping reads that spanned the entire hypothesized mitochondrial insertions. the upstream and downstream boundaries of each insertion exhibited coverage of  <dig> and  <dig> respectively in eremitis sp., and  <dig> and  <dig> respectively in p. radiciflora, which compare favorably with the overall coverage of each plastome . mapping each set of reads to their respective flanking sequences produced regions identical to those of the insertion with no sign of consistent mismatching or misassembly . neither were there any clear patterns of coverage interruption when approaching each locus . although it could be expected that this area would show higher coverage due to the reference mapping using reads from both the plastid and mitochondrial regions, the inserts show comparable coverage to the rest of the genome. the mitochondrial inserts are represented sufficiently to produce an assembly but are not proportionally represented in the read pool. one possible explanation could be that the base composition in the mitochondrial inserts is less at rich than in the rest of the plastome  as the pcr step during illumina library preparation has been shown to introduce base composition bias in fragments  <cit> . another possibility is that this region was deleted from the mitogenome in the course of transfer to the plastome.

it should also be noted that the illumina libraries for p. radiciflora and eremitis sp. were prepared using different methods , sequenced at different facilities using paired-end and single-end, respectively, and plastomes were assembled independently using completely de novo methods. finally, the insert was confirmed with a pcr experiment using plastome/mitogenome primer pairs.

we hypothesize that this event originated from a recombination between the plastome and the homologous regions within the mitochondrial genome most probably in a common ancestor of these two taxa. the appearance of this mitochondrial insertion in two species of parianinae is striking, and most parsimoniously interpreted as a single event even though one of the inserts is  <dig>  kbp longer than the other. given the rarity of mitochondrial insertions in grass plastomes, two such similar events in closely related taxa is more difficult to explain than a single insertion with subsequent differential degradation of this noncoding dna. events in which a mitochondrial genome incorporates dna sequences of plastome origin are not rare, especially in bamboos  <cit> . this creates homologous regions between the cytoplasmic organelles, which following further mitochondrial rearrangements might facilitate recombination of additional mitochondrial sequences into the chloroplast. while the mitochondrial genomes have yet to be sequenced in p. radiciflora and eremitis sp., querying the mitochondrial genome of bambusa oldhamii with its own plastome sequence using blastn reveals over forty regions of significant sequence similarity longer than 100 bp in length. the much less frequent horizontal gene transfer from mitochondrion to plastid has been observed and verified in other plant species  <cit> .

the subset of olyreae that possess the unique 150 bp inversion in the trnd-psbm intergenic spacer includes representatives of only five genera of olyrinae. the olyrinae are well-supported as monophyletic in this study as is also suggested in oliveira et al.  <cit> , which indicates that this inversion likely occurred once in the common ancestor of this lineage. the high number of substitutions and indels accumulated between species within this unique inversion either supports the notion that the inversion event occurred early in the history of this lineage or that mutation rates are elevated. an imperfect eight bp inverted repeat flanking the inverted region  suggests that a possible inversion mechanism could be a stem-loop formation induced recombination.

CONCLUSIONS
this study successfully characterizes the full plastome sequences of  <dig> tropical bamboos, one temperate bamboo, and one ehrhartoid grass. three sequences from guaduinae and two from chusqueinae represent the first completely assembled plastome sequences from the new world tropical woody lineage. though full plastome sequences have been assembled from old world tropical species  <cit>  our taxonomic sampling of this lineage extends beyond the bambusa - dendrocalamus clade. this study also marks the first full plastome phylogenomic analysis to be performed within olyreae. two plastomes from olyreae reveal the first evidence of a synapomorphic mitochondrial-to-plastid horizontal gene transfer in monocots.

this phylogenomic study supports paraphyly of the woody bamboo syndrome. however, the scope of the relationships presented here is restricted to the maternally inherited evolutionary signal, which demonstrates considerable conflict in the phylogenomic network analysis at the node where the three main lineages diverge . a study on three single-copy nuclear markers performed by triplett et al.  <cit>  outlined a scenario in which the extant allopolyploid woody bamboos are a result of two separate hybridization events between at least four distinct precursor lineages. herbaceous bamboos were supported in a sister relationship to a progenitor lineage that eventually diversified into precursor lineages that hybridized to form the extant woody bamboos. the triplett et al.  <cit>  study clarified some of the complexities of bamboo diversification and provided evidence that the apparent paraphyly of the woody syndrome in bamboos may be an artifact of analysis with exclusively plastid loci. however, note that one out of the three nuclear markers potentially supported the robust tropical woody-herbaceous bamboo sister relationship in plastid studies by embedding the diploid herbaceous clade within lineages exclusive to tropical woody bamboos. further study using a wider variety of nuclear markers may clarify this significant event in bamboo diversification.figure  <dig> 
a neighbor-net analysis indicates conflicting phylogenetic signals in the data. the three main bamboo lineages are indicated. note the branches for outgroup taxa lolium and zizania were truncated to facilitate visibility. bamb.: bambuseae; olyr.: olyreae; arun.: arundinarieae.



additionally, a comparative study on the transcriptomics of the lignin biosynthesis and deposition pathways could provide further insight on the evolution of the woody character. a single origin of characters found in the woody bamboo syndrome would be supported by similar expression profiles between bambuseae and arundinarieae in the genes for enzymes and transcription factors involved in lignin biosynthesis and deposition and formation of bisexual florets while differing expression profiles could suggest otherwise. other potential expansions on this study are an examination of the phylogenetic signals given by other molecular characters such as mitochondrial coding sequences and microstructural changes.

