BACKGROUND
understanding the patterns and drivers that govern the abundance and diversity of organisms motivates the study of ecology and evolution. historically, however, such study has focused primarily on non-model organisms, with some notable exceptions . ecological and evolutionary investigations have particularly neglected the nematode caenorhabditis elegans and its close relatives until recently  <cit> . and yet, the deep mechanistic knowledge about c. elegans development and life history, coupled with its experimental advantages in the laboratory, make it particularly suited for a more complete integration of molecular genetic approaches with evolutionary and ecological questions. this merging of disciplines is motivated further by interesting phylogenetically variable characteristics of the genus, such as the independent origins of androdioecy  in at least three lineages from the more prevalent gonochoristic reproductive mode among other caenorhabditis species, which reproduce through obligatory mating of females and males  <cit> . a major impediment to fully realizing the potential of integrating these fields, however, is the lack of basic information about species distribution and richness in nature.

studies of caenorhabditis in nature are difficult, not only because of their small size , but also because we know little about the habitats in which they can be found reliably  <cit> . for this reason, the first population genetic analyses on c. elegans were conducted from opportunistic collection or by sampling populations in artificial compost heaps  <cit> . subsequently, c. elegans was isolated from rotting fruits, as well as in phoretic association with invertebrates such as snails, slugs and isopods  <cit> . compost heap populations are mostly composed of animals in dauer diapause, but c. elegans and c. briggsae were recently shown to proliferate and feed in rotting fruits and stems in mainland france  <cit> . those rotting fruits were collected primarily in human-built orchards; although rotting stems are found in natural preserves, primary forests no longer exist in europe  <cit> . like many other model organisms , c. elegans is thus at least partly human-associated, which likely exerts a strong influence on its range, migration patterns, and population structure  <cit> . however, we still have very limited information on the distribution of c. elegans and other caenorhabditis species relating to habitat type and geographic location. most importantly, we lack information on caenorhabditis species diversity and population structure from unperturbed habitats.

here, we report the results of a systematic sampling of caenorhabditis across spatial scales, from within a single fruit to sampling at metre, kilometre, regional and global scales. in order to minimize the impact of humans and to contrast previously studied temperate sites with a tropical location, we sampled caenorhabditis populations in a primary neotropical rain forest in french guiana, at the nouragues national reserve. we quantified the structure of diversity at different genetic and spatial scales, including the species richness of caenorhabditis at the nouragues location. in addition, we examined levels of intraspecific molecular polymorphism of c. briggsae from french guiana and from additional recent local sampling of c. briggsae from different regions of the world.

RESULTS
species diversity in french guiana
we assessed a total of  <dig> samples for nematodes of the genus caenorhabditis from a broad spectrum of substrate types in french guiana . we isolated five different caenorhabditis species, in addition to a sixth species  found in may  <dig> that was not found in  <dig>  three of these species  have so far only been reported from french guiana  <cit> ; all three are gonochoristic. c. sp.  <dig> belongs to the drosophilae supergroup of caenorhabditis species, and is presently the sister species of c. angaria, with which it can form f <dig> hybrids  <cit> . c. sp.  <dig> and c. sp.  <dig> are closely related to each other within the japonica group of caenorhabditis . the other three species found in nouragues are species known from tropical regions on other continents  <cit> , namely, the gonochoristic c. brenneri and the two selfing androdioecious species, c. briggsae and c. sp.  <dig>  the most commonly encountered species at the nouragues natural reserve were the androdieocious species  and the new gonochoristic species c. sp.  <dig> 

*androdioecy = self-fertile hermaphrodites and males, gonochorism = females and males.

substrate type and presence of caenorhabditis
we found caenorhabditis nematodes in a wide variety of rotting vegetal substrates ; however, we could not detect any obvious substrate specificity of the different species . samples examined immediately after isolation indicated that caenorhabditis population size in a given sample varied greatly, from one to approximately one thousand individuals, including both dauer stages and proliferating populations with non-dauer juvenile and adult stages . of the  <dig> nouragues samples,  <dig>  contained caenorhabditis, including  <dig> of  <dig> rotting fruits and  <dig> of  <dig> rotting flowers. proliferating populations of caenorhabditis were found both in rotting fruits and flowers, as well as in one of three samples of erect live flowers . caenorhabditis nematodes were rarely found in humus or leaf litter  or in association with live or dead insects . in  <dig> of  <dig> positive samples, we found two or three different caenorhabditis species co-occurring in rotting fruits or flowers sampled at the same site . many samples also contained nematode species other than caenorhabditis, including members of the rhabditina , diplogastrina or aphelenchida.

distribution of caenorhabditis species at different spatial scales
at the kilometre scale, the spatial distribution of caenorhabditis species appears non-uniform across the landscape in the nouragues natural reserve , suggesting that geographic and ecological factors structure species distributions at this medium scale. indicative of potential species structuring are the following observations: 1) all seven of the c. briggsae isolations were obtained from the grand plateau area, 2) the  <dig> samples that contained any caenorhabditis from the nouragues river area  included c. sp.  <dig> , suggesting that c. sp.  <dig> is more common than other caenorhabditis species in this habitat, and 3) c. sp.  <dig> was found commonly over the entire sampling area, except perhaps in the river area.


to test for small-scale  spatial structuring of species and genotype diversity in the nouragues natural reserve, we focused on two sampling sites  that contained large numbers of rotting cecropia fruits on the ground . at site h <dig>  we processed  <dig> samples, of which  <dig> contained c. briggsae  and one contained c. sp.  <dig> . at site h <dig>  we processed  <dig> samples, of which  <dig> contained c. briggsae  and  <dig> contained c. sp.  <dig> . at both sites, many substrate samples  also contained other nematode species, including oscheius spp., which co-occurred with the caenorhabditis species in  <dig> of  <dig> cases.


pattern of c. briggsae genetic diversity at different spatial scales
to test for local population structure within a species, we focused on the c. briggsae isolates resulting from the above small-scale spatial analysis, then considered these together with isolates from the entire nouragues area and from other sampling sites in french guiana. we further placed the results in the context of worldwide diversity of this species.

we first investigated the global pattern of c. briggsae diversity with a multi-locus dataset of  <dig> isolates, including  <dig> new isolates derived primarily from tropical sites . our broad-scale analysis  is consistent with previous reports indicating that most c. briggsae isolates partition into two main groups that largely separate by latitude, the “tropical/i” and “temperate/ii” phylogeographic groups, in addition to a few genetically distinct isolates from geographically-restricted localities that do not follow this latitudinal dichotomy  <cit> . genetic differentiation among the phylogeographic groups is very strong in relative terms , although the absolute magnitude of divergence between them is modest  owing to the low species-wide polymorphism in c. briggsae. this contrasts with the weaker fst and greater absolute divergence among populations in species such as c. remanei <cit> . here, we merge prior naming schemes for genetic groups within c. briggsae that were based on phylogeography with those numerical designations used for mitochondrial haplotype groups, e.g. “tropical” as in  <cit>  versus “clade i” as in  <cit> , both for clarity with previous literature and to retain biologically informative labels when referring to genetic groups of c. briggsae for which there is evidence of local adaptation  <cit> .


*only the highly differentiated strains are labelled “kerala” and “taiwan” .

the genetic composition of several isolates further demonstrates that demarcation of the range boundary for the two main haplotype groups within c. briggsae does not strictly adhere to the tropic of cancer   <cit> . specifically, chinese isolates gxw <dig> and vx <dig> from wuhan  and gxw <dig> from weifang  clearly fall into the “tropical/i” haplotype group, but are found farther north than most such isolates, and farther north even than some isolates from the “temperate/ii” haplotype group. despite these exceptions,  <dig> % of  <dig> “tropical/i” isolates were collected in tropical or subtropical latitudes, and 100% of  <dig> “temperate/ii” isolates were collected in temperate latitudes. interestingly, in addition to the more common “tropical/i” isolates, the sets from kerala, hubei and taiwan each included strains corresponding to distinct haplotype groups, suggesting that sampling at local scales might reveal substantial genetic diversity  <cit> . this observed diversity motivated us to investigate local patterns of diversity of the c. briggsae isolates from french guiana.

all c. briggsae isolated from french guiana are nested within the "tropical/i" phylogeographic group. the multi-locus analysis showed that they cluster into two sub-groups that mirror the pattern of differentiation observed circum-globally for “tropical/i” isolates . the c. briggsae isolates from french guiana thus harbour a great part of the genetic diversity found within "tropical/i," despite the relatively small region sampled.

within french guiana, these two genetic sub-groups do not partition according to locality of origin. indeed, diverse genotypes occurred at the two sites where several c. briggsae isolates were collected . in addition, we found little differentiation  and divergence  between isolates from nouragues and montagne des singes. moreover, genotypes from the two genetic subgroups co-occurred at the smallest scale in the sub-sampling of cecropia fruits . distinct genotypes also occurred at the scale of 5– <dig> metres in montagne des singes . this result indicates that population structure among the french guiana genotypes is not consistent with strong local population genetic differentiation that would lead to isolation by distance. instead, the pattern of population genetic diversity of c. briggsae within french guiana is consistent with it being a microcosm of pan-tropical diversity patterns, at least for the level of resolution permitted with single nucleotide polymorphism in nuclear loci. however, one multilocus genotype was dominant in the samples from nouragues, which likely contributes to its non-zero differentiation with samples from montagne des singes .

to further investigate local patterns of diversity at various spatial scales, we then compared nucleotide polymorphism of c. briggsae that were collected in french guiana with isolates from several other locations. although different genotypes were found on the same fruit in french guiana , we did not observe any nucleotide variation within a sample of isolates collected in new jersey at a scale of a few metres . this result is consistent with the finding that “temperate/ii” isolates harbour thirteen-fold less nucleotide polymorphism , on average, than isolates from “tropical/i”   <cit> . at an intermediate spatial scale, we found overall similar levels of nucleotide diversity between the c. briggsae isolates from french guiana and isolates from the island of maui, hawaii . nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the size of the sample from maui is six-fold smaller than that of french guiana. further intensive sampling of small islands is warranted to investigate total diversity in c. briggsae, which might uncover novel sequence variants. for instance, inclusion of c. briggsae isolates from several hawaiian islands raises global measures of nucleotide polymorphism .


*see figure 5a; a“local” samples refer to isolates collected from a single putative population whereas “pooled” samples refer to isolates collected from disjoint populations  <cit> ; bn: mean number of strains; chd: haplotype diversity; dh: number of haplotypes; es: number of segregating sites; fπsi: average number of nucleotide differences per silent site; gθsi: nucleotide diversity per silent site.

discussion
high caenorhabditis species richness in a tropical rainforest
here we documented the extensive sampling of caenorhabditis in a tropical rainforest in french guiana and characterized the structure of genetic diversity of the cosmopolitan species c. briggsae from small , intermediate  and up to global spatial scales. we identified six species from a single tropical site, representing nearly 25% of the  <dig> caenorhabditis species known in laboratory culture  <cit> . three of these species may be endemic to this region, although sampling of caenorhabditis in south america is very limited. these findings reinforce the view that caenorhabditis nematodes can be locally diverse and – although they have been generally referred to as soil nematodes – are more easily found in rotting vegetal matter, especially fruits, flowers and stems  <cit> .

our sampling can be contrasted with a recent extensive sampling effort in temperate france  <cit> . in mainland france, just two species of caenorhabditis are found commonly: c. elegans and c. briggsae. in addition, c. remanei and c. sp.  <dig> each have been isolated once in the course of sampling many locations in france over many years  <cit> . the isolation of six distinct caenorhabditis species in just a few square kilometres of tropical forest, including three potentially endemic species, testifies to much higher species richness of caenorhabditis in the tropics  <cit> . moreover, this finding for caenorhabditis is fully consistent with latitudinal diversity patterns documented for many other taxa  <cit> . as discovery of new species in this group is progressing rapidly, phylogenetically-informed analysis of caenorhabditis species distributions may shed light on long-standing questions about the causes of latitudinal species diversity gradients  <cit> .

previous sporadic sampling of caenorhabditis nematodes in tropical south and central america has yielded c. sp.  <dig>  c. brenneri, and c. briggsae. an additional three species have also been found on caribbean islands   <cit> . the absence of the well-known c. elegans in the nouragues natural reserve is not surprising, however, given that this species is rare in previous sampling from the tropics  <cit> . thus, the distribution of caenorhabditis species around the world is consistent with there being a few cosmopolitan species and many other species endemic to particular geographic regions.

our study demonstrates the first evidence of heterogeneous species distributions of caenorhabditis at an intermediate spatial scale on the order of kilometres. it will be important in future work to determine whether these species distributions reflect stable features that might correspond to distinct ecological habitat characteristics of the different species, or instead reflect stochastic local abundances that are dynamic in time, perhaps owing to strong metapopulation dynamics associated with ephemeral food patches that can be utilized by many caenorhabditis species. co-occurrence of multiple species was common for samples of the same substrate type, and sometimes within the same sample, a pattern also reported for the less species-rich sampling in mainland france  <cit> . these observations raise the neglected issue of niche space in caenorhabditis biology as a major question to be answered to understand the abundance and distribution of species. unfortunately, there are few data describing caenorhabditis fitness reaction norms in relation to potential ecological factors that could differentially limit species persistence   <cit> .

spatial structure of genetic diversity
we used the cosmopolitan c. briggsae as a focal taxon for quantifying population genetic variability from the finest sampling scales within the nouragues forest samples up to pooled samples at regional and global scales. we found that distinct c. briggsae genotypes co-exist at scales down to a few metres  or even a single fruit . given their highly selfing mode of reproduction in nature  <cit> , this suggests that a given fruit can be colonized by multiple individuals of distinct genetic backgrounds. these results mirror findings for temperate latitude samples of c. elegans, in that high local diversity may occur while genetic differentiation among locations is low  <cit> . this pattern of large-scale homogeneity coupled with fine-scale heterogeneity also is reminiscent of the 'chaotic genetic patchiness' observed for some intertidal invertebrates with a highly dispersing planktonic stage  <cit> . in contrast to c. elegans, however, strong population structure dominates the global scale in c. briggsae, with 1) a large "tropical/i" phylogeographic group distributed widely in the tropics around the world, 2) a large "temperate/ii" phylogeographic group having very low polymorphism overall and hence undetectable local diversity, and 3) a few genetically divergent clades, so far each found only in one place   <cit> . it is likely that such geographically restricted diversity is not yet exhausted by our sampling, nor are the possibilities for observing recombination among the main phylogeographic groups. recombination had been previously noted at this large scale  <cit>  and can also be inferred among the french guiana multilocus genotypes, as visualized by the reticulation pattern of the haplotype network .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we described the first sampling of caenorhabditis in a primary tropical forest environment, analysing a variety of substrates. we found six caenorhabditis species, mostly in rotting flowers and fruits, the densest richness of species known in this group. three of these species are cosmopolitan, three appear less widespread and might be endemic to french guiana. the genetic structure of c. briggsae populations indicates events of long-distance migrations among different continents in the tropical zone, and a local spatial structure resembling that described for c. elegans in temperate zone populations.

