BACKGROUND
discrepancies between in vivo and in vitro susceptibility to antifungals discourage microbiologists and clinicians regarding the routine use of susceptibility testing methods. although in vitro resistance usually correlates with clinical resistance, high susceptibility in vitro is not always related to clinical success, particularly for aspergillus spp., most strains being susceptible in vitro  <cit> . ultimately, the mortality rates are unacceptably high in patients treated with antifungals that showed high in vitro efficacy  <cit> . propofol is an intravenous hypnotic agent very popular for induction and maintenance of general and intravenous anaesthesia. it is commonly administered in intensive care units to critically ill patients, often under mechanical ventilation, which represent a high risk group for health care related infections. the use of propofol has been previously associated to an increased risk for infection, although some controversy still remains  <cit> . it was proposed a low risk of contamination whenever providing standard hygienic precautions  <cit> . nevertheless, other observations described the lipid emulsion of propofol as a good culture medium to support the growth of candida albicans and escherichia coli  <cit> . additionally, other reports associated post surgical infections with the extrinsically contamination of propofol infusion  <cit> . propofol has also been shown to inhibit a variety of functions of neutrophils in vitro, although such effect was not so evident in vivo  <cit> .

we have studied the effect of the infusion of propofol and its lipidic vehicle upon antifungal susceptibility of candida and aspergillus spp. a promotion of resistance due to a decreased input of the antifungal drugs was found.

RESULTS
in candida strains, budding and germ tube formation were similar in presence of all tested concentrations of propofol infusion. in non-albicans strains, the incubation with  <dig> μg.ml- <dig> of propofol infusion resulted in a significant increased of cells with buds when comparing to control  . conversely, a significant reduction of germ tube formation was observed in c. albicans strains comparing with non-treated yeasts  . aspergillus conidia germinated in rpmi  <dig> culture medium after  <dig> to  <dig> hours, the hyphal form being obtained following  <dig> to  <dig> hours. propofol infusion supported the germination of all aspergillus strains, showing similar values to those obtained in plain rpmi  <dig> medium. a significantly higher percentage of germination of a. fumigatus conidia was found in pbs plus propofol and plain propofol infusion in comparison with plain pbs   following  <dig> hours at 37°c. longer incubation periods of conidia with propofol infusion showed lipidic drops or a lipidic layer around the hypha, in all assays and with all strains, which remained present following several washings steps .

the result of mic determination revealed that all fungal strains were susceptible to the tested antifungals. propofol infusion or its vehicle, at the tested concentrations, consistently promoted an increase of mfc mean values for candida and aspergillus strains, this effect being dose-dependent and statistically significant ; such effect was invariably observed with all strains of candida and aspergillus and with all antifungals, in some cases the mean values increasing over  <dig> fold. mfc values in the presence of  <dig> mg.ml- <dig> of propofol infusion or its vehicle increased at least  <dig> dilutions in all strains  for fluconazole and voriconazole, more than  <dig> dilutions for amphotericin b and  <dig> to  <dig> dilutions for posaconazole and itraconazole. there was no large variability between the tested strains.

nd not done

* the mean value for each strain was considered

flow cytometry analysis of candida blastoconidia resulted in 98% of cells stained with fun <dig>  even after the incubation of sodium azide . however, after treatment with propofol infusion and stained with fun <dig>  a non-stained sub-population of cells, similar to autofluorescence, of around 15% was revealed soon after  <dig> minutes . this fact was unrelated with the incubation with sodium azide at a concentration able to block the efflux pumps . the azole resistant strain of c. albicans 95– <dig> , after treatment with propofol infusion and stained with fun <dig>  revealed a non-stained sub-population, similar to other susceptible strains, even after the blockade of the efflux pumps with sodium azide. this effect was similar in presence of all the tested concentrations of propofol.

after  <dig> hour, the accumulation of -labelled itraconazole was detected in blastoconidia cells  . however, a decrease of 39% in intracellular -labelled itraconazole was seen when yeast cells were incubated with propofol lipid infusion . this effect was similar in presence of the different tested concentrations of propofol lipidic infusion and did not increase following the pre-incubation with sodium azide .

the results obtained in the different assays were similar when performed with propofol lipidic vehicle.

discussion
propofol administered in a lipid-based emulsion to patients has been shown to represent an excellent vehicle for supporting the growth of various microorganisms  <cit> . in the present study we clearly showed that budding of candida spp. was promoted when incubated in the presence of propofol infusion, significantly more than in a culture medium. aspergillus fumigatus germinate faster than the other aspergillus species, possibly being associated to higher pathogenicity  <cit> . we showed that propofol infusion also supported mould germination and growth, apart from yeasts. it is important to emphasize that the propofol concentrations used in all assays are within the plasma levels often achieved in clinical practice  <cit> .

due to the opacity of propofol infusion or its lipidic vehicle it was not possible to determine mic values. as the conventional susceptibility phenotypes refer to mic values, we could not establish the corresponding phenotypes after incubation with propofol. in the case of amphotericin b  mfc, determined after culture in agar solid medium, usually corresponds to mic values; for the other antifungals, mfc values are usually located within one or three dilutions above the mic. some c. albicans and c. tropicalis showed trailing phenotype  for azoles. this common effect may influence the evaluation of mfc values. however, trailing is only azole dependent and was not affected by the presence of propofol infusion. nevertheless, we could observe a significant promotion of the mfc value in presence of propofol infusion, in some cases up to  <dig> dilutions, suggesting that the strains became quite tolerant to the effect of all antifungals. fun <dig> is a fluorescent probe that is converted by metabolically active yeasts in intracytoplasmic vacuolar structures  <cit> . we have used this probe to study susceptibility of yeasts after incubation during one to two-hours with the antifungals; a higher intensity of fluorescent in susceptible strains, decreasing in resistant strains was described  <cit> . the decrease of the intensity of fluorescence could be explained by the presence of energy-dependent efflux pumps, which were reverted with sodium azide or several modulators  <cit> . in the present study, the viable cells showed a decrease of the intensity of fluorescence in the presence of propofol which was not however reverted with sodium azide, even considering the resistant tested strain. furthermore, cells were washed several times before the addition of the fluorescent probe in order to avoid its binding to propofol infusion. these results support that propofol infusion affected fun <dig> access and/or permeabilization, reducing the input of the fluorescent probe into the cell. we had also previously shown that -labelled itraconazole accumulation could be a useful tool to confirm the existence of efflux pumps in resistant candida strains to azoles  <cit> . the blockade of efflux pumps with sodium azide resulted in the reduction of input of -labelled itraconazole in candida cells, after incubation with propofol infusion. in fact, propofol infusion was responsible for the difficult access of itraconazole to the fungal cell.

attending to the facts that i) the increase of mfc values was similar with all antifungal drugs, including the recently available posaconazole; ii) fun <dig> could not stain a considerable percentage of the yeast cells in presence of propofol infusion and iii) a lesser amount of -labelled itraconazole was present within such cells, even after the addition of sodium azide, we are forced to conclude that the promotion of antifungal resistance in presence of propofol lipidic infusion results from a reduced access and/or permeabilization of antifungal agents into the fungal cells. the same results were obtained when only the propofol vehicle was used, thus we had concluded that the major responsible for such effect was the lipidic nature of propofol infusion. the formation of a lipidic layer surrounding the cells supports such assumption, being responsible for the reduced permeabilization. several studies reported that the lipidic membrane of fungal cells plays an important role in susceptibility to azoles  <cit> . fluctuations in the lipidic environment affects, not only drug diffusion but also efflux pumps, coded specially by cdr <dig> and pdr5p, leading to multidrug azole resistance  <cit> . in our study, as the efflux pumps were blocked with sodium azide, the increased mfc values probably resulted from poor diffusion of the antifungal drugs caused by the lipidic vehicle layer or drops deposited around the cells. the hypothesis that propofol could be binding the antifungal agent in culture medium reducing the free number of molecules available for penetrating the cells was also raised. mfc results were more evident when propofol was associated with itraconazole or posaconazole , both lipophilic drugs. however, we must consider that different concentrations of propofol resulted in similar effects. the hypothesis that the lipidic vehicle of propofol might be playing a role in sterol homeostasis and changing the azole target, should be considered attending to other research  <cit> . lipid uptake by the fungal cell was described in the presence of the azoles following longer incubation time   <cit> . measuring sterols in azole-treated fungi in the presence or not of the lipidic vehicle of propofol could be interesting however, the incubation time with propofol on cytometric and radioactivity studies was very short to allow the incorporation of the lipid in membrane.

CONCLUSIONS
the assays described in this manuscript provided an opportunity to describe the effect of propofol infusion in antifungal drug resistance. we concluded that propofol infusion, due to its lipidic vehicle reduced the access and/or permeabilization to candida and aspergillus cells to main antifungals administered to patients.

the described effect should raise the alert to a promoted risk of fungal infections in patients receiving propofol infusions, resulting from the fact that fungal strains become increasingly resistant to antifungals.

