BACKGROUND
the african clawed frog, xenopus laevis, is an important model organism in developmental biology. xenopus oocytes, eggs and early embryos have been widely used in cell cycle studies, which provided a basis for the current understanding of meiotic and mitotic transition. most control mechanisms that operate in maturing oocytes, fertilized eggs, and early embryos have been first established in xenopus laevis . however, the fate of unfertilized eggs in this species has received little attention.

fully grown xenopus oocytes of the stage vi are naturally arrested in the prophase of the first meiotic division with the intact nuclear envelope and partially decondensed chromatin. immature fully grown xenopus oocytes are not competent to fertilization and can be arrested at this stage in the ovaries for many months. during ovulation, the steroid hormone progesterone, secreted from surrounding follicle cells, induces oocyte transition from prophase i to metaphase ii in the process of meiotic maturation. in frogs, the term "egg" is conventionally used for the ovulated female gamete arrested in the metaphase of the second meiotic division. high activities of the key meiotic regulators, maturation promoting factor  and cytostatic factor  have been established to maintain metaphase ii arrest in mature xenopus eggs  <cit> . the meiotic arrest is essential for the embryonic development as it allows mature oocytes to await fertilization, preventing the continuation of cell cycles and parthenogenesis after meiosis.

once ovulated, eggs can either be fertilized and develop into embryo or they die within a short time. fertilization causes the release of calcium from intracellular stores, which event is necessary and sufficient for egg activation. consequently, calcium-dependent degradation of mitotic cyclins and mos occurs, resulting in the inactivation of csf and mpf, meiotic exit, and entry into the mitotic cell cycle. this allows development to proceed. ovulated unfertilized eggs undergo a time-dependent quality loss, the process also known as postovulatory oocyte deterioration  <cit> . accordingly, delayed egg fertilization results in progressive decrease of fertilization success in different frog, fish, and mammalian species  <cit> . spontaneous activation of ovulated mammalian eggs has been implicated as a likely biochemical basis for the time-dependent decrease of the fertilization rate  <cit> . also, the rapid loss of fertilization capacity of fish eggs during spawning has been linked to their spontaneous activation in aquatic environment  <cit> .

the eggs from different species, such as starfish, mice and humans were shown to die by apoptosis within  <dig> hrs of ovulation if they are not fertilized  <cit> . the recent studies using starfish eggs implicate mapk and calcium in triggering this process  <cit> . in this species, spontaneous egg activation and meiotic exit were shown to precede initiation of the apoptotic program. still, in contrast to the well characterized apoptotic process in various somatic cells, apoptosis in eggs and oocytes is not well understood. recently, cell-free extracts of xenopus eggs that can support apoptosis  <cit>  have been widely employed. these extracts are typically prepared from the eggs deposited by gonadotropin-stimulated animals. paradoxically, since the time of their discovery in  <dig>  no cell-based apoptotic process recapitulated in these extracts has been identified. although apoptosis in nutrient- or polyamine-deprived xenopus oocytes and eggs has been well documented  <cit> , no evidence has been presented that naturally laid frog eggs die by apoptosis. it has been suggested that the apoptosis in xenopus egg extracts might reflect atretic oocyte degradation  <cit> , however there is no experimental evidence for this suggestion. notably, in mammalian species with internal fertilization, the oocytes that have matured but have not been ovulated are degraded apoptotically  <cit> .

here, we report that the majority of unfertilized xenopus eggs are degraded by an apoptotic process within  <dig> hours after ovulation. in the absence of fertilization, under different environmental conditions, xenopus eggs spontaneously exit meiotic arrest from  <dig> to  <dig> hours after ovulation. after the meiotic exit, eggs are degraded by an apoptotic process within following  <dig> hours. the hallmarks of this process include prominent morphological changes, cytochrome c release, caspase  <dig> activation, decrease of the intracellular atp content, increase in adp/atp ratio, apoptotic nuclear morphology. at the late stages of egg degradation, prominent intracellular acidification and swelling can be observed. none of the apoptotic events could be detected in the eggs maintaining high activity of mpf and csf and in the immature prophase-arrested oocytes, indicating that a maternal apoptotic program is evoked in frog oocytes upon maturation and executed after meiotic exit in unfertilized eggs. it takes several hours for apoptosis to develop in eggs after meiotic exit. in the same manner, apoptosis is initiated in metaphase-released xenopus egg extracts only after their prolonged incubation at room temperature. our findings suggest that the apoptosis in cell-free xenopus egg extracts recapitulates the process of apoptotic degradation of unfertilized post-meiotic eggs.

RESULTS
unfertilized xenopus eggs spontaneously exit meiotic arrest
immediately after their disposal, xenopus eggs display quite uniform appearance. they are coated with jelly layer and have a prominent white spot in the animal hemisphere . at that time, the eggs are arrested in metaphase, as it can be judged by the presence of cyclin b and phosphorylated mapk . although some eggs experienced reversible cortical contraction  characteristic of egg activation within the first several hours after ovulation, most of them remained arrested in metaphase for at least  <dig> hours in water and  <dig> hours in or- <dig> buffer. afterwards the unfertilized eggs spontaneously exited metaphase arrest, as witnessed by cyclin b degradation and mapk dephosphorylation. meiotic exit occurred earlier in water-deposited eggs than in buffer-deposited eggs . by the time of meiotic exit, characteristic changes in the egg morphology could be detected. the white spot became hardly distinguishable and the eggs started to acquire marble-like appearance . subsequently, progressive decoloring of the pigment layer took place . presence of the jelly layer and different buffer composition have considerable effect on the timing of morphological changes and meiotic exit, notably, these events occurred faster in the eggs deposited in water . thus, under different environmental conditions unfertilized xenopus eggs spontaneously exit meiotic arrest within  <dig> hours after ovulation. for the convenience of the following biochemical analysis, degradation of the unfertilized dejellied eggs deposited in or- <dig> buffer has been investigated thereafter. of note, a minor fraction of all eggs  experienced irreversible cortical contraction leading to the fast egg whitening and swelling within just  <dig> hours . these eggs were excluded from the detailed biochemical analysis .

egg
 and  denote dejellied and jelly-coated eggs, respectively.

apoptotic events in unfertilized xenopus eggs
besides the beginning morphological changes, no other features of egg degradation could be detected at the time of meiotic exit. no significant changes in the level of cytochrome c released from mitochondria, caspase activity, intracellular atp content, adp/atp ratio, and intracellular ph have been observed during the first  <dig> hours after ovulation . the stability of the egg size evidences that the mechanisms of cellular osmotic homeostasis operate properly over that time . however, the dramatic biochemical changes, indicative of unfolding apoptotic process, developed in the eggs after meiotic exit. by 24- <dig> hours after ovulation, the eggs displayed significantly elevated caspase  <dig> activity and they abundantly released cytochrome c from mitochondria . the cell-free extracts prepared from these eggs induced apoptotic nuclear morphology in the added demembranated sperm nuclei . these features are characteristics of the classical apoptotic process. furthermore, depletion of intracellular atp, increase in adp/atp ratio, and significant intracellular acidification could be observed in the eggs by 30- <dig> hours after ovulation . the prominent increase in the intracellular egg volume by that time  is indicative of the irreversible loss of plasma membrane integrity that essentially defines the terminal stage of cell death.

*not determined

of note, prominent intracellular acidification could be consistently detected in the eggs by  <dig> hours using both spectrometric and fluorescent assays . however, overestimation of the ph value in late apoptotic egg lysates  was evident with the fluorescent assay due to, presumably, elevated ph-independent fluorescence of bcecf in these lysates. the spectrometric ph assay was devoid of this drawback, so, it was mainly employed in the following experiments.

single-cell analysis of unfertilized xenopus eggs
to better understand the sequence of events in a potentially heterogeneous population of unfertilized xenopus eggs, biochemical analysis of the individual eggs has been carried out. the eggs collected at  <dig> hours after ovulation  were found to be arrested in the metaphase, and no metaphase-arrested eggs were present in egg population afterwards, as judged by the phosphorylation status of mapk . the level of caspase  <dig> activity in these eggs was close to that in the control egg collected immediately after ovulation . also, the content of intracellular atp, adp/atp ratio, and egg size were similar to the control . cell-to-cell variation of the caspase activity at that time was rather low, reflecting high homogeneity of the egg population. however, the eggs collected at 18- <dig> hours after ovulation  displayed elevated caspase activity, and the degree of caspase activation in the individual eggs varied significantly in the range between 160% and 500% . these figures agree well with about four-fold magnitude of caspase activation observed in the bulk-scale experiments, which measure average values for egg population . the significant loss of intracellular atp and increase in adp/atp ratio were evident at  <dig> hours after ovulation . however, egg diameter did not yet alter significantly at that time . finally, the eggs collected at  <dig> hours after ovulation  displayed very low caspase activity and they were virtually depleted of atp. their diameter was drastically increased, indicating the loss of cellular osmotic homeostasis. these findings are largely consistent with the data obtained in the bulk-scale experiments. in addition, the single-cell analysis revealed a significant egg-to-egg variation of the caspase activation, suggesting considerable heterogeneity of the apoptotic response in the analyzed egg population.

early meiotic exit promotes accelerated apoptosis in xenopus eggs
meiotic exit was found to precede apoptosis in the unfertilized xenopus eggs . moreover, apoptotic events could not be detected in the eggs arrested at the meiotic metaphase . these data suggested that meiotic arrest may act to prevent apoptosis in the unfertilized eggs. if this suggestion is right, the early meiotic exit should promote accelerated egg apoptosis and degradation. to test this lead, freshly-deposited xenopus eggs were artificially activated with the calcium ionophore a <dig>  this treatment induced robust egg activation and meiotic exit within  <dig> minutes . however, no signs of unfolding apoptotic process have been observed in the eggs over the next  <dig> hours following activation. cytochrome c release and caspase activation in the eggs could be detected only in  <dig> hours after the ionophore administration. notably, these events occurred earlier and they were more robust in the ionophore-treated eggs than in the naturally laid eggs . also, the earlier atp decrease and adp/atp ratio increase were evident in the ionophore-activated eggs .

presently, it is unknown if calcium rise is involved in releasing the naturally laid xenopus eggs from meiotic arrest, so, the results with calcium ionophore cannot be immediately interpreted as physiologically relevant. to directly support a role of the cell cycle machinery in preventing apoptosis, we examined whether the specific cdk inhibitor roscovitine can accelerate apoptosis in aging xenopus eggs. we have found that similarly to calcium ionophore, roscovitine promoted earlier meiotic exit in these cells; cyclin and mos degradation and mapk dephosphorylation occurred within  <dig> hours of drug administration . importantly, the earlier meiotic exit was accompanied by accelerated apoptosis; faster morphological changes, caspase activation, atp depletion, adp/atp ratio increase, and egg swelling have been observed in the roscovitine-treated eggs .

altogether, the results obtained demonstrate that earlier meiotic exit is associated with accelerated and more robust apoptotic degradation of unfertilized xenopus eggs. the data provide a basis to infer cause-and-effect relationships between meiotic exit and apoptosis, suggesting an anti-apoptotic role for meiotic metaphase arrest. however, the fact that apoptosis does not unfold in the eggs immediately after meiotic exit indicates that some other factors also contribute to inhibition of the apoptotic program in these cells .

in vitro maturation of xenopus oocytes initiates maternal apoptotic program
the data presented above indicate that the majority of unfertilized xenopus eggs die by an apoptotic process within  <dig> hours of ovulation. on the other hand, immature fully grown xenopus oocytes of stage vi can rest in frog ovaries over several months. these facts imply that the apoptotic program may be initiated in the oocytes upon meiotic maturation. to confirm this suggestion, we compared out-of-body stability of the surgically-removed defolliculated xenopus oocytes and eggs obtained from these oocytes by in vitro maturation. the results of these experiments demonstrated that the oocytes remained stable outside of the animal's body in the or- <dig> media for at least  <dig> hours . none of the cell death events, such as cytochrome c release, caspase activation, intracellular acidification, and swelling could be observed in the resting oocytes over that period . however, some moderate decrease of the intracellular atp content and increase in adp/atp ratio, related, probably, to oocyte ageing, was evident . on the other hand, the studied apoptotic events manifested profoundly in the oocytes subjected to progesterone treatment. the hormone promoted meiotic oocyte maturation and cell cycle transition from prophase to metaphase, as judged by mapk activation and gvbd . afterwards, similarly to the naturally laid eggs, the in vitro matured oocytes experienced spontaneous meiotic exit  accompanied by the dramatic changes in the egg morphology . all the cell death events observed in the ovulated eggs, such as cytochrome c release, caspase activation, intracellular acidification, loss of intracellular atp, increase in adp/atp ratio, and swelling, could also be detected in the in vitro matured oocytes, albeit with some delay . altogether, the data of the in vitro maturation experiments demonstrate that progesterone renders xenopus oocytes susceptible to apoptosis. in accordance with the results obtained with ovulated eggs , apoptosis unfolds in the in vitro matured oocytes after meiotic exit.

discussion
the main finding of this study is that unfertilized frog eggs die by apoptosis following meiotic exit. a plethora of classical apoptotic events, such as cytochrome c release, caspase activation, apoptotic nuclear morphology, decrease of intracellular atp, increase in adp/atp ratio, and intracellular acidification have been observed in the unfertilized eggs of the african clawed frog xenopus laevis. notably, previous studies failed to reveal apoptotic features in the naturally laid intact xenopus eggs. for instance, cytochrome c release could not be detected in the intact metaphase ii arrested eggs over  <dig> hours of ovulation  <cit> . more recently, real-time monitoring of caspase activity in xenopus oocytes and early embryos using near-infrared fluorescence failed to detect caspase activation in the progesterone-matured oocytes over  <dig> hours and concluded that death in the mature oocytes arrested in meiosis ii proceeds by a process different from classical apoptosis  <cit> . the reason for the failed detection of the caspase activation in the unfertilized frog eggs seems to be the greatly delayed onset of apoptosis in these cells. even when the eggs appeared, by morphological criteria, to be dying, there was no indication of caspase activation in these eggs . accordingly, other events of classical apoptosis, such as cytochrome c release, apoptotic nuclear morphology, loss of intracellular atp, increase in adp/atp ratio, and intracellular acidification could not be detected in the unfertilized xenopus eggs until  <dig> hours after ovulation . eventually, after the delay, the eggs degraded by a well-defined apoptotic process within  <dig> hours after ovulation . in accordance with these results, the most recent study published after submission of the present paper reported that ovulated unfertilized xenopus eggs recovered in the external medium died by apoptosis within  <dig> hours  <cit> .

our data suggest that meiotic arrest in frog eggs is one of the factors responsible for the delay in the execution of apoptotic cell death. under different environmental conditions, unfertilized xenopus eggs were found to spontaneously exit meiotic arrest . meiotic exit precedes apoptosis and none of the investigated apoptotic events could be detected in metaphase-arrested eggs . in addition, the early meiotic exit induced by calcium ionophore or roscovitine was found to significantly accelerate apoptosis onset . markedly, synchronization of meiotic exit by the ionophore and roscovitine induced more robust and synchronous apoptotic process, suggesting causality between meiotic arrest and apoptosis. in connection with these data, the earlier meiotic exit in water, as compared to that in db buffer or or- <dig> media, was also accompanied by the accelerated egg apoptosis . thus, meiotic exit seems to be a prerequisite for execution of the apoptotic program, since  it precedes apoptosis,  none of the apoptotic events can be observed in the eggs maintaining high activity of mpf and csf, and  apoptosis in the unfertilized frog eggs is accelerated upon early meiotic exit.

previously, it has been demonstrated that mature eggs are much more sensitive to apoptotic insult than prophase oocytes  <cit> . also, the experiments involving in vitro reconstitution of apoptosis in cell-free extracts of xenopus eggs suggested that the extracts arrested in interphase, but not in metaphase were susceptible to an apoptotic program leading to caspase activation  <cit> . although apoptotic extracts are usually prepared from the eggs arrested in meiotic metaphase ii, egg lysis by centrifugation in the process of extract preparation causes calcium release, which promotes meiotic exit and progression into interphase. the meiotic extracts prepared in the presence of calcium chelators are markedly refractory to apoptosis  <cit> . it was shown that the mapk pathway active in the metaphase-arrested egg extracts renders them resistant to apoptosis  <cit> . caspase  <dig> phosphorylation at thr <dig> targeted by erk mapk in vitro was shown to be sufficient to block caspase  <dig> processing and subsequent caspase  <dig> activation  <cit> . it has also been reported that phosphorylation of caspase  <dig> by cdk1/cyclin b <dig> protects mitotic cells against apoptosis  <cit> . in addition, cdk1/cyclin b <dig> was shown to suppress apoptosis during mitosis through interdomain phosphorylation of caspase  <dig> within an evolutionarily conserved sequence at ser  <dig>  <cit> . the additional experiments using specific inhibitors and activators of mapk and cdk <dig> are required to reveal differential anti-apoptotic engagement of csf and mpf in the unfertilized xenopus eggs.

suppressing apoptotic program in mature frog eggs should serve the purpose of producing the largest possible number of gametes available for fertilization. this situation is quite reminiscent of the apoptotic induction in star fish eggs, where meiotic arrest effectively blocks apoptosis  <cit> . it was shown that induction of apoptosis in starfish eggs requires spontaneous mapk inactivation followed by p38mapk activation  <cit> . moreover, before the inactivation, mapk should be activated for a definite period, during which eggs develop competence to die. similarly, mature xenopus oocytes should also be arrested at metaphase ii with high activity of mapk and cdk <dig> before they can initiate apoptosis. immature xenopus oocytes, which have low activity of these meiotic regulators, were found to be markedly refractory to apoptosis . previously, microinjection of cytochrome c into immature xenopus oocytes was shown to reliably induce apoptosis  <cit> , suggesting pre-cytochrome c protection from apoptosis in these cells. in addition, the finding that mature eggs are much more sensitive to apoptotic insult caused by cytochrome c microinjection than prophase oocytes  <cit>  also indicates the existence of post-cytochrome c protection from apoptosis in the oocytes. in the future studies, it would be interesting to identify, at which stage of meiotic maturation frog oocytes develop competence to apoptosis.

remarkably, although apoptotic protection conferred by meiotic arrest is lost at egg activation, unfertilized post-meiotic eggs are not engaged into apoptosis immediately after meiotic exit. it takes several hours to release cytochrome c and fully activate caspases after either spontaneous or calcium ionophore-initiated meiotic exit . similarly, interphase xenopus egg extracts do not release cytochrome c until they have been incubated at room temperature for prolonged periods  <cit> , suggesting that some mechanisms must act to prevent apoptosis during that time. presumably, the same mechanisms work to suppress apoptosis after egg fertilization and during early embryonic divisions. it has been suggested that apoptosis is prevented during the early cleavages in the xenopus embryo by maternally encoded apoptotic inhibitors  <cit> , however their identity has not been disclosed.

notably, the apoptotic scenario revealed in this study is not the only way of egg degradation. some minor fraction of ovulated eggs  experience robust and irreversible cortical contraction. although this phenomenon occurs most often within the first  <dig> hours of ovulation, it can also be observed at later times. irreversible cortical contraction is associated with excessive egg activation , leading to the fast egg whitening and swelling within just one hour . egg hyperactivation is considered to be a pathological process  <cit> . evidently, it is quite different from the normal egg activation, so the hyperactivated eggs were excluded from the present biochemical analysis. it should be noted that although normally the percent of hyperactivated cells in a batch of ovulated eggs is quite low, it varies greatly according to season and individual animals. some batches of poor quality, especially those deposited in the summer time, may be composed almost entirely of the hyperactivated eggs.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study reveals that:  unfertilized xenopus eggs die by apoptosis if they are not fertilized,  apoptosis unfolds in the eggs following meiotic exit,  a maternal apoptotic program is evoked in frog oocytes upon meiotic maturation, and  meiotic exit is a prerequisite for execution of the apoptotic program in xenopus eggs. these findings make the unfertilized frog eggs a very attractive and feasible model for apoptotic studies. in addition, our results suggest that the well-established apoptosis in cell-free xenopus egg extracts recapitulates the process of apoptotic degradation of unfertilized post-meiotic eggs.

