BACKGROUND
synapsins are neuronal phosphoproteins that constitute a small family of synaptic molecules specifically associated with synaptic vesicles  <cit> . synapsins regulate the balance between the readily-releasable pool and the reserve pool of synaptic vesicles and are involved in the neurotransmitter release and synaptic plasticity  <cit> .

in vertebrates, synapsins are encoded by three distinct genes  that give rise to ten distinct alternative transcripts   <cit> . invertebrate and vertebrate synapsin transcripts share similarity among three conserved domains known as a, c and e domains. in particular, the n-terminal region shows a stretch of homology in the a-domain containing the unique phosphorylation site for camp-dependent protein kinase  and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase i/iv  common to all the synapsins, although the most extensive homology is found within the c-domain in a large region that represents the core of the synapsin transcript. a third conserved domain is located at the cooh-terminus  and it is shared by the a-type isoforms of synapsin i, ii and iii. in the last decades, a number of new functions have been proposed for synapsin family proteins, in addition to the classical role in neurotransmitter release. an involvement in maintaining vesicle integrity  <cit>  and in regulating the proportion of functional vesicles  <cit>  has been hypothesized.

synapsins also modulate neuronal development such as establishment of neuronal polarity, neurite elongation and synapse formation  <cit> . in mammals, the three synapsin genes show a distinct temporal pattern of expression in neurons: synapsin iii is expressed early during neuronal development and its expression is downregulated in mature neurons  <cit> , whilst the product of the other two synapsin genes are upregulated at the onset of synaptogenesis and remain elevated in mature neurons  <cit> .

urochordates  and cephalochordates  are chordate groups basal to vertebrates, with urochordates being the closest relatives to vertebrates  <cit> . ascidian and amphioxus larvae posses simple central and peripheral nervous systems that reproduce well the basic organization of chordate nervous system and are therefore good models to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying the chordate nervous system development  <cit> . in fact, in spite of the few neurons that constitute their nervous systems, a number of molecular studies have pointed out the expression, in both ascidian and amphioxus, of at least one member for virtually all the gene families identified in vertebrate development. thus, synapsin genes, which are preferentially expressed in neurons, are useful markers for the investigation of neuron-specific gene expression.

in this study we have analyzed synapsin homologues in the ascidian c. intestinalis and amphioxus b. floridae, from a genomic and a developmental point of view. we demonstrate the occurrence, in both model organisms, of a single member of the synapsin family, and the presence of an alternative transcript exclusively in amphioxus. furthermore, we have carried out a comprehensive comparative analysis of the exon-intron structure of the synapsin gene locus in humans and several metazoan phyla, and demonstrated a high level of conservation of its genomic organization. such analysis was also extended to the proteins to reconstruct the domain evolution of synapsin along several metazoans. we conclude that protochordate synapsin is a neuronal-specific marker, which is expressed in several cell types of pns  and in many, if not all, cns neurons during the final embryonic differentiation stages and in the fully developed embryonic nervous system.

RESULTS
a single synapsin gene is present in basal chordates and in the sister-group of the bilaterian metazoans
the amphioxus b. floridae and the ascidian c. intestinalis genomes contain a single synapsin gene  that shows a high degree of sequence conservation with vertebrate synapsins. the full length ci-syn cdna was  <dig> bp long and contained a protein-coding region of  <dig> bp. the ci-syn cdna translates into a polypeptide of  <dig> amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kda. the exon/intron organization of the gene encoding ci-syn was deduced by comparing its cdna sequence with the genomic sequences of scaffold  <dig>  and chromosome  <dig>  . the exonic sequences in the genomic database and the corresponding regions of the transcript were 98% identical. ciona ci-syn orf was encoded in ~ <dig> kb of genomic dna in both scaffolds, and distributed in  <dig> exons with sizes between  <dig> and  <dig> bp .

in amphioxus, a single synapsin gene was identified by in silico analysis and pcr experiments. however, pcr assay on amphioxus embryonic cdna library yielded two synapsin isoforms generated by alternative splicing of the same gene. these two cdnas result in a long protein, termed amphisyn-long and a short truncated protein termed amphisyn-short, respectively of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids. the amphisyn-long transcript consists of  <dig> exons  spanning  <dig> kb of genomic dna of the scaffold  <dig> . the amphisyn-short transcript differs from the long form for the deletion of exon  <dig> and  <dig> 

the ancestral condition of a single synapsin gene was previously demonstrated in some invertebrate species such as two ecdysozoans   <cit>  and three lophotrochozoans   <cit> . our results confirm that it was likely that a single synapsin gene was present in the chordate ancestor. beyond analyzing the conservation at the chordates origin, we tested whether this conservation could be further extended in evolution. systematic searches for synapsins-related sequences were carried out in the genome of a deuterostome , a lophotrochozoan , and a diploblast, the cnidarian sea anemone nematostella vectensis, representing one of the morphologically simplest metazoans. such analysis confirmed that synapsin genes are metazoan genes present in a single copy per genome, except for vertebrates .

genomic organization of syn locus
in mammals, each of the synapsin genes is associated with a single specific timp  gene . the members of the timp family are specific endogenous polypeptide inhibitors of matrix metalloproteinases , degrading enzymes that participate in the extracellular matrix turnover. in mammals, four timp  genes are known, three of which are nested with a specific syn gene , whereas a single timp  is independent of the syn locus . the nested timp proteins are similar in size and are encoded by five exons. in mammals, the gene structure of the syn locus is highly conserved because the nested timps are found at the same locations. to gain a more complete understanding of synapsin biology, we examined the evolutionary history of synapsin genes through genomic analysis of syn locus of some protostome and deuterostome species and searched the genome sequences for member of timp families and identified independent timps in some invertebrates . the nested syn-timp organization appears to be maintained throughout metazoan evolution, with the only exception of the syn locus of the c. elegans . a comparative analysis of the syn-locus of several caenorhabditis species together with that of the parasitic nematode brugia malayi confirms that the absence of nested timp is a specific feature of the nematode's clade . furthermore, a multi-alignment of the synapsin proteins shows that the location of nested timp sequences is conserved in all analyzed species  even if they are encoded by different introns. the syn locus of amphioxus, capitella, drosophila and nematostella is characterized by a single timp sequence within a single intron of the synapsin gene. instead, the ciona and strongylocentrotus syn loci possess two or multiple copies of timps within one intron of the synapsin gene. moreover, we identified independent and dependent timps in both the amphioxus and nematostella genomes, as well as in humans. however, due to the extreme divergence of both nested and independent timp sequences in invertebrates, it is not possible to identify their orthology with vertebrate timps based on their amino acid sequences.

conservation of exon-to-protein domain correspondence
next, we examined the synapsin gene structure  to further define the evolution of the synapsin gene family . all human synapsin genes exhibit similarities in their exon structure in both the nh2-terminal and central regions, whereas the cooh-terminal regions are more variable. in fact, the cooh-terminal region of the human paralogs is involved in alternative splicing of synapsin genes .

comparison of the conservation of the exon/intron boundaries from representative metazoan phyla revealed the presence of several introns in conserved positions. furthermore, several orthologous exons, in which the predicted amino acid sequences from invertebrates and humans can be aligned over the entire length , were observed. we referred to the conservation of the protein domains  that can be recognized in all species, although the relative position of b and d domains of human synapsin ia were also considered.

the coding sequences of the c domain are conserved with respect to its exonic location, except for ciona and drosophila where the c domain begins with the third exon. the a domain is encoded by a sequence within the first exon; the only exception is found in ciona and drosophila synapsins in which the a domain begins respectively seven and thirteen amino acid residues from the nh2-terminus of the protein, and in nematostella synapsin that does not have a clear counterpart of a domain in its first exon. the e domain is contained within the last exon in all sequences, although nematostella has a highly divergent e domain.

the gene architecture of the c-domain is well conserved in terms of both intron phases and exon sizes in all analyzed metazoans . however, some conserved intron loss events were observed. for instance, amphioxus has an exon  <dig> that is split in two exons in other species, whereas ciona, drosophila and nematostella show a single exon  corresponding to the mammal orthologous exons  <dig> and  <dig>  furthermore, ciona has an intron loss at exon  <dig>  that is also shown by capitella. however, in general the c-domain intron loss events are well conserved across different invertebrate species.

comparison of exon/intron organization at c domain level between human synapsin i and the invertebrate sequences shows that the organization of s. purpuratus is the most conserved , followed by the c-domain of amphioxus with six exons, nematostella and capitella with five exons completely conserved plus one orthologous exon that differs for very few nucleotides, and by ciona with four completely conserved exons. the situation varies widely in drosophila and caenorhabditis that show highly divergent exonic sequences.

protein sequence and phylogenetic analysis
vertebrate synapsins are a mosaic of multiple protein domains  <cit> . while the nh2-terminal portion contains two highly conserved domains named a and c, connected by the slightly less conserved domain b, the cooh-terminal portion arises from the combinatorial arrangement of numerous individual domains , including the highly conserved e domain which is shared among the a isoforms of the three human synapsin genes. synapsins are excellent substrates for a variety of protein kinases. protein phosphorylation sites have been extensively characterized in human synapsins. at least eight sites  have been demonstrated experimentally in human synapsin i   <cit> . sequence analysis allowed us to identify the three classical conserved domain a, c and e in the ciona synapsin and in the two amphioxus isoforms. to gain a better understanding of the evolution of synapsin domains, we analyzed a multiple alignment of synapsin isoforms from homo sapiens and several invertebrates . such analysis revealed that the highest degree of sequence conservation occurs in the c domain while a lower identity is found in e and a domains. however, there were no significant similarities with the other human domains.

using pair-wise comparison, we found that both amphioxus and ciona possess between 32-40%, 62-68%, 51-62%, identity to the a, c and e domains of humans, respectively . at the same time, lophotrochozoans also share significant sequence identity in the three conserved domains. interestingly, even if nematostella seems to lack a true comparable a domain, and possesses a highly divergent e domain, it shares between 57-61% sequence identity with the c domain of humans, while drosophila and caenorhabditis display only 50% and 30% identity .

the highly conserved c domain is the largest of the synapsin domains . studies on the crystal structure of the domain c suggest that it is structurally similar to atp utilizing enzymes  <cit> , with an atp-binding domain. such domain was detected in all analyzed synapsin proteins . moreover, all analyzed synapsins contain residues that are known to be responsible for atp binding in mammals , except for caenorhabditis synapsin in which there are lys <dig> arg and lys <dig> ser substitutions .

the b-domain, as well as the domain connecting the c- and the e- domains, show little primary sequence identity between vertebrate synapsin i and invertebrate synapsins . however, the proline-rich region between c- and e-domains is maintained in almost all invertebrate synapsins, although it is shorter than in human synapsins. the only exception was found in nematostella, in which the linker region between c- and e-domains is too short to be considered as an effective proline-rich domain .

the e-domain is a quite evolutionary-conserved region, especially for its cooh-terminal portion , supporting the finding that this region is of functional significance. in fact, the cooh-terminal region of e domain seems to be involved in modulating neurotransmitter release  <cit> .

we also predicted the putative phosphorylation sites in the various invertebrate sequences by using predphospho and netphosk  <dig>  and compared them with those of humans . the most conserved consensus site is site  <dig> within a domain, which is a predicted site for phosphorylation by pka and camki/iv in all invertebrate synapsins except for nematostella, which has a very divergent domain a . the two phosphorylation sites for mitogen-activated protein kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase  in the b-domain  are well conserved across invertebrate species, especially site  <dig>  that is absent only in ciona . interestingly, our prediction highlighted the presence of other putative phosphorylation sites in the c-domain  and in e domain   that appear to be conserved in most of the analyzed species.

to investigate the evolutionary history of synapsin family, we carried out phylogenetic analyses with sequences from representative species using both nj and ml methods, yielding very similar results . in this study, we presented only the ml tree with bootstrap values from both nj and ml analyses. phylogenetic analysis using several invertebrate and vertebrate synapsin proteins locates ci-syn in proximity of the vertebrate clade synapsins, while amphisyn results shifted nearest the chordate common ancestor. such results are highly supported  and are consistent with recent phylogenies that place cephalochordates basal to {urochordates+vertebrates} in the chordate lineage. moreover, nematostella synapsin appears more closely related to the deuterostome synapsins as compared to that of drosophila or caenorhabditis ones. in addition, lophotrochozoans cluster together in a separate clade. finally, based on sequence homology and phylogenetic analysis, amphioxus/ciona synapsin could not be classified as being i-like, ii-like, or iii-like, as well as the lamprey synapsin i and ii are not i-like o ii-like but are basal to the synapsin iii clade.

amphisyn expression during amphioxus development
the expression of amphisyn was examined during amphioxus embryonic and larval development by whole mount in situ hybridization. transcripts were first detected in 14-hour neurulae in four cell clusters of the neural plate . such clusters are periodically arranged following the boundary of the somites, beginning at s1/ <dig> and extending to s4/ <dig>  closer examination of such embryos in cross section  revealed that transcripts were primarily confined on either side of the ventral midline. the same periodicity was also maintained in 16-hour neurulae even if, in front of s1/s <dig> boundary, a further rostral cluster of cells appeared . as development proceeded, amphisyn expression extended in the posterior neural tube, but the periodicity of positive cell clusters became less evident . cross sections localized the expressing cells throughout the ventral extent of the neural tube  except for few positive dorsal nerve cells  that increased just after the first dorsal ocellus . by  <dig> hr, a new expressing domain became evident in single epidermal cells located ventro-laterally along the body of the embryo. such epidermal cells were preferentially localized in the sub-epidermal layer , although few labeled cells also appeared to reside in the epidermal sheet . two distinct cell populations in the sub-epidermal sheet were found: the first one was characterized by spherical cells preferentially localized in the mid-ventral region ; the second consisted of elongated cells residing in the ventro-lateral region . at the late-neurula stage , the expression in epidermal cells shifted in a more dorsal region . at this stage, we observed a synchronized development between the epidermal cells expressing amphisyn and the underlying somites . in the neural tube, transcripts starting at level of the posterior cerebral vesicle, remained through the two thirds of the total length of the embryo . the initial clusters of nerve cells observed in mid-neurulae had now expanded into clear longitudinal rows . however, the most anterior domain of amphisyn expression was characterized by a cluster of ventro-lateral nerve cells .

by early larval stage , a new expression domain appeared in the most anterior tip of the cerebral vesicle , in a region where the frontal eye complex will develop. scattered epidermal cells along the flanks of the body were still present  and several cells were just visible around the preoral organ  and the rostrum . by this stage, all sensory labeled cells were found exclusively in the epidermal sheet . at 36-hour larva, the expression in the neural tube remained substantially similar to that of the preceding specimen, although some further dorsal cells appeared to express amphisyn. the latter were more abundant in the nerve cord just behind the first dorsal hesse ocellus , but very few positive cells were also found in the presumptive region of lamellar organ . moreover, photoreceptor cells of dorsal hesse ocellus  as well as that of the frontal eye complex were clearly stained . amphisyn expression was never found in the most posterior part of the embryonic and larval nerve cord, probably because of the delayed differentiation of neurons in the more caudal regions. by  <dig> hours, several epidermal cells along the midline of the flanks continued to express amphisyn , as well as further epidermal cells located in the rostrum in a ventro-lateral position . the latter cells were clearly located in the subepidermal connective tissue  and probably correspond to the sensory cells precursors of the corpuscles of de quatrefages.

ci-syn expression during ciona development
spatial expression pattern of ci-syn was examined in embryos and larvae by whole-mount in situ hybridization. ci-syn expression was first detected at the mid neurula stage , in two lateral symmetrical cells at the posterior end of the neural folds . at late neurula stage , when the neural tube closure had begun in the posterior territories, the two ci-syn positive cells moved closer to the dorsal midline . in initial tailbud embryos , two additional spots of hybridization signal appeared anterior to the ones already present in earlier stages . in mid tailbud embryos , when the neuropore was closed and the neurulation was completed, ci-syn expression also appeared in cells of prospective anterior nervous system. in particular, ci-syn transcripts were present in the dorsal anterior sensory vesicle in two bilateral symmetrical cells, and in two more small rostral cells, near the opening of the neuropore . from cross sections of hybridized embryos  and by staining nuclei with dapi , it was possible to distinguish four positive cells aligned in a single row in the posterior sensory vesicle floor plate and four pairs of positive cells in the region that will contribute to form the visceral ganglion . further few positive cells were localized at the caudal tip of the neural tube . in late tailbud embryos , ci-syn transcripts were broadly present in the posterior sensory vesicle and in the visceral ganglion . moreover, ci-syn transcripts were detected in fibers connecting the sensory vesicle to the dorsal side of the visceral ganglion and in fibers emerging from the ventral side of the visceral ganglion and running into the tail . these last positive fibers extended for the first third of the length of the tail . ci-syn expression was also detected in cells located in the anterior region of the tail, recently described by horie et al.  <cit>  and named anterior caudal inhibitory neurons .

in the hatching larva, ci-syn transcripts were present in the peripheral and central nervous systems. in the tail, ci-syn expression had extended to the anterior two thirds of length . histological cross sections showed that ci-syn transcripts were present in axons of lateral nerves and in some motor neuron endplates. a strong hybridization signal was present in the sensory vesicle and in the visceral ganglion . histological cross sections showed that ci-syn transcripts were asymmetrically distributed and localized in all major neuron clusters: the photoreceptors cells, the pressure receptor coronet cells, the big dorsal eminens cell. in the neck, ci-syn expression was detected in the ventral region, while in the visceral ganglion the gene was widely expressed in both dorsal and ventral regions, where respectively contrapelo neurons and motor neurons are localized. expression in acins, in their endplates expanding laterally to the muscular mass, and lateral running fibers was still present . these neurons, formerly named planate neurons for their flat ovoidal shape  <cit> , were at least eight and their somata were located within the nerve cord, as it was clearly visible in cross sections . gene expression was also detected in some cells of the peripheral nervous system, and in particular in the sensory neurons of the palps and in some of the rostral trunk epidermal neurons  described by takamura  <cit> . in the tail, at least two, often three, large dorsal epidermal neurons were labeled. such cells correspond to the bipolar gabaergic interneurons  <cit> . after hatching, the nervous system of the larva is still developing. accordingly, the expression pattern of ci-syn extended more in a posterior position in the tail in late larva than in the hatching one and more numerous rten appeared positive in anterior dorsal position .

discussion
antiquity of syn locus genomic organization
in this study, we have analyzed the molecular evolution of the synapsin gene family. our analysis revealed that protochordates, as well as several invertebrates, possess a single synapsin gene, whereas higher vertebrates have three synapsins genes. it is, therefore, safe to assume that prior to the two rounds of vertebrate genome duplication   <cit> , only a single synapsin gene existed. on the other hand, at least two synapsin genes have been identified in the lamprey and three genes are present in higher vertebrates  <cit> . moreover, synapsin genes from lower organisms appeared to have a genomic architecture similar to the vertebrate synapsins. such conservation has mainly occurred in the c-domain, although some conserved introns loss events were observed.

a comparison of the synapsin locus between mammals and several invertebrate species showed that the nested organization of timp and synapsin is a general feature that has been conserved during evolution. a well-conserved guest/host relationship is that of the timps within the synapsin gene family , which is maintained from drosophila to human  <cit> . here we demonstrate that such genomic organization arose very early during metazoan evolution, being also present in the sea anemone, n. vectensis. these data match the new theory that before the emergence of bilateral animals, cnidarians split from the main animal lineage and their genome retained many of the features present in the last common ancestor of animals.

in addition, our results demonstrate that the ancestral syn-timp locus has undergone different duplication events. in fact, timp not nested within a synapsin gene, previously demonstrated only in vertebrates, was also found in nematostella and amphioxus. interestingly, two deuterostomes not having an independent timp, such as sea urchin and ciona, possess a peculiar timp organization with more than one timp within the intron of the synapsin gene. such data support the view that the ancestral organization of syn locus resembles much more that of amphioxus and nematostella, whereas the genomic organization of urochordates and echinoderms was lineage-specific and more divergent. we conclude that strong stabilizing pressures have been enforced throughout metazoan evolution to maintain the comparable genomic organization of present-day synapsin gene locus across diverse taxa.

evolutionary conserved domain architecture of synapsin proteins
in the present work, we show that almost all invertebrate synapsins share similarities among the evolutionary conserved domains a, c and e, even if nematostella lacks a clear a-domain. therefore, the multiple synapsin domains seem to have evolved at different rates throughout evolution. during the evolution of vertebrates, at least two gene duplication events can be hypothesized to give rise to the synapsin gene family and these events were probably accompanied by the emergence of additional domains .

in order to obtain a more exhaustive characterization of the evolution of synapsin domain architecture and their relationships in metazoans, we took advantage of the wide range of genomes now available . blast searching in the current genomic and est databases of other basal, i.e. diploblastic, animals failed to identify synapsin-related sequences in sponges , while positive results were obtained from other cnidarians species including hydra magnipapillata and acropora millepora. unfortunately, these sequences are clearly incomplete, due to gap in the genome and est and/or difficulties to predict complete open reading frame. in addition, no synapsin sequences have been identified in the trichoplax adhaerens, representing the basal metazoan phylum placozoa, as well as the choanoflagellate monosiga brevicollis, which branches as the closest known outgroup to metazoans  <cit> . outside metazoans, synapsin-related sequences were retrieved from protozoans: in the amoeba-flagellate naegleria gruberi and in the amoebozoa entamoeba histolytica . interestingly, the sequences identified in these two protozoans encode for two proteins characterized by a single domain sharing significant sequence identity with the c-domain of invertebrates and vertebrates synapsins .

thus, one possible hypothesis on the evolution of synapsin proteins is that new domains were added at various stages of evolution probably to cope up with the increased complexity in protein functions which paralleled the increased complexity of the nervous system . in particular, we suggest that: 1) a single c-domain was already present in protozoans; 2) the e-domain appeared to have co-evolved with c-domain in basal metazoans. the conservation of the e-domain over such a wide phylogenetic distance, suggests that it shares a function common to all eumetazoans ; 3) three conserved domains  appeared with protostomia and subsequently were maintained in deuterostomia and chordates . thus, the emergence of e domain appears to be correlated with the beginning of the genesis of nervous organization, since the simplest metazoans known to possess a nervous system are those of the phylum cnidaria  <cit> .

alternative transcripts in the synapsin gene family
mammal synapsins comprise a family of at least ten members  generated by alternative splicing of three genes. in human, the genes for syni, synii, syniii contain  <dig> exons . the last exon of syni gene contains two splice acceptor sites whose alternative use generates the two isoforms synia and ib encoding for proteins of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids, respectively. the two isoforms of synii gene  originate from alternative splicing involving the last three exons. finally, syniii gene gives rise to several isoforms . the isoforms b and c are identical to syniiia except for the absence of exon  <dig>  and exon  <dig>  and the difference in the reading frames of the last exon . the other isoforms are very peculiar being the result of two different alternative splicing events involving two new exons between exons  <dig> and  <dig>  and exons  <dig> and  <dig>    <cit> .

in invertebrates, kao and coworkers  <cit>  described the synapsin gene of c. elegans as composed of  <dig> exons, but suggested the existence of one extra exon upstream of exon  <dig>  by using genomic and est sequences we can now state that c. elegans has a single syn gene, composed of  <dig> exons, giving rise to two different transcripts, cesnn1a and cesnn1b . the cesnn1b is identical to the cesnn1a except for a sequence at the 5' end of the coding region found only in the isoform b and originated by the use of two exons at the most 5' end.

alternative transcripts have been also described in drosophila, aplysia californica, loligo pealei  <cit> . in drosophila, the single synapsin gene leads to  <dig> different isoforms. three of them   differ at the cooh end of the molecule . moreover, the isoforms a and c lack a sequence at the most 5' end. in drosophila, two large synapsin isoforms  generated by uag read-through were also found. in aplysia four alternative transcripts derived from a single synapsin gene has been described. such splice variants  differ for two inserted sequences and one possible substitution located in the most nh2-terminus and in the central part of the molecule . such isoforms are more similar to those of invertebrates than to those of vertebrates. in loligo pealei, two transcript variants  differing only by a 111-bp deletion/insertion, located in the cooh-terminal half, are present . in amphioxus, we demonstrated the occurrence of a short and a long isoforms in the comparable region of squid synapsin . the amphioxus short isoform differs from the long form for the deletion of exons  <dig> and  <dig> .

looking at the splicing events impacting known functional domains of the synapsins, we can suggest that invertebrate isoforms are not comparable to those of the vertebrates . in fact, the major splicing events in vertebrate synapsin transcripts encode for truncated proteins, missing the cooh-terminal end of the e-domain. in contrast, some invertebrate alternative splice forms , involving the nh2-terminal coding region, affect the a-domain, whereas others  alter the domain that follows c domain. only the isoform c of drosophila, lacking the last part of e domain, shares some similarity with the alternative splice form ib of human synapsin . finally, the highly sequence identity within the e-domains of vertebrate synapsins ia, iia, iiia, and the evolutionary conservation of such domain provide evidence that the ancestral synapsin gene encoded for an a-like synapsin isoform.

synapsin expression in post-mitotic phase of cns development in amphioxus and ciona
early during development, some organisms, such as nematodes and ascidians, show a remarkably invariant pattern of cell divisions  <cit> , and the pattern is so stereotyped that each cell can be individually named. such type of developmental process has been extensively used to precise embryonic origins of the various neuronal types in these model organisms.

since ascidian embryos show such invariant pattern of early cleavage, it has been possible to trace a mitotic descendant map of cells forming the cns  <cit> . interestingly in ciona, all cells that express ci-syn had ceased their mitotic activity. cells within the prospective sensory vesicle cease division as 13th-generation, with the exception of four cells that become post-mitotic in their 10th , 11th , or 12th  generation. the position of the two ci-syn positive cells in mid-neurula embryos is compatible with that of the a/a <dig>  cells, which had ceased mitotic activity in their 10th generation. in initial tailbud embryos, the observed positive spots most probably correspond to the a/a <dig>  and a/a <dig>  cells, daughters of a/a <dig> , which had entered the post-mitotic phase in their 11th generation. up to this stage, ci-syn transcripts are restricted in cells of the "a" line. by mid tailbud stage, after neurulation is completed, other cells become post-mitotic, including cells of the "a" line of prospective central nervous system, and in parallel ci-syn expression extends to these territories. in fact, in mid tailbud embryos ci-syn transcripts are present in the dorsal anterior sensory vesicle in the precursors of otolith and ocellus  and in two more rostral small cells, near the opening of the neuropore, most probably a/a  <dig> , that will contribute to form the neurohypophyseal complex of the larva. moreover, at this stage ci-syn is expressed in a row of cells in the floor plate of the posterior sensory vesicle, corresponding to a/a  <dig>  and a/a  <dig>  post mitotic cells. by this stage, an additional pair of cells becomes post-mitotic in the prospective visceral ganglion: the a/a  <dig>  cells. together with the a/a  <dig> , the a/a  <dig>  and the a/a  <dig> , that had ceased mitotic activity in earlier stages, form a group of eight paired neurons located in the ventro-lateral position of the visceral ganglion, where cholinergic motor neurons have been identified in hatching larva  <cit> . thus, cholinergic neurons are the first ones to differentiate in the embryos. other post mitotic cells derive from a/a  <dig>  and are located at the caudal tip of the neural tube. these cells clearly correspond to the ci-syn positive ones observed in tail and complete the pattern of ci-syn expression in mid tailbud embryos. moreover, in embryos up to this stage, all post-mitotic cells are ci-syn positive and all ci-syn positive cells are post mitotic. therefore, ci-syn expression can be considered an early marker of neuronal specification.

on the contrary, amphioxus, as well as vertebrates, do not possess this type of determinate cell lineage. more recently, the marker of cell division 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine  has been used in amphioxus to assess developmental cell proliferation, showing that only some regions of the neural plate are brdu labeled during neurogenesis  <cit> . in particular in mid-neurulae, only a region in the most anterior and posterior-third of the neural plate contained proliferating cells. during the subsequent phase of development, few dividing cells were present in the middle of cerebral vesicle at level of the neuropore and in some scattered cells along the posterior neural tube. a comparison between expression patterns of amphisyn and brdu data suggests that during cns development brdu labeled cells correspond to the amphisyn-negative zone. therefore, we can argue that amphisyn is a marker for postmitotic cells that have been committed to a neuronal phenotype. although at present it is not possible to establish where the first neurons to be born are located, the most interesting observation is that the earlier expression of amphisyn corresponded to the region of the neural plate where the locomotory control system will develop. in such region, several interneurons and motor neurons have been demonstrated to be cholinergic  <cit> . such assumptions are quite intriguing when compared with tunicates, in which, as above stated, the first neurons which differentiate are cholinergic. our results shown that amphisyn and ci-syn are restricted to the post-mitotic phase of cns development and probably are good markers of postmitotic neurons.

amphisyn expression in the cns
the central nervous system of amphioxus lacks an anatomical partition into fore-, mid- and hind-brain regions although several studies suggested the presence of specific anatomical domains of vertebrate brains  <cit> . the amphioxus cns consists of a cerebral vesicle , corresponding to a diencephalic forebrain and a possible midbrain region, and a posterior hindbrain followed by a spinal cord.

from an evolutionary point of view, the most significant observation of the earlier amphisyn expression is its segmental organization into the area in which the hindbrain region develops. on the other hand, the expression in amphioxus embryos of motor neuron markers  suggests the occurrence of a segmental organization of cell types in the hindbrain region  <cit> . therefore, even if the amphioxus hindbrain homologous lacks a clear anatomical subdivision in rhombomeres, the segmental expression of several genes in such region seems to be regulated by adjacent somites as proposed by mazet and shimeld  <cit> . the importance of the somites for segmental neuron organization during amphioxus neurogenesis is also confirmed by the present work. in fact, amphisyn expression shows a clear segmental arrangement with cell pairs at the junctions between somites, at least at the early stage of neuronal differentiation.

at larval stage, amphisyn expression was confined in some very anterior cells of the cerebral vesicle, likely photoreceptor cells of the frontal eye complex, and in cells of the posterior cerebral vesicle. in the latter, a zone of motor neurons and large interneurones also known as primary motor centre , has been described. the pmc has been homologized to the reticulospinal neurons in the midbrain and hindbrain of craniates  <cit> , and probably represents the region where neurotransmission via chemical synapses is most abundant  <cit> .

the present data on amphisyn expression seems also to support the absence of typical chemical synapses in the central region of cerebral vesicle. the staining gap in the cerebral vesicle corresponds to the region where the preinfundibular region is found. the preinfundibular region, a set of ciliated accessory cells, lacks typical chemical synapses, and a paracrine release has been postulated as the preferential modality of transmission  <cit> .

amphisyn-labeled cells were also identified more widely in the posterior larval nerve cord in the hindbrain-like region. such cells are arranged as rows positioned ventrolaterally in the nerve cord, representing both motor neurons and interneurons. several types of neurons in this region have been demonstrated to be cholinergic  <cit> . few labeled cells located dorsally in the nerve cord are mainly found posterior to the first dorsal ocellus, except for some very anterior cells located in the posterior cerebral vesicle at the level of the lamellar body. in the latter, dopaminergic neurons have been described  <cit> .

amphisyn expression in pns
amphisyn expression appears in the general ectoderm in single cells scattered along the body of the mid-neurulae and its expression increases during the elongation of the embryo. these cells probably correspond to the epidermal sensory neurons belonging to the pns. the pns of amphioxus is composed of several types of neurons, and at least two types of epidermal sensory cells, widely distributed along either sides of the body, have been described  <cit> . the type i receptors are primary sensory neurons having axons projecting to cns, whereas the type ii receptors are axonless secondary sensory neurons with synaptic terminals arising at short distances from the cell body. the former begin to differentiate at neurula stage while the latter start differentiation at early metamorphic larval stage. in amphioxus, differentiating type i receptors express several neuronal markers   <cit> , as well as amphisyn.

in mid-neurulae, amphisyn-labeled cells first appeared as single epidermal cells located ventro-laterally. the cross sections revealed that most of labeled cells are found in the space between the epidermis and the deeper tissue layer. in some cases these cells exhibit a round shape, whilst in others they are elongated, probably indicating two distinct phases of sensory neuron differentiation.

the appearance of new amphisyn-expressing cells in the more dorsal position of the animal body in later neurula stages, strictly resembles the expression pattern of amphi-trk, amphihu/elav and amphicoe  <cit> . the migration of the positive signal from ventral regions to the dorsal area and from the external layer to the subepidermal one during development, raises the question of whether this effect is due to cell migration or represents a gene expression shift. a first attempt to demonstrate such hypothesis was tentatively proved by dii labeling experiments on amphioxus, showing that ventrally-located cells migrate toward dorso-lateral sides of the embryo  <cit> . more recently, the origin, migration, and differentiation of type i receptors in amphioxus have been described by sem investigation and expression studies of amphitlx gene  <cit> . such data support the idea that primary sensory neurons, developing directly from the ventral epidermis, migrate into the subepidermal sheet. during migration from ventral to dorso-lateral position, cells morphology changes: firstly round cells located ventrally lose the cilium and extend pseudopodia, subsequently elongated cells that have reached the flanks of the body give rise to an axon before reinserting their perikaria in the epidermal sheet. amphitlx is the first gene that shows clearly nascent type  <dig> receptors in the process of delaminating from the general epidermis and entering the subepidermal space. however, amphitlx expression is downregulated before receptor cell erupts in the epithelium.

amphisyn gene is interesting because it turns on moderately early in the migrating sensory neurons and evidently continues to be transcribed during axogenesis . on the other hand, clear examination of cross sections of the same embryo  showed amphisyn-positive cells located either in the epidermis or just beneath it. therefore, precursors of type i receptors begin to express amphisyn as they start to migrate and continue to strongly express the gene also after their complete differentiation.

another interesting point is the observation that, in late neurulae, amphisyn-labeled cells are in register with the somites. such arrangement is also visible in the sem specimens reported by kaltenbach and coworkers  <cit> , where the migrating sensory cells appear situated at an indentation of epidermal cells at the level of intersomitic junctions. thus, it is possible that the direction of cell migration is controlled by the somite borders. however, more work needs to be done to elucidate the patterning of amphioxus type i receptors in relation to the mesoderm.

in early larvae, the number of epidermal amphisyn-labeled cells increases in the more dorsal middle of the body, as well as in more posterior and anterior regions. in the rostral region, two large cell bodies lying at some distance from the mouth, just behind and below the preoral pit, are strongly labeled. such cells belong to the oral nerve plexus surrounding the amphioxus larva mouth  <cit> . the expression pattern in the epidermal cells also persists in later stages of larval development in individual cells arranged as rows along the midline of the flanks of the body. at this stage, expression is also visible in the most anterior tip of the larva in the presumptive primary sensory neurons belonging to the corpuscles of de quatrefages  <cit> , structures having some similarities to the vertebrate olfactory placodes.

expression of ci-syn in cns and pns
in late tailbud embryos ci-syn is broadly expressed in all the prospective central nervous system, as the number of mature neurons increases and the single cells can not be identified any longer. in the larva, ci-syn transcripts are present in both cns and pns. in the sensory vesicle, ci-syn expression is present in all major clusters of neurons, including the photoreceptor cells, the eminens cells and the coronet cells. these cells have bulbous protrusions extending in the lumen of the sensory vesicle, express ci-th and were suggested to be related to the vertebrate hypothalamic primordium  <cit> . ci-syn transcripts were also found in the area of the otolith, which seems to be a static mechanoreceptor.

ci-syn transcripts are completely absent in the most anterior part of the sensory vesicle , where only glial cells have been described  <cit> , and are particularly abundant in the posterior region. this region has been recently named "posterior brain"  by horie and coworkers  <cit>  to distinguish it from the anterior region consisting of the ventricular cavity and surrounding cells, including sensory organs. the pb contains a number of diverse interneurons, some of which form synaptic connections within the pb, and others send projections to the visceral ganglion. they presumably form neural circuits for sensory information processing and motor regulation, since many sensory neurons send axons that gather in the pb  <cit> . the widespread expression of ci-syn is a further evidence of the large amount of neuronal connections present in this area. in histological sections, the distribution of ci-syn transcripts in this area is characteristically uneven and probably labels specific subpopulations of neurons whose function is still to be investigated. notably, in this area several types of chemically-identified neuronal types have been reported, including glutamatergic  <cit> , cholinergic  <cit>  and gabaergic neurons  <cit> . to account for the high number of neurons described in this region, neurons may be present also in ci-syn-negative areas. the expression of synaptotagmin, another synaptic vesicle protein expressed in the ascidian nervous system  <cit> , in later stage is partially overlapping with the synapsin one, particularly in the sensory vesicle and the visceral ganglion, but it is detectable also in earlier stages. at the larva stage, synaptotagmin is widely expressed in the sensory vesicle, in some visceral ganglion motor neurons, in all the antero-trunkal epidermal neurons as well as in the caudal epidermal neurons . thus, it is possible that a differential distribution of synapse-specific proteins exists in the pns. in fact, the artena and artenp, some ventral rten and the cen do not express ci-syn, but they are synaptotagmin-positive. we can suppose that synaptotagmin, as others synaptic proteins, should contribute to similar function during development in different cells types and nervous regions.

at larval stage, the most interesting data show the presence in the nerve cord of ci-syn in the cell soma of the planate neurons, near the base of the tail as well as along its length. these neurons are monopolar with elongated somata aligned along the trajectory of the ventrolateral nerve bundles, whose axon projects in either caudal or rostral direction, and the most distal of them lay halfway along the tail  <cit> . this is consistent with our finding, since ci-syn expression reaches the level of bipolar epidermal neurons in the middle of the tail.

protochordate and vertebrate synapsins: a comparative overview
synapsins are expressed throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems, and their expression varies across synapse types and brain regions  <cit> . in mammals, synapsins i and ii are expressed predominantly in adult brain, whereas synapsin iii appears more abundant in the fetal brain  <cit> . moreover, synapsin iii is required for initial cell elongation and early axon outgrowth  <cit> . amphisyn and ci-syn are both expressed in cns starting at the neurula stage, where they seem to have a role in neuronal differentiation. in particular, the early expression of amphisyn and ci-syn in the developing motor neurons suggests a role for these genes in the formation of neuromuscular synapses, as already demonstrated for synapsins i and ii in the xenopus embryo  <cit> . moreover, human synapsin i has been found in afferent nerve calyces surrounding type i hair cells and in sensory endings of taste buds  <cit> . at the same time, synapsins in protochordates are expressed in pns, namely in specific subpopulations of general  ectoderm, representing primary sensory neurons.

in mammals, synapsin i and ii are not expressed in the ribbon synapses of the retina  <cit> , and in some invertebrates, synapsins seem to be present only in interneurons of the visual system  <cit> . on the contrary, both amphioxus and ciona show a high concentration of synapsin transcripts in different types of the photoreceptive system, i.e. the ocellus-related cells in ascidian and the frontal eye complex and hesse organ in amphioxus. on the other hand, the vertebrate retina is constituted by two distinct types of vesicle-containing synapses: conventional synapses, found in amacrine cells, and ribbon synapses , found in photoreceptor and bipolar cells. mandell and coworkers  <cit>  described in several vertebrate species the absence of synapsins i and ii immunoreactivities from all retina ribbon-synapses, but a high abundance of synapsin proteins in the conventional synapses of amacrine cells. however, synapsins have been identified in both cone and rod cells of bovine retina  <cit> , suggesting that the complement of vesicle-associated proteins can vary between species.

moreover, there are further cns structures of amphioxus and ciona having a similar distribution of synapsin transcripts, and such structures show a certain degree of similarity. for example, the sensory vesicle of the ascidian has been considered the counterpart of the cerebral vesicle of amphioxus. in particular, the otolith and ocellus are homologized with the balance organ and the lamellar body of amphioxus larvae, a clear parallel has also been suggested between the visceral ganglion of tunicate and the primary motor centre of amphioxus larva  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
herein, we assembled and analyzed experimentally cloned and computationally predicted amino acid sequences of the synapsin genes from mammals, protochordates and several invertebrate species. using this set of sequences, we report:  the occurrence of a single synapsin gene in basal metazoans and protochordates;  the identification of a highly conserved genomic organization of synapsin locus;  the description of the conserved domains in the synapsin protein during evolution;  the protochordate synapsin expression is highly regulated during neurogenesis and nervous system formation.

