BACKGROUND
microarray analysis is a widely used technology for studying gene expression on a global scale. however, the technology is presently not used as a routine diagnostic tool. various studies have shown that microarray analysis results in improved diagnosis and risk stratification in many cancers  <cit> . more specifically, in human breast cancer molecular profiles have identified subtypes  <cit> , and prognostic subgroups that are relevant to patient management  <cit> , and may add to the prediction of therapy response  <cit> .

one study involved the discovery of a profile associated with the risk of early development of distant metastasis in young patients with lymph-node negative breast cancer  <cit> . the development of distant metastases is the primary cause of death in breast cancer patients; approximately one third of women with lymph node negative breast cancer will develop distant metastasis. the challenge therefore is to predict the risk of metastasis at the time of primary diagnosis and accurately manage those patients identified as high-risk. the amsterdam 70-gene prognosis profile has been shown to outperform all clinical parameters in predicting distant metastasis  <cit> . the ability to use this profile in a high throughput diagnostic setting would be a great advantage in the prognosis and treatment of breast cancer.

this profile, however, was generated on oligonucleotide microarrays containing approximately  <dig>  60-mer oligonucleotides. using these arrays for clinical practice would not only be costly, but their one-sample-per-chip design would not allow for high throughput processing of many samples on a routine basis. recently, an 8-pack format with  <dig> identical sub-arrays, containing a limited number  of 60-mer oligonucleotides became available. this would allow less sample rna input for labeling and hybridization and data processing time could be substantially reduced, permitting test results to become available within  <dig> days.

nonetheless, there are several issues to consider when 'reading' expression profiles from mini-microarrays. data processing steps, such as normalization to remove systemic variation and background subtraction, may require re-optimization for the smaller number of probes present. apart from such issues of data processing, the original biological samples used to generate the original profile need to be available for confirmation and validation purposes.

in this paper we describe the development of a customized diagnostic breast cancer mini-array, mammaprint, based on the amsterdam 70-gene expression profile  <cit> , and describe its reliable use in a diagnostic setting.

RESULTS
recently, using complex microarrays, a 70-gene prognosis profile was identified that is a powerful predictor for the outcome of disease in young breast cancer patients. this profile was generated using  <dig> tumor samples of patients having lymph node negative disease by hybridization of fluorescent-dye labeled rna to microarrays containing  <dig>  60-mer oligonucleotide probes. to enable the use of this prognostic classifier in a diagnostic setting, custom-made 8-pack mini-arrays were developed . this mini-array is a single 1" × 3" slide containing eight identically printed regions or sub-arrays, each containing  <dig>  60-mer oligonucleotide probes, including the  <dig> prognostic classifier genes  <cit> . this allows eight individual hybridizations to be carried out simultaneously on a single microarray slide .

to increase measurement precision, each of the signature genes was spotted in triplicate and an error-weighted average of the intensity ratios was calculated. in the original studies another method was used to decrease uncertainties of the array measurements, i.e., the use of the quantity xdev  <cit> , however, this showed undesirable artifacts since the variance in error estimation is dependent on the number of spots used in the calculations.

to determine if the customized mini microarray test performs as well as the original  <dig> k microarrays  <cit> , rna of samples used in the original series to develop the 70-gene prognosis classifier  <cit>  were retrieved, labeled and re-hybridized against a common reference sample with reverse fluorescent dyes using the 8-pack mini-arrays. since different measurement quantities were used , we reconstructed the 'good prognosis template' by using the data of the  <dig> good outcome patients generated on the mini-array based on log ratios. disease outcome classification of individual samples was then determined by the cosine correlation to this recreated template in a leave-one-out cross validation procedure.

the expression intensities of the  <dig> signature genes for the  <dig> original samples hybridized to the customized array are shown in figure  <dig>  the tumors are rank-ordered according to their correlation coefficients with the re-established 'good prognosis template' . genes are ordered according to their correlation coefficient with the two prognostic groups as previously described  <cit> . tumors with correlation values above or below the previously determined threshold  <cit>   were assigned to the good or poor prognosis profile group, respectively. the right panel in figure  <dig> shows the distant metastasis status of the patients and confirms the strong correlation of prediction and high accuracy between the profile predicted and actual outcome of disease of the patients, as observed in the original studies  <cit> .

comparison to original data
to perform a comprehensive evaluation of the mini-array results, we compared in figure  <dig> the current classification to the good and poor prognostic profiles with that of the originally published classification for each sample. results from the original study are shown  plotted against those obtained from the customized mini-array   <cit> . the data generated using the diagnostic test is highly similar  to the original published data. the overall accuracy of the diagnostic test was determined by calculating the odds ratio for the development of distant metastases within five years. the odds ratio calculated based on the current results  was highly comparable to the original data  using the methods described in the supplementary information of  <cit> .

a more detailed evaluation revealed seven discordant cases between mammaprint risk assessment and the published data. these cases included two patients that did not develop distant metastases, who were classified as being poor prognosis in the published data  <cit> , but the diagnostic test correctly classified them into the good prognosis group. furthermore, one patient who did develop metastases was originally classified as good prognosis, whereas in the current results this patient was classified correctly as having a poor prognosis. on the other hand, however, there were two good outcome patients classified as poor prognosis using the diagnostic test, while in the original data these samples were classified correctly, as well as two poor outcome patients classified as good prognosis by the current test who where correctly classified by original analysis as poor prognosis.

customized mini-array reproducibility
to further investigate if the differences seen were due to technical variation of the current test or could be otherwise explained,  <dig> samples were amplified and hybridized a second time to the 8-pack mini-array . the pearson correlation for the replicate experiments was  <dig> , indicating a very high degree of reproducibility of classification for individual tumor samples using the customized 8-pack array. also an anova analysis performed on the 70-gene expression values obtained in the duplicate experiments showed no significant differences, independent of variation between individual samples and profile genes .

to ensure that the outcome of the test does not change over time, two samples were amplified and labeled repeatedly over a period of  <dig> months . one sample  was classified as poor prognosis with an average cosine correlation to the good prognosis template of - <dig> . the other sample  was classified as good prognosis . both samples were stable over time as shown and the diagnostic test result was observed to have a very low standard deviation , indicating the robustness of the diagnostic test.

a sample close to the classification threshold was analyzed  <dig> times in a period of  <dig> months. the average correlation to the good prognosis template was  <dig>  with a standard deviation of  <dig> . the sample was misclassified  <dig> times , which is in agreement with the expected chance of misclassification  based on the area of the gaussian that falls on the other side of the decision boundary  and m =  <dig> ).

clinical validation study comparison
to more accurately estimate the risk of metastases associated with the 70-gene prognostic profile, a validation study  <cit>  was performed using a cohort of  <dig> young breast cancer patients. for the current study we selected the  <dig> patients from this cohort without lymph node involvement at diagnosis of which  <dig> rnas were available.

we calculated the probability of a patient remaining free of distant metastases and overall survival according to the prognosis profile and compared this to the published data  <cit> .

once more the data generated using the customized array is highly similar  to the original data.

as was seen before, kaplan-meier curves showed a significant difference in the probability that patients would remain free of distant metastases when classified in the good or poor prognosis profile group . the difference in prediction of probability of overall survival  between the groups with good or poor prognosis profiles was also highly significant . the estimated hazard ratio for distant metastases as a first event in the group with a poor prognosis signature versus the group with a good-prognosis signature, over the entire follow up period, was  <dig>  . this confirms the published data  <cit>  .

when the probability of a patient remaining free of distant metastases was compared between the current result  and the original analysis  in the good prognosis profile groups, no significant difference was found . similarly for those patients in the poor prognosis profile groups  . equally, there is no significant difference in overall survival of patients grouped by either the current result or the original published result for either prognosis profile group . all results taken together indicate that there is not only a strong correlation between good prognosis and the absence of distant metastasis or death  <cit> , but the findings generated using the more complex microarray platform were nearly perfectly reproduced using the customized mini-arrays, and demonstrate the robustness of the mammaprint 8-pack mini-array test.

discussion
recently, a 70-gene expression profile was established as a powerful predictor of disease outcome in young breast cancer patients. this profile was generated using microarrays containing 60-mer oligonucleotide probes corresponding to  <dig>  transcripts. to enable the use of this prognostic classifier in a high throughput diagnostic setting, a custom-made 8-pack mini-array was developed, which allowed for eight individual simultaneous hybridizations on a single microarray slide . in the present study we tested these custom-made microarrays for use in a diagnostic setting. sample rnas from our original studies from which the 70-gene profile was deduced and clinically validated were retrieved, labeled and hybridized to the mini-arrays. outcome prediction was found to be highly similar to the original data , as well as the probabilities of remaining metastases free and overall survival . there was, however, a small number for which a discrepancy was observed between the current result and that obtained in the original analysis. these were cases for which the 70-gene correlation to the good prognosis template was observed to be very close to the classification threshold , indicating that minor differences can cause the result for a sample to change from high to low risk classification, or vice versa.

to investigate if these small differences in correlation coefficient were due to technical variation of the customized arrays,  <dig> samples were labeled, hybridized and analyzed a second time. a high pearson correlation  between duplicate samples was observed, indicating very low measurement variability . the diagnostic test was found to be stable over time as well; two samples that were repeatedly labeled and hybridized over a period of  <dig> months as part of our internal control system showed minimal variation. most importantly, the outcome of these samples did not gradually shift over time . differences in outcome between the current and the original data might be due to experimental factors such as different labeling and hybridization protocols, as well as a new reference being used for the microarray hybridizations carried out for this study. sufficient quantities of this reference stock have now been created for many thousands of hybridizations. another explanation may be subtle differences in the data processing methods used for the high-throughput diagnostic test, as opposed to those used in the original study. to improve measurement precision in the current analysis, each gene was printed on the mini-array in triplicate, while on the original platform genes were singularly represented. xdev values were calculated to increase measurement certainty in the initial study, whereas triplicate spotting requires the customized array to use the more robust error-weighted mean log-ratios. the current procedure is therefore considered to be more reliable.

even though the technical accuracy is extremely high, samples close to the threshold have a higher chance of misclassification than samples further away from the threshold. based on the known variation in mammaprint results, a small proportion of mammaprint samples with indices close to the prediction threshold may have been misclassified. in principle, the chance of a patient with a poor clinical outcome incorrectly being assigned to a good prognosis profile should be minimized. based on analysis of mammaprint results generated to date, less than  <dig> % of all samples fall into this category. repeated analysis of borderline samples makes the area of classification uncertainty on either side of the threshold substantially smaller, reducing the proportion of false negative classifications to less than one percent.

the reproducibility of the current test and the similarity of its results to those obtained from the original data demonstrate that it is an excellent tool to predict outcome of disease in breast cancer patients and is highly suitable for a clinical diagnostic clinical setting.

an external validation series by the transbig consortium using this same customized mini-array, evaluating outcome prediction of  <dig> patients from  <dig> european hospitals who were diagnosed with lymph node negative breast cancer before the age of  <dig> years and who did not receive adjuvant therapy, showed the independent clinical validation of the 70-gene expression profile <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
using the mammaprint microarray test in the clinical setting will provide more accurate information on recurrence risk as compared to conventional clinical criteria and will thus improve the guidance for the requirement of adjuvant therapy for young women diagnosed with breast cancer. as a direct result, many patients could be potentially spared the side effects and risks of such treatment, improving quality of life and reducing healthcare costs.

