BACKGROUND
de novo protein design endeavors to construct novel polypeptide sequences that fold into well-defined secondary and tertiary structures resembling those found in native proteins. many de novo design strategies have relied on the known penchants of protein amino acids to espouse various secondary structures leading to several remarkable achievements  <cit> . alternatively, the amalgamation of conformationally restricted, non-protein amino acids by chemical synthesis has led to triumphant designs of secondary and super secondary structures that mimic proteins  <cit> . in this regard, the ability of α, β-dehydrophenylalanine  to induce β-bends in small and 310-helices in longer peptide sequences has been well studied  <cit> . the presence of dehydroresidues in peptides confers altered bioactivity as well as increased resistance to enzymatic degradation  <cit> . recently designed super secondary structures such as Δphe zippers and helical hairpins highlight the potential of Δphe to introduce long-range interactions in peptides and it has been noted that the geometry of a 310-helix brings Δphe residues at i and i+ <dig> position into a stacking arrangement and the structurally planar Δphe side-chains interdigitate to assist the cooperative recognition of helices  <cit> . in proteins, there is a wide interplay of weak non-covalent interactions between secondary structural elements, to achieve stability and overall compaction. in this context, in transmembrane proteins it is observed that glycine residues promotes close approach of helices, which permits not only favourable vander waals interactions of surrounding side chains, but also in many cases, encourage interhelical cα-h...o hydrogen bonds  <cit> . interestingly, it has been found that the gxxxg motif elicits a level of self-association in putative transmembrane helices and the three-residue spacing between both glycines proves to be optimal for the interaction. in an attempt to mimic similar interactions and geometric features, we designed and synthesized an undecapeptide, ac-gly1-ala2-Δphe3-leu4-gly5-Δphe6-leu7-gly8-Δphe9-ala10-gly11-nh <dig>  its structural features were characterized using x-ray diffraction and circular dichroism spectroscopy. Δphe residues and glycine residues as gxxg motif were at a two-residue spacer to give rise to a 310-helical conformation. thus the peptide incorporates two gxxg like motif  motif in the helix region and one gxxxg  motif near the n-terminus. the bulky leucine residues were placed in middle of the helical segment to ensure that the peptide folds into a right-handed screw sense. a 310-helical conformation of ambidextrous screw sense is established by x-ray diffraction. however, cd studies reveal that a right-handed 310-helical conformation dominate in solution. the preponderance of the right-handed 310-helical conformer is also confirmed using energy calculation studies . an unanticipated observation of ambidexterity of the peptide helices in the crystal structure demonstrates the influence of global interactions on the coexistence of left and right-handed helices in the crystal structure. this is a novel observation of a 310-helical dehydroundecapeptide mimicking interhelical interactions as seen amongst transmembrane helices.

RESULTS
crystal structure
the crystallographic details of the peptide are given in . crystallographic studies suggest that, despite the presence of l-ala and l-leu residues in the sequence, the peptide has folded into two conformers in the crystal lattice, conformer a and conformer b . from the main chain conformation angles  and the pattern of intramolecular hydrogen bonds , it is clear that both right-handed as well as left-handed 310-helices are present in the crystal structure. the average  values for 310- helical stretch  in conformer a are , whereas the average  values for this 310-helical stretch in conformer b are . the helices are stabilized by intrahelical 4→ <dig> hydrogen bonds . interestingly the four  amino acid residues, ala <dig>  leu <dig>  leu <dig> and ala <dig> have taken the positive ϕ and ψ values corresponding to the left-handed 310-helical conformation in conformer a . in 310-helices, every third residue would lie on the same face of the helix. consequently the side chains of the three Δphe residues in the undecapeptide, Δphe <dig>  Δphe <dig>  and Δphe <dig> are stacked on one face of the helix, residues leu <dig>  leu <dig> and ala <dig> lie on second face of the helix, while ala <dig>  gly <dig> and gly <dig> lie on third face of the helix. this arrangement of side chains creates a column of protuberant side chains at 120° to each other, resulting in the formation of grooves and wedges. the two helices a and b are antiparallel to each other. the angle between the two helical axes is 179°. it is observed that in crystal lattice the helix a is surrounded by three b helices, similarly helix b is surrounded by three a helices forming Δphe-Δphe, leu-leu and gly-gly helical interfaces . the closest approach cα-cα distances between the helices a and b at three interfaces was observed to be different;  <dig> Å at the Δphe-Δphe interface,  <dig> Å at the gly-gly interface and  <dig>  Å at the leu-leu interface . despite the closest approach of helices at the gly-gly interface as compared to leu-leu interface, energy calculation studies suggest that the leu-leu interface has the maximum stability followed by gly-gly and then Δphe-Δphe interface . in the crystal lattice, the helices of similar handedness related by translation symmetry are observed as approximate helical rods aligned along z-axis. it is interesting to note that helices of same handedness pack one above the other and stabilize through head-to-tail kind of n-h...o hydrogen bonds; n <dig> ..o10', and n <dig> ..o <dig>  while the tail to tail hydrogen bonding n <dig> ...o9'  is observed between the helices of opposite handedness  <cit>  . a notable feature in the crystal structure is that the two shape compliment helices a and b are interacting through extensive network of hydrogen bonds. at the leu-leu interface, helices a and b are involved in n-h...o hydrogen bond . at the gly-gly interface the two conformers a and b are held together by five cα-h...o hydrogen bonds all along the helical axis  <cit> . these backbone  to backbone  hydrogen bonds observed between cα, cα, and cα of conformer a to o8', o5' and o2' of conformer b respectively, and conversely cα and cα of conformer b to o5' and o2' of conformer a respectively , involve gxxg motifs from the two helices . at the Δphe-Δphe interface, helices a and b are held together by symmetrically placed aromatic-backbone c-h...o hydrogen bonds distributed all along the helical axis  <cit> . hence c-h ...o  hydrogen bonds are observed between cδ <dig> , cδ <dig>  and cδ <dig>  of conformer a to o6', o3' and o <dig> of conformer b correspondingly. similarly c-h ...o  hydrogen bonds are observed between cδ <dig> , cδ <dig>  and cδ <dig>  of conformer b to o6', o3' and o <dig> of conformer a respectively . the coexistence of right and left-handed helices favored by the involvement of interhelical hydrogen bonds in the solid state may be presumably to optimize helix-helix interactions, suggesting that tertiary  interactions, including overall vander waals, hydrophobic, electrostatic and hydrogen bond interactions can significantly influence even the local secondary structural features that involves amino acid residues close to each other in a peptide sequence. glycine residues  here seems to act as surrogate d-amino acids by assuming left-handed helical conformation  <cit> . in particular, the interaction motif which involves the occurrence of aromatic c-h..o hydrogen bonds and intercalation of aromatic side chains between adjacent and antiparallel 310-helices of opposite handedness is observed in other Δphe containing peptide crystal structures analyzed earlier in our laboratory  <cit> . it seems that the two opposite handed helices in the crystal packing seen have utilized a similar interaction motif leading to their association with each other. despite the presence of opposite handed helices, the present peptide is found to engage itself in extensive c-h...o hydrogen bonds. a remarkable feature of the present peptide is the observation of zipper like arrangement of multiple cα-h...o hydrogen bonds consistently at three residue intervals at gly-gly interface, which may be termed as glycine zipper. the distance of  <dig> Å between the adjacent helices at the gly-gly interface promotes packing interactions between the helices. this similar geometry for interhelical interaction is reportedly observed in transmembrane helical proteins between helices involving gxxxg like motifs. although the four-residue spacing is strongly preferred over other possible gly patterns, reinforcing the significance of the gxxxgxxxg sequence pattern. nevertheless, other spacings could lead to glycine zipper packing if the gly residues are placed on the same face of the helix. thus, the glycine zipper face may act as a magnet for helix packing.

circular dichroism studies
the peptide has three Δphe residues interspersed by two amino acid residues. the cd spectra display a negative couplet  in acetonitrile, chloroform and trifluoroethanol. a negative band is observed at about  <dig> nm and an intense positive band at about  <dig> nm, with a crossover point at ~ <dig> nm . this cd pattern corresponds to the absorption maximum at 270– <dig> nm and arises from the dipole-dipole interactions between the charge transfer electronic moments of the two dehydroamino acid chromophores placed in a mutual fixed disposition within the molecule. this pattern as reported earlier, is typical of a right-handed 310-helix  <cit> . the varying intensity of bands in different solvents suggests different content of the 310-helical conformer. in methanol, the spectrum shows a positive band at about  <dig> nm. this could be possible when the styryl side chains of dehydroresidues are placed on the opposite sides of the helix. in this arrangement, no exciton splitting will be observed, and the positive band at  <dig> nm arises from the contributions of the noninteracting but chirally perturbed chromophores. the very low intensity of bands in the cd spectrum in methanol may be attributed to the polarity of the solvent. it is known that folded peptide structures with stabilizing hydrogen bonds are more stable in apolar solvents than in polar ones. the peptide is found to preferentially form a right-handed 310-helical conformer. the difference between x-ray and cd interpretation may arise due to conformational heterogeneity in the solid state that can lead to crystallization of a minor conformer, driven by favorable packing interactions. on the other hand, the solution studies largely monitor the major species present in solution. the stabilization of right-handed conformer over the left-handed 310-helical conformer is also confirmed using energy calculation studies . the chcl3-meoh titrations revealed a surprising but interesting observation. at a concentration of 50: <dig> , not only the right-handed 310-helical structure is observed but there is also a steep rise in the molar ellipticity value . it is possible that an equal mixture of a polar  and an apolar  solvent provided some kind of amphiphilic environment to the peptide, leading to enhanced stabilization of the structure as compared to that in chloroform alone. following the above observation, the experiments were performed in different lipomimetic solvents such as aqueous sds and aqueous tfe mixture. cd spectra of the undecapeptide in sds and tfe/water solution show intense exciton-coupled band, characteristic of a right-handed 310-helical conformer. though the peptide was completely insoluble in water but it was soluble in different percentages of sds/water and tfe/water . thus the peptide is found to attain more stability in a membranous environment. the band intensity in tfe/water  decreased with the decrease in the percentage of tfe  and increase in the water content, which is deleterious for dehydrophenylalanine containing structured peptides. however the decrease in band intensity does not reflect in any conformational change of the present peptide even at 40% tfe/water, suggesting the overall stability of the peptide in a membranous environment, provided by tfe/water mixture. variable temperature studies in 40% tfe/water show maximum stability at 10°c, suggesting the effect of lowering the temperature on the stability of the structure . the explanation for the above observation could be a result of tfe reinforcing hydrogen bonds between carbonyl and amidic nh groups by the removal of water molecules in the proximity of the solute and lowering the dielectric constant of the surrounding milieu  <cit> . thus the peptide attains more stability in membrane mimetics at relatively low percentage, suggesting the propensity of the peptide to exist in an ordered 310-helical conformation in a hydrophobic environment and depicting stabilization achieved by molecular association  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present peptide, ac-gly-ala-Δphe-leu-gly-Δphe-leu-gly-Δphe-ala-gly-nh <dig>  provides the first example of stability and compaction in interacting helices when glycine residues are incorporated in the middle of the peptide sequence. the incorporation of glycines in the form of gxxg motif along with Δphe residue at two-residue spacer has helped in maintaining the 310-helical conformation in both solid as well as solution state. the amalgamation of gxxg motif has not only facilitated the helices to come close at the gly-gly interhelical interface but also promoted the formation of glyzine zipper, where a zipper like arrangement of cα-h...o hydrogen bonds is observed. the occurrence of weak c-h...o hydrogen bonds at Δphe-Δphe interface along with occurrence of main chain to main chain cα-h...o hydrogen bonds consistently at three residue intervals at gly-gly helical interface involving gxxg motifs seems to impart molecular association and stabilization to the interacting helices. the phenomenon of molecular association leading to stabilization of the 310-helical conformer is also confirmed by the solution state study. the present design can encourage the peptide designers in pursuing the ambitious goal of de novo design of helical bundles of higher order and compaction utilizing Δphe residues along with gxxg motifs.

