BACKGROUND
pockmarks, described as craterlike depressions on the seafloor, were first discovered at the scotian shelf and are likely to be formed by ascending gas or water 
 <cit> . the features have later been discovered throughout the world’s oceans, e.g. the norwegian continental slope 
 <cit> , the equatorial west african margin 
 <cit> , the bering sea 
 <cit>  and the belfast bay, maine 
 <cit> .

pockmarks may in some instances be related to active seepage, such as at gullfaks and tommeliten , where methane is emitted at the seafloor. at these sites anaerobic methanotrophic archaea  have been found to be important members of the microbial community in the sediments 
 <cit> . anme and their sulphate reducing bacterial partners are key players in anaerobic methane oxidation and ubiquitous in all methane environments  
 <cit> .

one area characterized by a high density of pockmarks is the seabed overlaying the troll petroleum reservoir in the north sea 
 <cit> . the pockmarks in this area have diameters up to about 250 m and depths up to around 10 m below the surrounding seafloor level 
 <cit> .

the troll pockmarks were most likely formed by expulsion of methane from decomposing methane hydrates, caused by increasing temperatures at the end of the last glaciation period about 11000 years ago 
 <cit> . no free gas has been detected in shallow sediments of the area at the present time; increasing concentrations of dissolved methane with depth have however been measured from approximately 70 m below seafloor  
 <cit> . although sporadic gas bubbles may still be emitted, it is believed that the main force keeping these pockmarks from being filled by sediments is the water-current activity in the craters and porewater flux 
 <cit> .

the troll field is one of the largest accumulations of petroleum discovered in the north sea 
 <cit> . the reservoir consists of sandstones from the late jurassic sognefjord formation and is located between  <dig> and 1300 m bsf 
 <cit> . although no high level flux of hydrocarbons  has been detected in this area, diffusion from the petroleum reservoir is likely to occur over geological time, supplying the prokaryotic communities in the overlaying surface sediments with organic carbon 
 <cit> . a variety of marine hydrocarbon degrading prokaryotes has been described, mainly from the alpha-, and gammaproteobacteria <cit> . one example is the genus alcanivorax of the gammaproteobacteria, regarded as a main player in aliphatic hydrocarbon degradation in marine environments 
 <cit> . other genera like maricaulis and roseovarius  and marinobacter  are capable of using polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons  as carbon sources 
 <cit> .

although prokaryotic communities related to active seepage sites are well studied , less is known about the prokaryotic communities in sediments influenced by low level flux  from underlying hydrocarbon reservoirs over geological time.

in this study we have combined analyses of high throughput  sequenced metagenomes with geochemical data to characterize prokaryotic communities in surface sediments from the troll area. the aim was to characterize the taxonomic distribution and metabolic potential of the communities, both in general and related to possible hydrocarbon degradation. further, we wanted to find whether there was an increased potential for methane oxidation or other microbial processes that might support the idea of seepage in the pockmark sediments, or if analyses of the prokaryotic communities would agree with the geological analyses indicating no active hydrocarbon seepage from the pockmarks at the present time 
 <cit> . we therefore analyzed sediment samples both from four pockmark samples and one sample from the troll plain. as references regarding thermogenic hydrocarbon influence, we chose two sediment samples from the seabed in the outer part of the oslofjord . this area is characterized by precambrian bedrock, formed more than  <dig> million years ago, and the presence of thermogenic hydrocarbons is therefore unlikely 
 <cit> .

RESULTS
the sediment samples from the troll area were taken from pockmarks  as well as one sample from the troll plain  . sample tpm1- <dig> and tpm1- <dig> were taken from the same pockmark , while samples tpm <dig> and tpm <dig> were taken from two smaller pockmarks . the two oslofjord samples  were taken from the outer part of the fjord . chemical analyses of the sediment porewater, as well as total organic carbon  and hydrocarbons in the sediments have revealed differences in available carbon and nitrogen sources in the two areas  
 <cit> . considerably higher concentrations of hydrocarbons  and a higher ratio of nitrite and nitrate/ammonia, combined with lower concentrations of ammonia and toc were revealed in the troll sediments compared to the oslofjord sediments. to see if these differences were reflected in the prokaryotic communities we used the workflow illustrated in figure 
 <dig> 

the table shows the sampling location and an overview of the chemical data obtained by the norwegian geotechnical institute in the petrogen project 
 <cit> .

sequencing coverage and taxonomic richness
after quality filtering and removal of artificial replicates the number of reads in our metagenomes ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with average read lengths between 337 ±  <dig>  and 378 ±  <dig>  bases . in the following text all percentages are given as percentage of the total reads, after filtering, in each metagenome.

 <dig> the 16s rrna gene and tdna were identified by the webmga pipeline.

the table shows general read-based information for the metagenomes.

rarefaction curves for the most detailed taxonomic level in megan  were leveling off from a straight line at 10% of the metagenome size, indicating that the most abundant taxa were accounted for . from  <dig>  to  <dig>  taxa were detected in each metagenome at this level. at the genus level the rarefaction curves almost leveled out with  <dig>  to  <dig>  taxa detected, indicating good coverage of the taxonomic richness.

estimated genome sizes  for the seven samples were all in the same range and varied between  <dig>   and  <dig>   mbp . the fraction of reads assigned to specific genes or functions is therefore assumed to be comparable between the metagenomes. the estimated probability  of sequencing a random gene of  <dig> bases was  <dig>  and between  <dig> and  <dig> hits could be expected in each metagenome, assuming the gene was present in one copy in all organisms 
 <cit> . the most abundant genes of the communities are therefore likely to be accounted for in our metagenomes. specific genes of interest, present in only small fractions of the community, could however still be missed by chance.

we also analyzed the taxonomy based on extracted reads assigned to the 16s rrna gene to see if these results were consistent with the results obtained by the complete metagenomes. the number of reads assigned to the 16s rrna gene ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , accounting for approximately  <dig> % of the reads . as expected, rarefaction curves based on these reads were still increasing steeply at the genus level, where only  <dig>  to  <dig>  taxa were detected . unless otherwise specified, the taxonomic results discussed in the following text are based on total reads.

geochemical, taxonomic and metabolic clustering
due to the complexity of the metagenomes and geochemical data, we performed an exploratory principal component analysis  to get an overview of the clustering of the samples and parameters tending to co-occur. the ordination analysis was based on the metagenomic data . the geochemical data was then fitted onto the ordination using the envfit function of the vegan library in r. the squared correlation coefficient  showed that all geochemical parameters with p-values ≤  <dig>  had a high goodness of fit .

the pca plot shows that the two oslofjord samples  were highly similar and positioned in the top right quadrant . all the troll pockmark samples were positioned in the bottom half of the plot. tpm1- <dig>  tpm1- <dig> and tpm <dig> were placed in the bottom left quadrant, diagonally opposed to the oslofjord samples, while tpm <dig> was positioned in the bottom right quadrant. tplain was positioned in the top left quadrant.
 <cit>  parameters were overlain using the envfit function of the vegan library in r. the first principal components accounted for 95 % of the variation in the dataset, while the second principal component accounted for 3 %. all metagenome data were given as percent of total reads. the geochemical parameters were normalized by dividing with the standard deviation and subtracting the smallest number from all numbers in each row. plot a: the metagenomic parameters are represented by red arrows. labels are shown for parameters with euclidian distance over  <dig>  from origin. the geochemical parameters are represented by blue arrows. only the most significant geochemical parameters are shown . plot b: is an excerpt of plot a, magnifying the central region of the plot. labels for all metagenomic parameters with euclidian distance over  <dig>  are included.

the first principal component  accounted for 95% of the variance in the dataset. along the pc <dig> axis tpm <dig> was the troll sample most similar to the oslofjord samples, while tplain and tpm1- <dig> were positioned furthest away. tpm <dig> and tpm1- <dig> were placed at an intermediate position.

the abundance of proteobacteria was the most important parameter for the positioning of sites along pc <dig>  proteobacteria, as well as thaumarchaeota, planctomycetes and actinobacteria had high negative scores along this axis. the analysis thereby indicated relatively high abundances of these taxa at the sites placed on the left side of the plot, especially tpm1- <dig> and tplain . firmicutes, euryarchaeota, chloroflexi and viruses all had high positive scores along pc <dig> indicating that the samples placed in the right section of the pca plot  had relatively high abundances of these taxa compared to the other sites.

although tpm <dig> grouped with the oslofjord samples along pc <dig>  it was separated from the oslofjord samples by pc <dig>  while chloroflexi, euryarchaeota, thaumarchaeota and firmicutes had high negative scores along pc <dig>  bacteroidetes, actinobacteria and planctomycetes had the highest positive scores along this axis and can therefore be considered as important parameters for the placement of the oslofjord samples and tplain in the top half of the plot.

concerning the carbon sources, the geochemical parameters supported a positive correlation between hydrocarbons  and the troll samples, while concentrations of bicarbonate and toc were positively correlated with the oslofjord samples . this correlated well with the metagenomic parameters, where level i seed subsystem “carbohydrates”  was placed in the same quadrant as the oslofjord samples, while “metabolism of aromatic compounds”  was positively correlated to four of the troll samples, particularly tplain and tpm1- <dig> .

taxonomic classification
the relative representation of the domains in the metagenomes was supported by the 16s rrna gene data . consistency between the taxonomy based on all reads and reads assigned to the 16s rrna gene was also detected at the phylum level .

the oslofjord metagenomes
the pca analysis  clustered the two oslofjord metagenomes  together. statistical comparison of the two metagenomes in stamp confirmed that they were highly similar. no significant differences in abundance for taxa at either the phylum or the class level were detected. at the genus level only the low abundant genus rickettsiella , containing intracellular pathogens of arthropods 
 <cit> , were identified as overrepresented in of <dig> compared to of <dig>  the high similarity of the two oslofjord metagenomes made them suitable as an out-group for taxonomic comparison against the troll metagenomes.

taxonomic comparison of the troll and oslofjord metagenomes
the genus level was chosen for the taxonomic comparison in stamp. this level is resolved enough to give a general indication of function and our rarefaction curves indicated good coverage at this level . each metagenome from the troll area was compared to both metagenomes from the oslofjord. by using a strict significance cut off  ≥ 2), we wanted to identify the differences most likely to be of biological relevance 
 <cit> . the analysis identified  <dig> genera over- or underrepresented in one or more troll metagenomes compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . although differences relative to the oslofjord metagenomes were detected in all metagenomes from the troll area , no genera were significantly overrepresented in all troll metagenomes . only two genera, gluconacetobacter  of the class alphaproteobacteria and psychroflexus  of the phylum bacteroidetes, were significantly underrepresented in all troll metagenomes compared to the oslofjord metagenomes 
 <cit> .

number of taxa at the genus level and seed subsystems level i and iii with significantly different abundance, based on statistical analyses using stamp. abundant taxa are defined as taxa comprising ≥  <dig>  % of all assigned reads in one or more metagenomes.

most taxa differing significantly in abundance from the oslofjord metagenomes were detected in tplain and tpm1- <dig> . genera of the phylum proteobacteria , as well as genera of the archaeal phylum thaumarchaeota, were most frequently overrepresented in these metagenomes, while genera sorting under the bacterial phylum firmicutes and the archaeal phyla euryarchaeota and crenarchaeota were most frequently underrepresented compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . these trends were also supported by the pca plot .

abundant taxa at the genus level
we were primarily interested in studying differences among the abundant taxa at the genus level , since these taxa are likely to have a higher influence on the biochemical activities at the different sites. altogether  <dig> abundant bacterial and archaeal taxa were identified at the genus level in the seven metagenomes . significant differences between one or more troll metagenomes compared to both oslofjord metagenomes were detected among  <dig> of these in the stamp analysis . of these  <dig> were detected in tplain and  <dig> in tpm1- <dig>  respectively . nine genera were detected in both tplain and tpm1- <dig> .

interestingly, both autotrophic nitrifying genera  and oligotrophic marine gammaproteobacteria ”) were overrepresented in all troll metagenomes, although not significantly in all, compared to the oslofjord metagenomes .

methanotrophic genera
to see if the sediments from the troll pockmarks had an increased potential for methane oxidation we searched the metagenomes for known methanotrophic taxa. anme is not recognized as an independent taxon in the ncbi taxonomy, but an inspection of the reads assigned to “environmental samples, archaea” showed that these were further assigned to anme fosmids isolated from eel river 
 <cit>  or to “uncultured archaeon”. inspection of the best hits for the reads assigned to “uncultured archaeon” and reads not assigned beyond the “environmental samples, archaea” revealed that most of these reads also could be assigned to anme 
 <cit> . anme, especially anme- <dig>  were the most abundant methanotrophs in all metagenomes, except in tplain, where reads assigned to “candidate division nc10”  were most abundant .

in the stamp analysis, only tplain displayed significant differences in abundance of known methanotrophic genera compared to the oslofjord metagenomes. the gammaproteobacterial genus methylococcus  was overrepresented while the abundant taxon “environmental samples, archaea” was underrepresented in tplain compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . reads assigned to “environmental samples, archaea” and further to anme were also two to three times less abundant in tplain compared to the other troll metagenomes .

metabolic potential
approximately 12-14% of the reads in each metagenome were assigned to seed subsystems by mg-rast  . “clustering-based subsystems” followed by “carbohydrates” and “amino acids and derivates”, were the most abundant level i subsystems in all seven metagenomes.

the two oslofjord metagenomes were highly similar and no significant differences could be detected at seed subsystem level i in the stamp analysis. on level iii, only two subsystems  were significantly overrepresented in of <dig> compared to of <dig> 

metabolic comparison of the troll and oslofjord metagenomes
very few significant differences were detected between the troll and the oslofjord metagenomes at seed subsystems level i in the stamp analysis. the only significant differences at this level were overrepresentation of the subsystem “macromolecular synthesis” in tplain and underrepresentation of “prophage” in tpm <dig> compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . at level iii however,  <dig> subsystems were significantly over- or underrepresented in one or more troll metagenomes compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . only one of these  was significantly underrepresented in all troll metagenomes compared to the oslofjord metagenomes.

concerning petroleum degradation, several subsystems involved in metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons were among those significantly overrepresented in tplain and tpm1- <dig> compared to the oslofjord metagenomes . these subsystems  were also considerably more abundant in tplain and tpm1- <dig> than in the other troll metagenomes . this was also seen in the pca analysis, where the level i seed subsystem “metabolism of aromatic compounds” was contributing to the separation of tplain and tpm1- <dig> from the oslofjord samples .

identification of selected key enzymes for hydrocarbon degradation further supported a higher potential for hydrocarbon degradation in tplain and tpm1- <dig> compared to the other samples . anaerobic degradation of several aromatic compounds is often funneled through benzoate and benzoyl-coa by benzoate-coa ligase and subsequent dearomatization by benzoyl-coa reductase 
 <cit> . the anaerobic activation step of toluene and several other aromatic hydrocarbons with fumarate addition can be catalyzed by benzylsuccinate synthase. we searched for these anaerobic key enzymes as well as for several dioxygenases involved in aerobic ring-cleavage of the aromatic intermediates catechol, protocatechuate, gentisate and homogentisate.

both benzoate-coa ligase, and several dioxygenases  were overrepresented in the metagenomes from tplain and tpm1- <dig>  alkane 1-monooxygenase , the key enzyme in alkane degradation, was also seen to be more abundant in tplain and tpm1- <dig> than in the other metagenomes. a few reads assigned to the key genes in anaerobic  and aerobic  methane oxidation were also detected in the tpm1- <dig> metagenome. the soluble methane monooxygenase was identified in the metagenomes from tplain and of <dig> as well.

an inspection of the level  <dig> seed subsystems sorting under “nitrogen metabolism”  revealed that “ammonia assimilation” was overrepresented in all troll metagenomes, although the difference was only significant for tplain. this fits well with the overrepresentation of autotrophic nitrifiers in the troll metagenomes.

denitrification represented by “dissimilatory nitrate reductase” was also overrepresented in the troll metagenomes  
 <cit> . further, “nitric oxide synthase” was significantly overrepresented in tplain, tpm1- <dig> and tpm <dig> compared to the oslofjord metagenomes. most reads assigned to this subsystem were classified as putative cytochrome p <dig> hydroxylase. cytochrome p <dig> enzymes are ubiquitous and involved in a broad range of chemical reactions, including aromatic hydrocarbon degradation 
 <cit> .

in accordance with the taxonomic comparison, tplain and tpm1- <dig> differed most from the oslofjord metagenomes also in respect of metabolic potential .

discussion
the pca analysis separated the troll samples from the oslofjord samples . this supports the oslofjord metagenomes as a suitable out-group for comparison against the troll metagenomes. the plotted geochemical parameter fitted well onto the ordination and supported a correlation between available carbon sources and the clustering of the samples. the plot further visualized correlations between geochemical and metagenomic  parameters.

to better reflect the situation in the environment, taxonomic and metabolic parameters used in the pca ordination were given as percent of total reads. this way high abundant taxa and subsystems were given higher influence on the ordination than their low abundant counterparts.

the pca analysis was based on metagenomic data from the phylum and seed subsystem i levels. the taxonomic and metabolic classification on this level provides a limited resolution compared to the genus and seed subsystem iii levels used for the in-depth metagenomic analysis. further, not all metagenomic reads could be assigned; neither was all possible geochemical parameters measured. still, the exploratory pca analysis provided a valuable insight into the effects of environmental conditions on community composition and differentiations. the results further supported the more detailed analyses performed in this study.

variation in the prokaryotic communities between the two sampling areas
the taxonomic comparison of the troll and oslofjord areas showed a general overrepresentation of autotrophic nitrifiers and omg in the troll area . both nitrosopumilus and omg are known to thrive in oligotrophic environments and their overrepresentation could therefore be due to lower toc in the troll area than in the oslofjord  
 <cit> . an active nitrifying community in the troll sediments was further supported by a relatively higher nitrite and nitrate to ammonia ratio as well as an increased genetic potential for ammonia assimilation in the troll sediments compared to the oslofjord . ammonia is however assimilated by other prokaryotes as well, especially in oligotrophic environments 
 <cit> .

the pca analysis showed a positive correlation between “nitrogen metabolism”  and concentrations of nitrite and nitrate measured in the pore water . a positive correlation was also indicated between these parameters and the abundance of the phyla proteobacterianitrospiraethaumarchaeota . although the phylum proteobacteria is highly diverse, the largest fraction of reads assigned to nitrospirae and thaumarchaeota were classified as nitrospira and nitrosopumilus respectively. the pca analysis thereby supports a positive correlation between the level i subsystem “nitrogen metabolism”, nitrifiers and elevated concentrations of nitrite and nitrate. the plot further indicated a negative correlation between these parameters and the pore water ammonia concentration. the considerably lower ammonia concentration measured in the troll samples compared to the oslofjord samples could be a result of the nitrifiers’ effective metabolism of ammonium. especially nitrosopumilus, strain scm <dig>  has been shown to have a high affinity for ammonia 
 <cit> .

interestingly, the pca plot indicated a strong positive correlation between thaumarchaeota  and the geochemical parameters zinc and calcium.

the correlation between calcium and thaumarchaeota could in part be explained by the calcium carbonate mound found close to tpm1- <dig>  where the thaumarchaeota were most abundant.

high variance detected within the troll area
the high variance present among the troll samples indicates environmental differences related to the different structures  on the seabed in the area . interestingly the tpm1- <dig> and tpm1- <dig> samples  were dissimilar, possibly due to the pockmark’s large size and heterogeneity. close to the eastern slope, where sample tpm1- <dig> was taken, biogenic carbonate structures probably formed during previous methane seepage could be seen  
 <cit> . meanwhile, no such carbonate structures were detected at the western slope where sample tpm1- <dig> was taken.

the pca analysis placed tplain and tpm1- <dig> considerably further left along pc <dig> than the other troll samples . the most striking difference in geochemical composition between tplain and tpm1- <dig> on one side and tpm1- <dig>  tpm <dig> and tpm <dig> on the other was the considerably lower concentration of aliphatic hydrocarbons in tplain and tpm1- <dig> compared to the other troll samples . this trend was also seen in the pca plot .

in combination with a higher taxonomic and metabolic potential for hydrocarbon degradation, this indicates a more active hydrocarbonoclastic subcommunity in tplain and tpm1- <dig>  although subsystems involved in degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons were detected in all metagenomes, significant overrepresentation compared to the oslofjord metagenomes could only be detected in tplain and tpm1-2; thereby supporting a more active hydrocarbon degrading community in these samples . the tplain and especially the tpm1- <dig> metagenomes also had a higher fraction of reads assigned to key genes for hydrocarbon degradation than the other samples . further, known hydrocarbon degrading genera from both alphaproteobacteria  and gammaproteobacteria  were overrepresented in tplain and tpm1- <dig> compared to the oslofjord metagenomes  
 <cit> . this trend can also be seen in the pca plot where the parameters proteobacteria  and “metabolism of aromatic compounds”  are important contributors in separating tplain and tpm1- <dig> from the other samples.

in general aromatic hydrocarbons are more recalcitrant than aliphatic hydrocarbons to microbial degradation 
 <cit> . the troll samples all share the common predominant source of hydrocarbons, the underlying oil and gas reservoir. the increased genetic potential for degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in tplain and tpm1- <dig> is therefore likely to be a result of sequential degradation of the various fractions in oil. a more active hydrocarbonoclastic subcommunity in tplain and tpm1- <dig> could have degraded a larger fraction of the less recalcitrant aliphates, forcing a shift in the metabolism towards increased degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons at the sampling time.

the seabed is a dynamic environment, and a theory by hovland and coworkers proposes that as old pockmarks are closed down new ones are created as a result of changes in fluid flow pathways over time 
 <cit> . higher potential for hydrocarbon degradation, possibly related to a more active hydrocarbonoclastic subcommunity in tplain and tpm1- <dig>  could be explained by increased bioavailability of essential nutrients  and metals involved in hydrocarbon degradation at these sites compared to the other troll sites, as a result of increased porewater seepage. increased porewater seepage could also bring about a slightly higher hydrocarbon availability, especially of the more aqueous soluble hydrocarbons, which could sustain a more active hydrocarbonoclastic subcommunity at tplain and tpm1- <dig> 
 <cit> .

at tpm1- <dig> a potential increase in porewater seepage could be explained by the carbonate mound identified close to the sampling site. this carbonate mound could constitute a seal for gas migrating towards the seafloor, thereby increasing the pressure in the porewater forced out along its sides 
 <cit> .

further, differences in exposure to water-current activity could also affect the bioavilibility of nutrients and community structure. previous investigation of fauna in large troll pockmarks has indicated the possibility for increased currents or turbulence at the eastern slope of the pockmarks in the area 
 <cit> . likewise, there is no protection from the water current on the troll plain.

methane oxidation in pockmark sediments
although methanotrophs contributed to all seven metagenomes, no general overabundance could be detected in the troll pockmark metagenomes compared to the oslofjord metagenomes, supporting the geochemical conclusion that there is no, or very low, active methane seepage in these pockmarks at the present time 
 <cit> . we did recognize marker genes for aerobic methane oxidation in tpm1- <dig> and tplain. this could be related to the slight overabundance of aerobic methanotrophic taxa  in these samples. interestingly, reads associated with anme were two to three times less abundant in the metagenome from the troll plain , than in the troll pockmark metagenomes  where anme accounted for up to  <dig> % of the reads. anme are less abundant in the troll pockmarks than in active, methane-seeping pockmarks like gullfaks, tommeliten and nyegga, where anme sequences dominated the archaeal 16s libraries in surface sediments 
 <cit> . in contrast, aerobic ammonia oxidizing nitrosopumilus was clearly the most abundant archaeal genus in the troll metagenomes. nitrosopumilus and other marine archaeal group i representatives have also previously been detected in the outskirts of hydrocarbon seepages, methane-hydrate sediments, oil spills and hydrothermal vents 
 <cit> . recently marine archaeal group i representatives were also identified as the dominating archaea in surface sediments  overlaying the zone of anaerobic methane oxidation  in sediments of an active methane seeping pockmark 
 <cit> .

since the zone for aom is deeper in sediments with low level diffusion based seepage, compared to sediments with active methane seepage 
 <cit> , we can not exclude that aom might be more important in deeper layers of the sediments. co <dig> produced by anaerobic oxidation of methane 
 <cit>   in deeper layers of the troll sediments would provide an additional carbon source for nitrosopumilus, and other predominantly autotrophic nitrifiers, generally overrepresented in the oligotrophic troll sediments. the predominantly autotrophic nitrifiers overrepresented in these oligotrophic sediments might therefore have a function in turning co <dig>  in part originating from hydrocarbons, back into organic carbon and thereby reducing the emission of this greenhouse gas to the seawater. the nitrifiers could further play a role providing terminal electron acceptors for nitrate reducing hydrocarbon degraders .

we did not find significantly overrepresented subsystems related to co <dig> fixing pathways in our analysis. this could in part be related to difficulties in assigning metagenomic reads to function. nitrosopumilus, the most abundant of the nitrifiers overrepresented in the troll area, is assumed to use a variant of the 3-hydroxypropionate/4-hydroxybutyrate pathway  for co <dig> fixation 
 <cit> . this pathway is not well defined in the seed subsystems of mg-rast . further, although n. maritimus most likely uses the same reaction sequences as described for metallosphaera sedula, not all reactions are catalyzed by identical enzymes 
 <cit> . it is still not clear whether ammonia oxidizing archaea are dependent on autotrophy or not. a mixotrophic lifestyle has been indicated for nitrosopumilus and other  group i.1a thaumarchaeota, while heterotrophic growth has been observed for thaumarchaeota of group i.1b  
 <cit> . since 4-hydroxybutyryl-coa dehydratase/vinylacetyl-coa-delta-isomerase, a characteristic key gene of the 3hp/4hb cycle 
 <cit> , has been detected by the kegg automatic annotation server  
 <cit>  among metagenomic reads assigned to n. maritimus from the troll metagenomes in a separate study 
 <cit>  it is likely that nitrosopumilus in the troll area has the genetic potential for autotrophy.

CONCLUSIONS
most taxa were present in all metagenomes and differences in community structure and metabolic potential between them were mainly due to abundance variation. despite detection of a few reads assigned to key enzymes for methane oxidation in tpm1- <dig>  our analyses revealed no general increase in the potential for methane oxidation in the surface sediments of troll pockmarks compared to the oslofjord. the analyses are thereby supporting geological analyses indicating no, or very low, methane seepage at the present time. despite high concentrations of hydrocarbons in the troll area, compared to the oslofjord, significantly increased potential for hydrocarbon degradation could only be detected in two of the troll metagenomes. overrepresentation of subsystem and key enzymes supported an increased potential for aromatic hydrocarbon degradation in these samples.

the proposed extended use of aromatic hydrocarbons as a carbon source could be a result of the lower alkane concentrations measured in these samples compared to the other troll samples. given the placement of the sampling sites, less bioavailability of nutrients essential for hydrocarbon degradation is a likely factor limiting the hydrocarbonoclastic subcommunities at the other sites.

the most evident difference between the two sampling areas was an overabundance of predominantly autotrophic nitrifiers, especially nitrosopumilus, in the troll metagenomes compared to the oslofjord. given the great depth of the hydrocarbon-containing sediments in the troll area, substantial sequential anaerobic degradation and oxidation of hydrocarbons is likely to occur. migration of degradation products, including co <dig>  up through the sediments could provide an additional source of carbon for the nitrifiers thriving in the area. this subcommunity could therefore play an important role turning co <dig>  partially originating from hydrocarbon degradation, back into organic carbon in these dark oligotrophic sediments. the oxidation of ammonia to nitrite and nitrate in this autotrophic process could also boost the supply of terminal electron acceptors for hydrocarbon degradation.

