BACKGROUND
molecular profiling technology allows for the simultaneous assaying of the abundance of tens of thousands of transcripts in a biological sample. once these abundance values have been obtained for many samples, prevalent higher-order data analyses may include clustering, classification, feature selection, and network estimation. a variety of algorithms seeking to address these higher-order tasks have been investigated and applied, to interpret gene expression patterns and to generate biological predictions. however, the accuracy of these predictions may depend on the low-level transformations utilized to produce abundance values from raw measurements, i.e., data pre-processing may be a critical factor in determining the validity and success of downstream studies. some key pre-processing steps for profiling data include image quantification and normalization. several image analysis software  have been designed for image analysis of the spots on microarrays  <cit> . background estimation has also been considered as an important issue in image quantification, however, evidence  <cit>  showed that 'inappropriate' local background adjustment could add noise into the microarray data and thus be detrimental to the downstream studies. background adjustment, therefore, is still an issue to be resolved. after image analysis, normalization usually needs to be performed. it is a procedure designed to minimize the unwanted variations in measurements arising from the technology, but to retain the intrinsic biological variations, and is also the focus of this work. in this study, we examined normalization in the context of a particular transcriptional profiling platform, cdna microarrays  <cit> , and the specific analytical task of classifying biological samples characterized by gene expression profiles.

in cdna microarray-based investigations, rna from two samples are reverse-transcribed and labeled with distinct  fluorescent dyes, then hybridized to a microarray spotted with dna sequences . an ensuing scanned image of the microarray is processed to yield an intensity measurement for each dye at every spot . if r and g are the spot-specific, quantitated, fluorescent intensities of the target and reference expression signals respectively, relative gene expression is defined as the log ratio m = log <dig>  and average expression is the log intensity . based on different biological assumptions and design principles, many normalization methods for cdna microarray data have been proposed. global normalization techniques adjust the center  of the distribution of the log ratio m values on each microarray to a constant  <cit> . these methods, however, do not correct for any intensity- or spatial effect.

a variety of techniques have been proposed to remove intensity effect. a non-linear approach employs robust locally weighted regression   <cit>  to smooth the dependence of log ratios on intensities  <cit> . the basic assumption of this approach is either that the majority of genes are not differentially expressed, or that genes are influenced by random effects   <cit> . a 'qspline' method uses a target array to adjust r and g values so that their distribution is similar for all arrays  <cit> , but the performance of this method may depend upon the choice of the baseline array  <cit> . a composite method employs both external control samples and total genes on a microarray to remove intensity effect  <cit> . to relax critical biological assumptions, 'housekeeping-gene'-related methods first identify non-differentially-expressed genes, and then use these genes for normalization  <cit> . semi-linear models are designed to account for the effects of print-tips , signal intensity, and differences in gene expression levels jointly in a single model  <cit> .

the removal of intensity effect at the pt level can partially remove spatial effect  <cit> . to remove spatial effect more completely, the dependence of m values on physical position can be smoothed using lowess  <cit> , or can be eliminated using weighted mean  <cit>  or median filter methods  <cit> , both of which assume that differentially expressed genes are not co-localized in the neighboring spots. since spatial- and intensity effect may be mutually dependent, a method that removes global spatial effect and global intensity effect in a single step has been proposed  <cit> .

whereas the above location normalization methods remove spatial- and intensity effect, scale normalization methods adjust differences in the scale of m values within and/or between microarrays. the assumption is that since the majority of genes are not differentially expressed, the scale of their m values should be constant. a robust estimate of the scale factor for scale normalization is median absolute deviation  <cit> .

normalization approaches seek to ensure that dye effect is removed, while biological variations are retained. spatial- and intensity effect and scale effect arise from printing, hybridization, scanning, or other technical factors, and can mask the signals arising from genuine biological variations in gene expression. visual aids used to assess the effectiveness of normalization methods  <cit>  include scatter plots of log ratio  versus average log intensity  . spatial plots are a color-coded representation of each spot on a microarray that depicts m values, or a quality  measure of some test statistic. these two types of diagnostic plots  <cit>  suggest that raw m values are often biased estimates of relative expression and that the dye intensities per spot need to be adjusted. quantitative criteria used to assess the robustness of normalization methods in removing dye effect include  rank variations of spot intensity in non-normalized versus normalized data  <cit> , and  correlation  <cit> , variance  <cit> , or error  <cit>  of the normalized m values in replicated data.

to ensure that biological variations are retained after normalization, several functional criteria have been employed. prevailing approaches determine the ability to predict a fixed number of differentially expressed genes in real or simulated data using quantitative measures based on t-statistics  <cit> , adjusted p-values  <cit> , and false-discovery rates  <cit> . however, there is uncertainty associated with these measures, and the true number of differentially expressed genes is unknown. spike-in data have been used to assess normalization approaches for affymetrix genechip data  <cit> . however, external control samples are not widely used for evaluation of normalization methods for cdna microarrays.

in this paper, we evaluated normalization methods for cdna microarray data using the k-nn loocv classification error , an alternative quantitative functional measure that is relatively unambiguous, objective and readily computed. we used k-nn classifiers because  their sensitivity enables us to discriminate between, and hence evaluate normalization techniques,  they are readily available,  they perform well in practice, and  their non-parametric nature means that assumptions about how the data are distributed have little influence on classification performance. since the primary aim of our evaluation of normalization methods was to assist practitioners in choosing effective data pre-processing schemes, we did not consider factors that may influence classification performance, such as feature selection and distance metrics. we investigated a wide spectrum of well-known and widely available normalization techniques: ten location normalization methods that adjust spatial effect and/or intensity effect , and three scale methods that adjust scale differences . we applied these methods, individually and in combination , to five diverse, published, cancer biology-related cdna microarray data sets , and we generated data sets with spatial effect, intensity effect and scale differences removed to varying degrees. computing the loocv classification error of k-nns estimated from these multi- and two-class data sets allowed us to investigate which and how much of the dye effect are removed by the  <dig> strategies.

* we adopted the terminology given in the table to avoid confusion within this work. elsewhere, these methods are known as: gmedian, global or median  <cit> ; slloess, 2d spatial  <cit> ; slfilterw <dig>  spatial normalization using median filter of the block size  <dig> ×  <dig>  <cit> ; slfilterw <dig>  spatial normalization using median filter of the block size  <dig> ×  <dig>  <cit> ; igloess, global loess  <cit> ; illoess, print-tip loess  <cit> ; istspline, invariant set normalization  <cit> ; qspliner, qspline using geometric mean of the r channels of all arrays as the target array  <cit> ; qsplineg, qspline using geometric mean of the g channels of all arrays as the target array  <cit> .

** the spatiallynormalise function in the trma package was modified to remove scale normalization. the normalize.invariantset function in affy package was modified so that the function could be applied on cdna microarray data.

*default* the default parameters for qsplineg and qspliner are 

* igsgloess was implemented in the following package/function: maanova r package/smooth . elsewhere, igsgloess is known as joint loess  <cit> . lowess: lowess curve fitted as a function of average log intensity , row location , and column location  of spots on a microarray.

s = median)
s = median)
* we adopted the terminology given in this table to avoid confusion within this work. elsewhere, the methods are known as: wscale, within-print-tip-group scale normalization  <cit> ; and bscale, between slide scale normalization  <cit> .

samples and class:  <dig> normal;  <dig> tumor
configuration: 
samples and class:  <dig> normal,  <dig> diffuse large b-cell lymphoma ;  <dig> follicular lymphoma 
configuration: ; 
samples and class:  <dig> normal;  <dig> clear cell carcinoma ;  <dig> granular cell carcinoma ;
 <dig> papillary carcinoma 
configuration: 
samples and class :  <dig> normal;  <dig> tumor
configuration: ; ; 

samples and class:  <dig> normal;  <dig> adenocarcinoma ;  <dig> squamous cell carcinoma ; 
 <dig> large cell lung cancer ;  <dig> small cell lung cancer 
configuration: 
RESULTS
spatial- and intensity-dependent normalization
diagnostic plots
we used diagnostic plots to examine the ability of different location normalization methods to remove spatial- and/or intensity effect . figure  <dig> shows spatial plots for two specific lymphoma microarrays normalized with four approaches designed to correct spatial effect . the non-normalized m values  for microarray "5850" display global spatial effect  whereas those for microarray "5938" exhibit local spatial effect . removal of spatial effect should result in a "random" red and green pattern of m values. slloess and slfilterw <dig> exhibit similar dye bias-removal abilities in that they both remove global spatial effect more effectively than local spatial effect. slfilterw <dig> removes both global and local dye effect effectively, largely because it uses a median filter of a small window size  for normalization. igsgloess removes most, but not all, global and local spatial effect . igsgloess may not be as effective at removing dye effect as expected because, as the developers indicate, lowess curve construction uses the standardized spatial variables , which may not be appropriate for location variables  <cit> .

visual inspection of the diagnostic plots in figures  <dig> and  <dig> suggest that slfilterw <dig> is an effective method for removing both global and local spatial effect, whereas illoess is good at removing intensity effect.

k-nn loocv classification error
for a functional, quantitative evaluation of location normalization methods, we first computed k-nn loocv classification error rates for data normalized using these methods individually and/or in combination. then for each data set, we ranked the normalization methods based on their loocv classification error rates. the smaller the loocv classification error rate, the lower the rank of the normalization strategy. in order to assess whether normalization is beneficial , we also computed the following quantity for a normalization method in each data set:

improvement =  - errorrate) / errorrate × 100%

where errorrate is the error rate of nonrm, and errorrate is the error rate of the method. tables  <dig> and  <dig> give results for five data sets  and  <dig> location methods designed to remove spatial- and/or intensity effect . figures  <dig> and  <dig> are alternative, visual representations of the classification "error rate" and "rank" in table  <dig> 

single-bias-removal methods
these strategies can be classified into two categories, spatial-dependent and intensity-dependent normalization methods. three spatial-dependent normalization methods  reduce k-nn loocv classification error rates to a similar extent  and have almost identical ranks , despite the fact that their abilities to remove spatial effect are quite different . since both slloess and slfilterw <dig> fail to remove local spatial patterns effectively , slfilterw <dig> may be too aggressive in removing "dye effect" . however, the three intensity-dependent methods  reduce k-nn loocv classification error rates to different degrees. the k-nn loocv classification error rate and rank of igloess are similar to those of the three spatial-dependent methods  , whereas illoess, which removes intensity effect more completely than igloess, has smaller k-nn loocv classification error rates than igloess in all five data sets. istspline, which uses a rank invariant set for normalization, is also better than igloess in all five data sets .

in all five data sets, except for lymphoma , the single-bias-removal normalization methods consistently yield smaller loocv classification error rates than no-bias-removal methods, nonrm and gmedian . the greatest benefit, an improvement of 56%, is seen with gastric carcinoma  .

double-bias-removal methods
igsgloess removes both spatial- and intensity effect in one step, whereas the remaining seven approaches are two-step strategies consisting of single-bias-removal methods applied sequentially .

in general, double-bias-removal methods have smaller k-nn loocv classification error rates and bigger improvement than single-bias-removal methods, and all perform better than nonrm and gmedian . using an arbitrary cut-off value of  <dig> for both median and upper quantile ranks , igloess-slfilterw <dig>  istspline-slloess and igloess-slloess  appear to be the best methods overall. these three two-step strategies not only have the lowest ranks amongst all normalization methods and across all data sets , they also showed most consistent and significant improvement over both nonrm and gmedian across all five data sets . the benefits of using igloess-slfilterw <dig> over no normalization  range from an improvement value of 40% in lung cancer to 58% in lymphoma , whereas the improvement values of istspline-slloess range from 33% in gastric carcinoma to 62% in lymphoma and the improvement values of igloess-slloess range from 33% in lung cancer to 56% in gastric carcinoma.

the ranks of the slfilterw3-related approaches  are higher than their slfilterw <dig> counterparts , suggesting that a window size of  <dig> ×  <dig> is more preferable than that of  <dig> ×  <dig>  a smaller window size may over normalize the data, and thus conceal real biological variations.

compared to the two-step approaches, the rank of the one-step method, igsgloess, is higher than igloess-slfilterw <dig> and istspline-slloess . this indicates that the one-step igsgloess has no apparent advantage over the two-step bias-removal strategies.

overall, the classification performances of data normalized using the double-bias-removal methods are better than that of nonrm, and the benefits  of doing so range from 21% in the case of lung cancer  to 100% in gastric carcinoma  .

qspline-related approaches
unlike the location normalization methods discussed above, qspline-related approaches require a target array. qsplineg and qspliner are single-bias-removal techniques and use g and r respectively as the target array. the reduction in k-nn loocv classification error rates for these methods is quite significant compared to the other single-bias-removal methods. however, it is noticeable that although qsplineg and qspliner produce similar results in almost all data sets, their results are different in lymphoma . in addition, when qsplineg or qspliner is combined with one of the three spatial-dependent methods, the rank of the resulting double-bias-removal technique is different from that of its counterpart technique . these results suggest that, similar to other baseline array-based normalization methods  <cit> , the performances of the qspline-related methods may also depend on the choice of the target array.

overall, the classification performance of data normalized using the qspline-related methods is better than nonrm by improvement values of 9% in lung cancer  and of 100% in gastric carcinoma . none of these qspline-related methods, however, outperforms the igloess-slfilterw <dig> .

scale normalization
tables  <dig> and  <dig> and figure  <dig> show loocv classification error rates, ranks and improvement for the k-nn classifiers estimated using  <dig> scale normalization methods combined with other spatial- and/or intensity-dependent normalization methods . for data normalized first with spatial- and/or intensity-dependent methods, little or no reduction in loocv classification error rates was observed when within-microarray scale normalization  was applied later. however, when between-microarray scale normalization  was used alone, or when both scale normalization techniques were used sequentially , there was an increase in both median and upper quantile ranks , suggesting that bscale should not be applied on the studied data sets. with regard to our running example, the lymphoma data set, scale normalization has no apparent beneficial effect on classification performance.

discussion
this computational investigation employed two types of visual diagnostic plots and k-nn loocv classification error rates to evaluate a broad suite of known normalization strategies. these analyses were applied to cdna microarray data from five published cancer studies. since all these data sets were acquired using genepix image analysis software and a recent study showed that background adjustment using genepix can increase variability of microarray data and compromise downstream data analyses  <cit> , we used foreground intensity values of the probes without background adjustment in this work. the normalization approaches examined are based on a variety of different techniques and implementations that are readily available and accessible.

our results show that the loocv classification error of k-nn classifiers depends on how much of spatial- and intensity effect can be removed by a normalization strategy. overall, the single-bias-removal location approaches perform better than gmedian and nonrm, while the double-bias-removal location strategies perform better than the single-bias-removal location approaches. of the twenty-three location normalization techniques investigated, three two-step processes , all of which removes intensity effect at the global level and spatial effect at the local level, appear to be the most effective at reducing loocv classification error. however, removing spatial- or intensity effect alone is not sufficient for reducing loocv classification error .

a recent review of normalization methods  <cit>  raised the concern that removing spatial effect  may add additional noise to normalized data, and suggested that a safe alternative was removing only intensity effect at the local level   <cit> . our results show that, although the classification performance of data normalized with slloess alone can be worse than non-normalized data as in the case of the lymphoma data set, when slloess is combined with another intensity-dependent approach , there is considerable improvement over nonrm, with improvement ranging from 23% in liver cancer  to 78% in gastric carcinoma . thus, removing both spatial- and intensity effect is beneficial for the downstream analytical task of classification. another study compared various lowess-based single-bias-removal intensity normalization approaches, and found that illoess may not significantly improve the results compared to igloess  <cit> . our results show that the benefits  of igloess over nonrm range from 5% in lung cancer to 44% in renal cell carcinoma; while that the benefits  of illoess over nonrm range from 23% in renal cell carcinoma to 46% in liver cancer. therefore, illoess performs better than igloess in our study. however, as a single-bias-removal approach, illoess still fail to outperform igloess-slfilterw <dig>  istspline-slloess and igloess-slloess, which are the best overall methods and whose improvement values over nonrm range from 40% in lung cancer to 58% in lymphoma for igloess-slfilterw <dig>  from 33% in gastric carcinoma to 62% in lymphoma for istspline-slloess and from 33% in lung cancer to 56% in gastric carcinoma for igloess-slloess .

a previous study employed k-nn classification of diluted samples to assess a small number of global linear methods for normalization  <cit> . the study presented here is more comprehensive, both in terms of the range of data sets and the diversity of normalization techniques. our results indicate that the k-nn loocv classification error of real biological samples provides an informative functional quantitative measure that can be used to evaluate normalization approaches.

differences in scale between microarrays can arise from both unwanted technical factors , as well as from genuine biological variations. the scale normalization techniques applied here aim to remove unwanted technical factors, and assume the existence of little biological variations between samples. for the five studied data sets, scale normalization of non- or location-normalized data do not result in an overall reduction in loocv classification error. indeed, two between-microarray normalization methods  result in an overall increase in loocv classification error . these results suggest that in the examined cancer-related data sets, there can be considerable genuine biological variations , and that these variations are masked by the applied scale normalization. the data sets considered here do not contain replicated data, so it is difficult to ascertain how much of the scale effect result from unwanted technical factors. scale normalization may be warranted in situations where technical differences can be discerned by examination of the replicated data and genuine biological variations are known or believed to exist. in such cases, scale normalization using external control samples may be more useful than the total gene approaches.

while our empirical analyses are thoroughgoing in terms of both normalization procedures and test data sets, we acknowledge that there are two caveats in this study that deserve attention and further investigation. first, we employed the loocv classification error as a functional measure to assess normalization methods. in principle, loocv provides an almost unbiased estimate of the generalization ability of a classifier  <cit> , especially when the number of the available training samples is severely limited , and is thus highly desirable for model selection or other relevant algorithm evaluation  <cit> . however, it is also known that the loocv error estimator may have high variance in some situations  <cit> , which could in turn affect the accuracy of the rankings of the normalization methods. empirically, however, we found that the loocv errors we obtained from various round of classification are quite stable, therefore we believe that our estimation is in practice reliable and suitable for ranking. nevertheless, error estimators that have shown to have low variance  are worth further investigation in the future.

the second caveat of this work is that normalization methods were evaluated using k-nn classification without the aid of auxiliary techniques, such as feature selection. the reasons we did not employ feature selection, but rather used all the probes that are present in the majority of the microarrays for classification are as follow: i) we believe that the influence of the dye effect  on the downstream data analysis can be better and more consistently reflected when a large number of the probes are examined. as such, using all valid probes for training a classifier can best reflect the effectiveness of the normalization methods, whereas using subsets of the probes may generate inconsistent results due to the heterogeneous nature of the dye effect across microarrays. ii) we also included low intensity probes in the analyses. although this may add noise and therefore could compromise the absolute classification performance of the examined normalization methods, we nevertheless think that these probes should not be excluded because reducing variability in low intensity probes is by itself an important objective of normalization methods. that is, a good normalization approach should be able to reduce variability in both low intensity- and high intensity probes effectively. and iii) we are aware that k-nns without feature selection may add variability to the classification results, however, k-nn classification is also appealing in that it is simple and requires no data pre-processing or assumption on data distribution. in addition, k-nn classifiers have been widely used in many classification tasks including high-dimensional problems arising from image and text data  <cit> .

due to the above two caveats, the relative rankings of the investigated normalization strategies can hardly be obtained accurately in this work. for example, our results show that igloess-slfilterw <dig>  istspline-slloess and igloess-slloess reduce loocv classification errors most consistently and effectively across all five data sets. it is difficult, however, to determine further which of these three strategies is the best, because small differences in classification results can either arise from inherent differences in these approaches and/or from the variability introduced by the loocv error estimator and less optimal k-nn classifiers. moreover, our results should not be taken as a warrant of directly using baseline methods, such as k-nns without feature selection, for high-dimensional classification tasks. more investigations are needed to understand the interplay between normalization  and feature selection  to ascertain normalization strategies to produce an optimal classifier.

CONCLUSIONS
using loocv error of k-nns as the evaluation criterion, we assessed a variety of normalization methods that remove spatial effect, intensity effect and scale differences from cdna microarray data. overall, the single-bias-removal location approaches  perform better than gmedian and nonrm, while the double-bias-removal location strategies  perform better than the single-bias-removal location approaches. of the  <dig> different strategies examined, igloess-slfilterw <dig>  istspline-slloess and igloess-slbscale, all of which are two-step approaches and remove both intensity effect at the global level and spatial effect at the local level, appear to be the most effective at reducing loocv classification error. the investigated scale normalization methods do not have beneficial effect on classification performance. these results also indicate that spatial- and intensity effect do have profound impact on downstream data analyses, such as classification, and that removing these effects can improve the quality of such analyses.

