BACKGROUND
the development of gene expression microarray technology over a decade ago has revolutionized the analysis of the transcriptomes from numerous organisms. the earliest gene expression microarrays focused on widely-used experimental organisms, such as arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , mus musculus  <cit> , saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> , drosophila melanogaster  <cit> , and caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> , in addition to humans  <cit> . in the intervening years, the number of commercially available species-specific whole genome expression microarrays has dramatically increased. nevertheless, there are numerous species, such as african great apes , for which whole genome expression microarrays are not commercially available.

in such cases, gene expression is often conducted using microarrays designed to evaluate a closely-related species or organism . several groups have employed commercially available human oligonucleotide microarrays comprised of multiple  <dig> mer probes to obtain gene expression profiles from african great ape tissues and cultured cells  <cit> . however, similar to observations from cross-species resequencing analyses  <cit> , this comes at a price of underestimating the abundance of orthologous transcripts with poor affinity for the arrayed probes due to mismatches, as discussed in references  <cit> .

one approach to address this problem is to remove  data from probes predicted to have poor affinity for orthologous transcripts based on sequence information . this has been made possible by the development and use of algorithms that can map short oligonucleotide probe sequences to entire genomes and other sequence databases . several different strategies exist that range from masking all probes not perfectly matched to a given transcriptome  <cit>  to masking only those probes with unfavorable hybridization properties based on predicted thermodynamic properties  <cit> . while multiple groups have examined the relationship between the number of probes within a probe set and the properties of resultant gene expression scores , its effect on the comparative analysis of human and chimpanzee cross-species gene expression data sets has not been discussed in detail.

here, we developed updated mask protocols for the analysis of human and chimpanzee gene profiles with commonly used affymetrix human oligonucleotide microarrays. we first describe the development of new mask files which only retain data from probes that are perfectly matched to a single human and single chimpanzee genomic sequence. next, we apply these masks to an existing publicly available oligonucleotide microarray gene expression data set representing five tissues derived from six humans and five chimpanzees  <cit> . we quantify the effects that altering the number of probes measuring the abundance of a given transcript have on intra- and interspecies gene expression comparisons. based on our observations, we suggest general rules for the interpretation of gene expression scores using masking protocols.

RESULTS
properties of individual probes
we developed an algorithm to rapidly map short sequence tags to complete genomes  and used it to determine how many times each probe in the human genome u133plus <dig> microarray  had an exact match in the human and chimpanzee genomes. the bulk of the probes  in the u133plus <dig> microarray have exactly one match in the human genome . this is in contrast to 67% of the probes matching one time in the chimpanzee genome. overall,  <dig> % of individual probes showed one match in both the human and chimpanzee genomes.

human genome build  <dig>  and chimpanzee genome build  <dig>  were used in these analyses.

we assigned probes into nine categories based upon the number of matches  with the human  and chimpanzee  genomes . these included: 0h_0c, 0h_1c, 0h_mc, 1h_0c, 1h_1c, 1h_mc, mh_0c, mh_1c, and mh_mc. the 1h_1c and mh_mc categories are among the easiest to justify. the former involves conserved single gene sequences in both species while the latter at least in part reflects multi-copy gene families in humans and chimpanzees. the 1h_0c category reflects consequences of fixed sequence differences between the human and chimpanzee genomes. below, we will discuss possible reasons for the remaining six probe categories, with the understanding that sequence errors or polymorphisms could influence each case.

affymetrix currently employs a system in which the annotation of each probe set is classified into one of five categories based on the evidence available for the probe set interrogating the intended gene of interest. the five categories are designated a, b, c, e, and r, with a indicating the most direct evidence for a probe/transcript relationship. of the  <dig> probe sets for which  <dig> probes are 0h_0c ,  <dig>  were provided an a level annotation. in contrast, ~81% of the  <dig>  probe sets for which  <dig> probes are 1h_1c  were provided an a-level annotation. in addition to these sequence quality issues, probes designed to overlap splice junctions absent in human genomic sequences will also fall into the 0h_0c category.

possible explanations for the 1h_mc, mh_1c, and mh_0c probe categories include assembly errors of multi-copy genomic regions, duplication or loss of genetic material in either lineage, or mutations in duplicated segments. the classification of probes in the two remaining categories  was unexpected since these require one or more matches in the chimpanzee and none in the human genome. this could arise due to the positioning of probe sequences across splice junctions found in human cdna sequences. such probes would not match the human genome; however, they could match processed pseudogene sequences present in the chimpanzee genome.

since our downstream cross-species  gene expression analyses would focus on data derived from the 1h_1c probes, we next evaluated the percentage of 1h_1c probes that were located in orthologous regions of the chimpanzee and human genomes. we determined if regions are orthologous by using the liftover tool provided by the ucsc genome bioinformatics group . we started with the coordinates of sequences that had a single hit in the human genome , and used the liftover tool to map them to the chimpanzee genome. we then compared the liftover coordinates to the coordinates that we had obtained by aligning the sequences to the chimp genome. if a liftover coordinate was within 100-nt of our coordinate, we counted the chimp hit as occurring in an orthologous region. of the  <dig>  sequences that have a single hit to both genomes ,  <dig>   hit orthologous regions in the chimpanzee and human genomes.

we then explored in further detail the  <dig> 1h_1c sequences that did not map to orthologous regions by liftover. a total of  <dig> of the  <dig> sequences are either in an intron or an exon of a human gene, or within 5-kb upstream or downstream. likewise,  <dig>  of the  <dig>  sequences were also in an intron or an exon of a chimpanzee gene, or within 5-kb upstream or downstream. of these  <dig>  genes,  <dig>  are predicted to be human/chimpanzee orthologs.

taking this additional information into consideration, we conclude that  <dig>   of the 1h_1c probes map to orthologous regions in the chimpanzee and human genomes. this is especially impressive since the chimpanzee genome assembly used is of lower quality than the human, which would result in some probes being falsely identified as not mapping to orthologous regions in both genomes. overall, these observations strongly support the use of 1h_1c probes for the analysis of human and chimpanzee gene expression profiles.

general properties of probe sets
a total of  <dig> % of probe sets  in the human genome u133plus <dig> microarray had at least one probe removed in the initial masking process . in addition,  <dig>  probe sets were completely eliminated from the most basic masking analysis . these included  <dig> probe sets in the affx control category, which by design are not expected to match the human or chimpanzee genomes.

note that  <dig>  probe sets are present in the u133plus <dig> microarray.

next, we considered how many of the nine probe categories were represented in a given probe set. for each specified category, we determined the number of probe sets containing six or more probes . these are designated as being 'category-enriched' probe sets. interestingly, we noted deficits in the number of annotated genes in certain category-enriched probe sets. at the time of analysis, 37% of the  <dig>  probe sets were annotated with a unique ncbi entrez geneid. a total of  <dig>   of the  <dig>  1h_1c_ <dig> probe sets were annotated with unique entrez gene ids. however, only  <dig>  of the 0h_0c category-enriched probe sets  were annotated. likewise, only  <dig>  of the mh_mc category-enriched probe sets  were annotated. strikingly, no entrez geneid was provided for any of the 0h_1c category-enriched probe sets .

effect of probe number on estimates of intra- and interspecies expression variation
next, we sought to explore broad effects of masking on expression estimates between species. since we are focusing on 1h_1c probes for expression estimates in both species, a major question concerns the effects of reducing the number of probes in a given probe set on gene expression scores. for this analysis, we applied mask <dig> to the entire gene expression set  and calculated the median interquartile range  of expression scores for all probe sets as a function of the number of remaining probes . we considered probe sets comprised of odd and even numbers of remaining probes separately since the rma median polishing algorithm calculates expression scores from such probe sets slightly differently  <cit> . this arises from differences in the formulas for determining the median in data sets consisting of odd and even numbers of observations. we propose that the effects of these differences may be enhanced by the small number of probes in each probe set.

as would be expected, the median iqr decreased with an increasing number of probes. however, the relationship was not linear, with a faster decrease occurring when there were five or fewer probes than for probe sets with at least six probes measured. adjusting for whether the number of probes was odd or even, the change in slope is statistically significant . this can be observed from the trend lines , generated using a breakpoint at either five probes for the even numbers of probe sets or six for the odd numbers. this reduction in slope supports a requirement of at least six probes in order to have improved stability of the gene expression measure. similar results were obtained for the corresponding intraspecies iqr comparisons . the only intraspecies comparison that did not achieve statistical significance at the  <dig>  level was for the human testes .

afterwards, we sought to determine if random probe masking could lead to the observed relationships between median iqr and probes remaining in probe sets. to address this question, we generated a total of nine hundred simulated masked data sets wherein we removed n1– <dig> probes from each of the  <dig>  1h_1c_ <dig> probe sets. overall, this entailed generating one hundred simulated data sets for each n probes removed. we recalculated median interspecies iqrs  and median intraspecies iqrs  for each of these simulated masked data sets. for all tissues, we observed that the median interspecies and intraspecies iqrs derived from these simulated masked data always increase with decreasing numbers of probes within probe sets.

a comparison of lines fit to the simulated data and real masked interspecies data  separately, found that the estimated slopes vary for three of the five tissues studied  . in contrast, the observed relationships between median iqrs and probe numbers in the actual mask <dig> brain and heart expression data showed a striking resemblance to the relationships found in the simulated masked brain expression data .

we sought to address the possibility that factors, such as the rates of evolution, have a substantial influence on the patterns of expression variation observed in different tissues as a function of 1h_1c probe number. for example, it has been demonstrated in the initial analysis of the current data set that patterns of differences in gene expression and gene sequences are similar in humans and chimpanzees  <cit> . as a first step to approach this issue, we calculated dn/ds ratios for refseq transcripts corresponding to approximately  <dig>  probe sets in both the human and the chimpanzee lineages . we chose to analyze dn/ds ratios since they provide a commonly used means of measuring rates of evolution, taking nonsynonymous  and synonymous  substitutions per site into consideration. in bulk, we found that the nucleotide substitution rates of refseq transcripts expressed in a given tissue do not significantly vary in relation to the number of 1h_1c probes within the corresponding probe set . based on our metrics, the bulk rates of evolution of expressed genes do not explain the discussed relationships between median iqr and probes remaining in probe sets for the five tissues. however, it should be note that these analyses are limited by the quality of current genomic sequence information for mammals such as the common chimpanzee. thus, this issue could be revisited with improved drafts and annotations of these genomes.

effect of probe number on inferences of cross-species differential gene expression
thereafter, we focused on quantifying the effect that probe number has on inferences of differential expression between humans and chimpanzees. for each tissue, we identified 1h_1c_ <dig> probe sets that showed differential expression across species . then, we compared the list of differentially expressed genes in a given simulated data set to the list of differentially expressed genes originally observed in the same tissue. this allowed us to calculate the median and range for each of the following:  overlap,  gain, and  loss of inferences of differential expression in the simulated data sets relative to that generated from the original 1h_1c_ <dig> probe sets in each tissue.

overall, we observed linear increases in both the gained and lost inferences of differential expression in relationship to decreasing numbers of probes sampled within a probe set . while this was consistent for all five tissues, probe sets with odd and even numbers of remaining probes behaved slightly differently. probe sets with even numbers of remaining probes showed more comparable increases in false negative and positive rates with decreasing probe number in all tissues , except heart . probe sets with odd numbers of remaining probes showed steeper increases in lost relative to gained inferences with decreasing probe number .

to illustrate the effects of masking, we compared the inferences of differential gene expression using mask <dig>  and unmasked data . for each of the five tissues, the application of the mask drastically reduces inferences of higher expression in humans relative to chimpanzees, as shown by comparing panels a, c, e, g, and i with b, d, f, h, and j. this is consistent with earlier comparative analyses of human and non-human primate transcriptomes which demonstrated that masking was essential to remove false inferences of differential gene expression caused by mismatches between arrayed human probes and non-human primate transcripts .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
strategies for cross-species gene expression analysis
without appropriate signal processing, the analysis of multi-species gene expression data sets generated using a single oligonucleotide microarray platform can result in heavily biased inferences of differential expression . one means to address this problem is to identify individual probes with poor hybridization specificity and sensitivity for any the species compared and remove them from analysis. ideally, this screening would be performed based on cdna sequences in all species under consideration. however, for numerous species, such as chimpanzee, publicly available cdna sequence data is limited. thus, we conducted our analyses based on the latest releases of the human and chimpanzee genome sequences even though we recognize our inability to query exon-exon junctions or consider polymorphic sequence in either or both species.

however, this computational approach leads to an additional source of error in expression measures due to the variation in the number of probes remaining in a probe set. the interpretation of masked data sets requires an ad hoc decision regarding the minimum number of probes required to calculate a gene expression score. inevitably, some information will be lost in the masking process because some probe sets will need to be excluded when too few probes are remaining to reliably estimate gene expression.

using simulated data sets comprised of over  <dig>  transcripts, we noted that the gained and lost inferences of differential gene expression increased in a linear fashion with decreasing probe number. however, the rates of change were tissue-dependent. the issue of minimal numbers of probes necessary to generate reliable expression scores has been investigated by lu et al.  <cit> . using the related affymetrix human genome u133a platform, they measured differential expression on ten artificial data sets generated from the u133a latin square experiment . based on elegant analyses of iqrs and false discovery rates in control probe sets, interrogating spike-in bacterial and phage transcripts, and human transcript probe sets, the authors concluded that a minimum of four probes is necessary to generate a reliable gene expression score. although similar in spirit, these analyses cannot be readily compared to the current study due to dramatic differences in experimental design, data processing, and definitions of differential gene expression .

overall, there is strong agreement between the analyses of lu et al.  <cit>  and the current study that reducing probe number to less than four leads to substantially different results relative to the full complement of  <dig> probes. this is especially relevant for the analysis of data from oligonucleotide microarrays where only four probes are used to interrogate exon abundance in the human transcriptome, as described in reference  <cit> .

conclusions from the empirical data
the data set of khaitovich and colleagues  <cit>  provides cross-species expression comparisons of the size and complexity necessary to evaluate the effects of probe masking on expression scores in different contexts . based on our comparative analysis of simulated and actual data sets, we found that random probe masking by itself can largely account for the observed relationships between expression variability and the numbers of probes within probe sets in some tissues , but not others  . this implies that in testes, additional factors are strongly influencing the relationships observed in the actual masked data. given the rapid rates of sequence evolution of fertilization-related genes  <cit>  and relatively slow rates of evolution of brain-expressed genes  <cit> , our observations may reflect relationships between sequence conservation, which can affect the number of 1h_1c probes in a probe set, and expression profiles in human and chimpanzee tissues. however, this is complicated by the fact that a single nucleotide difference between human and chimpanzee transcripts could result in masking all probes in one probe set and no probes in another. overall, additional investigations into the relationships between the rates of sequence and expression evolution, as first addressed in the initial analysis of the khaitovich data set  <cit> , are warranted.

in addition, we observed that lost and gained inferences of differential expression across species increased with decreasing numbers of probes in probe sets . however, it should be noted that these observations are strongly influenced by the criteria used to define differential gene expression. intriguingly, this relationship was affected by the odd or even nature of the number of remaining probes in a probe sets. probe sets with even numbers of remaining probes showed comparable increases in the lost and gained inferences of differential expression across species while probe sets with odd numbers of remaining probes showed a skewing towards more lost inference of differential expression than gained. this could be influenced by the way in which rma uses median polishing methods in data processing  <cit> . similarly, the choice of criteria and algorithms to identify differentially expressed genes will strongly influence results  <cit> . as with the normalization rma platform, we chose the functions available in the limma package for differential gene expression analysis due to widespread use of the package  <cit> .

overall, we conclude that the choice of mask to apply to the human and chimpanzee gene expression data set considered in this study is highly dependent upon the general goals of the meta-analysis. due to specialized requirements for data quantity and quality, no single mask design is optimal for all applications. based on our median iqr analyses , probe sets comprised of  <dig> or more 1h_1c probes consistently showed similar properties. this metric would provide expression estimates for 89% of the probe sets in the u133plus <dig> microarray which have at least 1h_1c probe . a slightly less conservative approach would be to apply a mask of requiring  <dig> or more 1h_1c probes, extrapolating from the analyses described in reference  <cit> . this metric would provide expression estimates for  <dig> %  of the probe sets with at least 1h_1c probe . the relative percentages of probe sets interrogated in these two examples are similar. thus, we recommend that less stringent masks  be used for exploratory analyses wherein the number of transcripts with expression scores need to be maximized while more stringent masks  be used for more rigorous evaluations of inter- and intraspecies variation.

additional applications for masks
in principle, our methods are applicable towards the development of masks for different microarray designs and other cross-species probe masking applications. for example, it is desirable to eliminate probes overlapping common polymorphisms that could affect gene expression data within a given species  <cit> . likewise, it could be useful to mask probes that overlap splice junctions and thus selectively evaluate the abundance of differentially spliced transcripts. multiple groups have applied masks to update annotation data and partition out unique sets of probes which each map to a single gene or transcript definition  <cit> . in the future, mask strategies may be useful for isolating or eliminating the effects of copy number and structural variation on downstream gene expression analyses  <cit> .

