BACKGROUND
sialic acid  is used by nontypeable haemophilus influenzae  to assist in the evasion of the host innate immune response. sialic acid is used to decorate the cell surface, primarily as the terminal non-reducing sugar on the lipooligosaccharride  and the biofilm matrix  <cit> . the presence of sialic acid on the cell surface protects the cell from complement-mediated killing, although the precise mechanism of this protection is unknown and may even vary among strains of nthi  <cit> . regardless, the acquisition and utilization of sialic acid is a crucial factor in the virulence of the majority of nthi  <cit> .

nthi cannot synthesize sialic acid and therefore must scavenge it from the host. nthi possess a high-affinity transporter for sialic acid, encoded by siapt   <cit> . the siapt transporter is a member of the trap transporter family, with siap functioning as the solute-binding protein and siat functioning as the transmembrane transporter protein. an ortholog of the e. coli sialic acid mutarotase nanm is found downstream of the siapt operon   <cit> , although nanm does not appear to be co-transcribed with siapt in h. influenzae strain rd  <cit> . the genes required for the catabolism of sialic acid are found in the adjacent, divergently transcribed nan operon . the genes of the nan operon encode all the enzymes required to convert sialic acid to fructose-6-phosphate , which can then enter the glycolysis pathway  <cit> . prior to the decoration of the cell surface, sialic acid must be activated by siab, the cmp-sialic acid synthetase, forming the nucleotide sugar donor used by sialyltransferases  <cit> . once transported into the cell, sialic acid is either catabolized by the enzymes of the nan operon or activated by siab. thus, these two pathways compete for the same substrate  <cit> . the organism must therefore maintain a balance between these two pathways, ensuring that a sufficient amount of sialic acid is available to decorate the cell surface and adequately protect the cell from the host immune response.

also present in the nan operon is the transcriptional regulator siar. siar is involved in the regulation of the nan and siapt operons  <cit> . siar was found to repress the expression of both the siapt and nan operons, thus regulating both transport and catabolism. binding of siar to the intergenic region between these two operons was demonstrated and the region of dna protected by siar was identified. as expected, it was found that inactivation of siar lead to a reduction in surface sialylation, demonstrating the need to control the expression of sialic acid catabolism. in addition to siar, the camp receptor protein  was identified as a regulator of the siapt operon, however a role in the regulation of the nan operon was not observed  <cit> . this is in part consistent with the observation that sialic acid is a camp-independent sugar  <cit> . in h. influenzae, crp has been shown to regulate utilization of galactose, ribose, xylose, and fucose  <cit> , in addition to regulating the development of competence  <cit> .

we now report on the role of intermediates in the neu5ac catabolic pathway in siar-mediated regulation. also, the potential interaction between siar and crp was investigated. siar was found to utilize glucosamine-6-phosphate  as a co-activator in the presence of the crp-camp complex. siar and crp were found to act in a cooperative manner to regulate the expression of the divergent transporter and catabolic operons. our results reveal a unique mechanism of regulation of two divergent operons regulated by two transcription factors from a single location.

RESULTS
promoter structure of the nan and siapt operons
the transcriptional start sites of the nan and siapt operons were identified using primer extension analysis. primers that bound in the nane and siap open reading frames were used. two major start sites were identified for the nan operon,  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp from the start codon of nane . the presence of additional minor bands may be the result of addional start sites or rna degradation or processing. the analysis identified a single transcriptional start site   <dig> bp upstream of the start codon of siap . this organization leaves  <dig> bp in between ts-1nan and ts-1siapt. the putative crp binding site is located at - <dig> to - <dig> relative to ts-1siapt and at - <dig> to - <dig> relative to ts-1nan . this organization suggests that the siapt promoter falls into the class i group of crp-dependent promoters  <cit> . a consensus - <dig> sequence was identified for ts-1nan and was found to partially overlap the siar binding site, consistent with the role siar plays in repression of the nan operon. the relative location of ts-1nan to the siar operator, in addition to the identification of a consensus - <dig> box, suggests that this start site would be primarily involved in siar-mediated regulation, however, the relative contribution of the two nan promoters will need to be examined in more detail.

glucosamine-6-phosphate is a co-activator for siar
previous studies found limited activation of siar-regulated operons by sialic acid  <cit> . the potential for intermediates in the sialic acid catabolic pathway to influence regulation by siar was explored. h. influenzae is unable to transport any of the intermediate sugars or phosphosugars of the sialic acid catabolic pathway  <cit> , therefore a mutagenesis strategy was necessary. each gene encoding an enzyme in the catabolic pathway was deleted in an adenylate cyclase  mutant strain, resulting in a series of double mutants. the Δcyaa mutant strain was used to allow for crp to be activated only by the addition of camp in subsequent experiments. in each mutant, sialic acid can be catabolized, but the sugar or phosphosugar immediately upstream of the inactivated enzyme should accumulate .

the mutants were grown to early exponential phase and then either sialic acid, camp, or both were added. expression levels of nane and siap, the first genes of the catabolic and transport operons, respectively, were compared using real time quantitative rt-pcr . rna from a culture that received neither sialic acid nor camp served as a reference for each experiment. when both sialic acid and camp were added to cultures, expression of nane was only moderately affected in strains 2019Δcyaa, 2019Δcyaa Δnank, 2019Δcyaa Δnana, and 2019Δcyaa Δnaga . the most striking change in nane expression occurred in 2019Δcyaa Δnagb, with expression elevated 83-fold . this mutant would be unable to convert glcn-6p to fructose-6p, thus accumulating glcn-6p. these results suggest that glcn-6p is a major co-activator in siar-mediated regulation.

the regulation of siap appears to be more complex. expression of siap was elevated 30- to 52-fold in strains 2019Δcyaa Δnane, 2019Δcyaa Δnank, 2019Δcyaa Δnagb, and 2019Δcyaa Δnaga . in contrast, increases of only 2- and 6-fold were observed in 2019Δcyaa and 2019Δcyaa Δnana, respectively . while siar can repress siap expression  <cit> , transcription of the transporter operon is more directly influenced by crp. despite this, siap expression was not as responsive to camp in 2019Δcyaa and 2019Δcyaa Δnana. these results indicate that in these strains, siar is able to exert some control over siap expression, however the mechanism in which this is accomplished is unclear.

siar and crp interact to regulate the adjacent nan and siapt operons
previous work demonstrated that in a siar mutant, crp and camp are unable to influence nan operon expression  <cit> . since the current studies were performed using different mutant constructs, the experiments were repeated with the double deletion mutant to confirm the previously observed phenotype. the 2019Δcyaa Δsiar mutant was examined by qrt-pcr  and regardless of whether sialic acid or camp was added, expression of nane did not change relative to the control. in the absence of siar, camp activated the expression of the siapt operon, while the nan operon was unaffected.

examination of the results obtained from 2019Δcyaa Δnagb revealed a large change in the expression of nane that was camp-dependent . the addition of sialic acid alone  led to a 16-fold induction of nane while the addition of camp alone had no effect. the addition of both sialic acid and camp resulted in an 83-fold induction of nane, indicating that the combination of glcn-6p and camp significantly increase the induction of the nan operon. these results provide evidence of camp-dependent activation of both the nan and siapt operons. since camp does not induce nane expression in a siar mutant, this suggests that camp-dependent activation of nane requires siar. siar and crp may physically interact to activate nan operon expression.

to demonstrate that siar and crp interact to regulate the nan and siapt operons, alteration of helical phasing was used. alteration of helical phasing is accomplished by the insertion of one half turn to the helix between the siar and crp operators. briefly,  <dig> bp was inserted between the siar and crp binding sites in strains 2019Δcyaa and 2019Δcyaa Δnagb, resulting in strains 2019Δcyaa+ <dig> and 2019Δcyaa Δnagb+ <dig>  respectively. these strains were examined by qrt-pcr and the results were compared with those obtained from the parent strains.

in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb background, altered helical phasing resulted in a steep reduction in nane expression  in the presence of both sialic acid and camp . the induction level of nane in the presence of sialic acid and camp was similar to the expression observed when sialic acid alone was added. the  <dig> bp insertion eliminated the camp-dependent activation of nane that was observed in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb strain.

in both the 2019Δcyaa and 2019Δcyaa Δnagb backgrounds, altered helical phasing also resulted in the induction of siap when camp was added . in the 2019Δcyaa+ <dig> strain, the  <dig> bp insertion led to a 43-fold increase in siap expression in the presence of camp  and a 29-fold increase  when both camp and sialic acid were present.

taken together, these results indicate that altering the helical phasing succeeded in uncoupling siar- and crp-mediated regulation of the nan and siapt operons. it resulted in nane expression becoming unresponsive to camp, much like it is in the 2019Δcyaa Δsiar mutant. altered helical phasing also prevented siar from exerting a negative influence on the expression of siap. we conclude that the insertion eliminated the ability of siar and crp to interact to regulate both the nan and siapt operons.

siar and crp bind to their respective operators simultaneously
binding of siar to an operator in the intergenic region between nane and siap was demonstrated previously  <cit> . the putative operator of crp was identified in silico and was found to overlap the region protected by siar in a dnase i protection assay by three base pairs. the ability of both proteins to bind to their operators was examined using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay . both proteins were able to bind to a probe comprising the region between the two operons and crp binding was dependent on the addition of camp . when both proteins were included in the binding reaction, the dna probe was shifted slightly higher than the siar-bound probe. this indicates that both proteins bind to their operators simultaneously, further supporting the hypothesis that the two regulators interact to regulate the adjacent nan and siapt operons.

glcn-6p alters binding of siar to its operator
many transcriptional regulators exhibit altered binding affinity for their operator sequences when a co-regulator is bound. to determine the effect of glcn-6p on siar binding, emsa was used. serial dilutions of siar were incubated with dna probes in the absence and presence of glcn-6p . in the presence of glcn-6p, siar bound the probe and glcn-6p slightly increased the binding affinity. while the presence of glcn-6p did not result in a major change in the binding affinity of siar, the change in the shift does suggest that glcn-6p is interacting with siar and impacting its ability to bind to its operator. other phosphosugars of the sialic acid catabolic pathway  nor glcn-1p altered siar-binding   <cit> . taken together with the expression data, this demonstrates that glcn-6p interacts with siar and has an effect on its dna-binding properties. siar is not displaced from the dna, but instead functions as an activator with glcn-6p as a co-activator.

as in our previous studies  <cit> , the binding of siar to the emsa probe resulted in the appearance of two shifted bands . this was even more apparent when lower concentrations of siar were present in the binding reaction. the double shift is possibly caused by the binding of multiple siar proteins to the probe. this is a likely explanation, considering that the region protected by siar is large   <cit> . further work will be necessary to determine the exact cause for the double shift.

glcn-6p accumulates in a nagb mutant
to confirm that neu5ac was transported and catabolized in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb mutant strain, 31p nmr spectroscopy of intact cells was used. cultures of wild-type  <dig> and 2019Δcyaa Δnagb were grown to early exponential phase and camp and/or neu5ac were added and the 31p spectrum was obtained . a peak was detected near  <dig> ppm when camp was added to either strain. when neu5ac was added, a peak was detected near  <dig> ppm in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb mutant that was absent in the wild-type strain. this peak was also absent in either strain when neu5ac was omitted. this indicated the accumulation of a significant amount of a phosphorylated compound in the mutant strain when exogenous neu5ac was present. since the neu5ac catabolic pathway is blocked at nagb in the mutant strain, neu5ac would be converted to glcn-6p, but not fru-6p. taken together with the interaction of glcn-6p with purified siar, this indicates that glcn-6p is accumulating in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb mutant and is responsible for the activation of the nan operon.

discussion
the importance of sialic acid in the protection of nthi from the host immune response requires that most of the sialic acid transported into the cell is activated by siab and utilized for the decoration of the los and biofilm matrix. therefore, it is important that the catabolism of sialic acid be tightly regulated. we previously identified siar as a repressor for these two operons, in addition to the role of crp in activating the expression of the transporter  <cit> . in this study, we present data that expands on our previous work, providing key details about the unique regulation of these adjacent operons. the two operons required for the transport and catabolism of sialic acid were found to be simultaneously regulated by siar and crp in a novel mechanism for cooperative regulation. siar functions as both a repressor and activator, utilizes glcn-6p as a co-activator, and interacts with crp to regulate two adjacent and divergently transcribed promoters.

since h. influenzae cannot transport the intermediates of the sialic acid catabolic pathway  <cit> , mutants in each gene of the pathway were used to examine the role of the sugar and phosphosugar intermediates in the expression of the siar-regulated operons. increased expression of the nan operon in the 2019Δcyaa Δnagb double mutant suggested that glcn-6p functions as a co-activator. this is unusual because catabolic pathways are typically regulated by the presence of the substrate. siar likely uses glcn-6p as a co-activator because sialic acid is utilized rapidly after transport by h. influenzae, either by activation with siab or catabolism beginning with nana. thus, sialic acid never accumulates to levels that would allow for sufficient expression of the transporter. in contrast, using glcn-6p allows for moderate activation of siapt to provide for transport of sialic acid. since glcn-6p can also be synthesized by the cell, expression of the transporter is not reliant on the presence of high levels of sialic acid, while increased sialic acid and catabolism will elevate levels of glcn-6p and increase expression of the nan and siapt operons. even though glcn-6p is not an endpoint in the catabolic pathway, transient levels of the phosphosugar likely allow for sufficient expression of the two operons.

in addition to identifying glcn-6p as a co-activator, we found that siar and crp interact to regulate both the nan and siapt operons. both regulators were able to bind to their operators simultaneously, demonstrating that binding of one protein does not prevent the binding of the other. camp-dependent activation of nane requires siar. furthermore, regulation of the two operons was uncoupled by the insertion of one half-turn of dna between the siar and crp operators. this insertion resulted in the loss of siar influence on siapt expression and the loss of nan induction by camp. based on this data and the proximity of the two operators, it can be concluded that siar and crp interact to impact the expression of the two operons. this interaction may be the result of direct contacts between the two regulators or cooperative effects on dna topography, however we cannot make any conclusions on the mechanism at this time. our results have led to the description of a novel regulatory mechanism for two regulators of adjacent operons. this model, in the context of the experiments carried out in this study, is displayed in figure  <dig>  siar by itself functions as a repressor of both the nan and siapt operons . when camp levels are elevated, the crp-camp complex can bind to its operator and partially activate expression of the transport operon, but not the catabolic operon . when both glcn-6p and crp-camp are present, an activating complex is formed with siar that induces expression of the two adjacent operons . when the helical phase of the two operators is altered, siar can only regulate the nan operon while crp can only regulate the siapt operon . interaction between siar and crp is necessary for regulation.

the interaction of crp with another transcriptional regulator is not an unusual phenomenon, however the regulation of the adjacent nan and siapt operons by crp and siar appears to operate via a novel regulatory mechanism. what makes this regulatory region unique is that it appears that the two operons are regulated by one set of operators. other examples of divergent operons regulated by crp and additional regulators operate by distinctly different mechanisms. the most common mechanism is the formation of a repression loop. an example of this is in the glp regulon of e. coli  <cit> . as with the siapt operon of nthi, only one of the divergent glp operons is induced by crp  <cit> . the difference between these two systems is that the repressor glpr binds to four operators in the intergenic region and forms a repression loop  <cit> . the two divergent operons of the l-rhamnose catabolic regulon of e. coli utilize yet another mechanism. in addition to having multiple crp binding sites, the two rha operons are regulated by separate transcriptional regulators, rhar and rhas  <cit> . rhar and crp interact to regulate the rhasr operon while rhas and crp interact to regulate the rhabad operon  <cit> .

siar shares functional similarity to nagc, the regulator of n-acetylglucosamine catabolism in e. coli. like siar, nagc regulates the expression of naga and nagb, as well as a number of additional genes. also, siar and nagc both regulate divergently transcribed operons and crp is involved in regulation  <cit> . there are a number of striking differences as well. glcnac-6p is the inducer of the nagc regulon. just as inactivation of nagb causes induction of siar-regulated genes, the inactivation of naga, and the subsequent accumulation of glcnac-6p, induces nagc-related genes  <cit> . nagc is displaced from its binding site in the presence of glcnac-6p  <cit>  while siar appears to always be bound to its operator. in e. coli, the alteration of phasing between nagc operator sequences results in derepression of both divergently transcribed operons. this is due to the inability of nagc to form a repression loop that is required for nagc-mediated repression  <cit> . this differs significantly with what we observed in siar regulation. in our studies, the alteration of phasing did not result in derepression, but instead uncoupled siar- and crp-mediated regulation of the nane and siap genes. the differences between siar and nagc suggest that, while some functional similarity exists between the two regulators, they both employ different mechanisms.

given the nature of regulation by siar and crp, the nan and siapt operons will never be maximally expressed when h. influenzae is in its natural environment. this is due to a number of factors, including the low abundance of sialic acid in the host and the rapid utilization of intracellular sialic acid. instead, regulation acts to subtly modulate expression of the operons, keeping expression under constant control so that catabolism does not outpace utilization and the expression of the transporter is appropriate for the availability of the ligand. these requirements are also in balance with the need to prevent the accumulation of inhibitory amounts of sialic acid, however, this need is likely minimal considering the factors of sialic acid availablity and utilization discussed above.

the role of crp in the regulation of sialic acid transport and catabolism suggests that sialic acid is utilized as an emergency carbon source in the host. h. influenzae can use sialic acid as a sole carbon source as efficiently as glucose  <cit> . sialic acid catabolism is not required for virulence as a nana mutant exhibits increased fitness in multiple infection models  <cit> . however, the fact that catabolism is present and conserved among h. influenzae strains suggests that it provides some advantage to the organism. the previous study examining virulence of a nana mutant was performed using an encapsulated, invasive type b strain rather than a non-typeable strain and did not test all possible environments within the host  <cit> . additionally, intranasal mixed-challenge experiments did not reveal an advantage for either the wild-type or nana mutant strain  <cit> . therefore, it is possible that sialic acid catabolism is advantageous in certain conditions or has increased importance for non-typeable strains. the need for cell surface sialylation has been well established in multiple infection models for nthi, but it is unclear at this time if and when catabolism is required.

CONCLUSIONS
glcn-6p, an intermediate in the catabolism of sialic acid, was found to function as a co-activator of siar in the regulation of the catabolic and transport operons for sialic acid in nthi. siar functions as both a repressor and an activator, depending on conditions, and is required for crp-dependent activation of the catabolic operon. direct interactions between siar and crp are likely involved in regulation.

