BACKGROUND
tsetse flies  are important agricultural and medical vectors responsible for the transmission of african trypanosomes, the agents of sleeping sickness disease in humans and nagana in animals. human sleeping sickness has resurged in africa necessitating the development and reevaluation of control strategies  <cit> . in the past, vector population control has been a successful strategy in reduction of trypanosome transmission. in particular, the success of population reduction based control strategies has resulted from the low reproductive potential of tsetse flies. the knowledge gained from molecular aspects of tsetse reproductive biology has the potential to yield new insights important for increasing the efficiency and decreasing the cost and complexity of the currently available tool set.

tsetse has a unique reproductive physiology and developmental cycle. they undergo viviparous reproduction . viviparous reproduction has arisen independently in other flies and in other orders of insects  <cit> . this process is specialized in tsetse. in tsetse the entire larval developmental cycle is intrauterine and the mother supplies nutrients to her offspring in the form of a milk secretion from a specialized gland   <cit> . female flies develop a single larva at a time. as a result a single female has the capacity to generate ~ <dig> offspring in her lifecycle. this is significantly less than most other diptera, such as mosquitoes, that are capable of generating hundreds of offspring in the span of a single life cycle. the low reproductive rate in tsetse represents a potential target for vector control as disruption of this process could have dramatic effects on population density.

previous gene discovery projects for tsetse have focused on the adult fat body/milk gland  <cit> , midgut  <cit>  and salivary gland  <cit>  organs in the tsetse species glossina morsitans morsitans. multiple genes with potential importance for the reproductive cycle were identified in the fat body/milk gland library analysis. in particular four cdnas have been characterized in more detail and identified as proteins synthesized by the milk gland for larval nourishment. these proteins include the major milk protein   <cit> , transferrin   <cit> , milk gland protein  <dig>  and milk gland protein  <dig>   <cit> .

in order to perform an in depth study of reproduction associated genes, a new cdna library was generated with a pool of mrna from reproductive tissues  and intrauterine larvae at all stages of development . cdnas from this library were randomly sequenced and resulting sequences were manually annotated. many of the annotated sequences were orthologous to genes associated with oogenesis, embryogenesis and larvigenesis in other insects. comparison of this library with other tsetse tissue specific libraries was informative in the identification of reproductive specific transcripts with uncharacterized orthologs in other insects, as well as transcripts of putative genes that show no homology to any genes in the ncbi non-redundant database.

RESULTS
general description of the reproductive/immature cdna library
a total of  <dig> ests were sequenced from the reproductive library of which  <dig> were used for contig generation after quality control screening. following assembly, the total number of unique contigs derived from the ests was  <dig>  average length of the contigs was  <dig> bp with a maximum of  <dig> bp and a minimum of  <dig> bp.

the contigs from this library were combined with est sequence data from the other tissue specific tsetse cdna libraries. the combined library consists of  <dig> contigs derived from published cdna libraries including adult fat body/milk gland  <cit> , midgut  <cit> , salivary gland  and the reproductive/immature ests described here. after assembly, reproductive/immature library specific contigs were identified and annotated.

analysis and categorization of proteins extrapolated from reproductive/immature est sequences was performed . there were a total of  <dig> unique putative proteins identified in the reproductive/immature cdna library;  <dig> transcripts represented full-length cdnas,  <dig> were truncated and  <dig> were fragments. identification of signal peptides and anchoring motifs associated with the putative proteins predicted that  <dig> are cytoplasmic proteins,  <dig> have signal peptides suggesting secretion and  <dig> are anchored to the cell membrane. results for the  <dig> remaining sequences were difficult to interpret due to the fact that they were either fragments or the results were ambiguous.

the profile of this library shows that hypothetical conserved proteins constitute 13% of the entire library, followed by proteins associated with metabolism and protein synthesis at 10% and 11%, respectively. the categories that had the highest number of transcripts differed from the ones that had the highest number of actual genes. factors associated with protein synthesis were the most highly expressed in the library with  <dig> transcripts, followed by cytoskeletal genes at  <dig> transcripts and then reproductive proteins at  <dig> transcripts. these results are logical as reproductive tissues and immature stages synthesize a large amount of protein for oogenesis, embryogenesis and nutrient storage. high levels of expression of cytoskeletal genes such as tubulin and actin are required for the cellular changes undergone during oogenesis, embryogenesis and larvigenesis. genes classified as reproductive encode proteins associated with processes such as vitellogenesis, embryonic development and larvigenesis. the reproductive classification was determined by homology to previously identified tsetse genes or to orthologs associated with these processes in other insects.

predicted proteins unique to the reproductive/immature library were categorized and est abundance for the categories was calculated . after filtration of nonspecific sequences,  <dig> library specific predicted proteins remained. within this subgroup, reproduction associated genes contributed to 33% of the ests. this group of genes also had the highest number of transcripts among reproductive tract/immature exclusive genes with  <dig> transcripts. the second and third most abundant est categories were hypothetical conserved  and unknown genes  with the second and third highest number of transcripts,  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

the hypothetical conserved genes are of interest, as these genes are likely associated with reproduction in not only tsetse but in other insects as well. characterization of these genes could provide new insights into processes associated with reproduction and development in insects. there were seven unknown genes, which returned no significant homologues from the ncbi database and thus appear to be unique to tsetse. analysis of these genes and their products has the potential to reveal novel functions and processes associated with viviparous reproduction. these gene products may constitute potential targets for population control strategies. as these genes may be unique to tsetse, they may pose very specific targets for control mechanisms interrupting the viviparous reproductive cycle of tsetse.

protein orthologs expressed exclusively in the reproductive/immature library: table  <dig> 
with the exception of cdnas encoding unknown proteins, the rest of the library was orthologous to putative proteins identfied in the ncbi non-redundant database. the majority of the genes were most closely related to orthologs from drosophila species . this is not unexpected as drosophila is well characterized and is closely related to tsetse  relative to other flies such as mosquitoes   <cit> . we focused our analysis on tsetse cdnas expressed exclusively in this library to identify putative proteins associated with tsetse's unique reproductive and developmental biology.

nuclear regulation: reproductive specific histones
we identified two putative histones limited to the reproductive library. histone composition of nucleosomes has been shown to change in different tissues and at different developmental stages in drosophila  <cit> . one of the histones  appears to be homologous to histone h <dig>  this particular orthologue of h <dig> could be associated with regulation of genomic dna structure during specific developmental events in the developing oocyte or the developing embryo.

the second histone is homologous to histone h <dig> . a reproduction specific h <dig> variant  appears to play a role in oocyte and embryonic development in mice. this variant is a maternal factor provided to the oocyte and is localized to active regions of the genome. it is thought to be associated with epigenetic reprogramming  <cit> .

protein export: gamma-snap
an important process that occurs during oogenesis in insects is vitellogenesis, the secretion of yolk proteins from either fat body cells or ovarian follicle cells and the uptake of those yolk proteins into the oocyte for use as raw materials during embryonic development. this process requires the transport of protein across the membrane of the cell producing the protein  and the membrane of the developing oocyte. a reproductive specific protein homologus to the snap family of proteins was identified in the library . in vertebrates, the snap proteins are required for formation of the snare complex which promotes the fusion of membrane lipid bilayers  <cit> . as the primary function of this protein is to mediate exocytosis and is specific to this library, it is a logical assumption that it may be a component in the machinery necessary for vitellogenesis. further study of this gene could yield insights into the mechanisms yolk protein secretion and vitellogenesis.

lipid metabolism/hormone synthesis: 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3
two of the library exclusive cdnas identified  appear to be orthologues of a  <dig> beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in drosophila melanogaster. these enzymes are associated with the biosynthesis and inactivation of steroid hormones  <cit> . although the two cdnas code for similar proteins, they appear to represent unique genes. steroid hormones are associated with regulation of egg development in other insects. the role of steroid hormone function in tsetse reproduction is unknown. analysis of these genes is a potential starting point for this area of research.

yolk proteins
vitellogenesis is a major process associated with egg development. it is the synthesis and deposition of yolk proteins into a developing oocyte. characterization of vitellogenesis was previously performed in glossina  <cit> , where a yolk protein gene identified from a fat body/milk gland tissue library was characterized and found to be predominantly expressed in the reproductive tract. in nematoceran flies such as mosquitoes, yolk proteins are generated by the fat body. in contrast, cyclorrhaphan flies such as d. melanogaster and sarcophaga bullata express their yolk proteins from both the fat body and the follicle cells of the ovary. in glossina yolk proteins appear to be predominantly expressed in the ovary and are likely expressed from the follicle cells. this particular gene is one of a few that has a large number of representative ests present in this library  relative to other library specific genes. this observation supports our previous characterization as well as observations by  <cit>  that gmmyp is an ovary specific gene and is the only yolk protein identified in glossina. multiple yolk proteins have been identified and compared in d. melanogaster, musca domestica and sarcophaga bullata  <cit> .

gonadal proteases
other important constituents of oocyte yolk are proteases required for the metabolism of yolk proteins and activation of other proteases during embryogenesis. one of the library specific genes appears to be homologous to a trypsin type protease . this trypsin could either be a component of the yolk or a larval midgut specific trypsin as the library does contain transcripts from immature stages. other trypsin like transcripts were also identified , however these transcripts were truncated making it difficult to perform a complete analysis. phylogenetic comparison of trypsin ez <dig> with a previously identified midgut specific trypsin from glossina suggests that these genes developed independently from each other . orthologs of the library specific trypsin were identified in other fly species. none of the homologues had been previously characterized. alignment of this trypsin with its homologues and with midgut specific trypsins reveals structural conservation of key residues associated with the trypsin active site, substrate binding site and proteolytic cleavage site . the two protein clades differ significantly in the n-terminal region of the protein. this region may be associated with secretion and/or activation of these trypsins.

chorion proteins
two putative chorion proteins  were identified as library specific and are orthologus to chorion proteins from drosophila. the protein encoded by ez <dig> is closely related to chorion protein  <dig> and is likely a component of the endochorion as it undergoes transcriptional activation in drosophila oocytes late in oocyte development  <cit> .

rna localization
correct localization of nurse cell generated maternal rna within the developing oocyte is required for dorsal/ventral and anterior/posterior patterning and positioning of primordial germ cells in the developing embryo. a cdna that is strongly orthologous to the drosophila gene tsunagi was identified in the database . tsunagi is a rna binding protein that forms a complex with another protein called mago nashi. in drosophila tsunagi knockout phenotypes show failure of the oocyte nucleus to migrate, the maternal mrna oskar does not localize to the posterior pole and dorsal/ventral patterning abnormalities occur  <cit> .

apterous
there are many transcription factors associated with embryonic development in insects. the ortholog for one of these factors  in drosophila) was identified as a library specific transcript . the effects of the knockout of this gene in drosophila are an absence of wing and haltere development, absence of development of a group of embryonic muscles and juvenile hormone deficiency due to defects in secretory cells in the corpora allata. indirect effects due to the absence of juvenile hormone include female sterility due to arrest of oogenesis, abnormal larval fat body breakdown, aberrant sexual behavior and premature death in adults  <cit> .

study of this factor and its effects on the development of the tsetse endocrine system  could yield important information on how juvenile hormone regulates oogenesis and pregnancy in tsetse.

doublecortin
an essential factor for the development of the embryonic brain and nervous system is a protein called doublecortin . mutations in this gene in mammalian systems result in disruption of cortical neuronal migration  <cit> . an orthologous cdna to dcx was identified as a library specific gene. a thorough investigation of how this gene functions in invertebrates has yet to be performed.

cuticular proteins
a group of proteins associated with larval development that were exclusive to this library were cuticular proteins. three putative proteins were identified , two of which  are orthologous to ecdysone dependant pupal cuticle proteins. previous work has been performed on tsetse cuticle proteins expressed during the different developmental stages  <cit> . it was observed that a large number of proteins are synthesized by the late third instar larvae relative to first and second instar larvae. this is logical as the intrauterine environment is hydrated and protective thereby not requiring the larva to protect itself from a hostile environment. the burst of expression of third instar cuticle proteins could be associated with larvae that are preparing for the stresses of parturition, wandering and pupation.

fat body protein 2
another transcript identified in the analysis of the library is an ortholog to the fat body protein  <dig>  gene  which is homologous to an alcohol dehydrogenase protein . this protein is thought to assist in the degradation of the fat body during metamorphosis  <cit> .

hexamerins
hexamerins  are larva specific storage proteins. two hexamerin/arylphorin type proteins were identified as library specific . these cdnas were very abundant relative to other unique genes with representative est abundance of  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts respectively. phylogenetic analysis of ez421969/ez <dig> was performed with hexamerins from other insect species and a hemocyanin from crabs as an outgroup . tsetse hexamerin forms a group with the other cyclorrhaphan flies  and then on a larger scale with the nematoceran diptera . the next closest group is the lepidoptera  followed by the coleoptera . this is followed by the more primitive hemimetabolus insects, plecoptera , dictyoptera  and orthoptera . the relationship between these proteins follows that predicted by current morphological and molecular systematic analysis of insects at the "tree of life "http://tolweb.org/tree/"  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of these genes shows them to be informative from a taxonomic viewpoint as there are many hexamerin proteins present in the ncbi database. they are also of biological interest as they are developmentally and tissue specifically regulated  <cit>  and are essential for the transition from immature to the adult stages of development.

tissue and developmental specificity analysis of unknown and hypothetical conserved genes: table  <dig> 
the search for library specific sequences revealed  <dig> hypothetical conserved and unknown genes. of these genes  <dig> hypothetical conserved and  <dig> unknown gene sequences were identified. to verify the specificity of these transcripts rt-pcr analysis was performed using cdnas from pupa, larva, reproductive tract  and the remaining carcass mrna from  <dig> adult flies at varying ages . the cdnas used in this assay were generated from tissue samples independent of the ones used to generate the library. none of the genes were expressed in the carcass, confirming their library specific nature. a total of seven genes, five hypothetical conserved  and two unknowns  were found to be exclusive to the reproductive tract. these proteins could be associated with functions in adult tissues such as the ovaries , uterus or spermatheca. identification of signal peptides and transmembrane domains in these proteins offer clues for their localization and function. ez <dig> and ez <dig> both have predicted secretion signals suggesting that these proteins are secreted from the reproductive tract. neither ez <dig> nor ez <dig> have signal peptides; however they both have one transmembrane domain, with 76% of the protein predicted to be extracellular.

three hypothetical conserved genes  were identified as larva specific. all three putative proteins contain signal peptides suggesting secretion. a hypothetical conserved gene was found to be pupa specific  and has a predicted signal peptide and two transmembrane domains with 50% of the protein predicted to be extracellular. ez <dig> was detectable in both reproductive tract and larva and has a secretion signal.

finally, three unknown genes were expressed in both larva and pupa specific cdnas . the localization of ez <dig> and ez <dig> could not be determined as they are partial cdnas.

hypothetical and unknown genes are of particular interest as they encode proteins either present in other systems with yet unknown functions, or proteins completely novel to the tsetse system. the evolutionary biology of the unknown genes is of particular interest. determination of the origins and functions of these proteins will be important to understanding the evolutionary process by which tsetse developed viviparous reproduction. this line of research can also yield the identification of tsetse specific target genes, which could be blocked to disrupt reproduction with minimal environmental effects.

CONCLUSIONS
determining tsetse's transcriptome from the reproductive/immature cdna library has yielded new information on putative proteins expressed in the reproductive tract and immature intrauterine developmental stages of tsetse. information associated with similar proteins characterized in other organisms can now be placed into the context of tsetse's reproductive and developmental biology to elucidate its reproductive physiology. this will be important to understand how these genes have been adapted to perform in a viviparous system. also of importance is the identification of genes orthologous in other organisms that remain uncharacterized, as well as the identification of genes entirely novel to tsetse. analysis and characterization of these genes will reveal information fundamental to insect reproduction and development. given the low reproductive capacity of tsetse, molecular data on reproduction specific processes has the potential to reveal novel mechanisms which could be exploited to control tsetse population levels and trypanosomiasis transmission.

