BACKGROUND
parental investment of the two sexes has been proposed as a key promoter of sexual selection in most species of the animal kingdom  <cit> . in species where both parents are involved in bringing up the young, paternal care is a crucial variable of female choice since females directly benefit from high levels of male investment  <cit> . biparental care is especially widespread in birds  with most of the species being socially monogamous  <cit> . in birds, females have been found to adjust their mating strategies and their own investment according to the expected male participation in offspring rearing  <cit> . females may assess paternal qualities on the basis of male secondary traits . mechanisms that have been proposed to explain female assessment of male parenting abilities are similar to ‘good-genes’ or ‘handicap’ models of female choice  <cit> . these models assume that male extravagant traits come with costs and only males of high phenotypic and/or genetic quality manage to sustain these traits  <cit> . traits that have been shown to be related to paternal qualities include morphological characteristics such as plumage coloration  <cit>  or courtship related behaviors .

in passerines, male song is such a courtship behavior  <cit>  and there is evidence that song serves as predictor for paternal effort. for example, high song rates were found to be associated with higher feeding rates in a few species, and it was suggested that high song rates possibly indicate a male’s foraging efficiency, his ability to defend a high quality territory or individual quality in general . elaborate song flights which are associated with social costs for males advertise future paternal performance in whitethroats sylvia communis  <cit> . large repertoires indicate higher feeding rates in male sedge warblers acrocephalus schoenobaenus  <cit>  whereas similar studies in other species failed to find a correlation between measures of song complexity and male care . assuming that song complexity reflects a superior male status  which has been mostly linked to indirect fitness benefits for females, it might at the same time be an indicator of more direct benefits of female choice . in summary, female songbirds may choose prospective good fathers by paying attention to male song prior to pair formation.

the common nightingale luscinia megarhynchos is a socially monogamous passerine and from few previous observations it is known that males provide paternal care during breeding. they, for example, feed the female during incubation, provide food to nestlings and readily defend the nest against potential predators  <cit> ; cb, personal observation). thus, reproductive success seems to be highly dependent on male contribution, making it most probable that in nightingales male parenting abilities are a crucial factor in mate choice. furthermore, nightingales belong to the most versatile singers of the temperate zone  <cit> . males have very large song repertoires of up to  <dig> different song types  with large repertoire birds being older  <cit> , being in better condition and arriving earlier at the breeding grounds  <cit> . within repertoires, specific features of certain songs seem to carry information that might be important during different behavioral contexts, which constitutes the basis for the formation of song categories . furthermore, the nightingale is an excellent model to study the functional aspect of complex ‘syntax-like’ rules of song delivery. song sequencing in nightingales is neither fully fixed , nor random, but instead follows sequential rules that are partly controlled by early learning and memory retrieval processes, e.g. . however, these sequential rules are not fully deterministic, but offer potential for behavioral plasticity both short- and long-term. for example, males change their repertoire composition and song sequencing with age, which is most probably attributed to an adjustment to the breeding population , or they change the sequencing of songs in response to playbacks  <cit> . also, the usage of specific song types  is related to different behavioral contexts or different times during the day and the breeding cycle, e.g.  which additionally affects the sequencing of songs. very recently it has been shown that the sequential ordering of song types is related to male attributes. for example, older males sing their songs more ordered  and membership to a population seems to be encoded in song sequencing   <cit> . these findings imply that the sequential ordering of nightingale song may carry information which is relevant for females during mate choice.fig.  <dig> example songs of nightingale song categories. the acoustic patterns that constitute categories are underlined in grey. : whistle song, characterized by a homotype series of repeated elements with a narrow frequency band and little or no frequency modulation. : trill song, characterized by a rapid broad-band trill consisting of repeated elements with little frequency modulation but covering a large frequency range. : buzz song, characterized by a long, non-repeated buzz element produced by a very fast repetition of sound units in a narrow and rather low frequency range



if a male’s song is also related to his parenting qualities, and if females use song to choose ‘good fathers’ has not been investigated in nightingales so far. to date, there are neither studies systematically investigating paternal care in the nightingale, nor studies looking at the relationship between song and parenting qualities. here, we investigated the potential function of male song as an indicator for future male parental care. to do so, we analyzed paternal care by continuous recording of male provisioning behavior at the nest across several days. also, we analyzed male nocturnal song with special focus on repertoire size, repertoire composition, and the sequencing of songs as possible candidates for the advertising function of male song. we hypothesized that males who are more committed to paternal care are ‘better’ singers.

RESULTS
male feeding effort
the analysis of video recordings of four nests during the late nestling phase  confirmed that male nightingales contribute to chick feeding. a comparison of the relative effort of both parents showed that males and females on average contributed equally to feeding, whereby individuals showed high variance in their feeding effort ; rate  females:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ; for details see additional file 1: table s1). for another  <dig> males, we calculated feeding rates from rfid recordings during morning and evening hours of days  <dig> to  <dig> of chick age. the feeding rate across all males was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , i.e. males on average visited the nest eleven times per hour ). males varied considerably in their feeding behavior, whereas feeding rates were stable within males across the recording period .fig.  <dig> male variability in feeding behavior. shown are individual feeding rates of all males  during the recording period. variability between males is higher than within males. for statistics see text



relationship between male song and feeding behavior
first, we identified those variables with the strongest relation to male feeding rates. the lasso algorithm resulted in four song measures: average shortest path length, buzz repertoire size, whistle repertoire size and trill repertoire size . the four song measures were all positively correlated with male feeding rates . thus, males with a more ordered singing style  and more complex song repertoires  fed their chicks more often. the effects of all other song variables were reduced to zero by the lasso algorithm. besides song, the ‘number of hatchlings’ affected male feeding rates  whereas ‘year’ did not have an influence. with this subset of variables  we trained a support vector machine algorithm to test the combinatory predictive power of the variables. we found that the performance of the support vector machine was very good since the predicted feeding rates by the algorithm were highly correlated with the actual feeding rates observed in the field . thus, feeding rates of males can be reliably predicted based on four combined song measures plus number of hatchlings.fig.  <dig> relation between actual and predicted male feeding rates. using the support vector machine algorithm we were able to reliably predict male feeding rates on the basis of the combination of four different song features . this is indicated by the strong correlation of the actual feeding rates observed in the field and the rates predicted by the algorithm . for statistics see text



discussion
our study confirmed previous observations that male nightingales considerably contribute to chick feeding with large differences between individual males. these differences in male feeding effort were related to several features of male nocturnal song. when analyzing which song features reliably predict male parenting abilities we found that male feeding effort can be assessed on the basis of the combination of four song measures, namely song orderliness, buzz, whistle and trill repertoire size. more specifically, males that sang their song sequences more ordered and sang many different buzz, whistle as well as trill song types contributed more to chick feeding.

our study provides the first thorough quantification of male feeding effort in nightingales including exemplary results on relative feeding contributions of both parents. our results on male feeding behavior fit well the described pattern that in socially monogamous and monomorphic species male parental care is common, whereas reduced male care, or its absence, is often correlated with polygyny and with sexual dimorphism in birds  <cit> . most interestingly, we found that the extent of future paternal effort is advertised by male nocturnal song prior to pair formation. evidence from the literature for this specific indicator function of song is still rare, especially for species with elaborate song . also, we identified song characteristics that have not been described before to be related to paternal qualities in birds.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study reporting a relationship between sequential ordering of songs  and paternal care in birds. although the sequential organization of birdsong has been intensively studied , there is only very scarce knowledge on the biological and adaptive value of song sequencing, e.g.  <cit> . in our study, the orderliness of male song sequencing indicated increased paternal investment. given that song orderliness is also associated with male age  <cit> , females choosing an orderly singing male might benefit from a male who signals viability and experience with the breeding grounds  and his willingness to care for the offspring. together these findings support the idea that the sequential ordering of birdsong carries relevant information during communication which may be directed to female listeners and thus, may have evolved by female choice  <cit> .

in addition to song sequencing, measures of song complexity  were correlated with higher feeding rates in our study. a similar relationship between song complexity and male provisioning has so far only been reported for the sedge warbler  <cit> . in other studies, the value of mating with large repertoire singers has mostly been linked to indirect  benefits for females  <cit> , or to other aspects of male quality . for nightingales, the role of repertoire composition and size in interspecific contexts is not yet fully understood since we for example, lack evidence that females are attracted by more complex song. on the other hand, there is correlative data on the potential indicator function of large repertoires  <cit>  and playback studies showed that females prefer songs containing many different buzz or whistle songs  <cit> . since in our study the number of different buzz, whistle and trill song types was highly correlated with repertoire size, it might be that females use the variety within song categories as a proxy for overall song complexity . alternatively or additionally, the fine structure of either buzz, whistle and trill elements might encode information on male quality or motivation, and thus be relevant for females  <cit> . to date, there is no direct evidence that the production of these elements is physically challenging for male nightingales. however, it was shown that males differ in the performance of these song structures, and that performance differences are related to male traits reflecting quality  <cit> . whether such performance measures predict paternal investment has not yet been investigated in songbirds, but there is accumulating evidence that even in large repertoire species the performance of fine-scale song structures is of adaptive value . although we cannot say what exact song features female nightingales finally use to assess males, it seems most likely that females use both, the quantity  and quality  of songs to assess a male’s adequacy as a mating partner.

in socially monogamous taxa there are different models on the extent of paternal investment depending on self-attractiveness . although our data do not allow evaluating relative parental feeding effort in more detail  we found that better singers fed their offspring more often. this supports the ‘good parent’ hypothesis which predicts that an individual’s attractiveness should reliably and positively indicate parental effort  <cit> . the quantification of further measures in the feeding context  will allow to draw a more detailed picture on the complex relationships between singing and parental investment in nightingales. with the method applied  we were able to identify four song parameters that gave strong predictive power for male feeding effort. this strategy  might be also highly adaptive for females especially when the evaluation of single parameters might be time consuming , or is hindered or not possible . the integration of multiple  cues might therefore enhance accurate and fast assessment of males and may thus be a prerequisite for successful reproduction  <cit> . this seems particularly feasible in species that have evolved complex vocal signal systems such as the nightingale where signals may contain multiple messages for different receivers  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that different aspects of male nightingale song honestly advertise direct fitness benefits to females. here, measures of song complexity and song sequencing reliably predict paternal investment and thus might be important for female mating decisions. we suggest that, during mate choice, female nightingales rely on multiple song cues to quickly gather information about signaller quality.

