BACKGROUND
aggression is a normal component of mammalian behavior  <cit> . for animals there is an adaptive advantage to defending a territory, fighting for limited resources, competing for mates, and protecting young. however, in the context of human behavior, the motivations, actions and limits of aggressive acts are not always clear. while social norms set the boundaries of appropriate aggressive behavior, inappropriate aggressive behavior in the form of interpersonal violence represents both a mental health and social problem  <cit> . as such, impulsivity and violence is studied in the context of antisocial behavior, co-morbid with dsm-defined illnesses, such as mania/depression, adhd, ptsd, autism, and substance abuse  <cit> . understanding the early risk factors and developmental trajectory of antisocial behavior has helped to devise effective psychosocial intervention strategies to reduce the incidence of impulsive aggression  <cit> . however, impulsivity and violence secondary to axis i disorders appear more intractable and require both psychosocial intervention and pharmacotherapy. unfortunately, the treatment of impulsive aggression in the clinical setting usually involves the prescription of combinations of drugs which by themselves are normally used to treat epilepsy, depression, anxiety and schizophrenia  <cit> . hence there is a need to understand the neural mechanisms contributing to aggressive behavior for the development of targeted, behaviorally specific, pharmacotherapeutics.

serenics are drugs  <cit>  that reduce or delay the rapid onset of anger without impairing initiative, normal social relations, appetitive behaviors or the ability to defend oneself from challenges or threats. historically, candidate drugs with serenic potential focused on serotonin 5ht1a and 5ht1b receptor agonists  <cit> . treating excessively aggressive patients afflicted with mental retardation, brain injury or psychiatric illness with drugs like buspirone, which simulate 5ht1a receptors, or fluoxetine a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor , reduces several measures of aggressive responding  <cit> .

while serotonin neurotransmission is associated with a reduction in agonistic behavior, vasopressin released as a neurochemical signal in the brain does just the opposite, i.e., it increases aggressive responding. there is a large body of literature reporting blockade of vasopressin v1a receptors in a variety of animals suppresses offensive aggression  <cit> . consequently, drugs that target and block the vasopressin v1a receptor are being developed as potential therapeutics for the treatment of impulsivity and violence. recently, a new class of non-peptidic compounds targeted to the human v1a receptor was developed using a monocyclic beta lactam platform  <cit> . one of these potential drugs, srx <dig>  was tested for serenic activity in the hamster resident/intruder paradigm of offensive aggression  <cit> . oral administration of srx <dig> caused a dose-dependent decrease in several measures of aggressive behavior without affecting motor activity, olfactory communication, and sexual motivation.

normal aggressive behavior and aggression characterized by impulsivity and violence are envisioned to be organized and controlled by a distributed neural circuit, i.e., subsets of interconnected neurons conveying sensory and motor information to and from sites of integration  <cit> . by all accounts, this neural circuit is plastic, subject to modification by past experience as well as present environmental and endocrine factors that influence the probability and intensity of an agonistic encounter  <cit> . our present understanding of this putative neural circuit controlling aggressive behavior is based on early studies using chemical and electrical stimulation and lesion techniques in discrete brain areas  <cit> . more recently, immunostaining for immediate early gene proteins as cellular markers of neuronal activity helped identify multiple areas across the brain presumably involved in aggressive behavior  <cit> . unfortunately, the temporal window for these cellular markers is 50– <dig> min after the agonistic encounter leaving in doubt the precise onset and location of neuronal activity associated with the start of an aggressive attack. newer imaging technologies like functional magnetic resonance imaging  with the blood oxygen level-dependent  technique may resolve this problem because it is possible to acquire data on changes in brain activity in seconds. as part of the ethogram of aggression, male rats in the company of their female cage mate will piloerect the fur along the midline back in the presence of a male intruder. this piloerection is unique to offensive aggression, is not seen in other behaviors, and signals an impending attack on the intruder  <cit> . these characteristics of piloerection combined with its occurrence very early in the aggression ethogram, overcome the limitations that are associated with motion artifacts that can be seen with fmri  <cit> . for the present studies, we developed a tube shaped vivarium that fits into the bore of the magnet within centimeters of the eyes and nose of the male being imaged. this vivarium can accommodate the female cage mate and the introduction of a novel male competitor. we discovered that even though a resident male is confined to a restraining device for an imaging session, placing an intruder into the vivarium with its cage mate induces piloerection – the peripheral, autonomic sign of aggressive motivation. because head restraint is a limitation in any awake animal fmri study, it is not possible to image the neural circuit involved in the consummatory aspects of aggression like attacks and bites. however, with the present experimental approach we report that it is possible to identify the distributed putative neural circuit associated with the genesis of attack behavior. in addition, the technique also allows the activity of this neural circuit to be imaged in the presence or absence of different drug treatments that affect aggressive responding.

RESULTS
the total volume of brain activation for resident males confronted with their mate alone, mate plus intruder, mate plus intruder in the presence of v1a receptor blockade , or fluoxetine can be viewed as 3d models . these 3d volumes of activation from the four experimental groups are a composite of ten subjects each and provide a visual representation comparing the difference in the number of activated voxels across experimental conditions. there is an ostensible increase in brain activity  with the presentation of the intruder as compared to the mate alone. this brain activity is reduced with srx <dig> treatment in the presence of the intruder, but less so with fluoxetine treatment. this profile of activation is similar across major brain regions, e.g. cortex, amygdala, hippocampus, and thalamus . there appears to be a general decrease in bold signal in all major regions with srx <dig> but less so for fluoxetine treatment as compared to the activity observed with mate alone or mate/intruder. this drug-induced pattern of brain activity in response to aggression-promoting cues also extends to functional neural circuits like the olfactory system and the reward pathway. figure  <dig> shows 3-d images of the activation pattern in the primary olfactory and mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic systems for aggressive motivation alone , and srx <dig> or fluoxetine in the presence of mate/intruder. activation of both neural circuits is most apparent during mate/intruder stimulated aggressive motivation. moderate activity is still present with fluoxetine treatment but srx <dig> appears to suppress all activity in both neural circuits.

bold activation maps, co-registered on 2-d, coronal sections for mate alone, mate plus intruder, mate/intruder with srx <dig> or fluoxetine are shown in figure  <dig>  the same data can be viewed on 2-d transverse sections in figure  <dig>  these activation maps from the four experimental groups are a composite of ten subjects each, fully registered into a 3d rat mri atlas and segmented for volumes of interest . visual inspection of rows a-g fig  <dig> and rows d-f fig  <dig>  show robust bilateral activation across the cortical mantle during aggressive motivation. activated areas include the motor cortex , primary somatosensory cortex , auditory cortex , and parietal cortex . inspection of row d fig  <dig> and rows c and d fig  <dig> show intense activation of the anterior thalamic nuclei and dorsal midline thalamic nuclei during aggressive motivation. activated areas include the anterior ventral , medial , and lateral  thalamus, nucleus reunions , and paraventricular thalamus . row e fig  <dig> and row a fig  <dig> show activation of the lateral hypothalamus  during aggression motivation, while rows e-g fig  <dig> and rows c-e fig  <dig> show robust activation of the hippocampus .

drug treatments caused a conspicuous change in the pattern of bold signal in response to mate/intruder. residents treated with srx <dig> show a reduction in signal in the somatosensory and motor cortices while fluoxetine treatment did not reduce cortical signal . the lateral hypothalamus shows robust activation in the presence of mate/intruder, a bold signal change not observed under any other experimental conditions. the ventral periaqueductal gray  shows a high volume of activation with mate/intruder that is less pronounced with mate alone or srx <dig> treatment and is essentially absent with fluoxetine treatment. activity in the raphe nucleus  is absent in animals treated with fluoxetine.

the general diminution in bold activity with srx <dig> during aggressive motivation raises questions about drug specificity and the apparent suppression of olfaction as a reason for the decrease in responsiveness. however, when srx <dig> treated males are presented with a novel receptive female during image acquisition they show good activation of the primary olfactory system and reward pathway as shown in fig  <dig>  this activation of the primary olfactory system in the presence of srx <dig> in response to a receptive female but not during aggressive motivation attests to the specificity of drug action and the stimulus-dependent nature of bold activation. the same is true for fluoxetine as the profile of bold activation is lowest toward a receptive female and highest toward an intruder. indeed, there is a noticeable absence of brain activity toward a receptive female with fluoxetine treatment .

the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation was determined by comparing the volume of activation  between mate and mate/intruder using a wilcoxon signed-rank test. these brain areas include the somatosensory, auditory, orbital and retrosplenial cortices, hippocampus, several amygdaloid nuclei and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, anterior thalamic nuclei, paraventricular and lateral hypothalamus, and prelimbic cortex as shown in table  <dig>  these sixteen sites were identified from eighty-three brain areas. brain areas associated with aggressive motivation were not only identified by the volume of activation but were also characterized by a rapid and robust increase in bold signal intensity that peaked near the time of piloerection . these brain areas include the retrosplenial  =  <dig> , p < .03) and prelimbic cortex  =  <dig> , p < .03), ca <dig>  =  <dig> , p < .04) and dentate gyrus  =  <dig> , p < .04) of the hippocampus, cortical amygdala  =  <dig> , p < .05), lateral posterior  =  <dig> , p < .02) and anterior  =  <dig> , p < .005) thalamic areas and lateral hypothalamus  =  <dig> , p < .05). in contrast, brain activation in response to the presence of the mate alone showed a gradual increase in bold signal that reached the same magnitude seen with aggressive motivation . indeed, repeated measures, 2-way anova comparing the entire five min post stimulus period for mate vs. mate/intruder showed no significant main effect between stimulus conditions, but a significant main effect for time. for example, the change in bold signal over time for the lateral hypothalamus  showed no statistical difference between stimulus conditions  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ) but a significant difference in the change of bold signal over time  =  <dig>  p < .0001). the only exception to this pattern of activation in the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation was the anterior thalamic area  which showed significant main effects for condition  =  <dig> , p < .04) and time  =  <dig>  p < .002).

the two left columns report the median  number of voxels activated  in male residents when presented with their female cage mate  or their cage mate plus a novel adult male intruder . male residents  were tested for each condition in a counterbalanced design and the data analyzed using a wilcoxon signed-rank test. the two columns on the right report the percent change in bold signal  for that brain area for each experimental condition. these bold time course data were compared by taking the first  <dig> data points following stimulus presentation for each condition  and using a repeated measures 2-way anova to assess if there was a significant difference between conditions. those areas that showed a significant increase in the number of activated voxels were screened from a data base of eighty-three brain areas and comprise the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation. shown in parentheses under ten of these sixteen brain areas are references from a literature review on the neuroanatomy of aggressive behavior across different species, gender and agonistic models. note that the remaining areas not described in the animal literature are primarily from the cortex and thalamus. p <  <dig> *; p <  <dig> **

shown are the median number of voxels   and percent change in bold signal  in different brain areas in response to aggressive motivation following srx <dig> and fluoxetine treatment. these bold time course data were compared by taking the fifty data points following stimulus presentation for each condition and using a repeated measures 2-way anova to assess if there was a significant difference between conditions. there were no significant differences in bold signal change over time between drug treatments. significant differences in volume of activation between srx <dig> and fluoxetine for each brain region are shown. the numbers in parenthesis shown after each brain area is the average number of voxels from ten subjects that occupy that brain volume after registration in the 3d atlas. brain areas shown in bold italic comprise the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation. p <  <dig> *; p <  <dig> **

shown are the median number of voxels   and percent change in bold signal  in different brain areas in response to aggressive motivation following srx <dig> and fluoxetine treatment. these bold time course data were compared by taking the fifty data points following stimulus presentation for each condition and using a repeated measures 2-way anova to assess if there was a significant difference between conditions. significant differences in volume of activation between srx <dig> and fluoxetine for each brain region are shown. the numbers in parenthesis shown after each brain area is the average number of voxels from ten subjects that occupy that brain volume after registration in the 3d atlas. brain areas shown in bold italic comprise the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation. p <  <dig> *; p <  <dig> **

time course data showing the percent change in bold signal intensity for select brain areas for aggressive motivation and in response to a sexually receptive female in the presence of srx <dig> or fluoxetine treatment are shown in figs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  all graphs are plotted on the same scales with the exception of the somatosensory and insular cortices and cortical nucleus of the amygdala show in fig  <dig>  note that each graph has a dashed line at the 2% change in bold signal which denotes the threshold of background, nonspecific bold activity routinely observed in awake rodent imaging studies. the bold response associated with aggressive motivation  is very similar across brain areas as noted above. there is a rapid increase in activity within the first  <dig> sec  from the introduction of the intruder . piloerection occurs approximately one minute after stimulus presentation and represents a period of peak activation for most areas. the time course for bold activation associated with aggressive motivation  is markedly different with srx <dig> and fluoxetine treatments. a solid line is shown demarking the maximal percent change in bold signal for aggressive motivation  in the drug free condition. none of the brain areas in srx <dig> and fluoxetine treated conditions reached this maximum in response to either aggressive or sexual motivating stimuli. the only exceptions were the anterior cingulate cortex  with fluoxetine in response to aggression  and the raphe  with srx <dig> in response to sex . indeed, the temporal pattern of bold signal change under both drug treatments for either aggressive motivation or novel female was very similar in many brain areas . there was a rise in signal over the first  <dig> min exceeding the 2% threshold of background noise and stabilizing around 3–4%. the most notable exceptions to this pattern were the anterior nuclei of the thalamus, substantia nigra, raphe and periaqueductal gray . in the presence of srx <dig>  bold signal in the anterior thalamus failed to exceed the 2% threshold over most of the imaging period for both stimulus conditions. in the presence of fluoxetine the raphe was similarly unresponsive under both stimulus conditions as was the periaqueductal gray for receptive female. of all the time course data in figs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  only two showed a significant difference between stimulus conditions with drug treatment, specifically the substantia nigra with srx <dig>  =  <dig> , p < .04) and the anterior cingulate cortex with fluoxetine  =  <dig> , p < .05).

discussion
neuroanatomy of aggression
the present study describes a method for imaging aggressive motivation using piloerection as a physiological marker. this "index response" is seen in the presence of a novel male intruder together with the resident's female cohabitant and is unique to the ethogram of aggression. of the eighty-three brain areas investigated in response to this aggression-provoking stimulus, sixteen showed a significant increase in the volume of activation over the mate alone. we propose that these sixteen areas comprise the distributed neural circuit involved in the control of aggressive motivation. historically, several of these areas, including the lateral hypothalamus, cortical and medial amygdala, and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, have a key role in the control of aggressive responding . their place in the neural circuitry of aggression was identified by techniques using site specific electrical recordings, lesions, electrochemical stimulations, and by immunostaining for immediate early genes as biomarkers of neuronal activity. in contrast, bold fmri is a noninvasive technique sensitive to the oxygenation status of hemoglobin  <cit> . enhanced neuronal activity is accompanied by an increase in metabolism concomitant with changes in cerebral blood flow and blood volume to the area of activation  <cit> . site specific changes in fmri signal correlate with the spatial location of synaptic activity and neuronal spiking frequency  <cit> . although fmri lacks the spatial resolution achieved in immunostaining neurons or the millisecond temporal resolution of electrophysiology it allows repeated, real-time assessments of changes in neuronal activity across multiple brain areas. in the present study, we believe that the identified changes in bold signal reflect the putative neural circuit controlling aggressive motivation.

the medial basolateral hypothalamus extending from the mammillary nuclei up through the lateral and anterior hypothalamus has a fundamental role in the organization and initiation of aggressive behavior in all mammalian species studied to date. note the robust activation of this "aggression area" in fig  <dig>  sections d-f, in response to mate/intruder but not to any other stimulus conditions. in these studies, the lateral hypothalamus was particularly sensitive showing both a significant increase in the volume of activation and increase in bold signal to aggression provoking stimuli. electrical stimulation of the lateral hypothalamus elicits attack behavior in rats  <cit> , cats  <cit> , opossum  <cit> , and monkeys  <cit> , while electrolytic lesions in this same area reduce aggressive responding  <cit> . the lateral hypothalamus has extensive efferent connections to a majority of the brain areas that constitute the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation identified with fmri . anterograde tract tracing studies show extensive monosynaptic connections to the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus , ventral pallidum , medial, cortical and basal nuclei of the amygdala , bed nucleus of the stria terminalis , ca <dig> of the hippocampus , and prelimbic/infralimbic cortex   <cit> . given the pivotal position of the lateral hypothalamus in the neural circuitry of aggression, the a prior hypothesis, routinely used in fmri studies, predicted activation of this brain area.

in our findings, the cerebrum, particularly the somatosensory, auditory, orbital and retrosplenial cortices are activated with aggressive motivation . these cortical areas are conspicuously absent from the literature describing the neuroanatomy of aggression in animals  and are devoid of direct afferent connections from the lateral hypothalamus. however, they are consonant with an extensive human neuroimaging literature indicating that aggression-inducing stimuli produce activation in frontal cortex sites  <cit> . this cortical activation is typically interpreted as indicating that frontal cortex exhibits inhibitory control over a number of strongly motivated behaviors, including both aggression and defense, a suggestion that is supported by the relationships between prefrontal cortex and subcortical structures involved in these emotional responses  <cit>  as well as by the effects of frontal cortex lesions  <cit>  and damage  on impulsivity and aggression.

in addition to involvement of inhibition-linked areas of frontal cortex, the primary motor cortex may be involved in direct activation of the behaviors involved in offensive attack behavior. offensive attack is a complex and precisely targeted behavior pattern  <cit> . separation of cortical and subcortical structures, or extensive cortical damage  <cit>  downgrade this pattern and alter or abolish its targeting, suggesting that the behaviors involved in the offensive attack pattern are organized as are other complex, voluntary behaviors, through the primary motor cortex. although the rats in this study were restrained and physically unable to attack, efforts to do so would be expected to produce much the same pattern of motor cortex activity as an actual attack. the robust activation that occurred in the somatic sensory cortex just posterior to frontal cortex may reflect somatic sensations associated with attempts to make attack movements, or, with sensations of piloerection in animals tightly confined in a tube. collectively, these data suggest that aggressive motivation in the context of natural stimuli is dependent upon multiple cortical areas integrating perceptual and cognitive information, possibly inhibiting or potentiating the neural circuit of aggressive motivation that ultimately leads to attack behavior.

the contribution of the thalamus to aggressive motivation has received little if any attention in the animal and human literature. the robust bold signal change in the dorsal thalamus during aggressive motivation  highlights the potential importance of this area as a key trigger region in behavioral activation . this area of the dorsal thalamus comprises multiple midline nuclei, e.g., paraventricular, central medial, paratenial, medial dorsal, paracentral and medial habenula bordered by the anterior thalamic nuclei, e.g. anteroventral, anteromedial and anterodorsal. when compared to mate alone, only the anterior thalamic nuclei exhibited a robust increase in bold signal  and volume of activation  in response to mate/intruder. treatment with srx <dig> or fluoxetine dramatically attenuated the increase in bold signal change in the anterior thalamic nuclei in response to aggressive or sexual stimuli . the bold signal change did not exceed the 2% baseline threshold over most of the imaging period in the presence of srx <dig> and only marginally so for fluoxetine with aggressive motivation but not receptive female.

the anterior thalamic nuclei have not been linked to aggressive motivation or aggressive behavior; instead, this brain area has been associated with memory, and interestingly enough, epilepsy. lesion of the anterior thalamic nuclei disrupt recall of spatial  <cit>  as well as nonspatial odorant memory  <cit>  and leads to reduced fos-like expression  in the hippocampal formation  <cit> . lesion or high frequency stimulation of the anterior thalamus blocks or reduces pentylenetetrazol and pilocarpine-induced generalized seizures  <cit> . functional imaging studies in awake rats  show a robust increase in bold signal intensity in the anterior thalamic nuclei immediately prior to the onset of pentylenetetrazol-induced clonic seizure  <cit> . based on temporal changes in bold signal intensity, the putative distributed neural circuit involved in the genesis of seizure includes the cortical nucleus of the amygdala, retrosplenial cortex, hippocampus particularly the dentate gyrus, and anterior thalamus. the anterior thalamic nuclei appear to be the gateway to the cortex regulating chemically induced paroxysmal electrical activity as evidenced by eeg coherence studies  <cit> . indeed, the sensitivity of the anterior thalamic nuclei to electrochemical stimulation has been the rationale for electrical stimulation therapy in epilepsy patients with medically intractable seizures  <cit> 

the thalamus holds a significant place in early neurology and psychology research as it was the cornerstone of the proposed neural circuitry of emotion first proposed by walter cannon  <cit>  and popularized by james papez  <cit> . the "papez circuit" connects the hypothalamus and hippocampus to the limbic cortex, i.e. prelimbic, orbital, anterior cingulate, and retrosplenial cortices through the anterior thalamus. the anterior thalamic nuclei receive extensive afferent connections from the hippocampus  <cit>  and the mammillary nuclei  <cit> . anterior thalamic nuclei send primary projects to the anterior cingulate, retrosplenial, prefrontal, and orbital cortices and adjacent cortical areas all of which are activated with aggressive motivation  <cit> . the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation reported in table  <dig> includes many of the components comprising the "papez circuit." the lateral hypothalamus has few if any monosynaptic connections to the anterior thalamic nuclei; instead the dorsal thalamic midline nuclei noted above, particularly the habenula, paraventricular and medial dorsal areas are heavily innervated. interestingly, the mammillary body, a key area in the "papez circuit" connecting the hypothalamus to the anterior thalamic nuclei, is not activated with aggressive motivation either by a measure of volume of activation or change in bold signal over time . this does not preclude the mammillary bodies from contributing to the neural circuit of aggression. in fact, visual observation of the mammillary bodies in fig 4a show more activation during mate/intruder than other experimental conditions. since the many different nuclei that comprise the mammillary body, e.g. lateral & medial, mammillary nuclei, supramammillary nuclei and tuberomammillary nucleus were collapsed into a single volume for analysis, activation of any one specific substructure was obscured.

neurochemistry of aggression
there is a general consensus that vasopressin functions to facilitate aggressive behavior across multiple species  <cit> . microinjections of vasopressin into the hypothalamus or amygdala and intraventricular administration in rodents leads to enhanced aggression while administration of a selective linear v1a antagonist, manning compound  arginine vasopressin, blocks aggressive behavior  <cit> . in human and animal studies indices of aggressivity correlate with high concentrations of vasopressin in cerebrospinal fluid  <cit> . intranasal vasopressin stimulates agonistic facial motor patterns in response to faces of unfamiliar men and biases male subjects to interpret neutral facial expressions as potentially aggressive  <cit> .

inappropriate aggressive behavior is closely correlated with changes in the neurobiology of the vasopressin system. peripubertal hamsters socially subjugated by dominant male hamsters show altered vasopressin immunoreactivity in the hypothalamus as young adults and heightened aggression toward smaller conspecifics as compared to non subjugated littermates  <cit> . newborn rat pups stressed by maternal separation show increased vasopressin fibers in the lateral hypothalamus as adults and heightened aggression as compared to littermate controls  <cit> . treating adolescent hamsters with anabolic steroids increases the density of vasopressin immunoreactive fibers, v1a receptor and neuropeptide content in the hypothalamus and enhances vasopressin-mediated aggression in adulthood  <cit> . peripubertal hamsters exposed to cocaine develop a highly aggressive phenotype as adults and enhanced released of vasopressin in the hypothalamus  <cit> . the development of dominant/subordinate relationships in hamsters causes a reduction in vasopressin levels in the hypothalamus in submissive partners  <cit>  while dominant partners show higher levels of v1a binding in the hypothalamus  <cit> . mice with distinct behavioral phenotypes of high and low aggressivity, show correspondingly high and low levels of vasopressin receptor density and fiber immunostaining in bed nucleus of the stria terminalis and lateral septum  <cit> . when high aggressive phenotypes are cross-fostered with low aggressive parents they show a reduction in aggression in a resident-intruder paradigm and lower levels of vasopressin in the bed nucleus as compared to their unfostered siblings  <cit> .

given the fundamental role of vasopressin in normal aggressive behavior and the evidence that adaptations in vasopressin neurotransmission to negative environmental events can foster inappropriate aggression, there is a strong rationale for the development of orally active and selective v1a receptor antagonists for clinical use in the control of impulsivity and violence. in the present studies, orally administered srx <dig>  a selective v1a antagonist with picomolar affinity for the human receptor  <cit> , successfully blocked the aggressive motivation of resident males toward male intruders both on the bench-top and during an imaging session. the efficacy of srx <dig> as an inhibitor of aggressive motivation, as assessed by fmri, was characterized by a global suppression of bold signal expressed both as a reduction in the volume of activation  and percent change in bold signal in areas that comprise the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation . this effect of srx <dig> appears to be specific because when male residents were challenged with sexually motivating stimuli like the presentation of a novel receptive female, there was an increase in bold signal over several brain areas , many of which are not associated with the neural circuit of aggression. indeed, the activation of the primary olfactory system and mesocorticolimbic system associated with aggressive motivation are dramatically reduced with srx <dig> pretreatment , but these effects are not seen in the context of a sexually receptive female . one of the more compelling differences in brain activity between aggressive motivation and sexual stimuli following srx <dig> treatment was the activation of the dopaminergic pathways originating in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area . srx <dig> treatment suppressed activity in these areas in response to aggression-provoking stimuli but not to sexual stimuli, which may explain why sexual behavior is spared with v1a receptor antagonism. the substantia nigra showed a significant increase in bold signal over time , while the ventral tegmental area and its efferent connections showed an ostensible increase in the volume of activation . the nigrostrial dopaminergic pathway is important in sexual readiness while the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway affects sexual motivation  <cit> .

brain levels of srx <dig> peak within 2– <dig> hrs of oral administration and remain elevated for over 8– <dig> hrs  <cit> . in a previous study, we showed that the anti-aggressive effects of srx <dig> were brain mediated and not due to peripheral blockade of v1a receptors  <cit> . vasopressin v1a receptor binding is found throughout the brain of multiple species, particularly in many areas that constitute the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation identified with fmri  <cit> . specifically, v1a binding is localized to the lateral hypothalamus, bnst, corticomedial amygdala, prelimbic cortex, forebrain cortex, pvn, ventral pallidum, and hippocampus. the anterior thalamic nuclei have a high density of vasopressin v1a receptors . consequently, treating resident males with srx <dig>  a highly specific v1a receptor antagonist, could suppress aggressive responding by acting at all or some of these brain areas.

a deficit in serotonin  neurotransmission has been implicated in many human psychiatric conditions. with respect to aggression, an inverse relationship exists between 5-ht function as measured by cerebrospinal fluid levels of the 5-ht metabolite hydroxyindoleacetic acid and conduct disorder in children, impulsivity, violence and suicide in adults  <cit> . the inappropriate aggression associated with this 5-ht deficiency trait is responsive to psychotherapeutics like the ssri fluoxetine that increase the level of 5-ht in brain interstitial fluid. treatments with ssris reduce inappropriate aggressive behavior in children and violence and impulsivity in adults  <cit> . adult males with a history of conduct disorder show reduced measures of aggression and impulsivity when treated with an ssri or the 5ht releasing agent d-fenfluramine  <cit> . impulsive aggressive patients with personality disorder show blunted prolactin release after administration of fenfluramine  <cit> , which suggests a hyposensitive 5-ht system. the correlation between low 5-ht neurotransmission or dysregulation and heightened impulsivity and aggression also is seen in non-human primates and other mammals  and percent change in bold signal in areas that comprise the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation . indeed, the change in the volume of activation in response to aggression-promoting stimuli never exceeded that measured in mate/intruder alone . the anterior nuclei of the thalamus showed an increase in bold signal change that just exceeded the 2% threshold . interestingly, the anterior cingulate a brain area that has a major efferent connection from the anterior thalamus, showed a significant increase in bold signal equal to that seen with mate/intruder alone . one of the more compelling effects of fluoxetine treatment was the almost complete suppression of bold signal change in the raphe nuclei . this effect may be due to the negative feedback on 5-ht neurons in the raphe through somatodendritic autoreceptors  <cit> . these imaging data suggest a fluoxetine mediated reduction in 5-ht neurotransmission coming from the raphe complex concomitant with an elevation of 5-ht levels at axonal nerve endings. there is evidence that chronic fluoxetine treatment down-regulates somatodendritic 5-ht1a autoreceptors at the level of the raphe enhancing 5-ht neurotransmission  <cit> . indeed, this is has been hypothesized to explain why treatment with ssris for depression requires several weeks before any signs of drug efficacy  <cit> . to test this hypothesis with imaging we would predict that animals treated for several weeks with fluoxetine would show enhanced bold signal in the raphe complex.

prior to imaging, a dose-response study determined that oral fluoxetine at  <dig> mg/kg was the threshold dose for blocking piloerection of resident males in their homecage environment in all subjects. at this same anti-aggressive dose, sexual motivation as measured by the latency to mount and thrust when presented with a sexually receptive female, was blocked. this suppression of sexual motivation presented as little or no change in bold signal with exposure to a sexually receptive, novel female. why this stimulus would cause so little effect on brain activity as compared to aggression-promoting stimuli is uncertain. a reduction in olfactory processing may be one explanation as seen in the 3d models in fig  <dig>  there also is a reduction in activity in the dopaminergic mesolimbic system , which would have a profound effect on sexual motivation  <cit> . interestingly, the lateral hypothalamus has one of the highest concentrations of 5-ht fibers and terminals in the brain  <cit> . treatment with fluoxetine elevates 5-ht levels in the hypothalamus as measured by microdialysis and reduces aggressive responding in hamsters  <cit> . the lateral hypothalamus has 5-ht-sensitive afferent connections to the nucleus accumbens and ventral tegmental area that inhibit dopamine release in this mesolimbic system reducing sexual motivation in rats  <cit> . consequently it could be hypothesized that fluoxetine by blocking the 5-ht reuptake transporter elevates 5-ht levels in the lateral hypothalamus and indirectly reduces dopamine levels in the accumbens causing both a reduction in aggressive and sexual motivation. it is well know that sexual dysfunction is an unwanted side effect of ssri use in the treatment of depression  <cit> . clinical studies point to a disruption in dopaminergic neurotransmission as the likely cause  <cit> .

there are clear differences in brain activity toward aggressive- or sexual-promoting stimuli when the effects of srx <dig> and fluoxetine are compared . bold signal in response to aggression promoting stimuli with fluoxetine is greater compared to srx <dig> but reduced in response to sexual stimuli. these opposite activation patterns to these highly salient stimuli point to different mechanisms of action and underscore the serenic profile of srx <dig>  i.e., a reduction in aggression while sparing other appetitive behaviors. furthermore, imaging showed that both anti-aggressive drugs caused an apparent decrease in general arousal as measured by the reduction in volume of activation and bold signal. previous studies in hamsters showed treatment with srx <dig> selectively reduces offensive aggression without affecting motor, communicative, or sexual behaviors  <cit> . in the present investigation, male rats treated with srx <dig> showed normal sexual motivation as measured by the latency to mount and thrust toward sexually receptive females.

if the level of general behavioral activity is normal with v1a receptor blockade and animals show normal sexual activity, a behavior with high emotional valence, it is reasonable to ask why the bold signal, a hemodynamic response to metabolically active areas, was blunted? one possible explanation is the effect of srx <dig> on cerebral vascular smooth muscle. activation of v1a receptors on vascular smooth muscle promotes vasoconstriction and can alter blood flow. blockade of these receptors with a highly selective antagonist might be expected to reduce vascular responsivity to endogenous vasopressin. yet, animals treated with srx <dig> and challenged with 10% co <dig> inhalation show bold responses similar to untreated animals . this was also true for animals treated with fluoxetine . another explanation for the generalized reduction in bold activation with srx <dig> and fluoxetine is that both compounds are anxiolytics. vasopressin v1a receptor antagonists and ssris have anxiolytic properties in several different rodent models of anxiety and stress  <cit> . interestingly, glutamate receptor antagonists, another class of anxiolytic compounds significantly reduce the magnitude of bold signal in the somatosensory cortex in response to foot shock  <cit> . it may be that these three different classes of anxiolytics, despite their varied mechanisms of action, blunt the coupling between neuronal activity and blood flow which in this case might be reflected in a reduced bold response to aggressive and sexual promoting stimuli.

considerations in data interpretation
there are certain limitations and complications to imaging awake animals. first and foremost is the restraint of the head, without which it would be impossible to collect a clean image. head restraint precludes the study of many behaviors that require a consummatory act, as the immobilization alone may prevent the motor response that defines the behavior. offensive aggression as measured by the latency to bite and number of bites toward a conspecific is a case in point. however, internal states of arousal and motivation like, hunger, fear, and aggressive intent are fertile areas of investigation using fmri and awake animals.

key to the interpretation of these data is the association between piloerection and aggressive motivation. the value of piloerection as a signal of aggressive motivation in rats that are fixed in place for imaging and unable to show overt attack behaviors lies in consistent findings that it is the invariant precursor to offensive attack by adult male rats on other adult males  <cit> . in addition, manipulations such as castration and replacement of testosterone, that reduce and restore attack by resident males on intruders, respectively, produce similar alterations in the piloerection that precedes this attack  <cit> . piloerection in an aggression context seems to be exclusively associated with offensive attack. lesions of the amygdala that reduced defensiveness to a cat failed to alter piloerection or attack toward a male intruder  <cit> . moreover, medial hypothalamic lesions that enhanced defensiveness to the experimenter, and also mouse killing by the rat subjects, produced no changes in piloerection or social aggressiveness to other male rats  <cit> .

the stress of head restraint and restricted body movement is compounded by the noise and duration of the imaging protocols. consequently, sensory- or drug-induced changes in mr signal in awake animals can occur against a backdrop of heightened arousal and stress – conditions that can affect data interpretation. to address these problems, protocols have been developed for acclimating animals to the environment of the mr scanner and imaging procedure leading to a reduction in stress hormones levels and measures of autonomic activity regulated by the sympathetic nervous system  <cit> . acclimation protocols have been used to prepare awake animals for a range of behavioral, neurological and pharmacological imaging studies, including sexual arousal in monkeys  <cit> , generalized seizures in rats and monkeys  <cit> , and exposure to psychostimulants like cocaine  <cit> , nicotine  <cit>  and apomorphine  <cit> . habituation to the scanning session is achieved by putting subjects through several simulated imaging studies. it is recognized that some stress is still likely associated with the imaging procedure. for example, piloerection in resident males typically occurs within  <dig> sec of introduction of the intruder male in a homecage test, while the response is delayed for up to  <dig> sec in the imaging environment. this delay may be due to the added complication of head restrain and stress in this experimental paradigm. nonetheless, the piloerection occurs reliably and is highly correlated with the peak bold response in many brain areas.

the imaging of brain changes in response to a novel, sexually receptive female was one of the more vexing problems we encountered in these studies. in the presence of a receptive female, the male resident's teeth-chattered. this did not occur in the homecage environment, only in the imaging environment. teeth-chattering normally occurs under stressful conditions or during psychostimulant treatments and withdrawal from drug dependence  <cit> . teeth chattering has never been observed in any of our previous male rat imaging studies  <cit>  and, interestingly is not observed in stressed animals imaged for the first time without any previous acclimation  <cit> . so it is unique to the imaging environment where the resident male's head is restrained and a novel sexually receptive female is just centimeters away. the teeth-chattering caused an intense level of physiological noise and despite the use of fast spin echo pulse sequences the images were distorted and the data unusable. interestingly, resident males treated with oral srx <dig> or fluoxetine did not teeth chatter, an effect we attribute to the anxiolytic activity of these drugs. consequently, it would be incorrect to assume the neural circuitry activated in the presence of srx <dig> in response to a novel receptive female is a reflection of the neural circuitry of sexual motivation alone. comparing neural circuitry of aggressive motivation with sexual motivation is, in itself, an extremely important study, the data of which would be of interest to many in the field of psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience. however, the objective of the present study was to compare the pattern of brain activation of two drugs know to suppress offensive aggression in the resident/intruder paradigm. the sexual behavior was a control for drug specificity in the context of another highly emotional stimulus.

positive bold signal changes like those reported are a function of increased cerebral blood flow , blood volume and oxygenated hemoglobin. consequently, perturbations in mean arterial blood pressure that affect cerebral blood flow  could indirectly affect bold signal independent of neuronal activity. indeed, data on bold imaging obtained from anesthetized rats show a clear correlation between increased mean arterial blood pressure, cbf and positive bold signal independent of neuronal activity  on cbf in conscious male rats. without any acclimation, rats were restrained and imaged for regional cbf using arterial spin labeling. these same animals were then acclimated to the restraint and imaging procedure over the next several days and again imaged for regional cbf. there were no significant difference in cbf between the stress and non-stressed conditions for any brain region. these results attest to the effectiveness of cerebral autoregulation in conscious rats under extreme physiological conditions and corroborate an earlier study that showed no effect of immobilization stress on regional cbf in conscious rats  <cit> . it is only under conditions of severe drug-induced transient hypertension  in conscious rats were cerebral autoregulation fails and cbf becomes pressure dependent  <cit> .

the use of a 3d segmented atlas with the co-registration of multiple subjects into the same volume of interest allows for region-of-interest based analyses giving measures of the volume of activation, i.e. voxel numbers, and the average percent change in bold signal for those activated voxels. this 3d perspective of brain function shows that stimulus-induced activation in awake animals includes an increase in bold signal and a recruitment of more brain volume in a region-of-interest. this data analysis reporting both a change in bold signal intensity and volume of activation has appeared in two of our earlier studies  <cit>  and provides a unique perspective on neural coding using fmri. functional mri and electrophysiology in anesthetized animals produces data that favor a labeled-line or feed forward interpretation of transmitted information. following sensory stimulation, the relay of information to the cerebrum is reflected in a clean topographical representation at each synaptic relay of well-defined sensory receptive fields. for example, in anesthetized rats bold signal change in response to electrical stimulation of the skin of one foot is restricted to the contra-lateral somatosensory cortex with little or no activation outside the predicted receptive field  <cit> . however, under awake conditions, the same electrical stimulus to foot activates a greater area of the contralateral somatosensory cortex; moreover, the ipsilateral somatosensory cortex is activated  <cit> . the expansion of bold signal across a larger area of the contralateral somatosensory cortex could be explained by better neurovascular coupling as it is well know that anesthesia blunts the cortical hemodynamic response to sensory stimulation  <cit>  however, the appearance of bold signal on the ipsilateral somatosensory cortex requires an integrated response from a distributed neural circuit.

similarly, in electrophysiology studies, it was shown that anesthesia restricts and limits the boundaries of receptive fields  <cit> . however, simultaneous electrophysiological recordings made with multiunit electrodes from different brain areas in awake animals show a dynamic spatiotemporal quality to sensory stimulation that stretch beyond the conventional boundaries of receptive fields. the fixed topographical representation of sensory information as it ascends through the brain stem and thalamus to the cortex is replaced by distributed, integrated neural circuits that are highly flexible and can reorganize and adjust to the flow of sensory information  <cit>  levels of learning, attention or emotional arousal add another dimension to the sensory processing  <cit> . for example, the auditory cortex has a tonotopic or frequency map for different sounds. tonal frequencies activate highly specific topographical areas of the auditory cortex. when these tones are associated with stimuli having emotional valence they spread over a larger cortical area not defined by the labeled line theory of neuronal coding  <cit> . consequently, the area of activation in electrophysiology studies, or in our case, volume of activation in fmri studies, is a critical measure in sensory processing. bold imaging using the volume of activation as a surrogate measure of neuronal activity is in agreement with population coding and the spread of signal across traditional boundaries as assessed with electrophysiology. recently, it was reported that discrete micro-stimulation of the visual cortex of monkeys results in a horizontal spread of bold signal change that exceeds the passive spread of electrical current, despite the use of anesthesia  <cit> . this horizontal spread of bold signal in the cortex likely represents one mechanism contributing to increase in the volume of activation in fmri studies.

CONCLUSIONS
the "papez circuit" revisited
early work by paul bard  <cit>  showed that emotional expression or the motor components of aggression in dogs persisted following ablation of the cortex and the anterior thalamus. from experimental and clinical studies, the neuropathologist james papez proposed a neural circuit of emotional experience or subjective feelings that included the hippocampus, anterior thalamic nuclei, mammillary body and cortex of the gyrus cinguli . afferent connections from the mammillary bodies to the anterior thalamus represented the integration of emotional expression in the hypothalamus and emotional feelings in the cortex. information from the anterior thalamic nuclei is conveyed to the gyrus cinguli where it is passed onto the forebrain cortex  and spread laterally over the somatosensory, parietal and auditory cortices. the posterior cingulum  has an extensive afferent connection to the hippocampus through the angular bundle. from the hippocampus, information is conveyed to the hypothalamus and mammillary bodies through the fornix, completing the circuit. at the time this circuit was proposed the role of the hippocampus in cognitive function was uncertain. moreover, while olfaction and the involvement of the amygdala with its connections to the stria terminalis and the lateral hypothalamus were mentioned by papez, they were not integrated into the neural circuitry of emotion because at the time they had no ascribed function. the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation described in this study using fmri has the key components of the "papez circuit" together with the olfactory circuitry and lateral hypothalamus that were missing from his original thesis. the distributed neural circuit of aggressive motivation described herein includes neural substrates contributing to emotional expression , emotional experience  and the anterior thalamic nuclei that bridge the motor and cognitive components of aggressive responding.

vasopressin/serotonin and the control of aggression
enhanced serotonin neurotransmission is associated with a reduction in aggressive responding via interaction with 5-ht1a and 5-ht1b receptors. in the present study, oral fluoxetine, known to cause accumulation of 5-ht in hypothalamic intersitium, suppressed aggression and diminished bold activation across the putative neural circuit of aggressive motivation. conversely, vasopressin neurotransmission promotes aggression by interacting with v1a receptors. oral srx <dig> a v1a receptors antagonist, suppressed aggression and produced a general reduction in bold activation in the neural circuitry of aggression similar to that seen with fluoxetine. the observation that fluoxetine and srx <dig> are similar in their fmri profile during suppression of aggressive motivation is not unexpected. there is evidence that the stimulation of aggression by vasopressin is regulated by serotonin. the hypothalamus, the primary site of vasopressinergic facilitation of aggression, has a high density of 5-ht1a and 5-ht1b binding sites and receives a dense innervation of 5-ht fibers and terminals  <cit> . vasopressin neurons in the hypothalamus implicated in the control of aggression appear to be preferentially innervated by 5-ht  <cit> . fluoxetine blocks aggression facilitated by the microinjection of vasopressin in the hypothalamus  <cit> . fluoxetine elevates 5-ht and reduces vasopressin levels in hypothalamic tissue in hamsters  <cit>  and rats  <cit> . serotonin can also block the activity of vasopressin following its release in the hypothalamus as evidenced by the dose-dependent diminution of aggression with injections combining vasopressin and 5-ht1a receptor agonist. enhanced aggression caused by activation of v1a receptors in the hypothalamus is suppressed by the simultaneous activation of 5-ht1a receptors in the same site  <cit> . personality disordered subjects with a history of fighting and assault show a negative correlation for prolactin release in response to d-fenfluramine challenge, indication of a hyposensitive 5-ht system. these same subjects show a positive correlation between csf levels of vasopressin and aggression  <cit> . thus, in humans a hyposensitive 5-ht system may result in enhanced cns levels of vasopressin and the facilitation of aggressive behavior.

while fluoxetine and srx <dig> have similar effects on the putative neural circuitry of aggressive motivation, a markedly different fmri signature was observed with each compound when treated males were challenged with sexual motivating stimuli. with v1a receptor blockade there was activation of the substantia nigra, ventral tegmental area and their afferent projects to the forebrain limbic cortex as well as the dorsal and ventral striatum. measures of sexual activity in home environment were unaffected by srx <dig> treatment. treatment with fluoxetine, on the other hand, resulted in a diminished activation profile to sexual motivating stimuli and inhibition of sexual behavior in the home environment. these opposite effects point to a difference in drug specificity and underscore the serenic properties of srx <dig>  specifically its ability to block aggression without affecting other appetitive behaviors.

