BACKGROUND
tissue microarrays  provide high-throughput analysis of tissue samples for in situ hybridisation and immunohistochemistry, by means of arranging multiple tissue samples in a uniform structure on the surface of a glass slide. tmas allow for large numbers of tissue samples to be analysed simultaneously at dna, rna or protein level.

kononen et al. first illustrated the use of tmas in  <dig>  <cit> . the technique involves the excision of cores of varying diameter  from regions of histological importance on donor tissue blocks and the subsequent insertion of these excised cores into precise co-ordinates on a recipient block. this process is repeated until a two-dimensional matrix of cores is inserted into the recipient block. once the block is complete, sections can be cut from the block, which are then available for any analysis currently performed on full-face tissue sections.

a large amount of data is associated with tmas, ranging from information on the tissue , to their construction, subsequent staining and assessment. it was becoming apparent that applications to assist in pathologist's reviews of tmas are required, as bottlenecks in the storage and manipulation of the data generated are beginning to emerge.

there have been previous attempts to create software applications that facilitate review of tmas  <cit> . the technology has varied from using microsoft excel™ spreadsheets, to the creation of complex databases. manley et al.  developed a relational database to store data and images, which focus on clinical outcome  <cit> . this system consisted of several databases to store tma images, tma information, pathological and clinical information, in microsoft access™. all data was manually entered into a main online form and then transferred into the relevant database table. each image was scanned using a grid structure that overlaid the image of the array. the images were composed of six separate  <dig> × fields, stitched together to form a single image, which was saved as a jpeg image . however, despite the advances made by this system, rapid file sharing over the internet was limited by large image sizes with slow internet connections. also, as the software utilised were commercial applications, adaptations to the functionality of the programs were not possible.

liu et al.  utilised a combination of commercial and in-house applications to store data, digitise images and perform statistical analysis  <cit> . information was stored in microsoft excel™ spreadsheets and reformatted by a program called tma deconvoluter, into a structure that can be further manipulated to allow statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering. although microsoft excel™ spreadsheets are traditionally used by scientists to store data, there is always a significant risk of human error, as large amounts of data entry are required and the object-oriented nature of the data does not lead to optimal data storage in spreadsheets.

the ability to interpret, review and grade histology in tma images across the internet was assessed by bova et al.  <cit> . this study evaluated the reviewer's ability to interpret images of tma cores, in order to assess the presence or absence of prostate cancer and to gleason grade tumours. in 99% of cases, the images were deemed interpretable; this was done by visual inspection. however, it was suggested that on occasion lengthy downloading times would limit the system's practical use. the authors recommended that compressed files of less than  <dig> kb should be evaluated for viable image quality, as using files of this size would reduce downloading times. inter-and intra-observer variability was found to be no greater, and in some cases less than, that reported when using traditional microscope-based gleason grading. this was evaluated by comparing the inter-and intra-observer variability observed in bova et al. study of on line analysis with those previously reported in literature for inter-and intra-observer of tma glass slide analysis. when evaluating levels of inter-and intra-observer agreement, bova et al. used percentage of complete agreement, and k coefficient of agreement. they concluded that web-based technology was an acceptable means to review tmas. the authors believed a limitation of their study was that web-based analysis was not directly compared with their microscope-based review. the authors recommended that this technology be tested using data resulting from immunohistochemical and in situ hybridisation reviews.

the advent of virtual slides permitted the review of whole tissue slides across the internet  <cit> . virtual slides provide users all the functionality of a microscope, but with numerous additional benefits, including concurrent access for multiple users, tracking of review movements and image annotation. virtual slides are reminiscent of microscope use, they are favoured by pathologists over static digital images, due to the ability to change magnification and scroll laterally while reviewing the image.

the aim of this study was to develop and validate a software application that would combine the benefits of virtual slides and online relational database technology, to facilitate tma reviews and scoring via the internet. to validate the software system developed, a study was created to ensure the system could achieve comparable results to those obtained from traditional glass slide analysis. the study examined users' ability to agree when performing virtual and glass reviews of six immunohistochemically stained tissue microarrays, across eight parameters.

RESULTS
two reviewers  examined  <dig> tma spots  stained with  <dig> immunostains using both review methods . neither user reported any technical difficulties when performing digital or microscope analysis. the levels of intra-and inter-observer variability between digital and microscope tma reviews were assessed, for parameters examining the amount of core and tumour present, the amount and intensity of membrane, cytoplasmic and nuclear staining.

the parameter, % tumour present, was difficult to assess, with low agreement recorded for inter-and intra-observer agreements across virtual and glass tma reviews. as this parameter has equivalent levels of inter-observer variability for both virtual and glass tma reviews, it has to be assumed that poor performance is not based on the method, but more likely the size of the range used. a 10% interval was used to quantify the amount of tumour present, which appears too constrained for this parameter.

reviewers found quantification of the parameter membrane intensity difficult to reproduce between virtual and glass tma reviews. when users assessed membrane intensity using a microscope, they predominantly used two categories of staining intensity, negative and moderate. with the virtual tma review, users appeared to use the classifier more extensively, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the assessment of intensity of immunohistochemistry, particularly the intensity of membrane bound immunostains is inherently difficult. for example, problems with her- <dig> assessment by immunohistochemistry are well documented  <cit> .

discussion
the objective of this study was to design and develop an online software application that presents tissue microarray images and stores associated review and clinical data. the result was the virtual tissue matrix , which consists of tma images available at multiple magnifications, scoring forms to gather tma review data and a relational database to store the generated results.

the vtm displays virtual tma images via a web site and facilitates the storage of tma data via a relational database. there are numerous advantages of using the vtm over other proposed software systems of its type. downloading of the images is rapid. only views that are requested by the user are returned at maximum resolution, thereby downloading the minimum required dataset. the vtm was designed in consultation with scientists and pathologists and, as a result, the reviewing process emulates the workflow involved in conventional tma reviews. the vtm interface is delivered in html, via a conventional web browser, allowing for intuitive user interaction. the vtm database is relational; a structure more suited to the storage of the object oriented dataset generated from tma experimentation, than previous efforts incorporating flat files and spreadsheets for data storage.

since the creation of the vtm there have been numerous advances in the technologies used for image acquisition  <cit>  and image analysis techniques and applications have been well documented in literature  <cit> . integrated intuitive systems are now available that rely on minimal human intervention when scanning slides such as aperio or dmetrix  <cit> . numerous commercial image acquisition applications are now available <cit> ; however, cost of purchase is often high for these integrated systems putting them out of reach for many research laboratories.

the vtm has been upgraded to support images generated by an aperio scanscope t <dig> scanner™. advantages of using the aperio scanscope t <dig> scanner™ include, batch uploading of slides, the ability to scan glass tma slides at  <dig> × magnification within minutes, one touch scanning which reduces manual intervention, automatic section of autofocus points within the tissue, and seamless images with no tiling artifacts. despite the advances in image acquisition and the obvious advantages automated systems have over older more labour intensive systems, these systems do not wholly address the problem of relating tma images to review and image analysis data.

the method used to acquire digital images within the vtm is not the main concern of this manuscript, the technology is constantly developing and advancing, and as new and improved systems are developed they can be integrated into the vtm with ease as illustrated by the upgrade to aperio™.

once developed the vtm was validated, via assessment of inter-and intra-observer variability on two users' evaluations of immunohistochemically stained tissue microarrays, using digital and microscope analysis. eight parameters were evaluated, the amount of core and tumour present, the amount and intensity of membrane, cytoplasmic and nuclear staining.

comparisons evaluated in this study illustrated that intra-and inter-observer virtual tma reviews produced equivalent levels of agreement as intra-and inter-observer glass tma reviews, for five out of the eight parameters examined. where discrepancies occurred it was dependent on the parameters and users involved.  in all comparisons, low levels of agreement for the amount of tumour present were observed. this was not surprising, as the application of classifiers to any data continuum  results in scoring variability around the interfaces of the classifier. this variability is increased when the number of classes are increased creating more interfaces. also, of the two reviewers used, one was a scientist and one a pathologist. the scientist accurate interpretation of tumour/non tumour may potentially be questioned as a result of this work.

of particular interest, were a large number of observations that were considered positively stained by virtual tma reviews which were considered negatively stained when reviewed using a microscope. this was particularly evident when quantifying the amount of cytoplasmic staining; where virtual tma reviews observed substantially more positively stained spots than glass tma reviews. the additional positively stained spots were largely considered to stain between 1–30% of the tumour area and/or to be weakly stained. this suggests that virtual tma reviews may be more successful in allowing the identification of small areas of staining and/or where staining intensity is low.

one proposed reason for the identification of staining when using digital images that was not observed with a microscope was the use of correcting adjustments to the image data during the digitising of tmas. bulbs used in microscopes have a characteristic tint; in general this is yellow or straw coloured. however, this tint is removed when digitising slides using a corrective algorithm, potentially unmasking weak staining that would otherwise be attributable to background tint. also, with microscope based analysis, background light is adjusted to best suit each individual spot. when digitising the slides for this study, a constant background light intensity was used to digitise all slides for this study.

excluding nuclear staining, where positive staining was infrequent, agreement levels were low when examining staining intensity. when using a conventional microscope, in general, users failed to utilise all grades within the classifier to characterise positive staining intensity; the category of moderate staining was repeatedly used when positive staining was observed, particularly for membrane staining. however, with digital reviews, all grades within the classifier were utilised more extensively, which suggests that the review of digital images gives a user more confidence to discriminate between different intensities and that subtle differences in intensity may be easier to detect when utilising digital slides, than when utilising a microscope. this may be due to the standardisation in lighting while preparing the images.

human observers, while excellent at object classification, are inherently poor at quantifying intensities and areas to any degree of accuracy. studies have shown that image analysis produces more reproducible results than pathologists for quantifying the intensity of staining, in relation to β-catenin expression in tmas for colon cancer  <cit> . image analysis systems may identify subtle differences in staining intensity, which are not quantifiable by a human reviewer, thus leading to the better correlation of expression data to prognostic indicators.

CONCLUSIONS
the virtual tissue matrix  was created to assist in tma analysis, by providing digital tma images at multiple magnifications online, and submitting tma review data from an online form into an associated database. the vtm illustrated that digital tma analysis obtained equivalent levels of agreement as microscope based analysis, for five out of eight parameters. the remaining three parameters achieved greater levels of agreement when performed using microscope analysis. however, on further investigation of the three parameters, it is proposed that the digital reviews may be providing the user with greater capability to accurately assess staining presence and intensity. results illustrated users were incapable of agreeing when comparing digital and microscope tma analysis when classifying staining intensity. greater levels of staining was observed when performing digital tma analysis, it is suggested this is due to the background correction step involved in digitising the slides.

comparisons of digital with glass reviews of immunohistochemistry stained slides is well documented in literature, however, in order to validate the vtm it was necessary to perform this study. as previously reported in literature, there was some degree of inter-and intra-observer variability. however, the ability of users to observe more positive staining when performing digital reviews, and the inability of users to utilise all categories within the classifiers provided when performing glass reviews are previously unreported in literature.

