BACKGROUND
the molecular characterization of canine lung cancer remains limited compared to the more comprehensive evaluation of human pulmonary adenocarcinoma . a few similarities between the human and canine pulmonary adenocarcinoma  molecular signatures have been identified and include the presence of kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene mutations and overexpression of the epidermal growth factor receptor   <cit> . if canine lung tumors could be classified into distinct molecular subsets based on genomic alterations, use of targeted therapies may improve clinical outcomes.

tyrosine kinase receptors  are a family of cell-surface receptors that signal primarily through tyrosine phosphorylation events  <cit> . many tkrs have been identified as key regulators of oncogenesis. alterations in tkrs result in aberrant activation of their downstream intracellular signaling pathways that are linked to cancer growth, cell migration, cell-cycle control, cell survival, angiogenesis and metastasis. tkrs may become dysregulated by several oncogenic mechanisms including mutations, protein overexpression and increased gene copy number. the established dysregulation of tkrs and their contribution to lung cancers has continued to drive the development of drugs that block or attenuate tkr activity.

the egfr is a tkr that has been identified as an oncogenic driver in certain subsets of human non-small cell lung cancer . approximately 60% of hpac express egfr. as such, egfr has become an important therapeutic target for the treatment of these tumors. a range of somatic mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of egfr have been identified and are characterized by short deletions in exon  <dig>  point mutations in exons  <dig> and  <dig>  single nucleotide substitutions that may occur throughout exons  <dig> to  <dig>  in-frame duplications and/or insertions predominately in exon  <dig> and rarely, an exon  <dig> mutation. short deletions in exon  <dig> and an l858r point mutation in exon  <dig> account for greater than 85% of the mutations. mutations in the egfr tyrosine kinase domain result in destabilization of its conformation and constitutive kinase activity which provides continuous activation of its downstream signaling pathways. lung cancers harboring constitutively active mutant egfr are exquisitely sensitive to egfr tyrosine kinase inhibitors  with response rates reported from 27-100%  <cit> .

treatment for hpac is surgical resection and adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy in combination with vinorelbine. primary radiation therapy is used in patients with inoperable stage ii disease or with patients that have operable tumors with medical contraindications to surgery. selective patients may benefit from molecularly-targeted therapy used in combination with chemotherapy, as a single first line-agent or maintenance chemotherapy. the results of standard treatment are poor as the 5-year relative survival rate varies depending on the stage at diagnosis from 49% to 16% to 2% for patients with local, regional and distant stage disease, respectively  <cit> . chemotherapy for the dog has been largely unrewarding, with minimal responses to vindesine, cisplatin, and partial responses to vinorelbine  <cit> . no responses were seen in dogs with primary cpac treated with the inhaled antineoplastic drugs paclitaxel or doxorubicin  <cit> . a dog with the diagnosis of primary bronchogenic carcinoma was treated with the tki, toceranib, and was reported to have stable disease of 34+ weeks  <cit> .

as the molecular profile of cpac has not been well-characterized, identification of therapeutic targets that would potentially have relevant biological activity is impossible. therefore, the objectives of this study were to define tkr expression and their phosphorylation state in cpac as well as to evaluate the tumors for the presence of potential egfr tyrosine kinase activating mutations in exons 18– <dig> 

RESULTS
sample demographics
twelve cases of cpac  met inclusion criteria. the mean age at presentation was  <dig>  years . eight of the dogs were castrated males and four were spayed females. the most represented breeds were basset hound, miniature schnauzer, labrador retriever , and a single case from a border collie, boxer, pomeranian, scottish terrier and mixed breed. fifty percent of the dogs  were classified as large breeds, 25%  were medium breeds and 25%  were small breeds.

histopathology
tumors classified as adenocarcinomas or the recognized subtypes were papillary 5/ <dig> , bronchioloalveolar carcinoma 6/ <dig>  and acinar 1/ <dig> . hematoxylin and eosin  stained sections were used to determine histologic differentiation. tumors varied in their degree of differentiation with 67% characterized as well-differentiated, 25% as moderately differentiated and 8% as poorly differentiated. companion lung tissue classified as “normal” by clinical and histological appearance was present for all  <dig> cases.

selected receptor tyrosine kinase mrna expression in cpac biospecimens
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction  was used to identify the presence of cpac mrna of fifteen different receptor and cytoplasmic tyrosine and serine/threonine kinases . message for all the selected tkrs and downstream serine and threonine kinases in table  <dig> was present in all of the twelve dog’s tumors and companion normal lung biospecimens. densitometry of relative rt-pcr egfr tumor transcripts were significantly decreased compared to normal lung egfr message, whereas transcripts for alk were significantly increased in tumors compared to the corresponding normal tissue alk message  .

ihc quantification of tyrosine kinase protein expression in tma cpac and normal lung biospecimens
canine pulmonary adenocarcinoma tissue microarrays were used to discover putative tkr tumor expression phenotypes. all cpac and normal lung core specimens were available for ihc analysis. subjective classification of immunopositivity for egfr localization in normal lung was determined to be in cytoplasm of the bronchial and vascular smooth muscle, basal layer of the bronchial epithelium, alveolar epithelium and the cytoplasm of alveolar macrophages. ckit positive staining of the normal lung was considered moderate and found in cytoplasm of alveolar macrophages. normal lung pdgfrα immunopositivity was located in the nucleus and cytoplasm of alveolar epithelium and macrophages, whereas the bronchiolar epithelium demonstrated moderate diffuse staining of the cell membrane, cytoplasm and nucleus. strong immunopositivity for pdgfrβ was predominately in the pulmonary interstitium, pneumocytes and peribronchiolar fibroblasts of the normal pulmonary biospecimens. faint vegfr <dig> positive reactivity was present in interalveolar fluid of the normal lung as well as found on either side of the pneumocytes, while positive staining for the ligand, vegf, was present in the cytoplasm of bronchiolar epithelium and alveolar macrophages .

canine pulmonary adenocarcinoma tma cores were subjectively graded by a board-certified pathologist using a semiquantitative scoring scale for intensity and localization of immunolabeling. the slides were evaluated blinded. egfr staining was present in the tumor cell cytoplasm from every dog. positivity for vegfr <dig> was present in 50%  of the patients’ tumors, whereas 100% of the tumors were positive for vegf. only 25%  of the patients’ tumors were positive for c-kit. all tumors were positive for pdgfrα immunoreactivity and had the greatest overall percentage of positive staining neoplastic cells. two cpacs had faint stromal staining for vegf and pdgfrα whereas; pdgfrβ had distinct strong stromal tumor staining in 92%  with faint positive cytoplasmic staining and rare membranous staining of the neoplastic cells in 75%  .

result numbers  and percentages  represent number of cpac- affected dogs. percentage of neoplastic cells staining positive were scored as follows: 1-5% =  <dig>  5-25% =  <dig> 26-50% =  <dig> and >50% =  <dig>  c: cytoplasmic, m: membranous, n: nuclear, s: stromal. no staining represents number and percentage of cpac-affected dogs that have no evidence of any positive immunoreactivity.

all  <dig> normal and tumor tissue sets of tma cores were used for ihc quantification. the greatest ihc percent positivity was seen for the tkr, pdgfr family. a statistically significant increase in the percentage of strong staining for pdgfrα was present in cpac compared to normal lung as determined by both the positive pixel or color deconvolution algorithms. both algorithms also quantified a statistically significant increase in the percentage of strong staining pdgfrβ and vegfr <dig> in the normal lung cores compared to the cpac cores . a greater percentage of strong staining intensity for the growth factor vegf was present in cpac biospecimens, however; the cpac vegf quantification only reached statistical significance when compared to the normal lung cores using the color deconvolution algorithm. quantification of the percentage of egfr strong immunopositivity was significantly increased in the cpac using the positive pixel algorithm; however, when the measurement of percent strong positive staining considered the entire tissue core using color deconvolution algorithm, the normal lung cores had a slightly greater positivity compared to the cpac. both algorithms quantified c-kit staining as negligible in all tissues.

relative level of receptor and cytoplasmic tyrosine and serine/threonine kinase phosphorylation in cpac biospecimens
to begin to identify which kinase families and downstream signaling nodes are expressed and activated in cpac, we evaluated the phosphorylation state of  <dig> tkrs and  <dig> downstream signaling cascades using a slide-based antibody array. the phosphorylation status of the tkrs and signaling nodes were determined in the normal lung tissue and tumor for each dog . the overall mean phosphotkr and signaling node fluorescence intensities were greater in the cpac when compared to normal lung, with the cpacs having increased phosphorylation of 75%  of the tkrs and 64%  of the signaling nodes . when considering tkr families, the strongest cpac fluorescence intensities were identified in the egfr and insulin r families. phosphorylation of the fibroblast growth factor receptor,  family was the greatest in the normal lung with phosphofgfr <dig> and fgfr <dig> accounting for the increased intensities. statistically significant increases in the phosphorylation of cpac tkrs were found for pdgfr, her <dig>  alk, ephb <dig> and ephb <dig> and the signaling node insulin substrate receptor- <dig>  a summary of the percentage of biospecimens that had tkr phosphorylation are presented in table  <dig>  all tumor and normal lung biospecimens had positive fluorescence and therefore phosphorylation of all serine and threonine signaling nodes.

phosphorylation of biospecimen protein lysate was determined by the presence of fluorescence that was quantified after normalization to the array spotted positive and negative controls for each sample. each receptor was assayed in duplicates and the mean fluorescence for that receptor was recorded. n, represents the number of positive samples and  represents the percentage out of  <dig> total samples.

mutational profiling of egfr
to begin to understand if egfr expression and activation in cpac could be related to altered egfr tyrosine kinase signaling, genomic dna for the egfr exons,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> from each cpac and matched normal lung biospecimens was sequenced. no mutations were identified for any of the exons in either the non-affected or affected lung tissues of any of the patients.

discussion
in hnsclc, tkrs frequently become mutated, overexpressed or become fusion genes as a result of chromosomal translocations. these alterations perturb cell behavior resulting in constitutive and aberrant activation of mitogenic cellular pathways. oncogenic tkr drivers in hpacs include egfr mutations, erbb <dig> insertions, alk, ros <dig> and ret fusions, and met amplifications. the importance of the identification of patients with these aberrant tkrs has led to personalized small molecule inhibitor therapy and thus has improved progression-free survival  rates. the findings in this study parallels those found in hnsclc as we demonstrate statistically significant increases in the phosphorylation of five tkrs and one downstream signaling node as well as increased tkr immunohistochemical expression for four tkrs in cpac. notably, increased phosphorylation of erbb <dig> and alk receptors were found in our cohort of cpac biospecimens, which recapitulates the findings in hpacs. gene amplification, epigenetic mechanisms and oncogenic viruses as causes of the increased tkr protein were not evaluated in the current study.

the egfr is a tkr whose activation is crucial for the growth and survival of hpac. two studies to date have evaluated egfr expression using ihc in cpacs tissues  <cit> . the localization of egfr protein to the bronchial epithelium and submucosal glands of the normal lung parenchyma in the present study corresponds to the findings of previous studies  <cit> . however in our population of dogs, egfr ihc positivity was also present in both the alveolar macrophages and alveolar epithelial cytoplasm. although human alveolar macrophages produce egf in a tissue and disease-specific manner  <cit> , they do not have the egfr receptor, suggesting that the antibody used to detect egfr in this study may lack specificity to distinguish between the ligand and receptor as they do have protein sequence homology at the c-terminus  <cit> . unlike human alveolar macrophages which only produce egf, type ii pneumocytes of adult rats produce egf and express egfr which use an autocrine mechanism that likely regulates pneumocyte differentiation and growth  <cit> .

semiquantitative evaluation of ihc indicated that all cpac had immunopositivity for egfr and therefore at least 1-25% of the neoplastic cells had egfr staining. the percentage of dogs with neoplastic cell egfr positivity in this study is similar to what has been previously reported. in a study that had  <dig> cases of cpac, 80% of the tumors expressed egfr and of the cpacs that had egfr, the percentage of tumor cells counted as positive ranged from 20-100%  <cit> . genetic alterations similar to those found in human egfr exons were investigated by sequencing the tyrosine kinase domains of both the cpacs and the non-affected tissues for detection of deletions, mutations or single nucleotide polymorphisms in exons 18– <dig>  sequence analysis of the cpac egfr tkr domains did not identify any significant nucleotide substitutions. additional genomic analysis of cpacs for the egfr transforming c-terminal domain deletion mutants of exons  <dig> to  <dig> and exons  <dig> to  <dig> should be performed as these are designated as chemo-responsive to anti-egfr therapy  <cit> .

the statistically significant increased phosphorylation fluorescence intensity of the egfr family member her <dig>  raises the possibility of this receptor playing a pivotal role in malignant progression. erbb <dig> uniqueness from its other family members is its inability to directly bind any known egf family ligand and its permanent fixation in the constitutively active conformation. as such, erbb <dig> heterodimers demonstrate increased potency in conveying extracellular signals  <cit> . erbb <dig> does not have intrinsic catalytic kinase activity. the most powerful signaling heterodimer in the egfr family is composed of erbb <dig> and erbb <dig> which functions as an oncogenic unit  <cit>  capable of activating the pi3k/akt pathway. novel oncogenic erbb <dig> extracellular domain mutants have been identified in hpac, which are activated by elevated c-terminal tail phosphorylation or by the formation of disulfide-linked dimers  <cit> . cell lines that overexpress erbb <dig> extracellular domain mutants have been shown to become potently oncogenic and have increased cell motility  <cit> . the increased phosphorylation and therefore constitutive activation erbb <dig> in cpac provides rationale for detailed mechanistic evaluation.

approximately  <dig> to 7% of hnsclc tumors are characterized by rearrangement of the gene encoding anaplastic lymphoma kinase  most commonly with echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like  <dig>  resulting in constitutively active kinases with transforming capacity  <cit> . tumors identified as having alk fusion proteins have a dramatic therapeutic response to specific alk inhibitors  <cit> . the small molecule inhibitor crizotinib has demonstrated high anti-tumoral activity, significantly higher response rate and longer pfs in alk-positive defined lung cancers. alk phosphorylation was significantly increased in our cpac cohort, as were the cpac alk mrna transcripts. as ihc represents a common method for detection of protein expression, we evaluated the tma for immunostaining of alk to validate the mrna and phosphorylation results. unfortunately, immunostaining for alk was negative using the selected antibody and method on formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples of canine normal lung, cpac and the three positive control canine tumors. however, ihc alk staining was positive when used on hpac tissue section known to have an alk-fusion protein. ihc detection of alk in hnsclc tumors presents a significant challenge due to differential expression of alk protein occurring at a low level and due to the performance of current available fluorescence in situ hybridization and ihc methods which lack sensitivity and reproducibility  <cit> . to improve ihc assay sensitivity, a novel, non-endogenous hapten, 3-hydroxy-2-quinoxaline and tyramide amplification into a dab-hrp based assay has been developed and detects low levels as well as heterogeneous alk protein expression in nsclc tmas but it is not commercially available  <cit> . the findings of increased cpac alk mrna expression and phosphorylation as well as the trend toward increased cpac phosphorylation of the downstream akt and mapk pathways, would provide reason for speculation that alk may be a promoter of cpac tumorigenesis.

the identification of significant increases in pdgfrα protein expression and phosphorylation in cpac may represent a mechanism to promote angiogenesis  <cit> . pdgfrα –mediated paracrine signaling between tumor cells and stromal fibroblasts was found to be a principal mechanism for stroma recruitment and tumor growth especially when tumor cells are deficient in vegf production  <cit> . the protein for the angiogenic growth factor, vegf, was also increased in both quantitative tma analyses as was the phosphorylation of vegfr <dig>  although not reaching statistical significance. the finding of a significantly increased vegfr <dig> protein by ihc in the normal lung likely reflects the presence of vast vascular capillary plexus that surrounds alveoli. only 20% of humans with nsclc have increased tumor vegfr <dig> expression which correlates with a highly angiogenic phenotype. human nsclc angiogenesis is triggered by a tumor vegf/vegfr <dig> autocrine feed-forward loop which amplifies vefg secretion by tumor cells and when this loop is inhibited, the tumor changes to a proliferative phenotype that sensitizes tumor cells to mapk inhibition  <cit> . taken together, the data may suggest that cpacs have activated receptors that likely contribute to angiogenesis pathways for promotion of tumor growth and metastasis.

CONCLUSIONS
an acknowledged limitation to this work is that it is descriptive in nature. the observed phosphorylation of the tkrs and downstream effectors needs to be further validated in cpac cell lines that are known to express these receptors. this may be difficult as canine cpac cell lines are scarce. furthermore, protein expression by ihc does not directly correlate with a causative role in tumor growth and survival. the observed discrepancy between tumor ihc egfr protein expression level could be due to the qualitative nature of ihc with the use of an egfr antibody that lacked sensitivity for canine tissue, differences in sensitivities of the two digital positive pixel quantification algorithms, as well as, the subjective determination of the staining by the pathologist. furthermore, the samples used for the tumor lysates were not microdissected and thus contain tumor, stroma and non-neoplastic cell infiltrates. when comparing receptor mrna and protein levels in a tumor to “histologically normal lung” tissue within the same individual, it is possible that molecular pathology has preceded the development of morphologically identifiable changes through the “field of cancerization” effect. as such, the normal tissue may have been in a precancerous state diminishing the possibility of finding differences. although we found no evidence of mutations or significant single nucleotide polymorphisms in the selected egfr exons that were sequenced from the normal lung tissues when compared to the ncbi canine reference gene, we are unable to definitively state that the “normal” lung tissue was not in a molecularly significant pre-neoplastic state for every receptor evaluated in this study. the inability to detect statistically significant differences in many of the tkrs at the protein and phosphoprotein levels may have been affected by the power of the study. if differences in the number of the receptors between the normal lung and the cpac were relatively large, the power would be less affected however, given the heterogeneity of tumors it may be that the number of primary cpacs used was not sufficient to find a statistically significant result. finally, the multiplexed phosphorylation tkr assay is labeled for human phosphorylation receptor detection as only approximately 50% of the phosphotyrosine receptor antibodies have been validated for canine use. thus, the use of this comprehensive screening array could potentially have a lower sensitivity and specificity in our patient population.

nevertheless, this work establishes that cpac tkrs are detected at both the mrna and protein levels and are activated. although this study analyzed a limited number of samples, the results expand our cpac knowledge and indicate that much work is still needed in this field.

