BACKGROUND
sarcoids are locally invasive skin tumours of equids and are considered to be the most common equine cutaneous neoplasm worldwide
 <cit> . macroscopically, sarcoids vary and six different clinical types are recognized: occult, verrucous, nodular, fibroblastic, mixed and malevolent
 <cit> . they are histologically characterized by disorganized dermal proliferation of spindle-shaped fibroblasts that form whorls and by epidermal hyperplasia, hyperkeratosis, and rete peg formation
 <cit> . the tumours can occur anywhere on animal’s body; however they often arise in areas of previous injury or scarring; additionally, they very rarely regress, more often persist and can be locally aggressive. currently, there is no effective therapy available for sarcoids
 <cit> .

many reports in the literature have shown that bpv type  <dig> and less commonly type  <dig> are involved in the pathogenesis of sarcoids. recent studies have highlighted the role of the bpv oncogenes e <dig> and e <dig> in the carcinogenesis
 <cit> . however, little is known regarding the molecular mechanisms underlying sarcoid tumourigenesis and only few genes contributing to the development of this neoplastic disease have been identified so far
 <cit> .

several studies associate the development of cancer to the loss of function of a number of oncosuppressor genes. in a recent work  we have provided evidence for an altered expression of the fhit protein in sarcoid tissues and derived cell lines. fhit is the first oncosuppressor gene whose aberrant expression has been associated to equine sarcoids whereas it is frequently altered in human tumours associated to papillomavirus infection.

mgmt is another oncosuppressor gene often inactivated in human pv-induced tumours. this gene, also called o6-alkylguanine-dna alkyltransferase, encodes for a dna repair protein that removes mutagenic and cytotoxic adducts from o6-guanine in dna
 <cit> . alkylation of dna at the o <dig> position of guanine is an important step in the formation of mutations in cancer, primarily due to the tendency of the o6–methylguanine to pair with thymine during replication, resulting in the conversion of guanine-cytosine to adenine-thymine pairs in dna
 <cit> . moreover, the o <dig> –methylguanine adducts crosslink with the opposite cytosine residues, blocking dna replication
 <cit> . mgmt is able to protect cells from such biological processes, resulting in the direct restoration of the normal guanine structure
 <cit> . the alkylated mgmt becomes detached from dna and is degraded through ubiquitination-dependent proteolysis
 <cit> .

the expression of the mgmt protein is decreased in a wide spectrum of human tumours due to several genetic mechanisms and as a consequence of the hypermethylation of the promoter region
 <cit> . in some human cancers, such as gliomas, inactivation of mgmt gene correlates with a better prognosis as this condition allows a better responsiveness to therapy with alkylating agents
 <cit> .

mgmt is a well-known target for methylation inactivation in hpv-induced cancer
 <cit>  but its role in bpv-induced cancer has not been investigated so far. dna methylation is a frequent epigenetic event in many human cancers. many studies have pointed out that promoter methylation of tumour suppressor genes is linked with hpv-induced cervical carcinogenesis
 <cit> .

whilst alterations in mgmt expression have been reported for several human cancers comprising those induced by hpv, a putative role of this gene and of epigenetic alteration, to the best of our knowledge, has never been investigated in veterinary oncology
 <cit> .

in order to gain new insights into possible mechanisms underlying bpv-mediated carcinogenesis, we investigated the status of mgmt protein expression in equine sarcoid cell lines and sarcoid tumours. the samples showing significantly reduced mgmt protein expression were further analyzed for the dna methylation status of equine mgmt cpg island spanning the predicted 5′utr.

RESULTS
mgmt protein expression in sarcoids and cell lines
to investigate the potential oncosuppressor involvement in equine sarcoid carcinogenesis, we analyzed immunohistochemically  <dig> out of  <dig> tumour samples for mgmt expression. negative staining for mgmt protein was observed in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases  ;  <dig> sarcoid samples  displayed very weak immunostaining signal in only few areas of the lesion . the remaining sarcoid samples , showed a very faint intracytoplasmic immunostaining signal for mgmt throughout the lesion .

normal fibroblasts derived from healthy horses displayed nuclear and cytoplasmic staining pattern for the mgmt protein. additionally, cells from the different skin layers also stained positive . human tonsil tissue section used as positive control showed positive immunostaining .

we also analyzed the equine sarcoid derived cell lines for the expression of mgmt protein. by indirect immunofluorescence, distinct staining was detected in the e-derm and eqso1a sarcoid cell lines. in e-derm the staining pattern was diffuse and the immunofluorecence signal was detected within the cytosol as well as in the nuclei of mitotic cells . in eqso1a the immunofluorescence signal was detected only within the cytosol and the staining pattern was diffuse . if staining of the sarcoid cell line eqso4b yielded very weak and hardly perceptible signal for mgmt protein .

to further confirm our finding of reduced intralesional mgmt protein expression,  <dig> sarcoid samples, which were available for biochemical analysis and skin from a healthy horse were analysed by western blot. cell lines were also analyzed. the anti-mgmt antibody yielded a band of the expected molecular weight in the neoplastic tissues, normal skin and all fibroblast cell lines. an increase in the amount of mgmt protein level in normal skin versus tumour samples was observed . in addition, mgmt expression levels were lower in eqso4b sarcoid cell line, whilst eqso1a showed similar mgmt expression when compared to e-derm cells .

equine mgmt cpg island and dna methylation analysis in sarcoid tissues and cell lines
the  <dig> sarcoids that stained biochemically or immunohistochemically negative or very weakly positive for mgmt protein expression, were analyzed for the potential involvement of epigenetic mechanisms in the abnormal expression of this oncosuppressor. to this aim, dna methylation profile of the cpg island associated to the putative regulatory region was analyzed. a similar analysis was performed also for sarcoid-derived cell lines eqso1a and eqso4b.

the only equine mgmt sequence available in genbank, is the predicted coding sequence and a partial 5′ utr region . to obtain the horse specific sequence of the upstream region corresponding to the human, murine and bovine cpg island, the cds sequence was used to query the ucsc database. through the blat algorithm and using the horse sep.  <dig>  assembly, the mgmt upstream region was obtained . an unknown region we localized in the ucsc sequence was identified by pcr amplification and subsequent bidirectional sequencing . the cpgplot analysis revealed a cpg island of about  <dig> bp. a region of  <dig> bp, including  <dig> cpgs, was subjected to sodium bisulfite sequencing. figure 
4a shows a not in scale scheme of the 5′ region of the equine mgmt locus, and the relative position of the predicted cpg island  as reconstructed according to the information obtained from ucsc and ncbi databases.

the dna extracted from the sarcoid samples and from a bpv negative normal skin sample, was converted by sodium bisulfite. figure 
4b on the top, shows the cpg island prediction obtained through the methprimer algorithm  and the position of the specific primers obtained using the same algorithm. the region of interest was amplified, cloned and sequenced. for each samples at least  <dig> clones were sequenced. one sarcoid sample showed a clear difference in the dna methylation content compared to the normal control. a similar analysis was performed also for the sarcoid cell lines, eqso1a and eqso4b compared to the e-derm fibroblast cell lines. also the eqso4b showed a different methylation pattern when compared to the normal skin derived cell line e-derm, similarly to that observed in the positive sarcoid sample. in the lower part of figure 
4b, the position of methylated and unmethylated cytosines in the different clones sequenced is shown for normal and sarcoid tissue and for the e-derm cell line and sarcoid cell line eqso4b.

discussion
dna methylation is a frequent epigenetic event in many human cancers
 <cit> . the transcriptional silencing by the hypermethylation of cpg islands in the promoter region, is a well-known common mechanism for the inactivation of tumour suppressor genes in human malignancies
 <cit> . in an ongoing study aiming at investigating the possible epigenetic changes of oncosuppressor genes involved in sarcoid carcinogenesis, we have recently demonstrated a noticeable alteration of expression of the fhit protein , which encouraged the investigation of the role of other oncosuppressor genes and of their regulative mechanisms in sarcoid molecular pathology. since many lines of evidence support the association between hpv infection and mgmt expression alteration
 <cit> , we analyzed the role of the mgmt gene.

in this study we investigated the expression of the mgmt protein within a normal fibroblast cell line  and the fully transformed sarcoid fibroblast lines explanted from an equine sarcoid tumour , as well as the pattern of expression in normal skin and sarcoid tissues. our data indicate, for the first time, a noticeable reduction and or absence of mgmt protein in naturally occurring sarcoid tumours as well as in sarcoid derived cell lines.

sarcoids may exist as six different clinical types
 <cit> , we have not found a correlation between down-regulation of mgmt expression and clinical appearance, suggesting the existence of a common mechanism underlying the reduction of protein expression that acts early during the development of equine sarcoids. our results are in agreement with several previous studies indicating that the loss and or reduced expression of mgmt is frequent in a variety of tumours
 <cit> , particularly in hpv-induced cervical lesions
 <cit> . it is possible that decrease of mgmt protein expression is a common mechanism of cancer development among different species.

it has been suggested that the activity of mgmt increases as the severity of neoplasia and its clinical stage also increases
 <cit> . sarcoid is considered as a “benign” non metastatising tumour. in this regard, it is reasonable to speculate that the reduction and/or absence of mgmt in sarcoids may be correlated to their relative benign biological behavior
 <cit> .

the presence of a functional mgmt gene is essential to avoid occurring mutations in other important genes involved in cancerogenic processeses. the silencing of mgmt gene induces a mutator pathway affecting some oncogenes such as ras
 <cit> . it is worth noting that sarcoid tumours and sarcoid derived cell lines show an up-regulation of ras activity . it is therefore possible to hypothesize a link between mgmt down-regulation and ras constitutive activation. however, further investigations are needed to confirm this, which is at moment only a matter of speculation.

as previously observed for the fhit protein, eqso4b cells revealed lower mgmt expression in comparison to eqso1a. mgmt reduced expression in vitro has been linked to its binding to hpv e <dig> oncoprotein which is able to enhance the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis of this oncosuppressor
 <cit> . additionally, hpv- <dig> e <dig> is able to modulate the dna methylation activity
 <cit> . since the eqso4b cell line contains higher copy numbers of viral genome and oncoprotein transcripts than the eqso1a
 <cit> , it is possible that the observed decreased level of mgmt protein found may directly correlate with bpv oncogene expression levels and be due to a similar mechanisms induced by bpv e5/e <dig> oncoproteins. further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying this peculiar aspect.

promoter methylation is the primary epigenetic alteration associated with transcriptional silencing of tumour suppressor genes during tumourigenesis
 <cit> . to determine if dna methylation was involved in altered mgmt expression in sarcoid tumours, we performed the sodium bisulfite sequencing analysis of the cpg island associated to the 5′ untranslated region of mgmt
 <cit> . our data indicated that in mgmt gene promoter heavy hypermethylation occurred in  <dig> out of the  <dig> analyzed sarcoid samples and in eqso4b cells. the sarcoid sample and the eqso4b cell line showed an overall similar hypermethylation pattern. differences may be explained by the presence of some polymorphisms, a fortiori considering that the analysis was carried out for a not translated region. eqso4b is a primary culture cell line and this may introduce some difference too. moreover it’s to be considered that the region is very complex in its sequence structure and this may promote polymerase slippage.

similar frequency of mgmt hypermethylation is observed in hpv induced cervical cancer
 <cit> , thus supporting the hypothesis that mgmt promoter methylation is not a common feature of pvs induced tumours.

our findings indicate an association between bpv infection and mgmt protein expression alteration suggesting the possibility of a mechanistic role for this gene as a cofactor triggering the development of equine sarcoid tumour in concert with bpv.

CONCLUSIONS
the biochemical, immunohistochemical and immunofluorescence analyses suggest that mgmt protein is reduced or absent in sarcoid tissues and sarcoid derived cell lines. the epigenetic analysis suggests dna methylation as one of the possible causative mechanisms for the loss of expression of mgmt in this tumour. further studies will be useful to confirm these findings and to clarify the other mechanisms underlying mgmt alteration in sarcoid carcinogenesis, but this study represents the first example in veterinary oncology of the epigenetic inactivation of the mgmt oncosuppressor.

