BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer , also known as lateral gene transfer, plays a major role in the evolution of microbial genomes. it helps microorganisms to rapidly acquire new metabolic capabilities and adapt to environmental changes . most genes involved in hgt are associated with pathogenesis, symbiosis, metabolism, and antibiotic resistance  <cit> .

hgt in bacteria is relatively well-studied and several estimates of its rate have been published , while horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to archaea is less well characterized, but was shown to be important for origin of major archaeal clades  <cit> .

hgt was shown to occur between both closely and distantly related organisms  <cit> . according to the complexity hypothesis, horizontal transfer of genes encoding proteins with many protein-protein interactions is relatively infrequent as compared to hgt of genes encoding proteins with fewer interactions  <cit> . besides, genes tend to be transferred between genomes with similar codon usage  <cit> .

hgt between bacteria and archaea was shown to be possible almost for all genes, except for a small fraction of genes toxic to the recipient organism  <cit> .

methanosarcina genomes are among the largest among archaea. it has been suggested that the large genome size in this genus is caused by massive hgt from bacteria  <cit> . other members of the methanosarcinaceae family are a psychrophile methanococcoides burtonii  <cit> , and halophiles methanohalobium evestigatum, methanohalophilus mahii  <cit> , methanolobus psychrophilus, methanosalsum zhilinae, and methanomethylovorans hollandica. all these species except the latter have much shorter genomes than methanosarcina spp.

methanosarcinaceae, like all methanosarcinales, inhabit diverse environments and possess the largest set of metabolic pathways among archaea. methanosarcinales share such traits as acetoclastic methanogenesis, the presence of cytochromes, genes encoding the a, k, and n subunits of reduced coenzyme f <dig>  dehydrogenase, bacterial-type phosphoglycerate mutase, bacterial adenylate kinase, nonhistone chromosomal protein mc <dig> involved in chromosome condensation, and the long variant of condensin subunit scpb  <cit> .

horizontal transfer of a short operon from clostridia  <cit>  was shown to dramatically change methanosarcinales  <cit>  or methanosarcinaceae  <cit>  metabolic capabilities, and allowed these organisms to use methyl compounds as substrates for methanogenesis. strikingly, the first observations of possible hgt in methanosarcina mazei showed that almost all functional types of genes could be horizontally transferred from bacteria to methanosarcina spp.  <cit>  and as much as 30 % of genes in m. acetivorans were predicted to be of bacterial origin  <cit> . about 50 % of genome of m. burtonii was shown to have atypical oligonucleotide composition and high transposon content, suggestive of hgt  <cit> .

analysis of specific patterns of gene gain in archaea was performed using the arcog database  <cit> , and by phylogenetic tree reconstruction  <cit> . in both cases, some groups, and in particular haloarchaea, methanomicrobia and smaller taxonomic groups of methanogenic archaea were shown to acquire substantially more genes  than others. while methanosarcinales had been shown to acquire hundreds of metabolic genes from eubacteria by hgt  <cit> , the origin of such genes and their location in genome, as well as hgt events in the common ancestors of methanosarcinaceae and methanosarcina was not studied in detail. here, we revisit the estimates of the hgt rate in methanosarcina spp. and methanosarcinaceae, and characterize possible donors of ht genes, their functions, operon structure, and gene expression.

RESULTS
hgt identification
groups of orthologous proteins  were built for all methanosarcina spp., as well as for all methanosarcinaceae with similarity cut-offs 50 % and 40 %, respectively .table  <dig> statistics for initial orthologous groups in methanosarcinaceae








the number of gops in each category of groups is presented in brackets in the table header



all gops with more than half proteins annotated as transposases or transposon-associated proteins were removed from the data . the final database contained methanosarcina gops that cover about 65 % of methanosarcina proteins ; 94 %  of gops contained only one orthologous protein per organism; the rest contained paralogs  for at least one species. from initial methanosarcinaceae gops all gops that were already a part of methanosarcina gops were removed, and only gops that have at least one protein from methanosarcina spp., 55 % of the initial methanosarcinaceae gops , were retained in the database. after that,  <dig> methanosarcinaceae gops included in the database did not contain paralogs.

all gops containing bacterial-type genes were selected using blastp . for each selected gop up to  <dig> top blast hits were aligned. using this alignments, two sets of phylogenetic trees were constructed, neighbor-joining trees with bootstraps, and maximum likelihood trees, totaling  <dig> tree sets . if the methanosarcina proteins were on the clade that contained methanosarcina and bacterial proteins but no other archaeal proteins, the corresponding genes were considered to be laterally transferred from bacteria. finally, we identified  <dig> methanosarcina genes from  <dig> gops as likely laterally transferred from bacteria to the methanosarcina last common ancestor. in addition, genes from  <dig> gops were transferred from bacteria to the last common ancestor of all methanosarcinaceae. we further analyzed singletons  and found that  <dig> genes were transferred recently in m. acetivorans;  <dig> genes were transferred in m.barkeri, and  <dig>  in m.mazei. in m. barkeri we observed horizontal transfer of an operon comprised of four bacterial-type crispr-associated proteins . overall,  <dig> ht genes were found in m. acetivorans;  <dig> ht genes, in m. barkeri;  <dig>  in m. mazei . hence, according to our estimates, about 5 % of genes in methanosarcina were horizontally transferred from bacteria to either the last common ancestor of methanosarcinaceae or methanosarcina, or to one of the methanosarcina species.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic trees for some gops. phylogenetic trees constructed by maximum-likelihood algorithm for a acetate kinase acka, involved in acetoclastic methanogenesis, and b uncharacterized alpha/beta hydrolase  . methanosarcina spp. are shown in red, other methanosarcinaceae in orange, firmicutes in light green, actinobacteria in blue, synergistetes in brown, thermotoga in dark-purple, proteobacteria in purple, dictyoglomi in yellow, cyanobacteria in emerald, and aquificae in grey. other archaea are shown in dark blue


methanosarcinaceae

methanosarcina
ma – m. acetivorans, mb – m. barkeri, mm – m. mazei




the m. mazei genome is the smallest one in the genus, and only  <dig> genes in m. mazei remain that have been horizontally transferred to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. this is almost twice fewer than the number of genes transferred to the other two species .

the phylogeny of methanosarcinaceae was reconstructed using 16s rna  <cit>  and by conserved archaeal proteins  <cit> . these phylogenetic trees are not completely congruent. the phylogenetic trees based on proteins involved in translation and on 23s rrna  show that m. mazei and m. acetivorans are more closely related to each other than to m. barkeri, while the phylogenetic tree based on 16s rrna clusters together m. acetivorans and m. barkeri to the exclusion of m. mazei . we found  <dig> gops containing ht genes only from m. mazei and m. acetivorans, and  <dig> gops containing ht genes only from m. acetivorans and m. barkeri, while no gops contained ht genes only from m. mazei and m. barkeri. if the 16s tree reflects the evolution correctly, then multiple hgt events had occurred in the common ancestor of m.acetivorans and m. barkeri, otherwise if the protein-based and 23s rrna trees are correct, then m. mazei has lost a considerable fraction of genes horizontally transferred to the methanosarcina last common ancestor.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic trees for methanosarcinaceae. phylogenetic trees constructed by neighbor-joining algorithm are based on ribosomal proteins , 23s rrna, and 16s rrna



time-scaled simulation of the non-redundant db composition and the predicted hgt rate
the rate of the observed hgt to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina or methanosarcinaceae turned out to be drastically lower than that reported in previous studies  <cit> . two possible explanations for that may be, first, insufficient sensitivity of our procedure or, second, changes in the database composition. to select between these possibilities, hgt searches against a series of time-stamped databases were implemented. the number of bacterial genes in each database was fixed at the  <dig> level, while the number of genes from archaea varied, so that, e.g., the  <dig> database contained all archaeal genes sequenced strictly before  <dig>  in order to make the results consistent with the published data, all bacterial-like genes selected after the blast search were considered ht, without subsequent tree construction. the estimated fraction of candidate bacterial-origin genes in the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. drastically decreases from 37 %  as if in  <dig> to 8 % in  <dig> . additionally,  <dig>  % of genes in  <dig>  seem to be horizontally transferred in the last common ancestor of methanosarcinaceae. figure  <dig> presents the data on m. mazei only, as in previous works the number of hgt events was calculated only for this species. because in this experiment only genes in gops were analyzed, a smaller portion of ht genes in  <dig> were obtained,  <dig> orfs versus  <dig> orfs in previously published results  <cit> .fig.  <dig> relation between the estimated frequency of hgt and the year of db release. to make the results consistent with the published data  <cit> , hgt predictions were based on the results of blast search only, without subsequent tree construction, hence, the shown fractions for  <dig> are higher than mentioned in the text. blue area – hgt in methanosarcina spp., purple – hgt in methanosarcinaceae; see the text for definitions



the drastic change in the predicted rate of hgt to methanosarcina is seen in the  <dig> time-stamped database, when two methanosarcinaceae genomes were sequenced, and events that could be earlier assigned as hgt to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina turned out to be more ancient. hence, the hgt effect on the methanosarcina genomes after their divergence from other methanosarcinales species probably has been overestimated in previous studies, and the hgt rate observed here seems to be more realistic. while the present analysis does not directly address the issue of the total number of genes of bacterial origin in the methanosarcina genomes, this simulation demonstrates that it has likely been overestimated in early studies.

the first control case: hgt in thermotogaceae
thermotoga maritima was also considered to be highly prone to hgt, as it had been claimed that 24 % of genes in these thermophilic bacterium had been transferred from archaea  <cit> . later it was shown that the fraction of possible hgt genes in thermotoga spp. is 8–11 %, but the blast e-value cutoff applied by the authors  was of low stringency  <cit> . we applied our blast-based pipeline to revisit these results. gops were built for proteins of all sequenced thermotogaceae: thermotoga spp., thermosipho spp., petrotoga mobilis, kosmotoga olearia, and fervidobacterium nodosum. all singletons and gops containing transposases were removed. then for all gops that contained t. maritima proteins, the time-stamped pipeline was run, but in this case the numbers of both archaeal and bacterial genomes for each year-stamped database were changed. we found only  <dig> of  <dig> analyzed gops  to be of possible archaeal origin, transferred to the common ancestor either of the genus or the family. this is smaller than the earlier estimates .

then we repeated the procedure not for gops, but for all t. maritima proteins. when the  <dig> database with the lowest cut-offs was considered, only 10 %  of t. maritima genes were seen as possibly horizontally transferred, fewer than  <dig> in the original publication  <cit> , and for the  <dig> database this number is only  <dig>  % , again lower than the previously observed number of  <dig> orfs  <cit> .

our possible explanation for this discrepancy could be that the  <dig> study had considered individual genes, then constituting a large fraction of database entries, while we analyzed only complete genomes.

the second control case: hgt in thermococcaceae
to validate the approach against false positives we ran the hgt prediction procedure on sequenced pyrococcus genomes. pyrococcus spp.  are well-studied, and thought to have small genomes with a low rate of hgt. indeed, the arcogs analysis demonstrated massive gene gain in the last common ancestor of thermococcales, but the origin of these genes was not discussed, although hgt from other archaeal clades was shown to be possible  <cit> . to identify possible events of hgt from bacteria, we applied the pipeline using the same settings as for the methanosarcina spp. all pyrococcus spp. genes were included in gops, no singletons were found, and 76 % of pyrococcus gops contained exactly one orthologous protein per genome, while the rest contained paralogs in at least one species. one hgt event to the last common ancestor of thermococcaceae involving a hypothetical protein was observed. the predicted low hgt rate in pyrococcus spp. shows that the genomes of methanosarcinaceae are indeed unusually dynamic.

taxonomic distribution of transferred genes
we further attempted to identify possible sources of bacterial genes horizontally transferred to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. or methanosarcinaceae. firmicutes and proteobacteria were shown to be frequent donors of horizontally transferred genes:  <dig> gops contain genes transferred from firmicutes with  <dig> of them further assigned to clostridia, and  <dig>  to bacilli;  <dig> gops arose from proteobacteria;  <dig>  from planctomycetes;  <dig>  from the bacteroides/chlorobi group;  <dig>  from actinobacteria;  <dig>  from cyanobacteria etc. . for  <dig> gops and  <dig> singletons, the origin could not be determined exactly. though actinobacteria is the third best-sequenced taxon, hgt from this group were rare and occurred only in the last common ancestor of methanosarcina, moreover, all transferred genes were subsequently lost in m. mazei.table  <dig> taxonomy distribution of horizontally transferred genes


firmicutes

proteobacteria

unclassified bacteria

planctomycetes; planctomycetacia

cyanobacteria

bacteroidetes/chlorobi group; bacteroidetes

actinobacteria

synergistetes

acidobacteria

chlamydiae/verrucomicrobia group

thermotoga

chloroflexi

deferribacteres

deinococcus-thermus; deinococci

methanosarcina in this case corresponds to either the last common ancestor of methanosarcina, or even more recent hgt in one of the methanosarcina species



as firmicutes and proteobacteria have the largest number of sequenced representatives, this can lead to overestimation of their effect. indeed, it has been shown that the number of unique cogs increases with the addition of new organisms to the pan-genome  <cit> , so well-sequenced taxa have more unique genes in their pan-genomes. to offset that, the overrepresentation coefficient was calculated as the number of gops containing genes transferred from a given taxon divided by the number of sequenced genomes for this taxon . this procedure implicitly assumed linear growth of the pan-genome size as new genomes are added to a taxon, which seems to be a correct approximation  <cit> . after applying this normalization we found that the most overrepresented taxa in the data are planctomycetes, synergistetes, and firmicutes. bacteria from these taxa as well as those from proteobacteria and bacteroidetes, co-occur in microbial communities with methanosarcina spp. .fig.  <dig> taxonomic distribution of transferred genes. distribution of hgt donors according to number of observed hgt events  and overrepresentation values ; see the text for definitions



functional breakdown of the transferred genes
to characterize functional consequences of hgt, all identified ht genes were assigned to cog categories, 86 %  of ht genes had cog identifiers. half of ht genes are associated with metabolism . assuming equal frequency of hgt for all cog categories, the expected transfer rates were based on mean fractions of the cog categories in all bacterial and archaeal genomes. overrepresented categories include defense mechanisms  and all types of metabolism except lipid metabolism and catabolism: amino acid transport and metabolism , energy production and conversion , nucleotide transport and metabolism , inorganic ion transport and metabolism , carbohydrate transport and metabolism , secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism , coenzyme transport and metabolism  .table  <dig> functional distribution of ht genes

tr. is the number of gops containing transporters, enz. is the number of gops containing enzymes, numbers in the heading represent the number of genomes in gop. all ht singletons were also included into this analysis

fig.  <dig> functional distribution of transferred genes and their operon structure. a representation of horizontally transferred genes in cog categories . b the fraction of genes encoding enzymes or transporters among the ht genes and the whole genomes. c the fraction of genes included in operons among the ht genes, and the whole genomes. d venn diagram representing the distribution of cogs with transcriptional factors among archaea and bacteria



then, ht proteins of methanosarcina spp. were assigned to four major functional groups: housekeeping genes, enzymes, transporters, and transcriptional regulators. the first category comprises replication, translation and transcription machinery genes, as well as genes encoding cell wall proteins.

the number of transcriptional factors and house-keeping genes in our data was estimated using cogs, while the number of transporters and enzymes was estimated using pfam and eficaz databases, respectively.

seven housekeeping gops with ht genes were found: t-rna-dihydrouridine synthase; cysteinyl-trna synthase; two acetyltransferases or methyltransferases, whose function could not be characterized further; and three proteins involved in dna repair. all other proteins involved in transcription, translation and replication were not found among the ht genes.

among  <dig> transcriptional regulators observed in the methanosarcina spp. only seven, belonging to two gops, were identified as ht ones. the fraction of transport proteins in methanosarcina spp. comprises about  <dig>  % of all genes , which is in good agreement with other estimates  <cit> . more than half of identified ht genes with an assigned functional class were either enzymes or transporters . the fraction of ht genes among transporters and enzymes was, respectively, 12-15 % and 9-11 % . hence, hgt of transporter genes is slightly more common than the transfer of enzyme genes, although this difference is not statistically significant .table  <dig> distribution of transporters and enzymes among ht genes and the genome in general


m. acetivorans

m. barkeri

m. mazei
percent value in the brackets represents the % of enzymes or transporters in studied portion of genome , while % ht column shows the percentage of occurrence of the proteins from this functional class among ht portion of genome. p-value is calculated for the null hypothesis that fractions of enzymes and transporters are equal among ht genes and for all genes



these results show that genes involved in metabolism, as well as in defense mechanisms  are frequently transferred from bacteria to archaea. lipid metabolism and catabolism is the only metabolic subsystem, where ht genes are rare. a natural explanation for that is the difference in the membrane composition of archaea and bacteria  <cit> . overrepresentation of enzymes and transporters among ht proteins confirms that these types of genes are the most common subjects of hgt  <cit>  . while hgt of both enzymes  <cit>  and transporters  <cit>  had been described in archaea, the rates of their transfer were not compared directly.

operon structure
to characterize operons , all intergenic distances were calculated for each methanosarcina genome. initially six different intergenic spacers’ thresholds were analyzed . a conservative value of 150 bp was selected as the maximum distance between genes in an operon, because with longer intergenic spacers, short ht operons start to merge with non-ht genes, while with a more stringent threshold on spacer length more than half of methanosarcina genes are not included in operons.

about 67 % of m. acetivorans and m. mazei genes, and 65 % of m. barkeri genes comprise non-trivial operons. of all operons with ht genes ,  <dig> operons are common for all methanosarcina spp. for ht genes, the fraction of genes in operons is slightly lower, significant at p =  <dig>  level . the average size of an operon with ht genes is  <dig>  genes per operon, while the average operon length in the genome is slightly larger, comprising  <dig>  gene per operon. 50 m. acetivorans operons,  <dig> in m. barkeri, and  <dig> in m. mazei were formed by both ht and archael genes. the mean length of a ht fragment is about  <dig> nucleotides , while the longest transferred segment consists of more than  <dig> nucleotides, and contains  <dig> ht na-atpase genes. they form one operon, common for m. acetivorans and m. barkeri, and previously shown to be transferred as a single hgt event  <cit> .table  <dig> summary of the operon structure in methanosarcina spp. among ht genes and for the genome in general


m. acetivorans

m. barkeri

m. mazei
ht operons are non-trivial operons with at least one ht gene. p-value is calculated for the null hypothesis that the fractions of operons and singletons are the same for ht genes and all genes



ht genes expression
available microarray and proteomics data were analyzed for three methanosarcina species . in four experiments on m. mazei ,  <dig> of  <dig> predicted ht genes were shown to be differentially expressed under a variety of conditions . thirty of these genes were found to change the level of expression in the absence of histone;  <dig> genes were differentially expressed depending on the nitrogen source;  <dig> genes showed increased expression on methanol media;  <dig>  increase on acetate media. overall, in the m. mazei genome, 55 % of genes were shown to be differentially expressed, so the fraction of observed expressed ht genes is not lower than the genome average. in m. acetivorans proteomic data,  <dig> proteins  encoded by ht genes were found   <cit> ; in microarray data  <cit> ,  <dig> ht genes  showed differential expression on methanol or acetate as a food source, while the overall number of differentially expressed genes in this experiments reached  <dig>  %. for m. barkeri,  <dig> ht genes  differentially expressed after air-exposure were found, whereas in the whole genome,  <dig>  such genes were observed  <cit> . overall, 46 % of ht gops contain at least one member that was found to be differentially expressed. these results show that ht genes are active in methanosarcina spp., and at least some genes have been shown to be differentially expressed, and hence are likely regulated.

discussion
hgt plays an important role in diversity and adaptation of microorganisms. in bacteria, hgt initially was shown to be responsible for rapid spread of antibiotic resistance on plasmids  <cit> . special gene transfer agents  were discovered in the purple nonsulfur bacterium rhodobacter capsulatus  <cit> , and it was shown that in marine bacterial populations the transfer rate of antibiotic resistance genes included in gtas was high  <cit> . rapid gene acquisitions through hgt are thought to have driven adaptation to different ecological niches  <cit>  and the origin of new bacterial and archaeal species  <cit> .

hgt rates for a variety of prokaryotic and eukaryotic  <cit>  species were estimated. in particular, all members of the methanosarcina genus were claimed to have dynamic genomes with a high hgt rate  <cit> . later, hgt in methanosarcinales was studied  <cit> , while for the family methanosarcinaceae this phenomenon was not addressed directly, and the functional distribution of ht genes transferred to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. or methanosarcinaceae was not investigated. we estimate that about 5 % of methanosarcina genes are horizontally transferred from bacteria since the last common ancestor of methanosarcinaceae. among them,  <dig>  % of genes were transferred to the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. or even later in evolution, and  <dig>  % of genes are the result of hgt to the last common ancestor of methanosarcinaceae. our estimate of the hgt rate in methanosarcina generally agrees with the one provided by the arcog analysis, where  <dig> hgt events were identified. however, in that study, the origin of the hgt was not identified  <cit> .

in order to understand why the fraction of bacterial ht genes in methanosarcina spp. has been overestimated in initial publications  <cit> , we performed searches through a series of time-scaled databases, and found that this effect was observed because of the database composition in  <dig>  further, we re-evaluated the fraction of ht genes in thermotoga maritima. again, we could not reproduce the original result of 24 % ht genes  <cit> , and observed a lower rate of 8-11 %  <cit> . still, it looks like at least some hgt events from archaea to t. maritima had occurred. we observed  <dig> such events, which is much lower than thought initially  <cit> . in both cases, artifacts in previous estimates of the rate of gene flow between archaea and bacteria were likely due to incomplete and biased composition of available databases and application of simple blast-based procedures that were not sufficiently reliable given these biases. however, it is possible that more hgt events occurred earlier in the thermotoga or methanogenic archaea evolution, and for methanosarcinales a high rate of hgt from bacteria was shown  <cit> .

many ht genes common for m. acetivorans and m. barkeri are not present in m. mazei. on the phylogenetic tree constructed using ribosomal proteins, m. acetivorans and m. mazei form a cluster to the exclusion of m. barkeri. it means that m. mazei, whose genome is the smallest one among these three species, has lost many ht genes. while the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. is thought to be a halophile as most methanosarcinaceae, it could be speculated, that m. mazei gene loss could be associated with adaptation to low salt concentrations, one such example is the loss of na + −atpase and some metal transporters  <cit> .

hgt played a major role in the development of acetoclastic methanogenesis. examples of such transfer are genes coding proteins pta and acka, key proteins is acetoclastic methanogenesis, that were thought earlier, when no other methanosarcinaceae genomes were sequenced except for methanosarcina spp., were thought to be transferred to the last common of methanosarcinaceae from clostridia  <cit> . we found that only the clade with methanosarcina proteins is situated within the clostridia clade, while no orthologs of pta and acka have been found in other methanosarcinaceae . this event had likely involved only the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp., while other methanosarcinales use other methanogenesis enzymes.

in theory, hgt events can occur between any prokaryotic groups with similar codon usage  <cit> , but additional factors have to be considered, such as co-occurrence of organisms in the same ecological niches  <cit> , or toxicity of ht gene products. the arcog study did not reveal any ‘highways’ of hgt, that would preferentially connect particular groups of archaea and bacteria  <cit> , but we have demonstrated that, at least for methanosarcina spp., some trends may exist, and hgt from clostridia and proteobacteria to methanosarcina spp. is the most frequent.

as clostridia and proteobacteria are the best sequenced groups of bacteria, we also applied weighted measures to find the most frequent donors outside the best sequenced groups. clearly, these calculations of overrepresentation are very approximate and have obvious limitations. indeed, even in groups with hundreds of sequenced genomes, not all available ecological niches are sampled, and such groups often have numerous sequences for popular species. on the other hand, the complicated history of hgt in bacteria may further obscure the real donor. we presented both estimates with and without normalization for sequencing biases, and the truth probably lies somewhere in the middle. still, while the most frequent donor could not be identified confidently, some robust trends could be observed, such as prevalence of firmicutes as candidate donors.

we also considered the functional distribution of transferred genes. both enzymes and transporters are the most frequent subjects of hgt . while transporters are more frequently transferred than enzymes, this observation does not reach statistical significance. however, this analysis is blind to archaea-specific transport proteins, that are still not well studied  <cit> . the addition of such transporters, as well as characterization of new classes of bacterial transporters, may influence the significance of this conclusion. theoretically, the hgt of transporters is a convenient mechanism of adaptation to rapidly changing conditions, providing the cell with ions and nutrients from a new environment. abc-transporters are known to be transferred between and within domains of life, and in a situation when such genes have been transferred from bacteria to methanosarcina via a third, archaeal organism, whose genome is not available, false predictions could be made. similarly, if a gene has been subject to hgt from methanosarcina to another archaeal species, our study design would not identify it as transferred from bacteria to methanosarcina. however, here we concentrated on recent hgt, where such misidentifications are less likely.

while the membrane of bacteria and archaea consists of different types of lipids, these results show that bacterial-type transporters could work in both cell types. the only class of transporters underrepresented among ht genes is lipid transporters, similarly to lipid metabolism enzymes, likely reflecting differences in the membrane structures.

the transfer of enzymes is rarer, mainly because a new enzyme has to be incorporated in a pre-existing metabolic pathway, and, further, subunits of protein complexes and proteins with multiple interactions seem to undergo fewer hgt events  <cit> .

hgt of bacterial genes has been studied for the last common ancestor of methanosarcinales   <cit> , and while the distribution of functional classes is similar with the one that we observe for hgt in the common ancestors of methanosarcinaceae and methanosarcina, there are some differences. firstly, for methanosarcinales more transfers of genes involved in replication, recombination and reparation  have been observed; secondly, there are fewer transporters among transferred genes. the latter may be caused by difficulties in establishing orthology in large gene families, common for transporters, at large evolutionary distances. also, for relatively recent events we observed that half of the transferred genes are involved in metabolism, while in the methanosarcinales study  <cit>  only 26 % of gains are associated with metabolism. hence, the presented results show that relatively recent hgt events tend to impact the metabolic potential, but not the basic cell functions, such as replication or recombination.

more than a half of hgt genes found in m. mazei were shown to be functional and differentially expressed, and the important question is how all these genes are regulated. the total number of known transcription factors in methanosarcinales corresponds to earlier predictions for prokaryotic organisms  <cit> . this observation may be biased by the fact that the number of transcription factors was estimated using the cog classification, that contains no clusters comprised exclusively by archaeal tfs, while many tf clusters are bacteria-specific . only in two hgt events tfs were actually transferred, but about 46 % of gops were shown to be expressed, and if the regulators tend to be transferred together with the genes they regulate, we would expect to see more hgt events involving tfs. this leads to a conclusion that ht genes from bacteria do not tend to be transferred with their regulators, but are mainly regulated by the factors already existing in the acceptor organism.

as we have considered only recent hgt events, we do not expect massive genome rearrangements since hgt, and that has allowed us to analyze the operon structure of ht genes. among ht genes, we have observed a lower fraction of operons, and the characteristic length of the transferred fragments is about 1200 bp . moreover, there are also mosaic operons comprised of both ht and archaeal genes. it is possible that the length of a ht fragment is limited by the mechanism of gene transfer from bacteria to archaea.

CONCLUSIONS
previously, the role of hgt in methanosarcina spp. was overestimated due to biased data. a more robust estimate of the fraction of ht genes either in the last common ancestor of methanosarcina spp. or of methanosarcinaceae is ~ 5 %. we studied the operon structure of ht genes and showed that the ht genes do not tend to be transferred as whole operons. most frequent hgt donors are firmicutes and proteobacteria. while the regulation of ht genes is not well understood, about half of identified ht genes in m. mazei are differentially expressed.

