BACKGROUND
microrna  is a class of ~ <dig> nt small non-coding rnas  which inhibit gene expression at post-transcriptional stage by binding to the 3'utr of mrnas. they play essential roles in many crucial biological processes, including development, differentiation, apoptosis and cell proliferation  <cit> , as well as numerous human diseases, such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia, fragile x syndrome, and various types of cancers  <cit> .

the studies on the biogenesis of mirnas  <cit>  show that mirna is firstly transcribed as pri-mirna  in the nucleus, then exported to the cytoplasm after being cleaved into pre-mirna . in cytoplasm, pre-mirna is processed into mature mirna and incorporated into the rna-induced silencing complex  which subsequently binds to the 3'utr of mrnas. the conversion of pre-mirna to mature mirna is generally one-to-one , although both strands of pre-mirnas could potentially become mature mirnas  <cit> . however, the splicing of one pri-mirna could result in multiple pre-mirnas. this is because mirna genes tend to be clustered in the genome  <cit>  and one pri-mirna could be a cluster of several mirnas  <cit> .

a set of mirnas that are closely distributed in genome is termed as the mirna cluster. the clustering propensity of mirnas was first been discovered by large-scale surveys of small ncrnas  <cit> . at present, it has been confirmed that mirna clusters are widely distributed in animal genomes  <cit> . the conservation of mirna clusters across species  <cit>  indicates that mirna clusters adapt special regulatory functions in biological processes. in addition, it has been shown by expression studies that the clustered mirnas are often co-expressed  <cit> , suggesting that they are jointly transcribed as a polycistron. thus, the hypothesis comes up that the genomic coordination of clustered mirna genes, which further leads to their coordinated transcription, will consequently result in a functional coordination. however, it is still unclear how the clustered mirnas function coordinately.

recently, yuan x-y et al. studied the functional coordination of clustered mirnas based on the protein-protein interaction  network  <cit> . they found that the clustered mirnas tend to target the mrna of proteins that are located in the same functional module. while this kind of correlation supports the view of functional coordination of clustered mirnas, little is known about the underlying mechanisms. in addition, the ppi network which is composed of direct protein-protein interactions cannot provide the successive regulation details of mirnas. for example, the successive regulation on a protein by a mirna through one or more tfs is not included in the ppi network.

here, we studied the regulatory coordination of clustered mirnas based on the mirna-transcription factor  regulatory network that comprises the interactions between transcription factors , mirnas and non-tf protein-coding genes. we found that there are two types of mirna clusters, i.e. homo-clusters  and hetero-clusters . in general, both the homo- and the hetero-clustered mirnas show the behavior of regulatory coordination. however, the ways of regulatory coordination of both types of clustered mirnas are different. the homo-clustered mirnas show a direct regulatory coordination which is realized by a single regulation step , and tend to be involved in emergency processes, whereas the hetero-clustered mirnas show an indirect regulatory coordination which is accomplished by  <dig> or more steps, and tend to participate in more complex processes.

RESULTS
homologous and heterologous mirna clusters
there are in total  <dig> mirna clusters of human , which can be classified into two types. one is the homologous cluster  composed of several mirnas from the same family, and the other is the heterologous cluster  composed of mirnas of various families . we found that there are  <dig> homo-clusters and  <dig> hetero-clusters. the detailed family diversity of the mirna clusters is characterized by the family entropy . it is seen that the distribution of efam shows a polarized behavior . most of the family entropies are either  <dig> or  <dig>  this means most of the  <dig> mirna clusters are composed of the mirnas from either one family or completely different families, suggesting that there is a fundamental difference of family composition between the homo-clusters and the hetero-clusters.

usually, the mirnas of the same family target a similar set of mrnas, since they have the same seed regions  <cit>  which predominantly determine the targets of mirna  <cit> . thus, it is suggested that the homo-clustered and the hetero-clustered mirnas may have quite different regulatory features.

clustered mirnas in network modules
in the mirna-tf regulatory network containing the interactions between tf, mirna and non-tf protein-coding genes ,  <dig> modules that have dense interactions were found using mcode plus  <cit>  of the network tool cytoscape  <cit> . these modules altogether contain  <dig> homo-clustered mirnas,  <dig> hetero-clustered mirnas and  <dig> isolated mirnas that are far from other mirnas and do not belong to any clusters. the statistical analysis  shows that the homo-clustered mirnas and the hetero-clustered mirnas are both significantly enriched  in these  <dig> modules. moreover, more than 50% of the modules  contain at least one mirna pair that comes from the same mirna cluster. the average cluster entropy  of the  <dig> modules which describes the diversity of the mirna clusters within a module is significantly lower  than that in the random case in which mirnas were randomly assigned to groups of the same number as human mirna clusters . these findings suggest that the mirnas located within one genomic cluster tend to be involved preferentially in the same module. such preference means that, in general, the clustered mirnas exert a coordinated regulation since a module in a biological network usually represents a special or relatively independent biological function  <cit> .

the preference of homo-clustered mirnas in the same module is not surprising. since the mirnas in a homo-cluster bind to similar targets, they tend to form a local community of dense interactions associating them with common targets . nevertheless, not all the homo-clustered mirnas are involved in modules. the reason is that some homo-clustered mirnas have such a small number of targets that the local community composed of these mirnas and their targets is not dense enough to be included in a module. in addition, some homologous members of hetero-clustered mirnas are found to be involved in the same modules . it seems that these homologous members of hetero-clustered mirnas have the same type of coordinated regulation with that of the homo-clustered mirnas. however, there are about 10% hetero-clusters in which the heterologous mirna members appear in the same modules . since the coordinated regulation by these heterologous mirnas obviously does not work through similar target sequences, it is assumed that there are distinct mechanisms underlying the coordinated regulation by hetero- and homo-clustered mirnas.

distinctive regulatory coordination of homo- and hetero-clusters
to measure the regulatory coordination of clustered mirnas quantitatively, we studied the target overlap of mirna pairs in the same cluster. the target overlap  of mirna i and mirna j is defined as:

  toij=∑knsiksjkmin+ <dig> 

where li is the number of targets that are regulated by mirna i, n is the total number of targets, and sik is the element of the connecting matrix. sik equals to  <dig> when mirna i regulates target k directly , otherwise it equals to  <dig>  clearly, toij varies in the range of  <dig> to  <dig>  the closer toij is to  <dig>  the more targets mirna i and mirna j share, and the stronger is the coordinated regulation by mirna i and mirna j.

we first studied the to distribution by checking the direct targets of mirnas. as expected, the homo-clustered mirna pairs have high tos. more than 75% mirna pairs in homo-clusters are of the tos higher than  <dig>  . the average to of homo-clusters  is significantly higher  than those for hetero-clusters  and random clusters . nevertheless, the tos of the hetero-clustered mirna pairs are as low as those of the mirna pairs in random clusters . about 90% mirna pairs in hetero-clusters and random clusters are of the tos lower than  <dig> . this indicates that there is no regulatory coordination of hetero-clustered mirnas within one step. however, the to features of hetero-clustered mirna pairs change when the indirect targets of mirnas are additionally considered. the behavior of to distribution for hetero-clusters looks more like that for the homo-clusters than the random clusters. specifically, the relative frequency of hetero-clusters is apparently higher than that for random clusters when to >  <dig>  . the average tos of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters which are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively are both significantly higher than that of random clusters as  <dig>  . this indicates that the regulatory coordination of the hetero-clustered mirnas comes up by indirect regulations.

furthermore, we analyzed the dependence of the average to on the number of regulation steps for homo-clusters, hetero-clusters and random clusters. a regulation step equal to  <dig> means that all the considered targets are directly regulated by mirnas. as shown in figure  <dig>  the tos of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters, which are both consistently higher than those of the random clusters, saturate when the regulation steps is more than  <dig>  however, there are distinct differences between the curves of homo-clusters and hetero-clusters. while the to curve of hetero-clusters is first close to that of random clusters for regulation steps less than  <dig>  it approaches the curve of homo-clusters and become significantly higher than that of random clusters  as the regulation step is larger than  <dig>  this means that the regulatory coordination of hetero-clustered mirnas occurs after  <dig> steps , unlike that of homo-clustered mirnas, where it is already effective at the first step . such distinction between regulatory coordination mechanisms may indicate distinct roles of the homo- and hetero-clustered mirnas in biological processes.

functional analysis of targets of homo- and hetero-clusters
the function of mirna targets was analyzed using the tool david . we found that the targets of homo-clustered mirnas are significantly involved in emergency processes that need to be preceded rapidly, such as response to stimuli and the intrinsic apoptotic pathway that involves mitochondria. the latter represents an emergency process since the intrinsic apoptotic pathway is usually activated to induce a rapid cell death  <cit> . in contrast, the hetero-clustered mirnas are involved in complex biological processes including the metabolism and the extrinsic apoptotic pathway that happens primarily in the cytoplasm. these processes are generally of less urgency, but they are more complex than those of homo-clusters. it has been revealed that thousands of genes and reactions are involved in metabolic processes  <cit> , and the extrinsic apoptotic pathway is composed of several complex caspase processes  <cit> .

moreover, the extrinsic apoptotic process is also more complex than the internal apoptotic process since it comprises significantly more reactions  <cit> . besides, three functions  are shared targets of homo- and hetero-clustered mirnas.

discussion
microrna clusters, which are groups of tandem mirna genes that are closely located in the genome, are abundantly and widely distributed in animal genomes. it has been revealed that about 50% of the mirna genes in drosophila  <cit>  and over 30% of the mirna genes in human, mouse, rat and chicken are located in clusters  <cit> . co-expression experiments of clustered mirna genes show that one mirna cluster is usually transcribed as a single transcriptional unit  <cit> . this suggests the existence of some kind of regulatory coordination between the clustered mirnas. however, it is still unclear how the clustered mirnas coordinate their regulation. here, we describe a genome-wide study on the regulatory coordination of clustered mirnas based on the mirna-tf regulatory network.

the mirna clusters are classified into homo-clusters that contain mirnas of the same family and hetero-clusters that contain mirnas of multiple families. most of the mirna clusters are either homo-clusters or hetero-clusters of mirnas with completely different families. such polarized behavior indicates that the family composition of clustered mirnas may be an important characteristic that is closely related to the regulatory features of mirna clusters.

in this study, we have used a mirna-tf regulatory network that represents the regulation exerted by tfs and mirnas on gene expression of target genes. this regulatory network presents a comprehensive view on the regulations of mirnas since it involves the transcriptional regulation of mirnas genes by tfs as well as the direct regulation of the targeted mrnas by mirnas. such regulatory network has previously been used to study the combinatory regulation of mirnas and tfs on gene expression. for example, different types of mirna-tf co-regulations have been revealed based on the mirna-tf regulatory network  <cit> . in addition, it is reported by kang et al. that there are two-layer regulations on the gene expression, where tfs function as important mediators of mirna-initiated regulatory effects  <cit> . these studies suggest that the mirna-tf regulatory network is a good substrate for studying the complex regulatory features of mirnas.

the result that the clustered mirnas, whether they are from homo- or hetero-clusters, preferably exert their effect in one module suggests a general regulatory coordination of clustered mirnas. intuitively, the regulatory coordination of homo-clustered mirnas is ascribed to the high sequence similarity of homologous mirnas. however, not all the sequences of homologous mirnas are similar enough to bind to the same targets. more than half of the homologous mirna pairs share less than 50% of the targets . an example is mir- <dig> family, in which any pairs of the three members  share less than 20% of the targets. the homo-clustered mirnas are the homologous ones that share large amount of targets. this suggests that the homo-clustered mirnas are not the arbitrary homologous mirnas, but the ones finely designed for the regulatory coordination. the target overlaps of hetero-clustered mirnas are much smaller than the homo-clustered mirnas, but they similarly appear in the same modules. this indicates that the homo-clustered mirnas and the hetero-clustered mirnas have distinctive ways of coordinated regulation. in addition, there are some cases that not all the members of mirnas in homo-/hetero-clusters are found in the same modules. one possible reason is that the size of modules depends on the parameter that scales the density of interactions. if the parameter is strict, the resulting modules, which are generally of small size, will include few mirna cluster members. another reason may be that  <dig> kb is not an accurate cutoff for the definition of mirna clusters. the mirna cluster members that are not found in the same modules may not be included anymore in the cluster when there is a little deviation of the cutoff.

it is clear that the regulatory coordination of homo-clustered mirnas is achieved by one regulation step , since the homologous mirnas in homo-clusters have almost the same targets. however, the regulatory coordination of hetero-clustered mirnas is realized by at least  <dig> steps. thus, the regulatory coordination of homo-clustered mirnas is direct, while that of hetero-clustered mirnas is indirect. these two types of coordinated regulation both have their own advantage. since there is no intermediate regulator between the mirnas and their targets, the direct coordinated regulation has the advantage of accuracy and quickness. whereas, the indirect coordinated regulation has the advantage of variety since diverse types of coordinated regulation can be realized by inducing additional cross-regulations between intermediated regulators .

in general, the regulatory coordination of clustered mirnas is to guarantee the validity and efficiency of mirna regulations in a certain biological process. the direct regulatory coordination means that the effective regulation is a rapid one which is capable to cope with an emergency situation . thus, the homo-clusters could be involved in biological processes that match this requirement, such as response to certain stimuli. however, a rapid coordinated regulation pushing the affected system into a certain direction is accompanied by the risk to let the corresponding biological processes run out of control unless there are additional control processes counter-acting this push. furthermore, the incorporation of more intermediates may increase the flexibility of regulation. therefore, the indirect regulatory coordination that results in a delayed regulation may be adopted by complex biological processes such as metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
our study is focused on the internal coordination of genomic-clustered mirnas. the results suggest that there are two types of mirna clusters, i.e. homo-clusters that contain mirnas of the same family and hetero-clusters that contain mirnas of multiple families. these two types of mirna clusters show distinct behaviors of regulatory coordination in the gene regulatory network that represents the direct interactions between mirna, tf and non-tf protein-coding genes. the homo-clusters show a direct regulatory coordination and tend to be involved in biological processes of emergency situations, while the hetero-clusters show an indirect regulatory coordination and tend to take part in more complex biological processes.

our study shows the diversity of mirna regulations responding to the complex requirements of biological functions and contributes to understand the complex function and regulatory mechanism of mirnas at a network scale.

