BACKGROUND
interest in understanding the effects of epigenetics in relation to different complex diseases is increasing. one epigenetic mechanism of particular interest is dna methylation at cytosines in cpg dinucleotides. the methylation patterns of genes may change and these alterations have been shown to be related to complex diseases, such as heart diseases  <cit> , schizophrenia  <cit>  and different cancers  <cit> . in cancer, several methylation changes are detectable at the early stages of cancer or even in pre-cancerous tissues or blood  <cit> . in addition, other methylation alterations have been shown to be specific to cancer type and stage  <cit> .

high-throughput technologies, such as microarrays and large-scale sequencing, allow genome-wide methylation measurements. analysis of methylation data requires efficient statistical methods to be able to identify potential methylation biomarkers and differential methylation patterns across sample types. several methods have been proposed to pinpoint significant methylation differences in patients with cancer and to classify different tissue types. examples include feature selection methods  <cit> , mixed effect and generalized least square methods  <cit>  and singular value decomposition-based methods  <cit> . in addition, methylation patterns of distinct microarray probes have also been modeled with beta-mixture models, which subsequently are used with partitioning algorithms to separate different tissue types into clusters  <cit> . each probe is modelled with its own beta-distribution that depends on the tissue type only. in the present paper, we propose a beta-mixture model to describe genome-wide methylation. we assume that methylation levels of nearby probes are dependent, as demonstrated previously by  <cit>  and  <cit> , and that methylation can be categorized into three different broad categories or states, low, medium and high methylation. in addition, we include knowledge about the genomic background  of the probes following suggestions in  <cit> . in total, our model has  <dig> parameters  per sample compared with approximately 27k probes in illumina methylation arrays. the parameters comprise genomic background, methylation state and level, and dependency between probes. in short, the model facilitates

 reduction of the dimensionality of a methylation profile

 for each probe, computation of the posterior probability of a methylation state,

 computation of a posterior probability that the latter state was correctly predicted.

we apply the model to a set of methylation microarray measurements from colon cancer samples and show that the model parameters reflect global patterns in the data. based on the estimated parameters, we are able to classify the samples with high accuracy and to exhibit global differences between the cancer samples. furthermore, the model assigns a methylation state to each probe value. using the states, accessible data summaries are provided.

RESULTS
the methylation array and the number of cpgs in probes in different genomic regions
the illumina human methylation 27k array consists of  <dig>  probes that measure the methylation status of cpgs in the human genome at single nucleotide resolution. the array measures genome-wide methylation and the probes target over  <dig>  genes. the great majority of the genes included in the array have two methylation probes , while  <dig> % of the genes have one methylation probe and only  <dig> % have more than two probes. the degree of a methylation of each probe is measured by the beta-value which is a continuous variable varying between zero and one, where one means full methylation. the probes of the illumina human methylation 27k array are  <dig> nucleotides long and contain different numbers of cpgs. probe locations can be divided into cpg islands , cpg island shore regions   and outside regions  . about one quarter of the probes  are located in the shore regions, one sixth  in outside regions and the rest  in the cpg-islands. depending on the region, methylation appears to happen at different rates such that cpg-islands are usually less methylated than the cpgs in other genomic regions  <cit> . logically, this results in an uneven distribution of methylation in regions with different numbers of cpgs because more cpgs occur in cpg-islands than in outside regions; see figure  <dig>  as a consequence, the number of cpgs affects the amount of methylation. in fact, we found a negative correlation between the number of cpgs in a probe and the beta-value of the probe . however, this correlation is reduced markedly when studying the probes in i, s or o regions separately . the probe distance from the cpg-island in the o class showed no correlation with the strength of methylation.

parameter estimates and interpretation
we used the proposed method to analyze methylation microarray data from normal and colon cancer tumor samples. colon cancer can be divided into different types and here we study patients with microsatellite instable  and microsatellite stable  tumors. in addition, we have samples of benign colon adenomas that are not considered as cancer tumors but are classified as mss-type adenomas. our data set contains  <dig> illumina methylation 27k microarray samples, divided into  <dig> normal,  <dig> adenoma,  <dig> msi and  <dig> mss-samples.

the basic idea behind the model is the assumption that the methylation level of a cpg  can be divided into three different states, low , medium  and high  methylation. the three states are biologically motivated in the following sense. l corresponds to the situation, where  all cells in a sample are unmethylated and h to the situation, where  all cells are methylated, irrespectively of the composition of the cells in the sample. m captures the situation in which the cells are only partly methylated , or some cell types in the sample are methylated while others are not.

the latter could be the case if the sample consists of different cell types  or one cell type shows heterogeneity, as would be expected for cancer cells. the three states are further empirically motivated .

we assume that statistical properties of these different states are the same throughout the genome and that methylation of a cpg site depends on its location  in the genome in relation to the nearest cpg-island. we concentrate on modelling genes with two probes; however, our model can also be extended to genes with more than two methylation probes . the beta-values of a gene's probe pairs are dependent with a correlation coefficient of r =  <dig>  between the probes. a similar degree of correlation has been reported for other data sets, while the probes measuring methylation levels of different genes have shown no dependency  <cit> . we built a model that can be considered a hidden markov model  of probe pairs within a gene. the hidden states are the methylation levels, l, m and h. further, the cpg probe pairs are classified by their locations into classes , ,  and . the latter includes both  and  pairs. other cases were omitted as they contained only a few or no probe pairs. we built one model for each of the classes.

we fitted a mixture of three beta-distributions  for each sample in the colon cancer data set, such that the beta-distribution corresponding to the medium methylation state is symmetrical; as described in greater detail in methods. the beta-distribution gives the density of the beta-value given the hidden state. that is, for each sample we estimate beta-distribution parameters α and β, mixture proportions ω and a transition probability matrix t for the hmm . the mixture proportions are the a priori probabilities that a probe is found in a given hidden state and the transition matrix gives the probabilities that a probe in some hidden state k <dig> = l, m, or h, is followed by a probe in state k <dig> = l, m, or h. for the class  we set the mixture coefficient of the high methylation state to  <dig>  i.e. this state could not be reached as high methylation appears to be very rare in this class. the same is assumed for the i probes in the class . figure  <dig> shows the empirical and the fitted mixture distributions for one msi-sample for different classes. we also built a model with only two states for every class and a model where the high methylation state was included in all classes but these did not reflect the data properties equally well as the model presented.

the mixture model parameters in different classes varied between samples, but some general trends in the sample groups  could be seen; see figure  <dig> for examples. in the figure, the hierarchial clustering of the samples based on the methylation array data  is also shown. the adenomas and the mss cancers are mixed in two big clusters and the differences between these clusters can be seen in the parameters as well, cf. figure  <dig> and  <dig> 

regarding the mixture proportions, the group of msi cancers is most easily discriminated from the other samples . indeed, for the  probe pair class, the msi mixture proportions for the low methylation state are clearly lower and the mixture proportions of the medium methylation state are higher than in the other classes. similarly, but less clearly, differences for the shore  region probe pairs could be detected, e.g. medium and high methylation state mixture proportions are higher for msi cancers compared with the other samples . furthermore, many mixture proportions vary in the same range when studying normals, adenomas and mss cancers. however, normals have slightly higher proportions for low methylation in  class than the other samples.

the probes in the outside regions show the biggest variations between the groups. normals have small coefficients for low methylation whereas the high and medium methylation states are almost equally probable. on the contrary, for all tumor samples medium methylation is clearly the most evident and the proportions of the low and high methylation vary greatly. in addition, for some adenoma and mss cancer samples, low methylation was more probable than high methylation while in msi cancer samples the low methylation state always had the smallest coefficient. mixture proportions in the outside regions also distinguished the two clusters of adenomas and mss cancers well. overall, mss cancers and adenomas share similar proportions in all the classes. class  mixture proportions do not show as large differences between groups as other classes.

we can see similar differences between groups in the estimated parameters of the beta-distribution as in the mixture proportions. we performed a principal component analysis  on the vector of beta-distribution parameters  to illustrate how the parameters vary across samples and tissues. in figure  <dig> all samples are plotted based on the three first principal components. again, normals and msi cancers are clustered into distinct groups while adenomas and mss cancers overlap. however, the two clusters of the hierarchial clustering  encompassing adenomas and mss cancers could be distinguished by the principal components. to further illustrate the use of the model we classified the samples using the mixture proportions and a leave-one-out procedure . we used as classes the four biggest clusters that can be seen in figure  <dig> . these were obtained by hierarchial clustering. the fifth cluster was omitted as it contained only two samples i.e., altogether  <dig> samples of the clusters 1- <dig> were used for the classification analysis. overall,  <dig> out of the remaining  <dig> samples  were classified correctly, see table  <dig>  for comparison, we followed the same procedure using beta-values from  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> probes and found similar classification results though with lower performance . using k-means only results generally in better performance:  <dig> % using mixture proportions and 90% when using  <dig> probes; for fewer probes the performance was less than when using the mixture proportions . note that k-means find the best division of the samples into four clusters, whereas the leave-one-out method assumes clusters are defined and classifies the samples one at a time.

classification based on leave-one-out cross validation.

data summaries
in this section we further illustrate the use of the model. for each probe pair, we computed the posterior mixture proportions and the most likely state. the most frequent state in a group was defined as the group's overall state. in table  <dig>  a summary of the results is shown. there are clear differences between groups which we expect from the previous analysis. normal samples have almost twice as many hh probe pairs as the other groups. likewise, msi cancers have fewer probe pairs with low methylation states, while the medium methylation state is far more common than in the other groups. the distributions of methylation states for adenomas and mss cancers resemble each other.

average number of probe pairs in different methylation states according to group.

we use the posterior mixture proportions to calculate the false annotation rate, far . far measures how often a probe pair is assigned to the wrong state: to each probe pair, we assign the hidden state , with k <dig>  k <dig> = l, m, or h, with the highest posterior proportion. the probability that this assignment is incorrect is given by far . for the colon data set, far =  <dig> , implying that about  <dig> in  <dig> probe pairs should have a wrong annotation. for example, in figure  <dig>  the bottom left plot, wrong annotations are likely to occur when the probability of the low and the medium states are similar , while confident annotations are made when e.g. the beta-value is around  <dig> .

next, we selected the probe pairs where the overall group state differed between groups. we further reduced the number of probe pairs by only choosing those for which the posterior mixture proportions showed a significant difference between groups using fischer's linear discriminant analysis. table  <dig> shows the results. for each probe pair, one or both probes might differ between two groups; in the table we count how many probes show a given change, e.g. l→m. most differences were found between normals and msi cancers with almost  <dig> differences while only  <dig> changed probes are detected between adenoma and mss samples. this again shows that based on methylation data, adenomas and mss cancers are difficult to distinguish. in addition to the number of changes, also the type of changes differed between comparisons.

number of changes in methylation states in group comparisons. norm = normal, aden = adenoma.

for example, when comparing normals with msi cancers, over 80% of changes were from low to medium methylation. in comparison, between normals and adenomas and normals and mss cancers, the proportions were 42% and 37%, respectively.

the characteristics of the changed probes also differed between comparisons; see table  <dig>  for all comparisons except between normals and mss cancers the majority of methylation changes happened at cpg-islands. further, there are differences between adenomas and mss cancers which may be used to distinguish between the two tissue types.

norm = normal, aden = adenoma.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have proposed a model for microarray methylation data. the model uses four different probe pair classes and three different methylation states. it is motivated by the empirical distribution of beta-values and knowledge of the genomic content of cpg dinucleotides. it reduces the dimensionality of a microarray data set to  <dig>  the number of parameters in the model. the model allows us to assign one of three broad classes  to each methylation probe value and assess the correctness of the assignment.

further, we illustrate the use of the model by analysing a colon cancer data set. normal and msi samples could easily be distinguished from the other samples, but adenomas and mss cancers were mixed together. however, the hierarchial clustering based on all beta-values  also mixed these two groups. this suggests that the methylation patterns in adenomas and mss cancers are very similar, which is in agreement with previous studies  <cit> . in addition, we identified differences in the genomic localisation of methylation changes. this observation may be used to discriminate between adenomas and mss cancers from genome-wide methylation data.

in the future it would be interesting to integrate information from different data sources, such as methylation, gene expression and copy numbers, into one model. it may also be beneficial to take the full step and model at the level of the dna sequence directly, anticipating the rapidly growing interest in next-generation sequencing.

