BACKGROUND
the four major types of cancer, lung cancer, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, and prostate cancer, constitute approximately 40% of cancer cases world-wide, with more than  <dig> million new diagnoses and  <dig>  million related deaths every year  <cit> . these are all epithelial cancers and are commonly characterized by genomic instability  <cit> . genomic instability is described as an enabling hallmark of cancer, generating random mutations which may also hit cancer critical genes  <cit> . at the nucleotide level, genomic instability can occur as frequent mutations of short nucleotide repeats dispersed throughout the genome, referred to as microsatellite instability, and results from a defective mismatch repair system . microsatellite instability has been described in several solid cancer types, including cancers of the colon, endometrium, stomach, and lung , and is associated with good prognosis in colorectal cancer  <cit> . chromosomal instability, characterized by numerical and structural chromosome changes, is common in solid cancers, but the causes for this molecular phenotype remain mostly unknown. measured as aneuploidy, chromosomal instability has been found to be associated with poor prognosis in all four major types of carcinomas . in addition to genomic instability, epigenome abnormality has also been described in several cancer types, although most prominent in colorectal cancer  <cit> . cancers with the cpg island methylator phenotype have frequent dna hypermethylation in gene promoter regions, often resulting in gene silencing  <cit> . recently, we described genome-wide instability acting also on the level of the transcriptome in colorectal cancer, affecting the pre-mrna splicing process  <cit> . this transcriptome instability  was characterized by large variation in amounts of aberrant inclusion and skipping of exons in colorectal cancer samples. these amounts were shown to be strongly associated with both the expression levels of pre-mrna splicing factors and poor prognosis for patients with colorectal cancer  <cit> .

rna splicing is a tightly regulated and highly tissue specific process that can occur by a number of different modes  <cit> . alternative splicing modes include differential inclusion of whole exons  or parts of exons , intron retention, mutual exclusion of cassette exons, alternative ordering of exons   <cit> , and splicing of exons encoded by different genes   <cit> . such alternative splicing is a major source of functional diversity in the human genome  <cit> . nearly all multi-exon genes are alternatively spliced, predicted to undergo on average seven alternative splicing events during tissue development and across tissue types  <cit> . in cancer, the rna splicing pathway is commonly disrupted, as evident by aberrant, disease-specific splicing patterns  <cit> . there is a large collection of proteins regulating the splicing process, and genes encoding these splicing factors have been identified as cancer critical genes, as is the case with srsf1
 <cit> . splicing factors have been found to be both differentially expressed  <cit>  and commonly mutated in cancer . hence, there is tremendous potential for splicing variation in the cancer transcriptome.

in the present study, we describe tin in several major types of malignancies, including breast cancer, cervical cancer, colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and prostate cancer. by analyzing exon microarray profiles for alternative splicing, we characterized the individual samples within the datasets for relative amounts of aberrant exon skipping and inclusion. in cancer types with tin, we found strong and non-random associations between these amounts and the expression levels of splicing factors. surprisingly, this association was intact in pan-cancer analysis of the tin-cancers, indicating that the pronounced tissue specificity found in corresponding analyses across normal tissue types and paired cancer-normal samples was lost.

RESULTS
strong correlations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors
exon microarray profiles for  <dig> samples from ten different cancer datasets and  <dig> samples from four normal tissue datasets  were analyzed for genome-wide alternative splicing variation. the lower and upper 1st percentiles of alternative splicing  scores within each dataset were used as threshold values to designate exons as aberrantly spliced . sample-wise amounts of aberrant exon skipping and inclusion were calculated as the number of exons exceeding these threshold values . these sample-wise amounts of aberrant splicing, relative to the average amount within the dataset, are referred to as tin-estimates. the tin-estimates and range of tin-estimates  were similar within all datasets . there was no correlation in tin-estimates between paired cancer and normal samples from the colon , lung , prostate , or stomach . in the breast cancer dataset, there were significantly lower tin-estimates in estrogen and progesterone receptor positive than negative samples . also, there were significant differences in tin-estimates between histological subtypes of both cervical cancer and lung cancer series ii. in the cervical cancer dataset, adenocarcinomas had higher tin-estimates than squamous cell carcinomas , whereas the opposite was found in lung cancer series ii . there were no associations between tin-estimates and sample characteristics in any of the other datasets .table  <dig> 
samples included in the study



apatient samples analyzed in-house btwo samples from the geo entry  were excluded due to failure of reading the raw data files. abbreviations: geo gene expression omnibus, msi microsatellite instability, mss microsatellite stable, na not available t tumor.



for samples in seven of the cancer datasets , the sample-wise tin-estimates correlated strongly with the expression levels of pre-mrna splicing factors . the amount of significantly correlated splicing factor genes  ranged from 41%  to 70%  within the datasets . there was a clear preference for negative correlation, and the average correlation coefficients for the significantly correlated genes ranged from − <dig>  to − <dig>  . in these datasets, samples were also separated according to tin-estimates when performing unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses by the expression levels of all splicing factors . principal components analyses based on splicing factor gene expression corroborated these results . in general, samples with low tin-estimates  were separated from samples with high tin-estimates , although not perfectly in colorectal cancer series ii and prostate cancer series i. this association between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors was less clear in the other three cancer datasets . here, the amount of significantly correlated splicing factor genes ranged from 2%  to 10% . analyses of the datasets with normal samples indicated associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors also in non-cancerous tissues, with strongest associations in normal colonic mucosa . this variance between the datasets showed no associations to quality control metrics of the exon microarray data . the three cancer datasets not showing associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors had similar quality control metrics to the other datasets, whereas the dataset showing most deviance during quality control , showed strong associations.figure  <dig> 
tin-estimates are associated with the expression levels of splicing factor genes in seven cancer datasets.
 in seven of the cancer datasets  there were strong and significant correlations  between tin-estimates and the expression levels of ≥41% of the totally  <dig> splicing factor genes. in the other three datasets, the correlations were mainly non-significant. yellow and grey bars represent the percentages of splicing factor genes with significant and non-significant correlations, respectively.  in two-dimensional principal components analysis based on the expression levels of splicing factor genes , samples were generally separated according to tin-estimates  in the same seven datasets . in colorectal cancer series ii and prostate cancer series i, the separation was not complete. in the gastric cancer dataset and lung cancer series i, there were few samples with tin-estimates ≥ ± <dig> . in the neuroblastoma dataset, there was no clear separation. pc, principal component.



to test whether the observed associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors were greater than expected by chance, comparisons were made with random gene sets of equal size , and permutations of the tin-estimates in each dataset . corresponding with the results above, the same seven cancer datasets that showed strongest associations, also had higher amounts of splicing factor genes with expression levels significantly correlated with the tin-estimates than was expected by chance , as opposed to the other three cancer datasets . the same results were obtained also when analyzing correlation strengths . interestingly, all the normal tissue datasets also had higher percentages of splicing factor genes with expression levels that were significantly correlated with the tin-estimates than expected by chance . the association was particularly strong in normal colonic mucosa, where 56% of the splicing factors were significantly correlated.figure  <dig> 
correlation between tin
-
estimates and splicing factor expression compared with random gene sets and permuted tin-
estimates. in seven of the cancer datasets , high percentages of the  <dig> splicing factor genes had expression levels that were significantly correlated  with the sample-wise tin-estimates . this was more than expected by chance, as compared with genes in each of  <dig>  random sets of  <dig> genes  and with  <dig>  permutations of the tin-estimates . in the other three cancer datasets , the percentages of significantly correlated splicing factor genes were much lower and not higher than expected by chance.



also in comparison with all gene sets included in the molecular signatures database v <dig>  , as well as with the full genome , the splicing factor gene set  had high amounts of genes with expression levels significantly correlated with tin-estimates in the same seven cancer datasets .

the percentage of tin-samples  in each dataset varied from  <dig> in lung cancer series i to 48% in prostate cancer series i . the datasets with the highest percentages also had higher amounts of splicing factor genes with expression levels significantly correlated with the tin-estimates . we consider this to strengthen the notion that tissue and cancer types with high variation in splicing also have a correspondingly high variation in splicing factor expression.

inverse relationship between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors
in the seven cancer datasets with strong associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors, the associations were mainly inverse. the amount of genes with expression levels that were negatively correlated with the tin-estimates  was much larger than the amount of positively correlated genes, with ratios ranging from  <dig> in prostate cancer series ii to  <dig> in prostate cancer series i. this ratio of negative vs. positive correlations was significantly higher than expected by chance . this significant shift towards negative correlation was not found in the three cancer datasets with weak associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors . in the normal tissue types, there was also a significant, but less pronounced shift towards negative correlation. here, the ratios of the amounts of significant negatively vs. positively correlated splicing factor genes ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> .figure  <dig> 
negative correlation between tin
-
estimates and splicing factor expression in the cancer datasets. in the seven cancer datasets  with strong associations between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors , the relationship was inverse, with a much higher percentage of significant negatively  than positively  correlated splicing factor genes . this shift was higher than expected by chance, as demonstrated by comparisons with genes in each of  <dig>  random sets of  <dig> genes , and with each of  <dig>  permutations of the tin-estimates . this significant shift towards negative correlation was not found in the three cancer datasets with weak associations between tin-estimates and splicing factor expression .



also in comparison with gene sets in msigdb, as well as with the full genome, the splicing factor gene set  had a strong shift towards negative correlation in the same seven cancer datasets .

transcriptome instability as a pan-cancer characteristic
although the individual normal tissue datasets showed strong correlations between the tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors, this association was lost in pooled analyses of the normal tissues  of four different origins. again, this was tested by calculating the correlation between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors across all the different normal tissue types, and comparing with random gene sets and permutations of the tin-estimates . this is compliant with the previously described tissue specificity in both splicing patterns  <cit>  and expression levels of splicing factors reviewed in  <cit> . the same results were found from analysis of the paired cancer-normal sample sets , again in agreement with the fact that pre-mrna splicing is differentially regulated also between cancer and normal tissues  <cit> . surprisingly, when doing the same comparisons across the cancer types with strong associations between tin-estimates and splicing factor expression, the strong and non-random associations prevailed . in these pan-cancer analyses, there was a much higher amount of significant negatively than positively correlated splicing factor genes . when limiting the analyses to cancer samples for which paired normal samples were available, the results were corresponding. non-random associations between tin-estimates and splicing factor expression were found only in analyses across colorectal cancer series ii and prostate cancer series i . this indicates that tin is a shared molecular characteristic across the affected cancer types.figure  <dig> 
correlation between tin
-
estimates and splicing factor expression in pooled tissue types. the left and right plots correspond to plots in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.  in pooled analyses of samples from four different normal tissues, the percentage of splicing factor genes  with expression levels that were significantly correlated with the tin-estimates , was not higher than expected by chance, as demonstrated by comparison with genes in each of  <dig>  random sets of  <dig> genes  and with  <dig>  permutations of the tin-estimates . the ratio between the amounts of significant negatively and positively correlated splicing factor genes was  <dig> .  contrarily, across  <dig> randomly selected samples from each of five different cancer types with strong associations between tin-estimates and splicing factor expression  the percentage of splicing factor genes with expression levels that were significantly correlated was higher than expected by chance . also, there was a significant shift towards negative correlation .



discussion
we have previously proposed genome-wide instability of the transcriptome as a molecular, pre-mrna splicing related characteristic of colorectal cancer. here, we show data indicating that the transcriptomes of several, but not all, other types of solid tumors also have this feature. common cancers of the breast, cervix, large bowel, lung, and prostate all show large variation in sample-wise amounts of aberrant exon skipping and inclusion  that are significant negatively correlated with the expression levels of splicing factor genes. such associations were also found within healthy tissue types, although to less extent. this is consistent with the fact that most tissues exhibit great and tightly regulated splicing variation. however, the splicing patterns were clearly distinct between healthy tissues and their malignant counterparts, as shown by discordant tin-estimates between paired cancer and normal samples in all the four different tissue types analyzed. this is in compliance also with the original tin-report, showing that colorectal cancers have higher tin-estimates than normal colonic mucosa  <cit> . furthermore, in analysis across the various healthy tissues, the correlation between tin-estimates and expression levels of splicing factors was not greater than expected by chance. this indicates a failure to detect a common pattern of regulation, and that the splicing process is predominantly tissue specific in healthy tissues. interestingly, in pan-cancer analyses, the strong associations with expression levels of splicing factors prevailed. these results suggest that tin is a pan-cancer characteristic, clearly distinguished from normal splicing variation and splicing factor expression.

the importance of molecular pan-cancer analyses has recently been illuminated by the cancer genome atlas pan-cancer project  <cit> . the recognition that cancers from separate organs may have shared molecular features, while cancers from the same organ may be distinct, has great potential influence both biologically, on our understanding of the tumorigenic process, and clinically, for example for more personalized and targeted treatment strategies. furthermore, pan-cancer analyses may aid in the identification of novel cancer-critical genes not disclosed in individual cancer types because of low mutation rates  <cit> . with regard to pan-cancer analysis of alternative splicing, mutation of the splicing factor gene u2af <dig> has been shown to result in both distinct and equal aberrant splicing events in lung adenocarcinoma and acute myeloid leukemia  <cit> , indicating both specific and common regulation in the two cancer types. here, from integrated expression analyses of a comprehensive collection of splicing factor genes, we have described tin both within and across individual cancer types, suggesting that tin is a general characteristic of cancer. closer inspection of individual splicing factor genes revealed differences between the cancer types with respect to which genes were most closely associated with the aberrant splicing amounts . no single splicing factor gene seceded in these pan-cancer analyses, suggesting that there is no dependency for the involvement of specific splicing factors in the establishment of tin.

in this study, genome-wide analyses of alternative splicing were performed by computational analyses of exon-level microarray data. although experimental work is needed to elucidate the functional mechanisms, an underlying biological explanation for the observed variation is suggested by the strong and non-random associations with the expression levels of splicing factors in several cancer types. in fact, this association increased with increasing splicing variation, as indicated by the correlation between the amount of tin-samples per dataset  and the number of splicing factor genes with expression levels that were significantly correlated with the tin-estimates. also worth noting is the striking inverse nature, with the great majority of splicing factors having expression levels that were negatively correlated with the tin-estimates. altogether, this suggests a mechanism in which decreased expression levels of splicing factors result in more aberrant exon skipping and inclusion. the fact that the majority of splicing factors are involved in several cancer types suggests a genome-wide mechanism. this is consistent with previous reports showing a coordinated regulation of rna splicing by numerous splicing factors  <cit> .

to describe tin as a genuine molecular pan-cancer characteristic, identification of individual, aberrant splicing events and functional validation of their correlations with splicing factor expression levels are warranted. such analyses are complicated by the genome-wide nature of the described associations. no single splicing factor is likely to account for all the observed variation. this situation resembles the obstacles faced also when characterizing the now well established genetic and epigenetic genome-wide phenotypes . however, we anticipate that ongoing rna sequencing efforts will be highly valuable in gaining further insights into the proposed tin characteristic.

there are various non-biological factors that may have influenced the splicing variation observed in this study. firstly, the analyses are sensitive to the sizes of the datasets, and the variation in tin-estimates increased with sample numbers . this is an inherent consequence of the analyses, as differential exon skipping and inclusion were detected relative to all included samples. secondly, technical variation in the microarray data may also have contributed. accordingly, thorough quality control of the data was performed, and the extent of correlations between splicing variation and expression levels of splicing factors in each dataset, was independent of various quality control metrics. however, the failure to detect the strong association between splicing variation and splicing factor expression in three of the cancer datasets  may be attributable to non-biological features of the data rather than inherent characteristics of the cancer types. in particular, the two datasets from lung cancer showed conflicting results, with strong associations between the sample-wise tin-estimates and splicing factor expression in series ii, but not in series i. both these patient series consist of non-small-cell carcinomas, but series i comprises adenocarcinomas only, whereas series ii also includes squamous cell carcinomas. although the tin-estimates were significantly higher in the squamous cell carcinomas than the adenocarcinomas in lung cancer series ii, the subtypes individually showed strong associations between the tin-estimates and the expression levels of splicing factors . for the other two cancer types represented by two datasets, colorectal cancer and prostate cancer, strong associations were clearly indicated in both datasets.

splicing factor encoding genes have previously been nominated as cancer-critical based on their altered expression levels  <cit> . recently, individual splicing factor genes have also been found to be commonly mutated in different cancer types, and this has been shown to have important implications for carcinogenesis . in this study, mutation analyses have not been conducted. furthermore, only the splicing events aberrant skipping and inclusion of cassette exons, as well as intron retention, have been considered. although these are the most common modes of splicing  <cit> , a complete view of the genome-wide effects of splicing factor expression on the splicing process should also consider the other events regulated by splicing factors .

although premature, the implications of tin as a common and novel, genome-wide characteristic of epithelial cancers are intriguing and warrant further investigation. similarly to the genetic and epigenetic genome-wide phenotypes that have been proven to be important clinical characteristics, allowing for sub-grouping of patients according to prognosis  <cit>  and tumor histology  <cit> , tin may also have clinical potential. previously, we have shown that tin is associated with adverse outcome for patients with stage ii and iii colorectal cancer  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
by computational analysis of alternative splicing based on exon-level microarray data, we show that common types of solid cancers  exhibit large variation among samples in amounts of aberrant skipping and inclusion that are non-randomly associated with the expression levels of splicing factors. importantly, this type of transcriptome instability is a pan-cancer characteristic, as opposed to the tissue specificity prevailing in healthy tissues. functional evaluation of the associations between this splicing pattern and the expression levels of splicing factors is needed to determine if transcriptome instability is a genuine phenotype of solid cancers.

