BACKGROUND
the establishment of rapid expression and purification procedures for recombinant proteins has become a major challenge for biotechnology and indeed any laboratory which studies proteins. the genomic and structural genomic communities have driven the development of high-throughput cloning, expression and purification technologies to a large extent. recent developments including filter-plate based assays for cloning, expression and purification, ligation-independent cloning   <cit> , gateway technology  <cit>  and auto-induction for protein expression  <cit>  are now readily coupled to robotic pipelines that have made the parallel production of proteins a relatively simple, cost-effective approach. e. coli remains the system of first-choice for expressing proteins, as it is cheap and easy to handle, however many mammalian proteins cannot be successfully expressed in e. coli  <cit> . this leaves the researcher to either explore expression space using a range of alternative e. coli strains, different temperatures, solubility tags or choose an alternative expression host  <cit> .

there are numerous commercial and non-commercial e. coli expression vectors available that incorporate fusion tags , gateway or lic technologies, protease cleavage sequences and regulable expression levels  <cit> . these vectors are generally designed to be used in diverse expression/purification applications and thus often contain extraneous sequences at either the n- or c-termini of the protein. in addition, the use of different fusion tags mean that alternative purification protocols are required for each protein expressed from a different vector, increasing the time it takes to find successful expression and purification conditions. as a result of these limitations, we set out to create a set of e. coli expression vectors that incorporate these essential features: i) protein expressed from each vector is initially purified in the same manner; ii) the cloning procedure is the same for all vectors and iii) a range of solubility tags are available. moreover these vectors have been developed for use at the general laboratory level so that a researcher can rapidly screen a range of expression conditions.

here, we describe a set of four rationally designed expression vectors for e. coli. the first,  encodes for a hexa-his tag followed by a tev recognition sequence. the other three encode for three common solubility tags [mbp  <cit> , nusa  <cit> , gst  <cit>  plus a tev recognition sequence. tev protease was selected due its superior specificity and adaptability to a range of buffering conditions  <cit> . the vectors are lic compatible, and contain an n-terminal hexa-his tag enabling parallel cloning and purification, expression is via a t <dig> promoter allowing for auto-induction and they all possess a tev recognition site between the fusion partner and the gene of interest. these features make the vectors ideally suitable for high-throughput cloning and expression screening.

we demonstrate that soluble expression was observed for a range of proteins and that they could be readily digested with tev to yield the native protein. in addition, we illustrate the relevance of parallel cloning in deciding on a solubility tag that is suitable for a target protein. this demonstrates that the vectors can be used successfully at the laboratory level to rapidly screen target proteins  and can be readily adapted to the high-throughput process.

RESULTS
construction of the plic vectors and his-hhr23a, gst-uim, mbp-α1-at and nus-ubl
several vector systems have been described that incorporate a variety of backbones, promoters, tag positions and cloning procedures. one drawback from several of these studies is the lack of consistency within the vector systems which does not allow a systematic study of protein expression  <cit> . thus the aim of this study was to generate a set of vectors which enable parallel cloning of a given target and enables a comparative analysis of the expression yields using different solubility tags. as a result, the plic set of prokaryotic vectors were created using pet21b as their host. an oligonucleotide cassette was used to introduce the his tag, tev site and lic site as well as two unique restriction sites . these unique sites were used to introduce either the genes encoding for the gst, mbp or nus tags and could in principle, be used to introduce alternative tags. the four vectors, termed plic-his, plic-gst, plic-mbp and plic-nus were created as shown in figure  <dig>  it is to our knowledge, the first set of e. coli expression vectors derived from the same backbone, with the only variation being in the solubility tag present. the genes hhr23a, uim, α1-at and ubl were subsequently amplified and successfully introduced into each of the vectors using lic. in addition, hhr23a was cloned into all vectors simultaneously to monitor the effect that different tags had on the solubility of this particular protein.

two recently developed ligation methods  and lic) have been used extensively by the structural genomics community. both techniques offer the opportunity for parallel cloning, such that multiple targets can be easily cloned into several different vectors. with the lic strategy in particular, target genes are amplified with 12– <dig> bp end sequences and the 5'-3' endonuclease activity of t <dig> dna polymerase is then exploited  <cit>  . this digestion event generates overhangs in the pcr product that allows subsequent insertion into a complementarily digested vector using a simple annealing step. as there is no need for restriction enzymes or ligation steps, lic is a highly efficient and cost effective means of cloning. it also has the advantage that it does not require expensive reagents or multiple manipulations.

the lic technique was found to be an efficient process in our hands, whereby up to 80% of the colonies screened were found to be positive. we observed, however, that success in lic lies in the quality of the linearized vector, which was dependent, in part, on using a vast excess of sacii enzyme. gel purification was used in the preparation of the vector and insert and it serves three purposes: by removing unwanted  dna polymerase, removing excess dntps and selecting the correct pcr product over other misprimed events or linearized vector over undigested material. in a high-throughput format, a sizeable quantity of pcr product would be generated  prior to parallel cloning into the vectors.

expression and purification of the constructs
each of the constructs was transformed into the e. coli host bl <dig> and expressed in  <dig> ml of auto-induction expression media. following expression, the cell density of each of the cultures were normalised to an od <dig> nm of  <dig>  prior to lysis, which allowed for a uniform number of cells between each sample. the cultures were chemically lysed using popculture , which is a chemical method for lysis and particularly useful for multiple samples. after lysis, the cell lysates were subjected to a solubility assay  to assess the relative proportions of soluble and insoluble expression. as shown in figure 3a, all of the constructs were found to have soluble expression, as judged by presence of a respective bands at the predicted molecular weights. both his-hhr23a and mbp-α1-at have marginally greater proportions of insoluble material, whilst nus-ubl and gst-uim have slightly elevated proportions of soluble material. optimization of soluble yields was not performed in this study, as this can vary greatly from protein to protein. it has been recently been shown however, that a lower temperature used during auto-induction may improve the yield of soluble material  <cit> . the soluble expression and purification of mbp-αl-at was particular interesting, as αl-at is generally produced in very high yields in an insoluble form and purified using a refolding method  <cit> .

in addition to screening different targets in each of the vectors, we also cloned a single gene  into all four vectors. as can be seen in figure  <dig>  hhr23a expressed largely as inclusion bodies, however soluble material was obtained in all four vectors. more importantly however, is that the tags had differing effects on the expression of hhr23a. in this instance, gst was found to be the most efficient in improving the expression whereas nusa had little additional benefit . this illustrates therefore, the usefulness of parallel cloning and expression, as a protein may express more favourably with a different tag.

an additional observation of the small-scale expression was the importance for a purification step . in some cases, soluble expression of the protein showed a very faint band in the soluble fraction, but was purified at more detectable quantities . this however, appears to be dependent on the degree of soluble expression, as the ubl and uim constructs for instance, showed very clear results in the solubility assay . the use of the solubility assay in isolation should thus be used with caution, particularly for a poorly expressing protein that may produce unclear results. in some cases, it may be useful to complement the assay with a western blot.

tev cleavage
generally, affinity tags are removed after purification as they can interfere with either the protein's function or with downstream processes. the most common example is if the protein is to be used for crystallographic or nmr studies. while there have been reports of proteins being crystallized with the assistance of an affinity tag  <cit>  the general view is that they should be removed  <cit> . each of the constructs described above has a tev cleavage site which can be used to remove the affinity tags, leaving the native protein with  <dig> vector-derived residues  . this is comparable to another lic vector available which describes  <dig> vector-derived residues   <cit> . indeed the introduction of non-native amino acids at the n- terminus is not ideal and it is a common problem that generally exists both for the lic and gateway technologies. as a result, the effect of such residues  on the expression, purification and integrity of a given protein must be verified experimentally  <cit> .

to validate the tev cleavage site, each of the proteins were digested with his-tagged tev protease and purified. as seen in figure 3b, after cleavage three species are present: the solubility tag , the his-tagged tev protease  and the protein of interest. this mixture can be purified further to remove the his-tagged tev protease and the solubility tag by selectively binding them to a ni-nta column. the protein of interest, on the other hand remains unbound to the ni resin as it lacks a his tag .

it is should be noted that although a given protein target may express solubly, its behaviour in the absence of the solubility tag may be very different, as this is a function of other factors . thus the integrity of the protein after tev cleavage should be verified using other methods .

CONCLUSIONS
here, we have presented a set of four rationally designed t7-based e. coli expression vectors whose features include the incorporation of solubility tags to assist in expression/purification, a tev cleavable sequence and a lic sequence. we have shown soluble expression and purification of four different proteins as well the ability to remove the tags using tev protease. these vectors allow for rapid parallel cloning and expression and are suitable for either laboratory-scale screening of target proteins, or alternatively for high-throughput screening.

