BACKGROUND
the nuclear envelope  consists of two adjacent membranes, the inner  and the outer nuclear membrane . the onm is functionally connected to the endoplasmic-reticulum  and contains numerous ribosomes, while the inm contains a unique set of transmembrane proteins and maintains close contact with chromatin in the nuclear matrix through the nuclear lamina network  <cit> . the onm/er comprising a single continuous membrane system is connected to the inm through nuclear pore complexes , which constitute the unique gateway for macromolecular transport across the nuclear-cytoplasmic boundary  <cit> . the cytoskeletal protein actin may play a role in ne function. this view has received support from recent evidence suggesting that the ne-membrane system is physically connected to the cytoplasmic microfilament network. for example, onm proteins containing giant spectrin repeats or sun  domains are involved in nuclear anchorage and migration, probably via actin filament interactions  <cit> . in metazoan cells, the integral onm protein nesprin  contains an α-actinin like actin-binding domain potentially capable to link the ne-membrane to the cytoplasmic actin cytoskeleton  <cit> .

actin is a highly conserved cytoskeletal protein that is distributed in a dynamic equilibrium between the ~ <dig> kd monomeric  and the filamentous polymerised  forms. actin's endogenous, polymeric properties are preserved in vitro and have been extensively characterised  <cit> . polymerisation occurs at the so-called critical concentration, where non-covalent interactions overcome a rate limiting step yielding trimeric nucleation complexes to which monomers associate spontaneously and seed filament growth  <cit> . inside living cells, the non-steady-state dynamics of actin polymerisation are highly regulated by an array of actin binding proteins . actin binding proteins regulate changes in actin's polymerisation state within functional sub-cellular domains or compartments allowing for actin's role in a variety of cellular processes as diverse as signal transduction and cell motility. importantly, the onm protein nesprin enhances actin polymerisation rates, shortens filament elongation times, and increases filament bundling in vitro. therefore, it has been hypothesised that nesprin  can recruit actin to the cytoplasmic onm interface  <cit> .

previously, ultra-structural studies using electron microscopy in fixed material have demonstrated "filament-like" networks continuous with the ne-membrane and npc  <cit> . moreover, light microscopic studies have reported a fine perinuclear "shell" of actin filaments around the nuclei of fixed cultured cells  <cit> . in the current study we visualised actin polymerisation in proximity to the ne-membrane inside living cells. this approach has been technically challenging, in part because the compartmentalised gradient is expected to be small . we overcame these difficulties, using a variety of fluorescent probes for actin and confocal fluorescence imaging methods. we report perinuclear actin inside intact living cells during interphase, and we provide evidence that perinuclear actin polymerisation involves binding at the onm of the ne-membrane.

RESULTS
cytochalasin d binds ne-membranes
actin binding drugs alter the gross shape of cell nuclei in eukaryotic cells during interphase. in untreated hela cells  we noticed that the nuclear shape  was in general characterised by a smooth, round shape, whereas ~20% of the nuclei were irregular in shape. irregular nuclei were characterised by asymmetric abnormalities including lobes and/or invaginations. in hela cells treated for thirty minutes with the actin binding drugs lantruculin a , cytochalasin d  or jasplakinolide  a significant two-to four-fold increase in the percentage of cells displaying ne-membrane irregularities was observed . of the drugs tested, cd was of particular interest. this fungal metabolite binds the free-barbed-end of actin filaments and thereby blocks actin polymerisation. the effect of cd on nuclear shape raised the possibility that the ne-membrane is directly a target for the drug. to address this question, we profited from the availability of a fluorescent cd conjugate: cd-bodipy tmr  to detect cd binding-sites at the ne-membrane using fluorescence microscopy.

before performing live cell in situ experiments we examined the actin binding characteristics of cd-bodipy-tmr in vitro and in fixed cells. cd-bodipy fluorescence was measured in vitro at various concentrations  in solutions containing fully polymerised rabbit skeletal muscle actin at  <dig> μm . under these in vitro conditions a concentration dependent, sigmoid shaped increase in cd-bodipy fluorescence was observed, which closely resembled its behaviour when added to fixed cells at the same concentration . both in vitro and in fixed cells these results suggest that the drug bound a saturable actin-binding site in the absence of dynamic actin filament turnover. in a second, in vitro assay we tested cd-bodipy's fluorescence characteristics in the presence of polymerised actin and lantruculin a . lata specifically binds g-actin , but not f-actin, and the resulting reduction in available monomers, shifts the dynamic steady-state equilibrium for actin filament formation towards depolymerisation  <cit> . in the presence of a constant concentration of actin  and cd-bodipy , the effect of increasing concentrations of lata was a net reduction in cd-bodipy fluorescence . this effect was linear at drug concentrations between 1–10μm, and half-maximal at ~5μm, reflecting the predicted stoichiometry given the concentration of actin present. since only the concentration of lata was modified in this assay, the three-fold change in cd-bodipy fluorescence could be explained by fluorescence enhancement of the drug's tetramethylrhodamine  moiety, upon binding to free-barbed-end protomers. fluorescent enhancement resulting from tmr-drug binding to actin has been previously reported for tmr-phalloidin, and attributed to the sensitivity of tmr-x moiety in proximity to the hydrophobic environment of actin protomers  <cit> . this increase in fluorescence is a favourable property for the drug's use as a probe because it enhances specific signal detection. in light of this fact, we next examined cd-bodipy fluorescence in a pure solution of actin around the critical concentration. accordingly, we found that cd-bodipy  fluorescence peaked in pure solutions of actin at the critical concentration  as shown in fig.2c). furthermore, relative to the total amount of actin present ), cd-bodipy fluorescence was diminished at levels at and above the critical concentration ). in contrast, below the critical concentration the cd-bodipy fluorescence relative to total actin present was at its highest levels, consistent with the view that free-barbed-end protomers and tri-meric nucleation complexes were most abundant at these concentrations ). these in vitro results strongly suggested cd-bodipy's utility as a fluorescent probe to detect cd binding sites in situ.

for in situ visualisation inside living cells we used cd-bodipy at very low concentrations  relative to the drug's expected affinity for actin. this provided sufficiently strong staining allowing for signal detection, without interfering with actin polymerisation  <cit> . within a few minutes after adding the fluorescent drug to the incubation medium we observed cd-bodipy accumulation into plasma membrane microspikes that were co-labelled with fluorescent actin expressed in the same cell . this observation was consistent with the expected binding properties of cd-bodipy, because these tiny sub-cellular compartments are characteristically concentrated with polymerising actin  <cit>  and are highly sensitive to disruption by cytochalasin d. in a separate series of experiments, hela cells stably expressing the transmembrane nuclear pore complex  protein pom <dig> conjugated to the green fluorescent protein   <cit>   were co-stained with cd-bodipy. in these experiments, cd-bodipy was observed to accumulate strongly in the deep perinuclear cytoplasm and across ne-membranes in almost all cells analysed. based upon the distribution of the pom <dig> npc signal, cd-bodipy was localised to the ne-membrane however we did not detect a strict signal co-localisation pattern . indeed across small stretches of the ne-membrane we discerned both positive and negative signal correlation among adjacent, near-sub-resolution regions of interest between cd-bodipy and pom121-gfp fluorescence . thus, cd-bodipy labelling formed a discontinuous pattern comprising punctuate accumulation along the nuclear membrane. this staining pattern suggests strongly that cd-bodipy binds directly at the ne-membrane, but is not strictly co-localised with npcs.

actin accumulates at the cytoplasmic phase of ne-membranes
in h-pomgfp cells we observed ~70% of ne-membrane pom121-gfp signal was spatially coincident with cd-bodipy signal, a value significantly greater  than that measured from control experiments . this suggests the presence of free-barbed-end actin-filaments in close proximity to the ne-membrane. to rule out the possibility that this accumulation of ne-membrane associated actin was due to treatment with cd-bodipy, we repeated the same imaging protocol and quantification method using h-pomgfp cells labelled by cytoplasmic microinjection of fluorescent actin . within minutes of microinjection into cell cytoplasm, the fluorescent  actin was detected in a ring pattern around cell nuclei similar to that observed for cd-bodipy. a series of experiments revealed ~37% of green pom121-gfp signal was coincident with cytoplasmically micro-injected actin  a value still significantly  higher than that measured in systematic control experiments. we next investigated the sub-cellular distribution of citrin-actin  <cit>  expressed in a hela cell line stably expressing red fluorescent nuclear lamin a . citrin-actin accumulated at the cell cortex , and in a faint, but distinct ring-like pattern close to the ne-membranes . delineated by the nuclear lamina labelling, the perinuclear actin signal was observed in both the reconstructed xy  and orthogonal yz  section views. in these reconstructions the fluorescence intensity of perinuclear actin appeared brighter than the actin fluorescence detected in the nearby cytoplasm . the three-dimensional analysis of signal coincidence revealed that about 65% of la-dsred nuclear lamina signal was significantly  co-incident with citrin-actin .

further, we observed that the distribution of micro-injected fluorescent actin in 3d rendered reconstruction from through stack image series comprises a punctuate discontinuous labelling across the ne-membrane . a pattern strongly analogous to that observed using cells stained with cd-bodipy and pom121-gfp .

the live cell imaging experiments suggested that cytoplasmically injected actin rapidly accumulated at the ne-membrane. therefore, we presume that freely diffusing actin in the cytoplasm had direct access to the perinuclear actin pool. we therefore used an in vitro actin polymerisation assay to examine the gross formation of actin polymers around highly purified nuclei, freshly isolated from rat liver hepatocytes. intact hepatocyte nuclei were incubated in the presence of actin under conditions favouring actin polymerisation. under these conditions we found that fluorescent actin polymerised in a halo around isolated intact nuclei. testing several actin concentrations we observed this phenomenon at concentrations as low as  <dig> nm actin . in the presence of only  <dig> nm fluorescent actin  we observed polymerised, fluorescent actin microfilament bundles in a halo around approximately 80% of individual nuclei ). pre-incubation of intact nuclei with antibody against fxfg-repeat containing nucleoporins ; and non-nucleoporin  both resulted in a decrease in the number of nuclei displaying actin filaments . furthermore, the non-specific nuclear transport inhibitor wheat germ-agglutinin  also significantly reduced the percentage of nuclear actin halos . by contrast, pre-incubation with antibodies to inm proteins  had no significant effect compared with both negative  and positive  control conditions . these experiments strongly suggest that actin polymerisation is localised to the cytoplasmic phase of intact isolated ne-membranes in vitro.

discussion
previous studies using conventional approaches in fixed cells have described evidence for perinuclear actin in a variety of cell types including giant polyploid silk gland epithelial cells  <cit> , insect cells  <cit> , amobea  <cit>  and fungi  <cit> . in vertebrate tissue cells a perinuclear actin basket, revealed by phalloidin has also been reported  <cit> . however, these studies were limited to a visualisation of actin after cell fixation, and lacked information on actin polymerisation, in situ, ie inside living cells. in the current study, we provide evidence for perinuclear actin polymerisation using spinning disk confocal microscopy. our results show that inside intact living cells actin polymerises at ne-membranes, in a manner involving free-barbed-end protomers and through yet unidentified molecular components at the cytoplasmic face of the ne-membrane.

actin is one of the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic cells and this exacerbates detection of specifically localised subcellular compartments or gradients, because the vast majority of measured signal is derived from actin bound in very bright structures  or g-actin. evidently, this is less problematic for studies investigating actin polymerisation in more accessible regions for imaging e.g. actin polymerisation at the leading edge of the plasma membrane  <cit> . by contrast, in the current study our interest was focused on perinuclear actin. to visualise actin in the perinuclear cytoplasm we used spinning disk confocal microscopy in order to maximise three-dimensional resolution. with this approach it was striking that a nuclear actin ring was observed using several types of probes for visualisation, but was not readily observed using conventional wide-field imaging. the need for spinning disk confocal microscopy followed by deconvolution can explain why the perinuclear actin ring has until now not been described inside living cells.

using confocal imaging our results reveal that cytoplasmic micro-injection led, within minutes, to accumulation of fluorescent actin at the ne-membrane. this rapid accumulation of micro-injected actin fits with the idea that the perinuclear pool of actin and cytoplasmic actin are in dynamic equilibrium. one mechanism for cytoplasmic g-actin to interact with the perinuclear actin pool could be that the latter concentrates actin binding sites that present free-barbed-ends to which free cytoplasmic g-actin may further associate. certainly, our results using cd-bodipy are highly consistent with this view. we have shown that cd-bodipy that binds free-barbed-end actin with high affinity in vitro, yields a labelling pattern coincident with the ne-membrane in situ. pertinently, the ne-membrane associated cd-bodipy signal was observed to extend into the perinuclear cytoplasm, but never into the nuclear matrix, suggesting that the signal is continuous with the cytoplasmic actin cytoskeleton. however, given the sensitivity and resolution limits of optical microscopy this does not rule out the possibility that actin polymerisation could be physically located at the inner-face of the ne-membrane.

a recent study has shown that microinjected actin is localised to the ne-membrane of starfish oocytes, in a ring pattern around the nucleus  <cit>  analogous to our findings presented in the current work. this study showed that a transient burst of actin polymerisation occurs upon ne-membrane fenestration marking the beginning of nuclear envelope breakdown , and m-phase progression. using ultra-structural electron microscopy lenard et al. localised actin polymerisation to the inner face of the ne-membrane in accordance with their model. our current study using high-resolution multidimensional light microscopy raised the same question: i.e. whether polymerisation occurs at the inner- or outer- face of the ne-membrane. by contrast to the actin polymerisation upon nebd, our results suggest that perinuclear actin polymerisation in interphase nuclei of metazoan cells is driven from physical interactions at the cytoplasmic side of the ne-membrane. in vitro, we observed long actin filaments propagating outwards from intact nuclei isolated from differentiated rat liver cells, and incubated under conditions favouring actin polymerisation. furthermore, nuclei were intact and apparently impermeable  to actin because we never observed fluorescent actin inside the nuclear matrix. additional argument supporting the view that actin binds the cytoplasmic face of isolated nuclei was derived from our results indicating that actin polymerisation was strongly diminished in the presence of antibodies  targeting onm proteins, but not inm. both antibody  and lectin targeting onm nucleoporins inhibited actin polymerisation as strongly as anti-nesprin . therefore we hypothesise that these effects were due to molecular steric hindrance of a cytoplasmic onm actin binding site closely juxtaposed with nucleoporins and/or non-nucleoporins. this interpretation is also consistent with our observation that no actin labelling method yielded precise co-localisation with the nucleoporin pom <dig>  despite the uncertainty concerning whether nucleoporins and/or non-nucleoporins provide the actin binding site, our results do demonstrate that intact interphase nuclei support actin polymerisation at the cytoplasmic face of onm. interestingly, previous studies on isolated patch-clamped nuclei have provided evidence that npc ionic permeability measured by electrophysiology can be modulated by actin added to the ionic bathing solution suggesting that the effect involved cytoplasmic onm interactions  <cit> . moreover, a role for npc-associated cytoplasmic cytoskeleton filaments in regulation of npc transport functions has been postulated  <cit> . in either case, taken together with our current results, these hypotheses provide for a plausible functional impact linking the signalling milieu of the cytoplasmic actin cytoskeleton with npc structure and function.

CONCLUSIONS
a dynamic pool of actin filaments is linked to the cytoplasmic face of nuclei in metazoan cells during interphase. further studies will now aim at the identification of the factor  responsible for targeting actin polymerisation to the ne-membrane, and precisely defining the functional implications therein.

