BACKGROUND
female mate preferences have led to the emergence of extremely elaborate and diverse male ornamentation in many animals . a robust framework exists for understanding how traits and preferences coevolve at the population genetic level  <cit> . these models predict that sexual selection and the assortative mating of attractive males and choosy females inevitably leads to a positive genetic covariance between male trait and female preference. yet, the physiological pathways that translate such genetic information to mating behaviors are largely unknown. these physiological mechanisms have the potential to profoundly shape the rate and direction of coevolution if they have mutually pleiotropic effects on the expression of a trait and the preference for that trait.

sexually selected carotenoid-based male coloration appears in a diversity of taxa, from crabs  and fish  to birds , and has become a model system for understanding the costs, benefits, and evolution of male sexual trait expression  <cit> . carotenoids are a class of pigment molecules that vertebrates are unable to produce endogenously and must acquire directly or indirectly from plants, bacteria, or fungi  <cit> . carotenoids can promote immune function  <cit>  and alleviate oxidative stress  <cit> ; but see  <cit> . thus, carotenoid-based coloration reveals information about male quality  and female preferences for intense carotenoid-based coloration have been demonstrated in a number of taxa .

although the costs and benefits of carotenoid pigments for male coloration have dominated the attention of behavioral ecologists, carotenoids have the potential to shape female choice behavior, through their direct influence on female physiology. similar to males, carotenoids can enhance immune system responsiveness and antioxidant protection in females  which may permit investment in costly mate choice behaviors  <cit> . carotenoids are also particularly important to breeding female birds because they are an essential component in egg yolks  <cit> . carotenoid supplementation of females enhances egg production, yolk carotenoid accumulation, and subsequent embryo development and offspring quality  <cit> . thus, the reproductive condition of female birds may be linked to the environmental and physiological availability of carotenoids. we hypothesize that traits underlying carotenoid acquisition and accumulation provide a mechanistic link between female choice behavior and male coloration.

carotenoids may also influence mate choice for colorful traits through their direct influence on the visual systems of birds. in the avian retina, carotenoid pigments accumulate within oil droplets located between the inner and outer segments of the single cone photoreceptors  <cit> . in this position, carotenoids modify the spectral sensitivity of the cone in a way that is predicted to enhance color discrimination and color constancy  <cit> . similar to plumage coloration, carotenoid accumulation in the avian retina is constrained by diet and health  <cit> , and variation in retinal accumulation is linked to aspects of visual discrimination  <cit> . therefore, carotenoid accumulation in the retina may influence a female's ability to discriminate the coloration of potential mates.

in an indirect manner, ecological changes in the availability of dietary carotenoids have the potential to change the value of carotenoid-based colors as indicators of male quality and the benefits to females for choosing those traits  <cit> . specifically, carotenoid-based male signals in a carotenoid-rich environment may not be useful indicators of quality because it is relatively easy for males to acquire all of the carotenoids they need to become colorful. consistent with this hypothesis, grether et al.  <cit>  observed that female guppies reared on a carotenoid-limited diet had significantly stronger preferences for male carotenoid-based coloration then females reared on a carotenoid-rich diet. this result suggests that dietary carotenoid levels provide females with information about environmental carotenoid availability that they may use to weigh the value of carotenoid-based male signals. however, physiological mechanisms behind this environmentally tuned response are unknown.

to investigate influence of carotenoids on female mate choice, we manipulated dietary carotenoid intake, quantified physiological accumulation of carotenoids, and examined mate selection behaviors of female house finches . the house finch is a model species for the study of sexually selected carotenoid-based coloration; males have plumage that varies from drab yellow to brilliant red depending upon dietary carotenoid access, health, and genetic quality  <cit> . thus, male coloration is considered an honest indicator of male quality and, in nearly all populations, females prefer brilliant red males  <cit>  but see  <cit> . although these population-level preferences for male coloration are clear, individuals within a population may vary in their responsiveness, discrimination, and the strength of their preferences, in ways that may alter the intensity and direction of sexual selection  <cit> . because mate choice is a complex behavior with components that may be differentially influenced by physiological or environmental conditions, we examined three specific components of choice.

mate choice behavior can be initially divided into two components: 1) the preference function and 2) choosiness  <cit> . the preference function is the slope of the relationship between a female's response and the level of expression of the male trait  <cit> ; steeper slopes indicate stronger preferences. choosiness reflects the effort invested into mate choice by the female and can be further divided into two components: 1) responsiveness and 2) discrimination  <cit> . responsiveness is the mean level of response by a female to all males , and discrimination is the variance in the female's response among the males she has sampled  <cit> . a high level of discrimination indicates that a female is biasing her response toward a specific male, while a low level of discrimination indicates a similar response to all males.

to examine the influence of carotenoids on these three components of mate choice, we captured female finches prior to the breeding season, maintained them in captivity, and fed them high- or low-carotenoid diets. we then presented these females with males that were manipulated to vary from yellow to red and measured the association time of the females with the males. association time has been shown to be a reliable indicator of female choice in house finches  <cit> . from these observations, we calculated the preference function, responsiveness, and discrimination for each female  <cit> . we measured plasma carotenoid levels before, during, and after carotenoid supplementation and retinal carotenoid levels at the conclusion of the study, using high performance liquid chromatography  <cit> . because all females were maintained on a very low carotenoid diet for two months before carotenoid supplementation, we considered our initial measure of plasma carotenoid levels to be an indicator of a female's ability to accumulate carotenoids from a limited diet  <cit> . therefore, if female preference for carotenoid-based coloration is linked to carotenoid accumulation and availability, we predicted that both the preference function and choosiness would be positively correlated with pre-supplementation plasma carotenoid levels and significantly increased among carotenoid-supplemented females. if retinal carotenoids affect a female's ability to discriminate among potential mates, we predicted that retinal carotenoid levels would be positively correlated with the level of mate discrimination and with the repeatability of the preference function between successive choice trials. alternatively, the environmentally contingent carotenoid indicator model of grether et al.  <cit>  predicts that strength of female color preference should be negatively related to carotenoid availability and accumulation.

RESULTS
female carotenoid accumulation, body condition, and activity rate during mate choice
in january, prior to carotenoid supplementation, the plasma carotenoid levels of the female finches did not differ significantly between the treatment groups . the high-carotenoid diet significantly increased plasma carotenoid levels compared to initial levels and females fed the low-carotenoid diet . before and during supplementation, the plasma carotenoid levels of the females were within the range of variation observed amongst wild birds at the same time of year . following the eight-week carotenoid supplementation period, we returned all of birds to the low-carotenoid diet in an effort to minimize differences in circulating carotenoid levels during the mate choice trials. our goal was to isolate the persistent diet-induced changes in retinal carotenoid accumulation from the more labile plasma carotenoid levels  <cit>  and to test the specific role of retinal carotenoids in female choice. however, supplementation differences in plasma carotenoid levels persisted and high-carotenoid birds retained significantly higher levels during the mate choice test  that were similar to the mean levels observed among wild females .

the effects of dietary carotenoid supplementation on the retinal carotenoid levels of these birds are presented as part of a separate study  <cit> , but, to summarize these results, birds receiving the high-carotenoid diet had significantly higher retinal carotenoid levels  than those fed the low-carotenoid diet.

there was no significant effect of carotenoid supplementation on body mass ; however body mass changed significantly over time . body mass declined following capture  for both groups, then remained stable for the rest of the study .

female activity levels during the mate choice trials differed significantly between the diet treatments , and this difference was driven primarily by a significant increase in movement of the high-carotenoid diet females . high-carotenoid females spent a mean ± s.e.  <dig>  ±  <dig>  min. flying and/or climbing during the trials, compared to the low-carotenoid females that spent  <dig>  ±  <dig>  min. moving. the treatment groups did not differ significantly in the amount of time devoted to preening  or sitting .

male coloration measures as a predictor of female choice
although the manipulated coloration of the stimulus males can easily be categorized with the human visual system, these categories are unlikely to reflect how female house finches perceive male coloration  <cit> . to address this limitation, we used noise-limited receptor  <cit>  and cone-capture  <cit>  models of the avian visual system to calculate the contrast values and tetrahedral color-space location of each male's manipulated plumage. this analysis revealed that, despite a qualitative match to human visual perception of wild birds and hue values within the natural range of variation, our manipulated males fell outside this range when coloration was quantified using the avian visual model . specifically, the red/orange, orange/yellow, and yellow experimental males tended to produce higher quantum catches for the medium-wavelength-sensitive cone than was typical of our sample of wild males .

despite these limitations coloration was a significant predictor of female association time with the males. with the exception of the color space-component vector component r, all of our metrics of male coloration were significant predictors of female association time . although the red/orange and orange/yellow males had very similar levels of chromatic contrast when compared to red males , their color did differ significantly when compared against one another . the best predictors of female choice were the tristimulus hue value and the color-space vector component θ, both of which are also significant predictors of feather carotenoid content  <cit> . because of its link to avian visual perception, we chose to focus subsequent analyses on the color-space vector component θ.

mean ± se values for color measures acquired from stimulus male and the results of a linear regressions of female association time with each measure of experimental male plumage color. chromatic and achromatic contrast values were calculated in comparison to the reddest male in each mate choice trial.

carotenoid status and female choice behavior
females spent significantly more time in association with the reddest males ; however the preference for red males did not differ significantly between females fed the low- vs. high-carotenoid diets . females fed the high-carotenoid diet were significantly more responsive to males overall than were the low-carotenoid-diet females . this pattern mirrors the differences in activity level between the diet treatments, but it is not a simply a by-product of changes in activity. when activity  is included as a factor in our analysis of mate choice, diet treatments remained a significant predictor of mate responsiveness . mate preference functions and discrimination did not differ between the diet treatments . however, pre-supplementation plasma carotenoid levels were a significant predictor of mate discrimination , such that females who circulated relatively higher levels of carotenoids were more discriminating and tended bias their association time towards one or a subset of the males . female responsiveness and the mate preference function were not significantly associated with pre-supplementation plasma carotenoid levels . time of day was a significant predictor of female association time, with females spending more time with males earlier in the day . however, there was no significant effect of time of day on color preference .

results of univariate ancovas testing the effects of dietary carotenoid supplementation and pre-supplementation plasma carotenoid levels on the three components of female choice for male plumage coloration.

within each treatment group, total retinal carotenoid levels were not a significant predictor of mate choice behavior . the repeatability of the preference for male plumage coloration did not differ significantly between diet treatments  or with retinal carotenoid accumulation within each treatment .

we found no evidence that males behaved differently toward females from different diet treatment groups. males were much less likely than females to terminate male-female associations during the trials , and the frequency of male terminations did not differ significantly between the female diet treatments . males terminated association a mean of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  times per trial, while females ended associations  <dig>  ±  <dig>  times/trial.

discussion
here we provide evidence that carotenoids, a dietary component essential for the expression of sexually selected male coloration, also influence female mate choice behavior. specifically, female house finches receiving a carotenoid-limited diet had significantly reduced levels of mating responsiveness, and the degree of female discrimination among males was positively correlated with circulating plasma carotenoid levels at the beginning of our study, when all females were receiving a carotenoid-limited diet. in contrast, the directional preference for red male plumage coloration was unaffected by supplementation and was not significantly linked to circulating carotenoid levels at any time during the study. below, we consider these carotenoid-dependent changes in specific components of mate choice behavior in the context of 1) physiological costs of and constraints on mate choice behavior, and 2) the adaptive value of the various mate choice behaviors  <cit> .

experimental design considerations
we initially designed our study to examine the specific role of retinal carotenoid accumulation in female discrimination of colourful mates, but revealed a much more general role of carotenoids in female choice behavior. yet, because of this specific design, it is important to consider the details of our diet and color manipulations when interpreting these more general patterns. our dietary carotenoid manipulation consisted of a period of supplementation followed by a return to the base diet, which was intended to produce persistent changes in retinal carotenoid levels while minimizing difference in circulating carotenoid levels during the mate choice tests. however, at the time of the mate choice trials, the plasma carotenoid levels of the supplemented females were similar to the mean of wild females at the same time of year and levels in the unsupplemented females were consistent with the very lowest levels observed in the wild. thus, the low- and high- carotenoid-diet females provide a comparison of relatively carotenoid-depleted females to individuals circulating an average level of plasma carotenoids.

we manipulated male plumage coloration following established methods  <cit>  that provided a match to the range of wild finch coloration in simple measures of hue and qualitative human assessments. however, when we examined this coloration with a model incorporating the assumed visual capabilities of the house finch, we found that our some of experimental males  fell outside of the natural range of color variation. therefore, the consistent directional preference of females for red males in our study, although consistent with patterns of sexual selection in a number of house finch populations  <cit> , could be the result of discrimination against orange and yellow males because they are outside the natural range of variation. despite this limitation, our color manipulation is unlikely to have generated the diet differences in mate responsiveness and the correlation between circulating carotenoid levels and mate discrimination that we report.

carotenoids and mate choice constraints
in many species, mate choice is a complex and costly process requiring the location, assessment, and comparison of potential mates  <cit> . moving among and interacting with potential mates depletes energetic resources  <cit> , and this activity is likely to generate oxidative stress  <cit> . carotenoids may facilitate active choice by countering the oxidative stress resulting from physical activity. for example, carotenoid supplementation improves the escape flight performance of zebra finches , and antioxidant supplementation, including carotenoids, alleviates flight-induced lipid peroxidation and dna damage in budgerigars . the behavioral effects of carotenoids extend beyond locomotion, and recently van hout et al.  <cit>  found that carotenoid supplementation of male starlings  enhanced song production. specifically, nest-oriented song production was increased, suggesting a link between carotenoids and reproductive behaviors in particular  <cit> . consistent with this direct physiological role of carotenoids, we observed that carotenoid supplementation increased both female responsiveness to males and their general activity in the mate choice context, thus supplemented females may have been better able to meet the costs of active mate assessment and selection.

the performance of the sensory system imposes limitations on a female's ability to assess and discriminate among males. we previously found that carotenoid accumulation in the house finch retina is a significant predictor of visual discrimination in a foraging context  <cit> , and we hypothesized that carotenoid availability may influence female choice for colorful males through carotenoid-mediated changes in color discrimination  <cit> . however, we found no support for this idea in the current study. although carotenoid supplementation increased carotenoid levels in the retina, as well as significantly influenced mate choice behavior, when we looked within diet treatment groups we found no relationship between retinal carotenoid concentration and any component of mate choice behavior. although a direct experimental manipulation of retinal carotenoids, without more general physiological effects of supplementation, would be a stronger test of this hypothesis, our data suggest it is unlikely that a retinal-carotenoid-specific mechanism is driving the changes in mate choice behavior between treatment groups. this is not altogether surprising, because the color differences between stimulus males were relatively large, easily discriminated by human observers, and likely outstripped any of the carotenoid-related shifts in discriminability. a much finer-scale manipulation that more accurately mimics natural male coloration is now needed to test for more subtle effects of retinal carotenoids on visually mediated mate selection.

carotenoid status and the adaptive value of mate choice
the cost and benefits of mate choice are dependent upon the context in which reproduction occurs, and females may adaptively shift their choices to balance these costs and benefits . carotenoid availability and accumulation can change the context of mate choice because they can significantly influence a female's reproductive potential. through their antioxidant and immunomodulatory effects , carotenoids can enhance female health and condition and directly promote fecundity and offspring quality  <cit> . in fact, a positive carotenoid balance over the course of a breeding season is a significant predictor of reproductive success in barn swallows . therefore, the reduced responsiveness of the low-carotenoid-diet females, and the correlation between discrimination and circulating carotenoid levels under dietary carotenoid limitation, may be linked to the immediate potential of these females to produce many high-quality offspring.

grether  <cit>  proposed that the value of male carotenoid-based colors as quality indicators is negatively related to the environmental availability of carotenoids. thus, carotenoid-limited females should show stronger preferences for male carotenoid coloration than carotenoid-replete females  <cit> . however, we found that color preferences of female house finches were not affected by dietary carotenoid supplementation or correlated with the carotenoid accumulation ability of females. this result contradicts the predictions of grether  <cit> ; however our carotenoid manipulation occurred only during the adult stage and lacked the concomitant limitation of food availability during development that revealed these patterns in guppies  <cit> , and our color manipulation was not exactly matched to natural male coloration. however, a stable mate preference function is not surprising because preference is generally considered innate and/or developmentally determined component of mate choice  <cit> , which tends to vary less among individuals  <cit> , and therefore may be less sensitive to a female's current condition  <cit>  than other components of choice . in previous work, hill  <cit>  found that female house finches from distinct populations, with very different patterns of male coloration, all show a common preference for red males, suggesting that red preference is an ancestral trait in the house finch that is maintained despite very different social and environmental conditions.

implications for the evolution of carotenoid-based coloration
we hypothesized that traits mediating carotenoid acquisition and accumulation could promote the coevolution of male ornaments and female preferences by facilitating both the production of sexually selected male coloration and female choice for those ornaments. this coevolutionary process is typically envisioned as a linkage between male ornament expression and female directional preference for that ornament  <cit> . however, we found no significant relationship between carotenoid acquisition and accumulation and the directional preferences of female house finches for male plumage coloration. yet, the carotenoid-dependence of female responsiveness and discrimination has the potential to influence the intensity and direction of sexual selection on male carotenoid-based coloration.

carotenoid supplemented females spent more time associating with males, and we found a significant positive correlation between pre-supplementation circulating carotenoid levels and female mate discrimination. females that circulated relatively high plasma carotenoid levels, at the beginning of the study, later tended to focus their effort on a single male and spent less time assessing other potential mates. if we extend these observations to a natural context, we predict that females with a carotenoid-rich diet and/or the ability to accumulate high levels from dietary sources would more rapidly select a mate and thus pair up earlier in the season. early paring female house finches tend to pair with higher-quality, redder males and enjoy higher reproductive success than later-paring birds  <cit> . this could drive a pattern of assortative mating between responsive, high-carotenoid-status females and colourful, high-carotenoid-status males, which together produce a relatively large number of offspring. following this scenario, there should be significant selection on the traits that mediate carotenoid acquisition and accumulation in both males and females that will promote the evolution of elaborate carotenoid-based coloration. this pattern is complementary to biard et al.'s  <cit>  suggestion that the maternal allocation of carotenoids to egg yolks contribute to the evolution of carotenoid-based plumage coloration by facilitating the development of physiological mechanisms of carotenoid accumulation. therefore, carotenoid-replete females may not only be more likely to pair with attractive high-carotenoid-status males, but they may also be better able to allocate carotenoids to eggs and produce high-quality attractive offspring, which may contribute similar selective pressures on the mechanisms of carotenoid acquisition and accumulation.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that the acquisition and accumulation of carotenoids, which are nutrients important for health, female reproduction, and the production of sexually selected male coloration, are positively related to female mate responsiveness and discrimination. we suggest that the behavioral and physiological traits mediating carotenoid acquisition and accumulation provide a mechanism that may promote the coevolution of carotenoid-based sexual ornaments and female choice for those traits. the common and complementary benefits of carotenoid accumulation in males and in females may underlie the ubiquity and elaboration of carotenoid-based sexual signals in animals.

