BACKGROUND
the ability to predict evolution would be valuable not only for understanding such processes as adaptation and speciation , but also for engineering robust industrial strains, anticipating ecosystem responses to climate change, and combatting antibiotic resistance . models that capture the relationship between genotypes and environments, the structure and state of regulatory and metabolic networks, and the resulting phenotypes are likely to be important for developing these predictive abilities  <cit> . ultimately, models of the relationship between genotype and phenotype will need to be combined with models of evolutionary and ecological dynamics in integrated frameworks that can predict the trajectory of evolution  <cit> .

the dynamics of evolutionary change reflect multiple processes and varying selective pressures that are influenced by many ecological, physical, and cellular constraints that may conflict with one another. understanding whether and how these dynamics lead to the splitting and divergence of lineages is of central interest, as these processes represent the initial steps towards speciation. to this end, several theoretical studies have shown that cellular tradeoffs can promote lineage divergence . the importance of such tradeoffs can be readily understood in the context of metabolism and growth. for example, if there were no tradeoffs, then one would predict that cells should maximize their expression of transporters and their surface area to achieve the highest possible rate of substrate uptake  <cit> . however, such cellular investments would impinge on other cellular processes owing to competing requirements for membrane and cytosol space  <cit> , ribosomes  <cit> , and redox carriers  <cit> . thus, cells may appear suboptimal for individual physiological parameters, but this might be merely a consequence of being optimal for the combined set of parameters and associated cellular tradeoffs.

historically, the interplay between cellular tradeoffs and evolutionary and ecological dynamics has been analyzed using game theory and differential equation-based models that consider small or idealized metabolic systems  <cit> . these studies have highlighted that tradeoffs in cellular metabolism can lead to incomplete degradation of a resource, resulting in the evolution of cross-feeding interactions  <cit> . this phenomenon has been seen in several evolution experiments under both batch and chemostat conditions . to increase predictive power in microbial ecology and evolution, it is now desirable to develop models that can take into account cellular metabolism at a larger scale and across different organisms. stoichiometric models offer a promising approach because, in principle, they can capture all enzyme-mediated metabolic reactions of an organism in an unbiased and non-supervised way using genomic information  <cit> .

flux balance analysis  has been developed to determine the optimal metabolic state of an organism, given knowledge of its biochemical network, biomass composition, and uptake flux rates  <cit> . this approach is based on the assumptions that evolution has optimized metabolism and that metabolic fluxes can be predicted by setting the growth rate for a given rate of substrate uptake  as an optimization criterion that can be solved by linear programming . early applications of fba ignored the essential role of tradeoffs in the computation of metabolic fluxes  <cit> , but more recent applications have incorporated tradeoffs as constraints on total fluxes  <cit>  and thereby achieved better prediction of experimentally observed metabolic states, such as preferential substrate utilization  <cit>  and acetate overflow  <cit> . experimentally measured reaction thermodynamics and gene expression levels have also been used to constrain optimal metabolic states that reflect tradeoffs , and there have been efforts to combine fba with ecological interactions between multiple species in microbial communities . these approaches use species-specific models in a shared environment to maximize a predefined, community-level objective  <cit>  or apply fba within a dynamic framework  <cit> . the latter approach enables prediction of ecological interactions such as competition and cross-feeding between different species making up the model community, given defined substrate uptake constraints for each model species  <cit> . however, none of these approaches can currently be used to predict the interplay between ecological and evolutionary dynamics.

here, we begin to overcome these limitations by integrating a fba model of multi-phenotype systems with both cellular constraints and evolutionary dynamics. we define an overall constraint on uptake rates to enforce tradeoffs while simulating multiple model organisms living in the same environment without the need to specify each organism’s uptake preferences a priori . by limiting total uptake in the model, and including o <dig> “uptake” in that total, we seek to represent cellular limitations that can arise from many diverse processes, including redox cycling  <cit> , respiratory chain  <cit> , enzyme expression  <cit> , and substrate uptake  <cit> . although o <dig> uptake per se might not be limiting, limitations in the electron transport chain can effectively limit o <dig> respiration. accounting for all the different possible limitations arising from cellular processes in a mechanistic manner is beyond the scope of stoichiometric models; however, limiting total uptake provides a general constraint that allows us to implement the tradeoffs observed in different studies in a simple, consistent, albeit approximate manner .

this approach allows integration of evolutionary dynamics by mutations that change substrate uptake rates along with the optimization of each model organism in the context of other model organisms that are present and coevolving in the same environment. the combined framework, which we call evofba, thus aims to provide a more realistic way to model the interplay between ecological and evolutionary dynamics with global constraints arising from cellular tradeoffs. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first fba modeling approach that captures the continuous adaptation of organisms to the interplay between ecological and evolutionary dynamics in systems with multiple strains or species.

to examine the ability of evofba to capture ecological and evolutionary dynamics, we used it to simulate the evolution of escherichia coli populations in a defined glucose-limited environment with daily transfers. we then experimentally analyzed the predictions of evofba in the context of the long-term evolution experiment  with e. coli, in which  <dig> populations started from a common ancestor have been propagated in a glucose-limited medium for more than  <dig>  generations  <cit> . we found that the evofba simulations predicted the emergence of cross-feeding model organisms as a stable end-point, which in fact has occurred in at least one of the ltee populations  <cit> . moreover, we saw that key metabolic features of the model organisms were in qualitative agreement with the physiological properties we measured for the two biological lineages that emerged and subsequently coexisted for more than  <dig>  generations.

RESULTS
microbial communities and their underlying metabolic interactions reflect the ecological and evolutionary histories of the component species  <cit> . to capture these interactions, we combine stoichiometric metabolic models with ecological and evolutionary dynamics in the multi-layered evofba framework . to test the utility of this framework, we apply it to the ltee in which e. coli populations evolve in a defined glucose-limited environment  <cit> .

to model the ltee, we ran evofba simulations starting with a metabolic model of e. coli that accounts for  <dig> carbon sources including glucose and byproducts that can be scavenged from the environment to produce biomass and fuel associated core metabolic reactions. in each evofba simulation, we allowed the metabolic model to change by random mutations under global constraints that must be obeyed. thus, each simulation produced mutant model organisms exhibiting different uptake rates, metabolic flux patterns, and resulting growth rates.

evofba predicts evolution of cross-feeding between lineages with different metabolic flux distributions
starting from a population of identical model organisms under conditions similar to the ltee, a typical evofba simulation produced through random mutations more than  <dig>  genetically distinct model organisms over  <dig> simulated daily transfer cycles . the evolutionary dynamics across replicate simulations were highly reproducible in their key features, in particular the diversification of the population into two coexisting lineages . thus, throughout the paper, we will focus on results from a typical representative simulation that resulted in  <dig>  different model genotypes, of which  <dig> survived at least one transfer event  and  <dig> reached a population size of at least  <dig> cells at some point . these simulations revealed specific changes in oxygen, glucose, and acetate uptake by the model organisms . glucose uptake and incomplete oxidation resulted in acetate secretion by the ancestral model organism, which would then switch to acetate uptake and oxidation after the glucose was exhausted. thus, the ancestral model displayed a diauxic shift , as observed in e. coli  <cit> . as the in silico evolution proceeded, new model organisms arose that had increased glucose uptake and acetate production. the resulting increase in acetate concentration generated an ecological niche that was colonized by other model organisms with increased acetate uptake but reduced glucose uptake. after ~ <dig> simulated daily transfer cycles , the simulated evolution came to a halt, with no mutant model organisms able to replace the dominant ones. thus, the in silico dynamics produced two distinct lineages that specialized on glucose and acetate, respectively. the glucose-specialist model organisms lost the ability to consume acetate, whereas the acetate-specialist model organisms retained the ability to consume glucose but at a lower rate, and the timing of their diauxic shift was changed . as a consequence, the simulation led to a stable cross-feeding relationship between two lineages of model organisms.fig.  <dig> evolutionary dynamics in silico. a numbers of surviving cells  after each simulated cycle on a logarithmic scale. each curve shows one of the  <dig> model organism genotypes that survived at least one cycle . b relationships among ancestral and mutant model genotypes for those that reached a population of at least  <dig> cells at any point during the simulation . model id indicates the identifier assigned to each model genotype, with  <dig> being the ancestor. line thickness is proportional to the log10-transformed number per 10-ml volume at the start of each cycle. coloured bars show relative uptake rates for glucose , acetate , and oxygen 

fig.  <dig> replicate runs of evofba. a one of five replicate simulations using the same parameter set as described in the main text and shown in fig.  <dig>  all simulations led to qualitatively similar outcomes. b running evofba simulations with a smaller maximum mutation step size , see methods eq. 5), led to the same diversification into glucose specialist and glucose-acetate co-utilizing model organisms, although the time required to achieve the diversification was substantially longer. model id, line thickness and coloured bars are the same as in fig. 1


fig.  <dig> simulated and experimental dynamics of population density and substrate concentrations. a simulated dynamics over a 24-h transfer cycle for the evolved acetate specialist , ancestral , and evolved glucose specialist  model organisms. model ids are the same as in fig. 1b. b experimental data for the  <dig> ks <dig> , ancestral , and  <dig> kl <dig>  clones from the ltee. biological experiments were performed at a 10-fold higher concentration of glucose than the simulations to increase cell density and thereby improve the accuracy of the measurements of cell growth and concentrations of residual glucose and secreted acetate. biological data are means of three replicate cultures and error bars show standard deviations



we then examined the metabolic fluxes for the two model organisms when growing on glucose and acetate . on glucose, both the glucose and acetate specialists displayed similar behaviours, using the tca cycle only partially and the glyoxylate shunt not at all . after switching to acetate consumption , the acetate specialists showed very different fluxes, with reverse glycolysis and full use of the tca cycle including the glyoxylate shunt . we emphasize that the emergence of cross-feeding model organisms and their associated fluxes in the evofba simulation represents an idealized evolutionary stable state given the assumptions of the evofba framework.fig.  <dig> metabolite turnover fluxes in glycolysis and tca cycle. fluxes in the glucose specialist  and the acetate specialist  genotypes  during growth on glucose  and acetate . the following metabolites and reactions are shown: ac, acetate; actp, acetyl-phosphate; akg, alpha-keto-glutarate; cit, citrate; f6p, fructose-6-phosphate; fum, fumarate; glx, glyoxylate; g6p, glucose-6-phosphate; icit, isocitrate; mal, malate; oaa, oxaloacetate; pep, phospho-enol-pyruvate; succ, succinate; succoa, succinyl-coenzyme a. pgi, acn, ace, and ack are the reactions catalyzed by glucose-phosphate isomerase, aconitate hydratase, malate synthase, and acetate kinase, respectively . thickness of the arrow indicates the flux over the given reaction; the reference arrow at the bottom right shows a flux of 10 mmol/gdw/h



adaptive diversification in one ltee population, matching evofba predictions
two distinct lineages had emerged in one of the ltee populations, called ara- <dig>  by  <dig> generations, and they have coexisted ever since  <cit> . the lineages are called s  and l  after their colony sizes on agar plates. the maintenance of this polymorphism depends on a cross-feeding interaction in which the l type is a better competitor for the exogenously supplied glucose and the s type is better at using one or more secreted byproducts  <cit> , although the precise ecological and metabolic mechanisms are still unknown. therefore, we used predictions from the evofba simulations to generate hypotheses about these mechanisms.

we hypothesized that, first, l specializes on glucose and secretes acetate and, second, s specializes by improved acetate consumption. we tested this hypothesis by analyzing two evolved clones sampled at generation  <dig> from the s and l lineages, named  <dig> ks <dig> and  <dig> kl <dig>  respectively. hplc analyses confirmed the presence of acetate in a 24-h supernatant of  <dig> kl <dig> that was grown in the same medium as the ltee . acetate was not detected after growing  <dig> ks <dig> in that supernatant . we then measured the acetate and glucose concentrations over time in cultures of the ancestor,  <dig> ks <dig>  and  <dig> kl <dig> clones in dm250-glucose medium . both the l and s clones consumed glucose faster than the ancestor, consistent with previous assays  <cit> . moreover, in agreement with the evofba results,  <dig> kl <dig> secreted acetate, with its concentration remaining high for many hours in the monoculture, and  <dig> ks <dig> drew down its own acetate secretion much faster than both  <dig> kl <dig> and the ancestor. after exhausting the glucose by 6 h,  <dig> ks <dig> showed diauxic growth and consumed acetate until it was depleted after 9 h, whereas  <dig> kl <dig> had barely, if at all, begun to consume acetate at that time even as it had exhausted the glucose by 5 h . these results support the hypothesis that the stable coexistence of s and l depends on acetate cross-feeding, with acetate production by both the l and s lineages and more efficient acetate scavenging by the s lineage, which exhibits a faster metabolic switch from glucose to acetate .

physiology and fluxes in s and l clones agree qualitatively with evofba
the evofba simulation reaches an evolutionary equilibrium, whereas the interaction between the s and l lineages remained highly dynamic over thousands of generations  <cit> . therefore, we examined the metabolic divergence of the s and l lineages over the course of the ltee. we first measured the ability of clones from earlier and later generations to grow in minimal media containing glucose or acetate. s clones from later generations typically grew faster and with a shorter lag phase on acetate and more slowly on glucose than s clones from earlier generations, while the opposite trends were observed in the l lineage  . compared to the ancestor, s clones improved their growth on acetate over evolutionary time, while l clones initially improved somewhat but were variable, with the  <dig> -generation l clone showing weak growth similar to the ancestor . on glucose, the opposite trend was observed with l clones consistently improving compared to the ancestor, while s clones improved initially but declined in later generations . these patterns of growth relative to the ancestor are consistent with previous assays using the ltee clones  <cit> . these evolutionary trajectories of growth on acetate and glucose indicate character displacement and suggest tradeoffs that prevent the simultaneous optimization of growth on both carbon sources. the trajectories are qualitatively consistent with the evofba simulations, although the evofba predicts complete specialization on glucose without any acetate consumption. this evofba prediction represents a potential evolutionarily stable end point, which might eventually occur in the s and l lineages after more generations.fig.  <dig> changes in growth rates of s and l on glucose and acetate over evolutionary time. growth of s and l clones sampled at multiple generations of the ltee was followed in dm250-acetate  and dm250-glucose  media. clone names are shown above the horizontal red and blue bars, which denote s and l clones, respectively. the ancestor  and a 2000-generation clone  isolated prior to the divergence of the s and l lineages are also included. growth rates  are shown according to the colour scale for 1-h sliding windows over 24-h and 7-h periods in the acetate and glucose media, respectively. empty cells indicate missing values based on filtering negative rates or unreliable values 



we then tested the flux patterns predicted by evofba  by measuring, in several ltee clones, the promoter activities of genes encoding four key metabolic enzymes, using transcriptional fusions with the gfp reporter gene . both s and l clones showed moderately increased promoter activity for pgi relative to the ancestor . both s and l clones exhibited larger increases in the promoter activities of acnb and aceb relative to the ancestor, with the s clones showing much greater increases than the l clones, consistent with the possibility of greater flux through the tca cycle and glyoxylate shunt in the s acetate specialists. there were no obvious changes in the promoter activities of acka in either the s or l lineages. of course, there may be discrepancies between promoter activities and actual enzyme activities  <cit> . nonetheless, these patterns agree reasonably well with the flux predictions from the evofba simulations, especially as they relate to the higher activities in the s lineage of the genes that specifically promote growth on acetate. as noted above, we reiterate that the evofba simulations predict an eventual complete loss of the acetate-specific activities in the l lineage, whereas thus far they are merely expressed at a lower level in the l lineage than in the s lineage.fig.  <dig> transcription levels of four genes encoding metabolic enzymes in the ancestor and evolved clones. promoter activities measured as /od450nm for genes involved in glucose and acetate metabolism during the first 8 h of growth in dm250-glucose. the clones are, from left to right: 50ks <dig>   <dig> ks <dig>  ancestor ,  <dig> kl <dig> and 50kl <dig>  the genes are, from top to bottom: pgi encoding glucose phosphate isomerase, acnb encoding aconitate hydratase, aceb encoding malate synthase a, and acka encoding acetate kinase. activity values are means based on three-fold replication of each assay



discussion
we developed a modeling framework, called evofba, which combines metabolic models that are amenable to fba with an evolutionary algorithm to simulate the interplay of evolutionary and ecological dynamics in systems with multiple strains or species. we applied evofba to the ltee with e. coli and predicted the emergence of two stably coexisting lineages with distinct metabolic flux distributions that promote a cross-feeding interaction. these predictions fit with the polymorphism seen in the ara– <dig> population, where two lineages emerged early in the ltee that have now coexisted for tens of thousands of generations  <cit> . the evofba simulations enabled us to hypothesize specific ecological and physiological mechanisms that generate and sustain this polymorphism, and we then tested these hypotheses using the bacteria from that ltee population. on balance, we found that the ecological, physiological, and metabolic properties of these coexisting lineages agree reasonably well with the predictions of the evofba.

only one of the  <dig> ltee populations evolved a persistent polymorphism that has been studied in such detail  <cit> . however, other ltee populations show evidence of negative frequency-dependent fitness, deep phylogenetic divergence, or both, which are consistent with adaptive diversification . these results suggest that other populations may have evolved cross-feeding interactions similar to the one studied here, even if they were not always so persistent  <cit> . one possible explanation for why persistent polymorphisms did not evolve in the other populations is that the establishment of the s lineage appears to have involved epistatic interactions between multiple mutations  <cit> , which may have limited its evolutionary accessibility  <cit> . this possibility reflects one of the limitations of evofba, which cannot capture all of the intricacies of biological evolution but instead predicts optimal end states that emerge given the simplifying assumptions of this approach. for example, mutations in evofba affect the rates of resource uptake, but not the rates of internal reactions in the model. this limitation reflects the computational burden of simulating a multitude of mutant genotypes, the number of which would increase greatly if all reaction rates were subject to mutation. this limitation could be relieved by the development of more efficient algorithms , but the final evolved model organisms might not differ functionally from those based on the current approach because changes in uptake rates can already affect downstream flux distributions. another limitation of the evofba approach at this time is the assumption that constraints on the uptake fluxes can be changed only by mutation, while the optimization of fluxes within those constraints is immediate through fba  <cit> . in other words, metabolic fluxes change within physiological limits without delay, whereas changing the limits themselves requires mutations. these assumptions are reasonable starting points for incorporating evolutionary dynamics into an fba framework, but physiological delays in metabolic adjustments are also sometimes important  <cit> . expanding the evofba framework to include the dynamics of physiological transitions could start by integrating previous work on incorporating gene regulation into fba  <cit> .

adaptive diversification is expected, and has occurred, in other evolution experiments besides the ltee, such as when two exogenous carbon sources are provided  <cit>  and in high-glucose chemostats, where substantial acetate is produced  <cit> . however, the adaptive diversification observed in the ltee was unexpected owing to the presence of a single carbon source, glucose, which was supplied at a low concentration  <cit> . using the evofba framework, we predicted that acetate secretion was the primary metabolic driver leading to the emergence of the polymorphism, and that prediction was supported by our experiments. the long duration of the ltee—including several thousand generations to establish the s and l polymorphism  <cit>  and its persistence for tens of thousands of generations  <cit> —may have facilitated adaptive divergence under these more restrictive ecological conditions, in comparison with other studies of much shorter duration where glucose, acetate, or both were supplied exogenously at high concentrations  <cit> . in fact, low levels of acetate, as observed in our study, have previously been reported to favor generalists as opposed to divergence into coexisting specialists  <cit> . nonetheless, the l lineage evolved higher glucose uptake rates, which led to acetate overflow and the construction of a new niche that benefited the s lineage, as occurred in the evofba simulations. thus, niche construction by the bacteria led to the emergence of this polymorphism, in contrast to experiments where both carbon sources were added to the medium  <cit> . despite the differences between the ltee and previous evolution experiments  <cit> , similar metabolic processes emerged.

CONCLUSIONS
the combination of evofba and experimental evolution provides a useful approach that can give insights into general mechanisms involved in the emergence of bacterial diversity and community construction. this approach may stimulate the development of even more detailed and integrated studies aimed at predicting the outcomes of evolution experiments and dynamics in multi-species systems including synthetic microbial communities  <cit> .

