BACKGROUND
morphological variation is a ubiquitous phenomenon and it exists at many taxonomic levels such as between species, within species and among individuals in populations. depending on its relationship to the background environment, morphological variation may be either adaptive or non-adaptive  <cit> . the degree to which the environment, phenotypic plasticity, and the underlying genetic architecture interact may also fundamentally influence morphological variation  <cit> . moreover, divergent morphology is often associated with speciation events suggesting that phenotypic variation plays a role in the speciation process  <cit> . thus, a fundamental goal of evolutionary biology is to understand what governs patterns of morphological variation in natural populations.

in this study we explore patterns of morphological divergence and the genetic signature of recent isolation in populations of nine-spined stickleback  in northern sweden. the nine-spined stickleback is a small euryhaline fish that inhabits a variety of freshwater and brackish environments in the temperate and subarctic regions of the northern hemisphere  <cit> . in sweden, nine-spined sticklebacks are widely distributed in the baltic sea  and inhabit a variety of freshwater ponds, lakes and rivers  <cit> .

throughout its range, the nine-spined stickleback displays remarkable morphological variation, particularly in isolated freshwater populations where morphology appears to be shaped by a combination of isolation, drift and natural selection  <cit> . for example, sticklebacks from landlocked populations are generally larger than their coastal conspecifics  <cit> . also, loss of the pelvic girdle and dorsal, pelvic, and anal spines has been observed in several isolated populations  <cit> , making it an excellent model for studies of parallel evolution.

the armour and spines of sticklebacks  are used primarily as a defence against piscivorous fishes and many populations retain both characters in the presence of these predators  <cit> . however there may be a cost in maintaining such defences in populations lacking predatory fishes, as reduced armour and spines may aid escape from invertebrate predators  <cit> . if so, reduction or loss of these traits should be favoured in populations where invertebrate predators predominate  <cit> . reversal of the loss of armour has also been shown in sticklebacks, suggesting that these defensive traits may be rapidly regained in populations based on the strength of natural selection experienced  <cit> .

the topology of scandinavia has been strongly influenced by recent climactic events related to its most recent deglaciation after the last glacial maximum approximately 11- <dig>  calibrated years before present   <cit> . prior to this time, the region was completely covered by an ice sheet. fish populations originating from the baltic sea presumably became trapped in lakes and ponds formed by land uplift soon after the ice-melt  <cit> . in northern sweden, nine-spined sticklebacks occur in both single species lakes and lakes with mixed fish communities  <cit> . recently, predatory fish such as brown trout  and rainbow trout  have been introduced in a few lakes for recreational angling purposes, offering an ideal platform to explore the role of predation on morphological variation in nine-spined sticklebacks.

there are several goals to the current study. first, we investigate whether populations of nine-spined sticklebacks show genetic signatures of isolation in inland lakes and ponds isolated since the last glacial retreat. here we investigate patterns of genetic differentiation, genetic variation, and bottlenecking using nine variable microsatellite loci. the second goal of the study is to investigate morphological divergence between populations that share common ecological conditions. to this end, we group populations according to whether they originate from the baltic coast, coastal lakes, or inland lakes and ponds with or without predators. finally, we explore the potential for natural selection to affect morphological evolution by comparing phenotypic divergence with neutral genetic divergence using a pst - fst approach; an alternative to qst - fst based on phenotypic variation in natural populations.

RESULTS
details concerning the sampling locations and predator regimes can be found in table  <dig> and figure  <dig> 

sites, abbreviations , number of individuals sampled from each population , coordinates , group, and fish community composition are listed for each site. na = not applicable.

adata for community composition derived from pike database  <cit> . species names: arctic char = salvenlinus alpinus, brown trout = salmo trutta, burbot = lota lota, crucian carp = carassius carassius, grayling = thymallus thymallus, perch = perca fluviatilis, pike = esox lucius, rainbow trout = oncorhynchus mykiss, roach = rutilus rutilus, ruffe = gymnocephalus cernuus, three-spined stickleback = gasterosterus aculearus, whitefish = coregonus lavaretus. bstocking date. clast recorded date of presence.

genetic analysis
summary statistics of microsatellite data per population are listed in table  <dig>  fisher's exact tests indicated no significant departures from hardy-weinberg equilibrium for any locus in any population after application of a bonferroni adjustment to correct for multiple tests  <cit> . tests of genotypic disequilibrium between loci were also non-significant after bonferroni adjustment, supporting independent assortment of microsatellite loci. analysis using microchecker detected possible null alleles at stn <dig> in gb and rt populations and potential null alleles or incorrect scoring due to stutter in stn <dig> in the rt population. analysis of loci over all populations with lositan suggests that loci are putatively neutral except locus stn <dig>  which may be under positive selection, and stn <dig>  which may be under balancing selection. we reran the lositan analysis excluding inland populations and these results suggest that all loci in ancestral coastal populations are neutral.

number of alleles , sample sizes , and expected and observed heterozygosity  are reported for each population. the total number of unique alleles per locus  tallied over all populations is also reported. see table  <dig> for description of site abbreviations.

a neighbour-joining phylogenetic tree using da distances based on all microsatellite data demonstrates that baltic coast and coastal lakes cluster together and are genetically more similar to one another than inland populations with or without predators . inland populations showed greater genetic distances, consistent with longer periods of isolation from coastal populations and each other . bootstrap support for the branching order of the inland populations is poor, which is in line with our expectation that these populations all originated within a short period of time after the last glacial retreat.

population pairwise fst estimates demonstrate that coastal populations show lower levels of genetic differentiation than inland populations. among coastal populations, pairwise fst values were low  indicating weak population structuring among these populations. in contrast, inland populations had high levels of genetic differentiation as evidenced by high pairwise fst values . pairwise standardized fst values gave similar results to pairwise fst values . a nested within-group comparison between baltic coast and coastal lake populations showed no significant differences in fst estimates . a nested within-group comparison also shows no significant difference between fst estimates between inland lakes with or without the presence of predators . however a significant difference between pooled coastal  and pooled inland  fst estimates is apparent confirming the visual impression from figure  <dig> that inland populations show higher levels of within-population genetic differentiation .

standardized fst values are above the diagonal, uncorrected fst values are below the diagonal. see table  <dig> for description of site abbreviations.

uncorrected fst values were bootstrapped over  <dig>  replicates and non-significant pairwise differences  are marked with an asterix.

inland populations had lower levels of within-population genetic variation than coastal populations. in coastal populations, all nine microsatellite loci were polymorphic, with 3- <dig> alleles segregating per locus. baltic coast and coastal lake populations showed similar levels of observed heterozygosity , allelic richness , and gene diversity  . inland populations, on the other hand, had a maximum of  <dig> alleles segregating per locus and high levels of fixation ranging from 0- <dig> loci fixed for a certain allele per population. no two inland populations showed fixation for the same set of loci. inland populations had significantly lower ho, a and hs than their coastal counterparts  but whether or not an inland population had predators present did not have a significant influence on either ho, a, or hs .

number of populations , observed heterozygosity , allelic richness , gene diversity  and fst values are listed for each group for all nine microsatellite loci. within-group pst estimates with 95% confidence intervals for pc <dig>  and pc <dig>  and c/h <dig> critical value  with conservative 95% confidence limit are also listed. asterix denotes h2/c critical value for the instance where pst <fst. na = not applicable.

we found evidence of recent population-level bottlenecking in two of the  <dig> populations investigated. populations gb and vst both showed a significant heterozygosity deficiency based on our bottleneck model criteria . in all other populations there was no evidence for a departure from mutation-drift equilibrium implying that recent genetic bottlenecking is unlikely to account for reduced levels of genetic variation in inland populations.

morphological analysis
results of the analyses of the  <dig> morphological characters are summarized by population in table  <dig> . mean estimates of body length  were highest for the inland populations without predators, but did not differ significantly from the other groups . relative measures of head depth  demonstrate that inland populations  have the most divergent morphology while coastal populations  show intermediate values for this trait . relative head-eye length, on the other hand, show baltic coast and inland lake without predator populations to have the most divergent morphology, with coastal lakes and inland lake - predator populations having intermediate values . relative estimates of spine length  consistently demonstrate significantly longer spines  in coastal populations than in inland populations . the one measured meristic character, the number of dorsal spines, was variable in all populations with a mean of 9- <dig> spines  for all populations except bn, which had a mean of five spines  . however, this character was not significantly different between groups .

see table  <dig> for description of site abbreviations and text for measurement descriptions.

a cluster analysis based on population means across all  <dig> morphological characters demonstrated strikingly similar morphology between baltic coast and coastal lake populations . inland populations showed greater divergence in morphology than coastal populations . although there is some morphological clustering among inland populations that share similar predation regimes, there is also clustering of populations that have disparate predation regimes, suggesting that overall phenotypic appearance may evolve independently in these populations .

results of the principal components analysis  showed that the first two principal components had eigenvalues greater than one and explained a combined  <dig> % of the total variation of the full data. therefore only these two axes were used in subsequent analyses. principal components axis  <dig>  represented  <dig> % of the variance and had high loading scores  for pelvic spine length, anal spine length, and all dorsal spine lengths after varimax rotation . principal components axis  <dig>  represented  <dig> % of the variance and had high loading scores for standard length, head depth, head length, and pelvic girdle width . therefore, pc <dig> corresponds to a "spine length" function while pc <dig> corresponds to a "body size" function. only pelvic girdle length had high loading scores for both pc <dig> and pc <dig> .

proportion of variation explained by each axis is shown. see text and figure  <dig> for measurement descriptions.

visualization of the pca results reveals tight clustering of baltic coast and coastal lakes in pc space , confirming their morphological similarity. inland populations, on the other hand, showed much greater variation than coastal populations. inland populations without predators showed greater variation in pc <dig> scores than in pc <dig> scores and the opposite is true for inland predator populations . thus, the introduction of predators in inland populations appears to have reduced variation in body size, accompanied by an increase in the variability of spine length .

to test whether variation in pc scores differs significantly between groups and populations nested within groups, we constructed a nested multivariate analysis of variance  on pc <dig> and pc <dig>  our results show strong support for morphological divergence among groups and significant differences between populations nested within groups .

pst - fst comparisons within groups
within-group estimates of neutral genetic divergence  and phenotypic divergence  in baltic coast and coastal lake groups demonstrated low estimates for each measure . the baltic coast group had pst >fst with non-overlapping 95% confidence intervals for both pc <dig> and pc <dig> suggesting that divergent selection on both spine length and body size is occurring in populations of this group. coastal lake pst estimates, on the other hand, had overlapping 95% confidence intervals with fst  which suggests that within this group, one cannot distinguish between the effects of natural selection and genetic drift on phenotypic appearance. within the inland no predator group, we found pst <fst for pc <dig> indicating stabilizing selection on spine length and the opposite trend, namely pst >fst for pc <dig>  suggesting divergent selection in body size in this group . finally, inland populations with predators show pst >fst for pc <dig> and pc <dig> suggesting divergent selection on spine length and body size, but estimates of pst are more variable than any other estimate and confidence intervals overlap fst values, making a judgement as to whether natural selection or genetic drift is operating equivocal .

to test whether our measures of pst are a robust and fair measure of qst, we investigated the estimate of the critical c/h <dig> ratio  <cit>  for both pc <dig> and pc <dig> in cases where pst >fst and the inverse relationship  when pst <fst. low values of these ratios indicate more robust support for pst to approximate qst in their various scenarios  <cit> . if we assume that body size is moderately heritable so that h <dig> =  <dig>  , and because c cannot exceed unity, using the lower 95% confidence limit for pst in cases where pst >fst yields low values of c/h <dig> critical values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for baltic coast populations pc <dig> and pc <dig> respectively . this implies that a 70-80% lower c than h <dig> would be necessary to attribute the observed phenotypic divergence to drift. thus, we may interpret our results to be robust under this scenario to the null expectation. similarly, a low c/h <dig> critical value of  <dig>  was found in inland no predator group for pc <dig> also demonstrating a robust signature of divergent selection within this group. under the one instance where pst <fst in inland no predator pci, the h2/c ratio was low at  <dig>  and we may conclude that qst <fst, i.e. a signal of convergent evolution/stabilizing selection on spine length in inland populations without predators.

discussion
in this study, we used molecular and morphological data to quantify differentiation between populations from coastal areas of the baltic sea and inland populations that have been isolated since the last deglaciation. in general, we find that baltic coast and coastal lake populations are similar genetically and morphologically. inland populations, on the other hand, show greater genetic and morphological divergence. the recent introduction of predators into some inland populations also appears to have altered the evolution of body shape and spine length as inland populations with predators varied considerably in spine length but showed much greater conservatism in body size than inland populations without predators. taken together, these results suggest that nine-spined stickleback populations in northern sweden are strongly influenced by a combination of recent glacial activity, isolation/drift, and natural selection.

genetic divergence
our results support the hypothesis that inland populations of nine-spined sticklebacks were isolated from coastal populations following the recent deglaciation of the baltic sea. our first line of support for this hypothesis comes from the physical location of these sites which were among the first areas to be exposed after the retreat of the scandinavian ice sheet circa  <dig> -  <dig> k cal. ybp  <cit> . a plausible scenario is that these populations originated from baltic stock and were isolated as the land uplifted from glacial rebound forming lakes and ponds  <cit> . additional support for this hypothesis is venerated by the observation that few natural populations of nine-spined sticklebacks are found in northern sweden above or below the highest coastline exposed after the last glacial maximum  <cit> .

in agreement with the hypothesis for isolation of inland populations, we found lower levels of genetic differentiation, as measured by nei's da, fst and standardized fst, in coastal sites and very high levels of genetic differentiation including the fixation of different alleles in many inland populations. accordingly, we found higher levels of genetic variation as measured by ho, π, and hs in coastal populations than in inland populations. these last two findings are consistent with a pattern of isolation and genetic differentiation of populations through genetic drift and/or founder effects. based on our results, these decreases in ho do not appear to be due to a recent bottleneck in inland populations, with the exception of vst where significant results of simulated genetic bottlenecking were detected. we also found that populations from coastal lakes appear to be genetically indistinguishable from those emanating from the baltic sea, suggesting a separation so recent that genetic differences have yet to become apparent. these results strongly suggest that coastal populations are closely related whereas inland populations have existed in isolation for quite some time, and that genetic drift is responsible for the divergence in allelic frequencies and fixation of certain alleles.

our support for a reduction in genetic variability among inland populations echoes findings in freshwater populations of the closely related three-spined stickleback  that generally have reduced genetic variability  <cit>  as a result of isolation from presumably ancestral anadromous populations  <cit> . similar models for post-glacial colonization by nine-spined sticklebacks have also been proposed and confirmed for north american populations  <cit> . a recent study of nine-spined sticklebacks by shikano and colleagues demonstrated similar patterns of isolation from anadromous ancestral populations of this species in europe  <cit> . in their study, coastal populations from the baltic sea had high levels of genetic variation as measured by allelic richness and heterozygosity when compared to populations from freshwater systems near the baltic while higher levels of genetic differentiation, as measured by fst and da, were prevalent in freshwater but not in coastal populations  <cit> . the authors concluded that these patterns of genetic variation and genetic differentiation are consistent with postglacial recolonization of freshwater habitats, and subsequent isolation reducing variation in these populations through genetic drift and founder effects. since shikano and colleagues' study encompassed sampling from a much larger geographic area than studied here, it appears that this pattern of isolation is common in the baltic region and that recent glacial history has greatly affected the current distribution of these fishes.

morphological divergence
our results show many morphological similarities between baltic coast and coastal lake populations of nine-spined sticklebacks, mirroring the pattern of low levels of genetic differentiation. given that coastal lakes have been isolated from the baltic due to land uplift over a relatively short period of time , it is not surprising that there has been little differentiation in morphology compared to the relatively greater morphological divergence in inland populations. moreover, piscivorous fish such as pike and perch are not currently detected in two of the three coastal lakes  <cit>  but were likely present in these habitats prior to and during lake formation. therefore morphological divergence in the absence of predation may be expected in these populations in the future, but perhaps not over the short time since isolation from the baltic.

inland populations of nine-spined sticklebacks displayed higher morphological diversity as compared to coastal populations. we also found evidence of morphological differences in both body size and spine length with respect to the presence of fish predators. additionally, we found highly divergent morphological variation in some inland populations. for example, the populations with the two most divergent morphologies, bn and rt, show the greatest differences in mean body size. the bn population also has a reduction in the number of dorsal spines and dorsal spine length, and all but one individual completely lacked pelvic spines. this pattern of pelvic spine loss and an overall reduction in spines has been demonstrated in several species of stickleback  <cit>  and may be due to an ecological escape from predation pressure, an ion deficiency related to calcification and bone deposition and/or increased invertebrate predation pressure in these populations  <cit> .

nine-spined sticklebacks that exist in ponds where they are the only fish species can obtain much larger body sizes than their coastal counterparts, presumably because of the absence of fish predation combined with interspecific competition for resources and/or fecundity selection  <cit> . confirming this prediction, we observed a trend for individuals hailing from inland populations without predators to be larger, on average, than both baltic populations and inland lakes with predators. a similar pattern of larger size encountered in populations that either lack predators or have non-gape limited predators has been shown in three-spined sticklebacks  <cit>  and brook sticklebacks   <cit> , strongly suggesting that predation limits body size in this and other species of sticklebacks.

despite having a smaller range in body size than their counterparts that hail from predation-free lakes, nine-spined sticklebacks from predator lakes have much greater variation in spine length. although spine lengths are significantly smaller in inland populations compared to coastal populations, there is a trend for inland populations with predators to show longer spines , on average, than inland populations without predators. the implication, therefore, is that spine length has increased in these populations as a result of the recent introduction of predatory fish. however the great variation in spine length exhibited among these populations within this group suggest that these populations may be responding to predation pressure differently. this great variation spine length could be caused by differing predation regimes within these lakes due to differences in predator communities, population densities of predators, differences in the relative exposure time to predators, and/or the recent extinction of predators within at least one lake. although our results strongly suggest a role of predation, we cannot rule out that other ecological factors not measured in this study such as water chemistry may affect morphological variability in predator lakes.

pst - fst comparisons
quantitative comparisons between morphological and neutral genetic divergence as estimated by qst - fst, have been used as metric to investigate the potential for natural selection to influence morphological variation in many populations or species  <cit> . the analogous comparison based solely on phenotypic data  has been highly criticized, particularly because it is difficult to tease apart the variance in phenotype attributable to environmental or genetic effects in wild populations. thus, some advocate that qst - fst comparisons should only be performed under controlled conditions in common garden experiments  <cit> . while such approaches are preferable, we argue that there can be some value to pst - fst comparisons in natural populations. for example, in a recent meta-analysis that compared estimates of qst - fst from different types of studies, estimates of pst from wild populations do not yield higher estimates than studies that use either broad or narrow sense estimates of additive genetic variation  <cit> . secondly, studies of pst in wild populations show meaningful variance among populations where a common garden approach may not be easily applied  <cit> . for example, in order to quantify additive genetic variation in our study of  <dig> natural populations with all potential crosses and multiple family groups taken to the f <dig> generation would be a feat of herculean proportions in terms of time, scale and expense. finally, in light of the criticism of pst as a substitute for qst, it should also be kept in mind that common garden estimates of qst may be inappropriate to compare to fst because the genetic basis of the phenotypes on which selection may potentially act may be partly genetic but non-additive , or environment-dependent. thus we believe that pst - fst studies in natural populations do have some merit although we advocate caution in its interpretation.

acknowledging the aforementioned concerns, we compared pst estimates for both spine length  and body size  within groups to estimate the relative influence of natural selection and genetic drift on the evolution of morphological phenotypic variation within our groups of interest. despite the great morphological similarity within the baltic coast group, it demonstrated pst >fst in both spine length and body size. given the high gene flow experienced within this group, the most likely explanation is that these slight morphological differences could be explained by phenotypic plasticity in response to local environmental variation. however it should be noted that our fst estimates are so low that any variation in morphology would likely be greater than genetic divergence and so this result should be viewed cautiously. in coastal lakes, pst ≈ fst for these estimates making distinctions between selection and genetic drift equivocal. in inland lakes without predators, we found a robust fst - pst pattern of convergent evolution and stabilizing selection on reduced spine length strongly suggesting that reduced spine length is advantageous in single species lakes, potentially to aid escape of fish from invertebrate predators. a robust pattern of divergent selection and local adaptation on body size is also evident in inland no-predator lakes. finally, great variation in body size and spine length within the inland predator group may also be indicative of divergent selection on these traits in these populations but confidence intervals are wide making a realistic determination difficult. taken together, these results show opposite and robust patterns of convergent versus divergent selection on spine length based on the presence or absence of predation, strongly implicating the recent exposure to predators as a significant factor shaping phenotypic differences between these populations.

the degree to which our main focal phenotypic characters, body size and spine length, differ in their phenotypic response to selection is not currently known in nine-spined stickleback but may vary among different populations due to different environment conditions and standing levels of genetic variation  <cit> . studies on other fish species show that fish predators potentially can induce phenotypic changes in body shape and morphology without necessarily changing the background genetic structure  <cit> . for example, one study showed that cues of a predatory fish induced a deeper body and longer dorsal spines in a sunfish   <cit> . the genetic component of the traits studied here remain unknown as previous studies investigating genetic differences among populations of nine-spined stickleback using a common-garden approach have not yet reported heritablities for these traits  <cit> . among three-spined sticklebacks, morphological traits of predator-naive and predator-sympatric populations demonstrate high values of heritability for body shape  and length  and moderate values for relative spine length   <cit> . other studies of three-spined sticklebacks have shown that body size is moderately heritable   <cit>  or that heritability may vary from negligible  to moderate  due to environmental factors such as rearing salinity  <cit> . taken together, these results suggest that in most cases morphological traits such as body size and spine length are moderately to highly heritable in three-spined sticklebacks, but that the ratio between genetic and environmental variance  may not be equal across populations.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding the causes underlying morphological differences between populations is a fundamental question in evolutionary biology. our power to explore differences in morphology among inland populations with disparate predation regimes is significantly enhanced by our knowledge of predator stocking and 'fisher knowledge' based on over  <dig> years of data collection within inland lakes. our two findings that 1) fish hailing from inland no predator lakes appear to be convergent selection on small spine length and divergent selection on body size and 2) fish from predator lakes have a highly variable response in spine length and body size strongly suggests that the recent introduction of salmonids in these lakes have influenced morphology in nine-spined sticklebacks in these populations. however, our current study cannot determine whether additional factors such as water chemistry  <cit>  and invertebrate predation  <cit>  can contribute to phenotypic variation in our populations of stickleback. additionally, the amount of environmental variation and heritability of phenotypic traits within and between populations is outside of the scope of this study but certainly warrant additional investigation along these lines. this research also highlights the importance of studying morphological and genetic variation on a fine ecological scale in order to determine the environmental factors responsible for shaping the shared and unique features of evolutionary histories.

