BACKGROUND
knowledge about the processes that generate and maintain marine biodiversity, and the evolutionary relationships and genetic variation of regional populations, along with assessments of the amount of demographic connection between these populations, are essential for understanding and effectively conserving and managing marine resources  <cit>  such as the highly diverse coral reefs  <cit> . however, this information is currently lacking in the indo-pacific for most coral reef organisms other than fish and corals  <cit> , which is surprising considering their diversity and the significant ecological and economic roles played by this ecosystem  <cit> .

because marine organisms frequently have high dispersal potential , their ranges have often been considered to be vast. however, populations have frequently been found to be highly genetically differentiated  <cit> . sometimes they exhibit fine-scale endemism  <cit> , and  speciation is a common process in the sea  <cit> . two main processes have been invoked as responsible for allopatric speciation in the tropical indo-west pacific : vicariance, where a species' previously coherent geographic range has become fragmented following the formation of a barrier to dispersal; or speciation through a founder effect, where a new population is established by a small number of individuals, often by long-distance dispersal, and subsequent restricted gene flow has led to speciation . both processes are probably the extremes of a continuum rather than being mutually exclusive  <cit> , but the degree of their interplay remains poorly understood.

this study focuses on tropical marine sponges, a highly diverse, ecologically and economically important, but notoriously understudied, marine invertebrate taxon  <cit> . biodiversity analyses of australasian tropical sponges based on species occurrence data have, for example, revealed quite different trends from those of other marine phyla in the iwp  <cit> . latitudinal gradients in sponge diversity were not evident, but various environmental factors were prominent at small spatial  scales. patterns observed at larger spatial  scales of diversity have been ascribed to biogeographic factors and connectivity . however, investigations based on morphometric data alone did not suffice to unravel the biogeographic factors and connectivity among populations.

the lemon-yellow calcareous sponge leucetta chagosensis dendy  <dig>  served here as a model to test biogeographic and phylogeographic hypotheses, and to determine the degree of connectivity vs. isolation among populations, with a focus on the sw pacific. l. chagosensis has a wide indo-pacific distribution, ranging from the northern red sea to the central pacific  and from okinawa  to brisbane , and was considered to be a single species throughout this range  <cit> . however, the validity of this assumption has been challenged by molecular data  <cit> . l. chagosensis is relatively common and is typically found in shaded habitats below a water depth of  <dig> m. it is often the dominant macro-sponge in semi-cryptic habitats, e.g., on the great astrolabe reef  . it is viviparous, and as such, is thought to have low dispersal capabilities, as is the case for many other sponges  <cit> . initial attempts to use mitochondrial gene sequences  to resolve phylogeographic patterns of l. chagosensis in the western pacific were unsuccessful due to the low variability of this marker  <cit> . such low intraspecific mtdna variation is apparently a general mtdna feature in sponges and anthozoan cnidarians, presumably due to the low rate of their mtdna evolution  <cit> . a subsequent phylogeographic study, focussing on the sw pacific, used rdna internal transcribed spacer  sequences that provided better resolution and uncovered a deep phylogeographic break on the great barrier reef with distinct northern and southern clades. each of these gbr clades was more closely related to the indonesian clade than to each other, and a vicariance scenario of fragmentation and range expansion during and after the last glacial sea level low was suggested as a cause for this structure  <cit> .

the aims of the present study were as follows: to unravel the phylogeographic structure of l. chagosensis over its full geographic range using two nuclear loci; to estimate the degree of connectivity among regional populations; to determine whether vicariance or founder dispersal was responsible for generating the observed patterns; and to test l. chagosensis' taxonomic status as a widespread indo-pacific species.

RESULTS
rdna
its, partial 28s sequences
our data set of  <dig> individuals  includes samples covering the known geographic extent of l. chagosensis . the first rdna fragment used  includes the 3' end of the 18s gene, the full its <dig>  the  <dig> s gene, and the nearly complete its <dig>  it was combined with a fragment from the c2-d <dig> region of the 28s gene. see table  <dig> for general features of both fragments. although previous studies did not detect any intragenomic polymorphisms  in the its regions either by sscp  <cit>  or by the subcloning of amplicons  <cit> , a few igps were detected here, both in the its and partial 28s gene. all polymorphic sequence types could be resolved into two sequence types per individual. both rdna fragments had a high gc content , in the normal range for sponge rdna  <cit> .

maximum aligned length , gc content, maximum uncorrected p-distance in percent, and nucleotide diversity of each sequenced fragment. its rdna: its <dig> and its <dig> plus flanking regions; 28s rdna: c2-d <dig> region of the 28s rdna; atpsb-iii: second intron of the atp synthetase beta subunit gene.

rdna sequence type network
the estimated statistical parsimony network, which had a maximum calculated connection limit of  <dig> steps , is shown in figure  <dig>  it was congruent in its general topology with a phylogeny estimated by bayesian inference , which had low branch support  . the network showed the sequence types oriented along a central axis, with two main clusters near the top and bottom ends. the top cluster, centered around the most frequent sequence type s <dig>  contained specimens from the northern gbr, the coral sea, guam, taiwan, papua new guinea, and sulawesi . the bottom cluster, centered around the second most frequent sequence type s <dig>  contained specimens from the central and southern gbr, the coral sea, and png . sequence types from the central south pacific  form an ambiguous loop in the network that could not be resolved with confidence. leucetta villosa wörheide & hooper  <dig>  the putative gbr-sister taxon of leucetta chagosensis, is located within this part of the network. towards the top cluster, a number of deeply separated branches contain sequence types from the philippines, the red sea, and one specimen from vanuatu. the last branch, closest to the top cluster, contains sequence types from japan, indonesia, and png .

analysis of molecular variance 
amovas were carried out for two subsets of the data: subset  <dig> contained all samples from the total  <dig> geographically pooled populations in four regional groups , and subset  <dig> contained a more spatially restricted set of individuals from the sw pacific only. for subset  <dig> , the rdna genetic variation was hierarchically structured, with about 41% distributed among populations within the groups, about 42% within populations, and only about 17% among the four groups. fixation indices showed significant high genetic structuring at all hierarchical levels, with the highest structuring within populations and the lowest among groups. for subset  <dig>  less than 3% of the variation was distributed between the two groups, with no significant differentiation. slightly more than a third of the variation was distributed among populations within the groups, which were highly differentiated, and a little less than two thirds of the variation was distributed within highly differentiated populations.

hierarchical structuring of molecular variation  within and among a priori defined populations and groups based on rdna sequences only. subset 1:  <dig> populations grouped into four groups; subset 2:  <dig> populations from the sw pacific grouped into two groups. statistical significance is based on  <dig>  permutations in arlequin: * p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> .

atp-synthetase beta subunit intron ii 
sequences and alignment
both alleles of atpsb-iii, a phase- <dig> intron , could be resolved from  <dig> specimens of l. chagosensis. the length of the intron varied between about  <dig> bp in most individuals to  <dig> bp in the population from okinawa, japan, due to a very long insertion. the maximum uncorrected p-distance among alleles was  <dig> %, with a nucleotide diversity  of  <dig>  – about a four-fold increase in variation compared to the rdna regions sequenced . no significant deviation from neutrality was found  and no recombination was detected.

several indels of various lengths were observed; some were minisatellite repeats restricted to certain populations, e.g. vanuatu. length variant heterozygotes differed either in the number of residues in a stretch of homomer thymidines starting at position  <dig>  or in a few private indels. after collapsing the  <dig> alleles of the  <dig> specimens sequenced,  <dig> unique alleles remained.

phylogeny estimation
the estimated unrooted bayesian phylogeny of the  <dig> unique alleles is shown in figure  <dig> . an estimated phylogeny using the maximum likelihood optimality criterion showed the same topology, and a statistical parsimony network, constructed using tcs with the 95% connection limit, yielded several disconnected networks . in the bayesian phylogeny, six main larger clades were present, all of which were well supported by posterior probabilities  or bootstrap proportions in maximum likelihood analyses . the unrooted tree was characterized by one polytomy, in which the relationships among the four main clades could not be resolved. the general phylogeographic patterns were congruent with the rdna network . several populations were reciprocally monophyletic , while others were paraphyletic  or polyphyletic . alleles from the philippines were most divergent.

an estimated phylogeny with all  <dig> alleles had the same topology, and showed that alleles from heterozygous individuals that were subcloned to resolve length variant alleles were found in the same larger clade and were not dispersed among distantly related clades .

analysis of molecular variance 
amovas were carried out for two subsets of the data, as defined above for the rdna. for subset  <dig> , genetic variation was, in part, hierarchically structured, with about 9% distributed among the four groups, about 57% among populations within the groups, and about 34% within populations. fixation indices showed significantly high genetic divergence within populations and among populations within groups, with non-significant among-group differentiation. for subset  <dig>  about 10% of the variation was distributed among the two groups, which were not significantly differentiated. about 46% of the variation was distributed among highly differentiated populations within groups, and about 44% within highly differentiated populations.

hierarchical structuring of molecular variation  within and among a priori defined populations and groups based on atpsb-iii sequences only. subset 1:  <dig> populations grouped into four groups; subset 2:  <dig> populations from the sw pacific grouped into two groups. statistical significance is based on  <dig>  permutations in arlequin: * p <  <dig> ; ** p <  <dig> .

pairwise fixation indices 
all but two pairwise comparisons of genetic differentiation between eight populations in the sw pacific based on fst values were statistically significant at the 99% confidence level . the lowest significant value observed was  <dig> , between the population from the central gbr and papua new guinea. most other pairwise comparisons had values of more than  <dig> , and the highest values observed were above  <dig>  . only the pairwise comparison between the population from the capricorn section of the southern gbr and the adjacent population from the sunshine coast and brisbane indicated no significant genetic differentiation. testing for a pattern of isolation-by-distance by performing a mantel test between genetic  and spatial distances did not reveal any significant relationships  for the whole data set , but an analysis of populations along the south equatorial current  revealed a weak but significant correlation  . however, some populations did not match this trend; as was the case for some of the pairwise comparisons among populations on the east-australian coast: s'gbr-central gbr, s'gbr-n'gbr, brisbane-central gbr, brisbane-n'gbr . calculations using log-transformed distances and log-transformed gene flow parameters  revealed significant negative correlations for the  <dig> population subset  and the eight population subset .

pairwise fst values of eight populations in the sw pacific . bold values indicate a significance level of < <dig> , * a significance level of < <dig>  after  <dig>  permutations in arlequin  <dig> . ns = non-significant. populations correspond to subset  <dig> of tables  <dig> and  <dig> 

combined rdna and atpsb-intron analyses
phylogeny estimation
all three fragments – its, the c2-d <dig> regions of the rdna, and atpsb-iii – were obtained for  <dig> specimens . among those,  <dig> unique genotypes were found. the estimated bayesian phylogeny is shown in figure 5a. the general topology was congruent with the phylogeny estimated from the atpsb-iii-only alignment. several deeply diverging major clades were detected, highly supported by posterior probabilities and maximum likelihood bootstrap values, allowing for an increased resolution compared to the atpsb-iii-only phylogeny and solving the polytomy among the four larger clades with their main geographic distribution in the indo-northwest pacific . a closer relationship of the indian ocean clades  to the remaining ones from the indo-northwest pacific  was revealed in an unrooted phylogeny, which also suggested a closer relationship of the philippine clade with the clades from the southern pacific . the main clade geographically restricted to the southern pacific  was, itself, substructured into two sister-groups: the south-central pacific sensu stricto  and the south-western pacific, restricted to png and australia's east coast. several regional populations showed reciprocal monophyly , while others were para- or polyphyletic . the geographic distribution of two of the main clades  in the area of the gbr and png are also illustrated in fig. 5c.

neighbor-net analyses
neighbor-net analyses of the two separate rdna and atpsb-iii partitions of the  <dig> genotype data set were carried out to explore ambiguities in the data and to evaluate the degree of congruence among both loci . some ambiguities were detected in the atpsb-iii neighbor-net, especially among genotypes from the southern pacific . the rdna neighbor-net showed a much higher degree of incompatible splits . both were largely congruent with the phylogenies estimated using other methods .

a comparison of the two neighbor nets revealed that the position of several genotypes was different in the two networks . g <dig>  was found among southern gbr genotypes in the atpsb-iii neighbor-net, whereas they were found among south-central pacific genotypes in the rdna neighbor-net, where they were closely related to those from vanuatu . similarly, g <dig>  grouped with genotypes from the north-western pacific in the atpsb-iii neighbor-net, but was closest to a second genotype from bali  in the rdna neighbor-net. also, the position of g <dig>  was different in both networks.

estimation of migration rates and directions
migration rates and directions were estimated for two subsets: 1) a three large-population case, where populations from the east coast of australia, png, and the south pacific were pooled based on geography , and a spatially more restricted six population case, also based on geography, containing five populations from australia plus the one from png . populations contained the same specimens as those used for the amova analysis. very low migration among populations was estimated for subset  <dig> , but for the more detailed subset  <dig>  higher asymmetrical migration was estimated within the gbr . outside the gbr, the only population that was estimated to receive more than one effective immigrant per generation was png .

Θ , migration rates , and the number of effective migrants per generation  among three larger populations in the sw pacific as estimated by migrate. populations were pooled: australia; papua new guinea ; southern pacific . for immigration occurring between populations, the upper row is the receiving population and the left column is the broadcasting population. Θ values are given in the diagonal. the first number in the other cells is nem, derived by calculating / <dig>  and the numbers in parentheses are migration rates . the number of alleles used were  for australia: 116/186; png: 26/38; and s'pacific: 34/ <dig>  for a total of 176/ <dig> 

Θ , migration rates , and number of effective migrants per generation  among six populations along the northeast australian coast and papua new guinea , as estimated by migrate. populations were: n'gbr ; cen. gbr ; cap. gbr ; bne ; coral sea ; and png . for immigration occurring between populations, the upper row is the receiving population and the left column is the broadcasting population. Θ values are given in the diagonal. the first number in the other cells is nem, derived by calculating / <dig>  and the numbers in parentheses are migration rates . the numbers of alleles used were  for n'gbr: 22/23; cen. gbr: 18/16; cap. gbr: 42/33; bne: 16/8; coral sea: 26/27; and png: 28/ <dig>  for a total of 152/ <dig> 

discussion
in this study, the phylogeographic structure of the widely distributed coral reef sponge leucetta chagosensis was investigated throughout its known indo-pacific range, using two unlinked nuclear dna markers, the rdna its, a fragment of the 28s gene , and a novel marker for sponge evolutionary studies, the second intron of the atp synthetase beta subunit gene . deep genetic divergences, substantial phylogeographic structure, and substantial amounts of regional isolation with low amounts of migration among regional populations were uncovered, and were congruent across both loci. based on the present data, we argue that life history traits  in combination with historical factors  are responsible for the diversification of the study taxon over space and time.

connectivity, or lack thereof
a relationship is expected to exist between the amount of genetic differentiation of allopatric marine populations and their dispersal abilities  <cit> , with low dispersing taxa showing higher genetic structuring and a significant correlation between genetic and geographic distance  compared to those capable of wide dispersal  <cit> . in this study, genetic variation was significantly structured among and within populations, but no ibd was detected across the whole set of populations. this suggests that, overall, the colonization process of l. chagosensis was discontinuous, with founder effects occurring when new populations were established  <cit> , and that the very low migration rates were responsible for the lack of genetic cohesiveness. a weak, but significantly positive correlation between fst and geographic distance was detected among populations connected along the south equatorial current , consistent with expectations based on low dispersal capabilities; some populations on the australian east coast were also highly differentiated despite their close geographic proximity, probably because there was an area of overlap of two of the deepest diverging clades .

occasional gene flow in a stepping-stone model  <cit> , in which dispersal and genetic exchange occur only between adjacent populations, was suggested by the significant negative slopes of the rma regression of the logarithmic transformed values  for both the whole set of populations and the ones along the sec. however, the negative slopes  were shallower than expected for a strict stepping-stone model  and might indicate some long-distance dispersal  <cit> . unfortunately, low geographic coverage of l. chagosensis samples from the south pacific  prohibited further analysis and inference at this stage.

the low migration rates, below one effective migrant per generation, frequently observed here are less than the minimum required  to compensate for genetic drift, and thwart continued genetic divergence of populations  <cit> . for the gbr, these values are lower than those reported for gbr invertebrates  <cit> . in a conservation context, where some authors have argued for the use of a threshold of  <dig> effective migrants per generation as a minimum to counteract local extinction risks  <cit> , the overall low number of migrants encountered here is cause for concern because isolated populations are clearly prone to local extinction. such a high degree of regional isolation certainly needs to be taken into consideration for the effective design of marine protected areas  <cit> .

results from the present study suggest that the colonization of new distant habitats by l. chagosensis and the genetic cohesiveness among them cannot be sustained by the dispersal of sexual propagules alone. occasional long-distance dispersal, either by asexual fragments  <cit>  or by rafting  <cit>  might play a role. to date, there is no direct evidence for long-range dispersal in the studied taxon, but the discovery of a budding specimen of l. chagosensis  provides evidence that asexual dispersal does occur naturally. such asexual fragments  constitute fully functional mini-sponges that are probably capable of surviving for a considerable amount of time in the plankton  before potentially colonizing distant reef habitats.

genealogical patterns
the structure of the rdna sequence type network, with the two most common sequence types at opposite ends of the network  connected by a longer branch, is reminiscent of a "dumbbell" shaped network  <cit> , which apparently indicates that two long-separated populations each underwent a  expansion. this interpretation would support a scenario where populations were separated during low sea level stands, and subsequently expanded with rising sea levels from refuges on the queensland plateau and the shallower shelf south of the gbr  <cit> . this hypothesis, originally formulated by davies  <cit> , is also supported by a number of other genetic studies on fish and corals . however, such a vicariance scenario is complicated by the intermediate allopatric populations in the rdna network, and was not supported by a recent study of calcareous sponges from the same calcarean family leucettidae, pericharax heteroraphis, using the same molecular markers   <cit> . here, bentlage and wörheide observed much less variation in both markers and no phylogeographic  structure on the gbr, and attributed this to the retention of ancestral its rdna polymorphisms and a relatively recent expansion after a population bottleneck. this suggests considerable amounts of idiosyncrasy in each species'  history.

using the rdna internal transcribed spacers  for phylogenetic inferences poses some difficulties. the internal transcribed spacers  separate the 18s and 28s rdna genes in the tandemly repeated rdna cistron  <cit> . while variation among the multiple its copies is normally homogenized by a process called 'concerted evolution'  <cit> , intragenomic polymorphisms   <cit>  do occur, e.g., if concerted evolution is slow  <cit> . the occurrence of potentially paralogous its copies can then confound phylogenetic inferences  <cit> . the few rdna igps detected in this study could all be resolved into two different sequence types, and were always found to be closely related and clade-specific, most likely representing orthologs. nonetheless, reconstruction of sequence types from rdna igps by haplotype inference should always be preceded by subcloning of rdna amplicons of several individuals to check the extent of intragenomic polymorphism  <cit> . we consider the risks of analysing paralogous rdna sequence types to be minimal in this case, but the inclusion of additional and independent loci is necessary to untangle the true demographic history from locus-specific forces because only genealogical concordance across multiple unlinked loci can elucidate whether phylogeographic breaks are caused by stochasticity or by real barriers to gene flow  <cit> .

to this end, our analysis of atpsb-iii sequences provided pivotal insight. this new marker showed about five-fold higher substitution rates than the rdna, and higher phylogeographic resolution was achieved with congruent deeper coalescent patterns across loci. based on the data presented here, we argue that the high concordance between the two loci is due to population substructuring and putative reproductive isolation, and not to the linked inheritance of both loci .

the large divergence of the reciprocally monophyletic genotypes from the philippines, with their divergence especially pronounced among the intron alleles, points to a long-standing isolation of the philippine population. the philippine islands are an area of complex island-geomorphology that have undergone complicated tectonics, with some islands on crustal fragments originating far south-east of their present position  <cit> . several of today's islands have emerged since the late miocene , and the sampled area at the northern reef of bohol probably belonged to proto-mindanao during the pliocene  <cit> . initial colonization could have happened by long-distance dispersal soon after reef habitats were established. this could then have been followed by persistence when subsequent changes in shoreline constellations due to cycling sea levels reinforced the genetic isolation of this region  <cit> , resulting in the deeply divergent and reciprocally monophyletic clade discovered here. such apparent founder speciation has been previously described in the terrestrial fauna of the philippines  <cit> , but might be more widespread in marine biota than previously appreciated  <cit> . this could also be responsible for generating and maintaining the other reciprocally monophyletic populations discovered here. however, for more in-depth interpretations of the remarkable divergence of the philippine population, a broader geographic coverage of the whole island group would be required.

substantial amounts of local endemism  were also uncovered, pointing to considerable amounts of regional isolation similar to what has been found in some other reef invertebrates  <cit> . this is also consistent with expectations based on low dispersal capabilities. however, some populations were found to be para- or polyphyletic. such a pattern of population poly- or paraphyly may be caused by either incomplete lineage sorting or recurrent  gene flow among previously separated clades  <cit> , or both of these factors. these two processes of shared alleles among distinct clades are hard to distinguish on the basis of genetic data alone  <cit> . avise  <cit>  proposed that deep coalescence of polyphyletically distributed lineages would point to incomplete lineage sorting, whereas shallow genealogical patterns would be caused by recent gene flow. for l. chagosensis, all polyphyletic populations  showed deep coalescence, as expected for a scenario of incomplete lineage sorting. however, the previous differentiation of geographically restricted reciprocally monophyletic lineages with subsequent re-dispersal into each others' ranges are equally likely to have caused the apparent overlap in geographic distribution of the two deepest diverging clades in the area of png and east australia. based on the presence of putative hybrids , we favor the latter scenario. however, more extensive geographic sampling from those critical regions would be beneficial to allow additional conclusions.

under the phylogenetic species concept  <cit> , all reciprocally monophyletic groups uncovered here would represent different recognizable taxa and esus . the degree of reproductive isolation among those esus cannot be discerned at present, i.e., whether they are from a single, still-interbreeding widespread species, or instead constitute a reproductively isolated sibling  species. support for the latter came from the near-fixation of alternative atpsb-iii alleles in some populations, e.g., between the populations from brisbane and polynesia. the occurrence of a different combination of atpsb-iii alleles and rdna sequence types in some individuals, uncovered by their different clade-affiliations, is an indication of occurrences of hybridization and incomplete reproductive isolation. one of those hybrids is l. villosa, was described as a closely related sister-species of l. chagosensis based solely on morphological data  <cit> . this is evidence that those hybrids are also manifested as  distinguishable phenotypes.

the temporal aspect
resolving the temporal frame of clade divergences in l. chagosensis remains a challenge due to the paucity of unequivocally identifiable fossil remains. we also lack information about mutation rates in this taxon. only from the study of wörheide et al.  <cit> , who analysed divergences in rdna its sequences in several reciprocally monophyletic populations of prosuberites laughlini  across the isthmus of panama, can we derive a mutation rate of roughly 1% its rdna sequence divergence per million years for this demosponge. while the validity of applying this mutation rate estimate to a phylogenetically distant taxon is untested, it does currently represent the only option for a rough estimation of divergence times among l. chagosensis clades. thus, the deepest divergences among l. chagosensis its rdna sequence types would have happened about  <dig> million years ago in the late pliocene, and subsequent divergences would have occurred in the pleistocene . the late pliocene, an era with fluctuating sea levels  <cit> , and the resulting differences in shoreline distributions and current  patterns, has been estimated to be the time of vicariant speciation in a number of marine taxa, as has the pleistocene  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
deep phylogeographic structure was uncovered in this study, congruent across the two nuclear markers used. there was low gene flow among most regional populations, some of which showed isolation-by-distance effects. overall, dispersal was indicated in a stepping-stone model with some long-distance genetic exchange – all consistent with expectations from the allegedly low dispersal capability of the taxon. reciprocally monophyletic populations have long been isolated and constitute putative sibling species, but the degree of reproductive isolation between para- and polyphyletic populations remains to be investigated in more detail. hybrids displaying mixed genotypes from deeply divergent clades were rare, but one  was morphologically distinguishable. l. chagosensis might therefore be regarded as a complex of closely related  species rather than a single widespread species.

however, we cannot conclusively determine at present whether the observed structure was generated solely by vicariance resulting from glacio-eustatic changes during the late pliocene and pleistocene, or was simply a result of general dispersal limitation with stochastic long-distance dispersal and founder speciation. however, both processes supposedly contributed with varying degrees to the generation and/or maintenance of the observed phylogeographic structure in each region.

the low migration rates observed here are not sufficient to counteract the continued genetic divergence and regional isolation of populations. geographically restricted and deeply divergent genealogical lineages of taxa with low dispersal capabilities are therefore prone to local extinction, since immigrants from more viable, distant habitats cannot easily replenish populations depleted of genetic diversity. these results highlight the need for comprehensive biodiversity estimates  when considering an effective design and implementation of marine reserves, in order to conserve the complete diversity to promote reef resilience.

