BACKGROUND
the genetic contribution to complex traits such as muscling in livestock production animals is often intensively monitored. the information is used as a tool in selective breeding programs, based on the relative genetic performances of sires, to enhance desirable traits within the population. this sire-based genetic information for a complex trait, which is typically the result of polygenic effects, is generated by extensive progeny testing for the trait  <cit> . the molecular mechanisms underpinning this genetic merit within a population are typically undefined but are likely to arise from polygenic changes in gene transcription mediated by genetic variation in promoters, transcriptional regulatory elements such as enhancers and insulators, and mrna splicing sites as well as variants affecting mrna turnover. although there are several additional mechanisms that could impact phenotype independent of gene transcription including changes in protein intrinsic activity and mrna translational efficiency, it has been suggested that polygenic transcriptional changes are probably the major influence on variation in complex traits within a population  <cit> . genetic variation could alter gene expression via cis- or trans-acting mechanisms in a manner that impacts the functional activities of specific pathways that directly contribute to the trait  <cit> . the identification of these pathways has been an important goal of mammalian genomics.

one of the major advantages of using livestock to investigate the genetic and biological bases of complex traits is that the industry holds comprehensive genetic performance data for sires based on quantitative trait measurements made from large numbers of their progeny. the poll dorset breed of sheep has been intensively bred for rapid growth rate and superior muscling characteristics  <cit> . in particular, there is strong emphasis in breeding programs for the trait eye muscle depth , which is measured ultrasonically in longissimus lumborum muscle at the 'c' site  between the 12th and 13th rib in the progeny of breeding sires. estimated breeding values  for this trait have been determined for many sires. hence, sires with varying genetic performances for this trait can be identified from industry databases.

by integrating sire-based ebv information with progeny-based gene expression data obtained by microarray analysis we directly tested the hypothesis that there is genetic structure to gene expression in ovine skeletal muscle. moreover, we employed an integrated systems biology approach using both an ebv weighted gene co-expression network analysis  and a differential gene co-expression network analysis to identify highly connected genes correlated with the trait and differentially connected genes in the high and low ebv sire groups, thereby identifying major functional pathways contributing to the genetics of enhanced muscling  <cit> .

RESULTS
the genetics of eye muscle depth in sheep
six poll dorset sires with extensive progeny records were selected on the basis of having a range of ebvs for the eye muscle depth  . emd is a skeletal muscling trait measured by ultrasound at a predefined site in longissimus lumborum skeletal muscle in yearlings. the ebvs are predictions of the sire's relative genetic merit for the emd trait based on progeny performance data collected from large numbers of animals over two seasons . positive and negative ebvs indicate sire genetic performance better or worse than the industry wide average set for a baseline population in  <dig>  three sires  were in the top 1st to 15th percentiles for all industry sires for this trait  and two sires , each with ebvs of - <dig>  were in the 95th percentile , while one sire  had an ebv of + <dig>  . by contrast with the sire based percentile rankings for the high muscling group, sire v was included in the low muscling sire group. a total of  <dig> half sib progeny derived from the six sires were selected for microarray analysis using rna extracted from longissimus lumborum skeletal muscle. the number of progeny sampled for each sire is shown in table  <dig> 

1estimated breeding value of a sire for the yearling eye muscle depth  trait measured by progeny testing. ebvs were derived from data extracted from lambplan  <cit> .

2emd ebv  is a measure of the difference in the trait from the industry-wide contemporary average set in  <dig> 

3accuracy reflects the number of progeny with phenotype information used to calculate the ebv. accuracy ranges from 0-99% and indicates the probability of an ebv changing with the addition of more progeny data. the magnitude of possible change decreases as accuracy increases. accuracy below 75% is regarded as low, between 76-90% as medium and above 90% as high.

4percentile ranking of the sire amongst contemporaries for the emd trait.

5sire group v was classed in the low muscling sire group because of its percentile ranking relative to sires in the high muscling group.

microarray gene expression analysis of skeletal muscle samples
the bovine affymetrix microarray was used to measure gene expression in muscle samples from each of  <dig> progeny produced from the six selected sires. previous studies have extensively validated the use of this microarray with ovine samples, although there is some data loss due to species specific differences in probe set sequences  <cit> . the microarray data were initially processed by using the affymetrix processing software mas <dig> and significantly expressed genes were subsequently filtered for the independent mas <dig> flag calls of present or marginal in all  <dig> microarrays thereby yielding  <dig> probes. this was a highly conservative strategy designed to select for genes that were transcribed in all of the muscle samples. these data were then used as input for unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis. figure  <dig> shows the hierarchical cluster analysis, which used signals from the  <dig> genes in each of the  <dig> samples. there was strong association of gene expression with sire group ) . moreover, the data also showed strong correlation with sire ebv status ) . thus, there was substantial genetic structure to the gene expression program in the progeny skeletal muscle samples suggesting that this directly contributed to the ebv status of the sires. the origins of this effect could reflect the impact of genetic variation on gene expression at the time of sampling or involve changes at earlier developmental times. one trivial alternative possibility is that this program simply reflected a sire-based genetic effect independent of direct contribution to the muscling ebv status. this is unlikely as the tissue examined for gene expression was the same as that measured to establish the ebv status of the sires. in addition, analyses of enriched gene functions and pathways detailed below were highly relevant to a muscling phenotype. there is no a priori reason why this would occur if these results were due to an indirect sire based genetic effect. the gene expression profile of one sire group ) proved an exception as it was not consistent with the ebv status of the sire in the context of the results from the other sire groups. the progeny of this sire showed much greater variability in gene expression compared with other sire groups .

to further dissect this gene expression information a systems biology approach using gene networks was subsequently employed.

gene expression network construction
the architecture of gene expression networks may provide insight into the biological mechanisms underpinning the genetics of the emd trait. a gene co-expression network analysis relies on the hypothesis that a strong correlation in mrna expression levels for a group of genes implies that these genes work cooperatively in contributing to a trait. the degree of connectivity of a gene in the network is simply the number of other genes that show correlated expression with that gene.

a component of the weighted gene co-expression network  approach  <cit>  was initially employed to construct the network. this approach has been widely employed to build a weighted gene co-expression network based on gene expression and the absolute pearson correlation coefficient between gene expression levels to detect clusters of genes correlated with a trait  <cit> . the gc-rma microarray data processing algorithm was used to generate the primary gene expression data input for gene network construction. the  <dig>  most connected genes  in each of the high and low muscling datasets  were employed for initial network construction using the wgcna package, which is a connectivity based method that detects clusters of highly interconnected genes based on soft thresholding using a power function and scale free topology  <cit> . the adjacency matrix was calculated by raising the correlation matrix of gene expression profiles to a power β, which was chosen based on the scale-free topology criterion. a β value of  <dig> was chosen . modules of genes were defined using the topological overlap measure , which shows the degree of overlap in shared neighbours between pairs of genes in the network  <cit> . the tom-plot visualized this relative interconnectedness between pairs of genes and showed how modules  were created. modules were defined using the dynamic tree cutting algorithm on a dendrogram created from the dissimilarity-tom matrix, which was calculated using the adjacency matrix  <cit> . this construction led to the identification of  <dig> modules, with each containing more than  <dig> genes . these modules were then used for the wgcna and the differential network analyses. each module was uniquely identified by a colour name.

weighted gene co-expression network analysis 
the identified modules were then selected on the basis of their module correlation , which is the absolute correlation between the module eigengene , and sire ebv for emd. further, genes in the identified modules were then retained based on their intra-modular connectivity  and the absolute correlation of the gene expression with the sire ebv for emd. four modules were identified: module violetwgcna , module cyanwgcna , module tanwgcna  and module lightgreenwgcna . additional file  <dig> lists the genes present in these four wgcna modules.

functional enrichment analysis of genes in wgcna modules
functional enrichment analysis was used to assign biological relevance to the genes present in each of the four wgcna modules in the context of module eigengenes for the sire groups. these analyses used agrigo  <cit> , the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery   <cit> ) or gene set enrichment analysis   <cit> . while there is overlap in the functionalities of these databases, each also has unique capabilities.

genes present in the cyanwgcna module were strongly enriched for go terms associated with protein catabolism mediated by the proteosomal components, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis and threonine endopeptidases . this was also apparent from analysis of individual functional categories using david e.g. kegg pathway  and interpro protein domain . the proteosome consists of a highly ordered macromolecular complex of multicatalytic proteases which function in energy dependent regulated proteolysis. before a protein is degraded, it is first flagged for destruction by the ubiquitin conjugation system, which ultimately results in the attachment of a polyubiquitin chain to the target protein. the proteasome's regulatory cap binds the polyubiquitin chain, unfolds the protein, and feeds the protein into the proteasome's proteolytic core for destruction. additional file  <dig> shows a table listing enriched clusters of terms using the david functional annotation clustering approach, which gives a higher level perspective of functional term enrichments. the highest ranked cluster, which contained  <dig> terms, had an enrichment score of  <dig>  ) and was represented by terms relating to the proteosome, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis and proteolysis. a second related cluster  continued the focus on regulation of protein metabolism.

the positive eigengenes for the three low muscling sire groups in the cyanwgcna module suggest increased emphasis on protein catabolism in these groups. consistent with this conclusion, previous studies of muscle deposition in sheep divergently selected for yearling growth rate over ten generations indentified enhanced protein degradation in hind-limb muscle in lines of these animals selected for low growth  <cit> . conversely, the negative eigengenes for two of the high muscling sire groups in this module suggest decreased emphasis on protein catabolism, which is consistent with more skeletal muscle protein in these two groups. next, the genes within the cyanwgcna module were examined by using gsea for enrichment of conserved cis-acting regulatory motifs. this database included conserved gene-associated anonymous motifs in the human, mouse, rat and dog genomes and conserved gene-associated transcription factor binding motifs. the conserved motifs were restricted to a 'promoter' sequence window corresponding to ±  <dig> kb of the transcription start site. additional file  <dig> shows that this module was associated with four enriched transcription factor motifs , nrf <dig> , gabpb <dig>  and one anonymous motif), which may participate in limiting muscle formation in the low ebv sire group. interestingly, nrf <dig> induces expression of the key promyogenic transcription factor mef2a  and has roles in regulating mitochondrial biogenesis and proteosome synthesis  <cit> . the enrichment for this transcription factor motif in the genes present in this module is consistent with a dual functional role for nrf <dig> in potentially balancing myogenesis and mitochondria production with energy dependent protein catabolism. it may also be speculated that in the high muscling sire groups represented by sire groups i and ii, there is decreased emphasis on mitochondria biogenesis, which could reflect a fibre type shift toward fast twitch glycolytic fibres. these fibres are known to contain fewer mitochondria than slow twitch oxidative fibres  <cit> .

module tanwgcna was enriched for terms associated with rna processing as defined by david functional annotation clustering . consistent with this, analysis of the kegg pathway showed enrichment for the splicosome . the former analysis also revealed a relatively small cluster enriched for terms associated with the cytoskeleton but this was below the threshold for cluster significance . agrigo analysis confirmed enrichment for cytoskeleton protein binding  in the go molecular function category but there were no other significant go terms in the biological process and cellular component go categories . the eigengene sire group pattern for this module is similar to that of the cyanwgcna module. thus, there was increased emphasis on rna turnover and cytoskeletal reorganisation in the low muscling sire groups. a single transcription factor binding motif  was enriched in promoters of genes in this module . this transcription factor is also involved in nuclear control of mitochondria function  <cit> .

functional terms representing protein synthesis at the level of ribosome protein function  were strongly enriched in module lightgreenwgcna. additional file  <dig> shows agrigo hierarchical tree graphs for each of the go categories, which are consistent with this conclusion. david functional annotation clustering not only revealed over-representation of ribosome function in this module  but additionally suggested that mitochondrial function was also enriched  . the sire group eigengenes for the lightgreenwgcna module indicate that the expression of genes encoding ribosome proteins is positively correlated with the low muscling group. one possible explanation for this finding is that in the low muscling animals there is increased emphasis on enhancement of the ribosome protein machinery as compensation for constraints on muscle formation at the levels of myogenesis or myofibril hypertrophy responses. the enrichment for terms associated with mitochondrial function in this module is consistent with shifts toward slow twitch oxidative fibres in the low muscling group and fast twitch glycolytic fibres with lower mitochondrial content in the high ebv sire group. gsea analysis indicated enrichment in this module for an anonymous promoter motif and the motif for binding by the elk <dig> transcription factor -like transcription factor 1) . the latter protein binds klf <dig>  and acts cooperatively with histone deacetylases to suppress smooth muscle cell differentiation and postnatal growth  <cit> . this therefore suggests a transcription factor mediated regulatory mechanism which impacts both muscle cell formation and general protein synthesis in the low muscling group.

module violetwgcna initially did not achieve significance for any functional terms. however, the striking relationship between this module and sire group ebv status  suggested that further analysis was warranted. consequently, agrigo functional analysis was performed using less stringent parameters . this analysis identified muscle sarcomere organisation  and muscle development  in the go category biological process while several terms relating to skeletal muscle fibre structure  were revealed in the cellular component category . these data were consistent with coordinate emphasis on muscle structural components in the high muscling sire group. gsea analysis identified three anonymous motifs and four motifs corresponding to known transcription factor binding sites , tgif , runx <dig>  and titf ) . meis <dig> has been implicated in regulation of myogenesis through its control of the transcription of myod <dig> , a pivotal promyogenic transcription factor and myostatin, a negative regulator of myogenesis  <cit> . runx <dig> has been shown to be involved in the maintenance of skeletal muscle  <cit> . thus, increased muscle protein synthesis driven by myogenesis is probably a significant contributor to the high muscling sire groups.

the violetwgcna module contained a number of notable genes in addition to those encoding proteins directly contributing to skeletal muscle fibre structure. atp2a <dig> encodes a ca2+-atpase that facilitates the atp coupled translocation of calcium from the cytosol to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, and is intimately involved in muscle excitation and contraction. this protein isoform characterises fast twitch glycolytic muscle fibres , which contain fewer mitochondria than oxidative fibres  <cit> . this is consistent with decreased emphasis on mitochondria in the high muscling sire group as already suggested from analyses of the lightgreenwgcna, tanwgcna and cyanwgcna modules. the violetwgcna module also contained two additional genes whose encoded proteins, ryr <dig>  and srl , are also actively involved in calcium transport and storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. collectively, this information suggests increased emphasis on sarcoplasmic reticulum function in the high muscling sire groups. this organelle controls the dynamics of calcium release and uptake during muscle contraction and is essential for normal muscle function  <cit> . calcineurin a alpha , another gene in this module, has key regulatory roles in skeletal muscle development, regeneration and hypertrophy and is therefore consistent with higher muscling occurring in sire groups i-iii  <cit> . the module also contained dicer <dig>  which encodes an important enzyme required for mirna maturation. several mirna are known to be positive regulators of myogenesis  <cit>  and dicer <dig> is essential for muscle development  <cit> . interestingly, a simple binary comparison between the high and low muscling sire groups demonstrated that dicer was one of the most up-regulated genes . enhanced dicer <dig> activity could lead to increased levels of mature mirna thereby promoting increased myogenesis in the high muscling sire groups. the identification of several genes within this module that are known to regulate skeletal muscle formation confirms that the gene expression network analysis using the wgcna approach provides valuable insight into the pathways regulating muscling which contribute to the muscling ebv.

differential co-expression network analysis
another independent method to analyse these data used a differential co-expression network approach  which identified modules that were differentially co-expressed i.e. network modules containing genes that were highly correlated with the high muscling trait but not the low muscling trait and visa versa  <cit> . the hypothesis being tested was that the extremes of the muscling ebv trait were the result of changes in emphasis on specific biological pathways. specific differentially connected modules were identified by comparing the behaviour of the  <dig> gene network modules for the high and low muscling ebv trait. a module was defined as differentially co-expressed when it was significantly different from random in one condition but not in the other condition. the conditions were high and low ebv status for emd. the approach uses a resampling method to calculate a p-value for each module. genes in the modules were then retained based on different criteria than for wgcna and hence the gene contents of the identified modules were not identical when comparing this analysis with the wgcna method. genes in the differentially co-expressed modules were retained only if:  the intra-modular connectivity was >  <dig> , and;  the intra-modular connectivity with other modules was <  <dig> . five of the originally identified  <dig> modules were differentially co-expressed . one module was found to be non-random in the high muscling group and random in the low muscling group  and vice versa for the remaining four modules . thus, the genes in the violetdiff module may play a direct role in enhancing muscle development as they were highly connected in the high muscling sire group and correlated with ebvs for this group but not in the low muscling group. the remaining four modules were highly connected in the low muscling sire groups suggesting that the genes in these modules represented regulatory networks suppressing muscle formation and maintenance. the genes present in these modules are listed in additional file  <dig> 

1a module was differentially co-expressed when the pairwise correlations were not random in one condition  and random in the other condition   <cit> . the conditions were high or low sire ebv status for emd. hm, high muscling ebv; lm, low muscling ebv.

2the p-value is a measure of the significance that a module differs from random.

functional enrichment analysis of genes in differentially co-expressed modules
agrigo analysis of the genes present in the violetdiff module identified enrichment for contractile fibre and myofibril in the go cellular component category . these functional term enrichments are consistent with the high muscling ebvs being driven by increased muscle protein synthesis. david functional annotation clustering identified aspects of endonuclease activity, protein catabolism and vesicle mediated transport as enriched although they were only weakly significant  . in contrast with the agrigo analysis, muscle structural components did not reach significance in the david annotation clustering analysis. the reasons for this are not clear but are likely due to differences in inherent methodologies and significance thresholds . gsea analysis identified five anonymous motifs and four motifs corresponding to transcription factor binding sites in the promoters of genes in this module . of the latter it is noted that c/ebp  is essential for establishment and maintenance of energy homeostasis in neonates and it has a strong role in the development of adipose tissue  <cit> . one possibility is that there is cross-talk between regulatory mechanisms that govern muscle formation and adipose tissues in these animals. motifs for tgif, meis <dig> and runx <dig> binding were also identified in this analysis, as for the violetwgcna module.

the light-greendiff module, as for the wgcna analysis, was strongly enriched for ribosome protein function  . there was also enrichment for mitochondrial function. this differentially expressed module was only significant for the low muscling ebv category and therefore it was consistent with previous conclusions that the low muscling ebv trait was associated with increased emphasis on protein translation, perhaps as a compensatory mechanism, and increased mitochondria formation or function. gsea analysis confirmed enrichment for the elk <dig> motif as was demonstrated for the light-greenwgcna module .

the green-yellowdiff module, which was significantly co-expressed only for the low muscling trait, was weakly enriched for terms generally relating to rna processing, transcription factor activity and regulation, and ubiquitin-mediated protein catabolism . this differentially expressed module was associated with the low muscling ebv trait and therefore it is suggested that this trait was primarily the result of both enhanced rna processing and enhanced protein catabolism. gsea predicted ten enriched promoter motifs of which six were known transcription factor binding motifs . of these transcription factors, pax <dig>  was particularly noteworthy as it is a marker of resident myogenic progenitor cells  <cit> . this may indicate that pax <dig> links muscle rna and protein turnover with maintenance of myogenic progenitor cells in the low muscling trait. srebp <dig>  was also identified in this analysis. it links control of muscle mass with lipid metabolic pathways, thus connecting muscle formation with energy regulation  <cit> .

analysis of the salmondiff module only revealed weak enrichment for terms summarised as carbohydrate metabolism and rna processing . gsea revealed seven enriched transcription factor motifs and one anonymous motif  . srebp <dig> was again identified. also of note was gata <dig>  which has been implicated as a negative regulator of cardiac muscle development  <cit> .

the orangediff module showed enrichment for regulation of transcription and protein catabolism . the latter term was consistent with the low muscling status in sire groups iv-vi. gsea analysis revealed three anonymous motifs and seven enriched transcription factor motifs including motifs for c/ebp and mef2a . the latter, as mentioned above, is a pivotal promyogenic transcription factor while the former was also identified in the violetdiff module.

while the wgcna and differential co-expression network analyses are inherently different in their approaches, both yielded broadly similar conclusions in terms of the relationships between the sire groups and the functional term enrichments associated with identified modules. higher resolution of the analyses could be anticipated by increasing the number of progeny per sire and the number of sire groups although there was surprisingly strong genetic architecture in the gene expression patterns in the current investigation given the restricted number of sires groups evaluated.

CONCLUSIONS
there was strong genetic architecture to the gene expression program in skeletal muscle samples taken from the progeny of sires characterised by a range of ebvs for emd . the genetic basis of population variation for most complex traits, like muscling, is thought to be the result of contributions from a large number of polymorphic genes each of small effect size. within an animal many genes act by coordinate activation and repression of specific biological pathways to elicit cumulative effects on the muscling trait. genetic variations in these genes are likely to contribute to variation in the trait within the population. the current gene expression network analyses identified pathways operating in skeletal muscle that are likely to contribute to quantitative trait variation in the trait emd, a measure of muscle yield. polymorphic variations in a subset of genes encoding proteins directly participating in these pathways, their regulation or in early developmental processes underpinning the formation of these pathways are likely to be responsible for genetic variation in the emd trait.

gene co-expression network analyses are more likely to identify modules containing co-regulated genes whose encoded proteins directly contribute to structural units such as muscle fibres, proteosomes, ribosomes and mitochondria, all of which were identified in the current analyses. genes involved in regulating the formation of these structural units are likely to be a primary source of the genetic variation determining sire ebv status. the strong proteosome signature  indicated that there was increased emphasis on protein degradation in the low muscling ebv groups. the enrichment for the nrf <dig> transcription factor binding motif in the promoters of genes in this module is consistent with the role for nrf <dig> in regulating  <dig> s proteosome formation  <cit> . therefore, nrf <dig> and its related counterpart nfe2l <dig> are potential candidates for examination of genetic variation contributing to variation in the emd trait. regulators possibly contributing to the genetic variation in muscle fibre formation included ppp2ca  and dicer <dig>  which were identified in the violetwgcna and violetdiff modules. these genes are known to control muscle function and formation. calcineurin has a key role in the hypertrophy response of skeletal muscle and dicer <dig> is essential for muscle formation as it catalyses the processing of pre-mirna, some of which are essential for myogenesis  <cit> .

enhanced muscling is probably also linked with a fibre type shift toward fast twitch glycolytic fibres, which have fewer mitochondria than slow twitch oxidative fibres. consistent with this conclusion, direct examination of the longissimus lumborum muscle in the progeny of poll dorset sires characterised by high ebvs for emd demonstrated an increased proportion of fast twitch glycolytic type iib fibres compared with progeny from sires with low ebvs for this trait, although the number of myofibres and overall size of myofibres for each fibre type were unaffected by ebv  <cit> . these results indicate that intense genetic selection for increased emd in this sheep population is also likely to select for increased glycolytic fibres in the longissimus muscle. whether this impacts on the overall growth performance of the animals through differing metabolic emphases in skeletal muscle is not known. the same study showed that total rna and total protein were higher in the progeny of high muscling sires. this result is also consistent with the model shown in figure  <dig> 

analysis of the promoters of genes in the identified modules often suggested that specific transcription factors provided multi-functional linkages between the processes of muscle formation, protein turnover and energy homeostasis. for example, the transcription factor nrf <dig> linked regulation of the formation of the energy dependent proteosome with mitochondrial biogenesis, while c/ebp linked muscle formation with adipose tissue formation and energy homeostasis. thus, these highly integrated regulatory systems provide increased opportunity for feedback control mechanisms that maintain muscle mass within genetically predefined limits but also in a state that is responsive to the overall energy balance in the animal. this may be a consistent theme in the genetics underpinning variation in muscling. it is interesting to note that five of the enriched transcription factor motifs  were also indentified in an analysis of bovine skeletal muscle development using gene expression information and a different analysis methodology  <cit> .

the future challenge is to identify causal genetic polymorphisms contributing to variation in the emd trait. the integration of high density snp information with these network analyses, especially using highly connected hub genes, may accelerate the discovery of cis-acting genetic polymorphisms that alter gene expression and thereby directly contribute to this muscling trait  <cit> .

