BACKGROUND
all organisms are confronted with diseases, which can be particularly threatening to endangered species that show reduced genetic diversities  <cit> . in vertebrates, growing evidence suggests that genetic diversity is especially important at the level of the major histocompatibility complex . since the primary function of mhc molecules is to present parasite-derived peptides to t-lymphocytes, it has been argued that parasites and pathogens are major selective pressures acting on the evolution of mhc genes  <cit> . there are two main types of mhc molecules, class i and class ii. both classes of molecules function as shuttles that transport peptides from the cytoplasm and display them on the cell surface. mhc class i molecules in particular are expressed by nearly all cell types and present peptides that are derived from proteins degraded by the proteasome  <cit> .

the mhc polymorphism is especially high in the region that encodes for the peptide-binding domain. the residues of the α <dig> and α <dig> domains of the mhc class i molecules form the peptide-binding region. antigenic peptides are anchored at specific residues called antigen binding sites, which are commonly found to be evolving under positive selection in natural populations .

the polymorphism present at the mhc genes has regularly been investigated at multiple levels of organization. firstly, a very particular feature of mhc genes is the existence of trans-species polymorphism  which has been observed in various taxa . thirdly, at the individual level, mhc diversity has been associated with numerous fitness traits such as secondary sexual ornamentations  <cit> , parasitism  <cit> , and life time reproductive success  <cit> . although patterns are not clear, several studies have found fitness advantages in individuals carrying either an intermediate number of mhc alleles  <cit>  or a maximum number of alleles .

despite a tremendous research effort to understand the evolution of mhc genes and their relevance for conservation biology, surprisingly few studies have focused on the group of non-avian reptiles. the best-characterized mhc example in this taxa is that of the tuatara in which the second exon of the mhc class i is comprised of two sets of duplicated alleles in most individuals  <cit> .

in this study, we used  <dig> deep amplicon sequencing to investigate the variation of the mhc class i alpha- <dig> heavy chain in a population of the loggerhead sea turtle  nesting at the cape verde archipelago. next generation sequencing offers new tools to characterize extreme variation within and between individuals. the use of individually barcoded primers during amplification allows the sequencing of pcr products derived from hundreds of individuals in a single  <dig> experiment, even for dense gene complexes  <cit> . the read length of  <dig> sequencers also permits coverage of the entire polymorphic exons of the mhc.

the cape verde population of loggerhead turtles is the second largest in the atlantic  <cit> . recently, monzon-arguello et al. <cit>  revealed the significant genetic divergence between the cape verde rookery and other atlantic and mediterranean rookeries. furthermore, stiebens et al.  <cit>  showed strong signs of philopatry at the island level, suggesting a complex structure of the rookery with independent colonies. additionally, in cape verde, the fungus fusarium solani was found to be the cause of infections in turtle eggs that accounted for over 80% of mortality in a challenged experiment  <cit> , supporting the need to characterize immune relevant genes.

in this study, after characterizing the mhc class i α genes in the loggerhead turtle, we investigate different modes of evolution at different levels of organization from species to individuals.

RESULTS
phylogeny of mhc genes in reptiles
to investigate the phylogenetic coherence between neutral and adaptive markers, we built two phylogenetic trees of reptiles using i) mtdna control region and ii) mhc class i α genes. the trees suggest different evolutionary scenarios . on the one hand, the mtdna control region clearly separates reptile species where each node is supported by high bootstrap values. in contrast, the mhc class i phylogeny is much weaker and mainly separates the outgroup and the sphenodon mhc sequences. interestingly, the loggerhead turtle shows mhc alleles that display closer allelic relationships between species than within species - suggesting trans-species polymorphism over a large range of reptile species and/or a duplication event prior to speciation.

phylogeny of mhc in the cape verde rookery
the phylogenies within the loggerhead turtle population from cape verde based on mtdna and mhc class i alleles were also discordant. for the mtdna, we found two strong clusters arising from the presence of an extremely divergent haplotype  that differs from the other haplotypes from a maximum of  <dig> point mutations . as expected from the reptile phylogeny, the mhc neighbor-joining tree identified two main lineages supported by high bootstrap values , which suggests at least one duplication event and/or the maintenance of old allelic lineages. no particular link could be identified between the two phylogenetic trees.

mhc allelic pool
for the  <dig> turtles sequenced in this study, we obtained approximately  <dig> usable  <dig> reads. after data filtering ,  <dig> different alleles were detected with coverage depths varying between  <dig> and  <dig> reads per allele . allele abundances within the population varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . we found  <dig> singleton alleles , but all alleles were present in both independent pcr reactions.

out of the of  <dig> basepair  sequence, bp differences ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> with a median of  <dig> , and from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid changes . as would be expected under parasite-mediated balancing selection  <cit> , mhc genes in turtles show strong signs of positive selection: z =  <dig> , p =  <dig> . likelihood ratio tests also suggest that several codon sites in the mhc class i gene are evolving under positive selection .

ω =  where dn represents the number of non synonymous substitutions and ds the number of synonymous substitutions. numbers of codon sites refer to position in the reading frame.

none of the alleles that appeared in more than one individual were in linkage disequilibrium with one other .

the hudson four-gamete test  <cit>  implemented in dnasp  <cit>  detected eight recombination events . these values indicate the minimum number of recombination events in the history of the samples.

within the  <dig> alleles found, geneconv analyses detected six fragments significantly involved in gene conversion events. in addition, the numbers of pairwise internal fragments exceeded the random-assumption of 5%  suggesting the occurrence of gene conversion in turtle mhc class i genes.

individual mhc allele variation
individual diversity ranged from one to four alleles , indicating the presence of up to four mhc class i loci in this loggerhead population. out of  <dig> individuals for which cloning was also performed,  <dig> genotypes were identical between cloning and  <dig> sequencing. for the remaining individual, one allele was missing in the cloning approach, but increasing the number of sequenced clones a-posteriori revealed the presence of this allele in this individual .

identifying fitness proxies in sea turtles is difficult but numerous studies have found that larger turtles have higher clutch size  <cit> . thus, we used individual size  as an estimate of turtle body condition. we found that turtles with intermediate mhc diversity were larger than turtles with either higher or lower number of mhc alleles  – suggesting an evolutionary advantage to intermediate mhc diversity.

discussion
in this work, we characterized the allelic diversity for genes of the major histocompatibility complex in the endangered loggerhead sea turtle . loggerhead turtles are confronted with multiple direct and indirect anthropogenic threats menacing their genetic diversity – a crucial component of population viability  <cit> . the mhc genes are not only good estimators of genetic diversity but also play important roles in the onset of the adaptive immune system  <cit> . here, we used high-throughput genotyping to assess mhc adaptive genetic diversity. despite the numerous advantages of using next generation sequencing,  <dig> amplicon sequencing is particularly prone to sequencing errors such as homopolymers  <cit>  resulting in an increased frequency of indels  <cit>  or to increased number of sequenced chimeras  <cit> . nonetheless, the consequences of such effects can be diminished by combining precautionary pcr preparation , independent replicate reactions , accurate primer design  <cit>  and sufficient depth of sequencing coverage  <cit> . following all those recommendations we were able to address the evolutionary history of mhc class i genes in the endangered loggerhead turtles at multiple evolutionary levels.

firstly, at a large taxonomic range, we found clear species clustering for the mtdna control region. even though the mode of inheritance and the evolutionary rates of both mtdna and mhc markers are different, contrary to the neutrally evolving mtdna marker, the mhc genes showed a closer relationship between species than within loggerhead turtle alleles suggesting the existence of tsp within the reptile taxa. tsp corresponds to the maintenance of allelic lineages that are passed on during speciation events to each of the newly formed species  <cit> . tsp has been reported in related iguana species  <cit> , and our results suggest that tsp spans an even larger taxonomic range, which may arise from the slow evolutionary rate of the basal class of reptiles  <cit>  and/ or via long-term balancing selection.

given the observed signature of tsp, it was therefore not surprising to find that the sequenced mhc alleles in the loggerhead turtle population from cape verde clustered into  <dig> groups supported by high bootstrap values. genotypes with such diverse mhc alleles are expected to bind more dissimilar antigens that could then favor their maintenance on en evolutionary time scale  <cit> . interestingly, several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the maintenance of mhc polymorphism, but, given the function of these genes, parasite-mediated balancing selection is the most likely driving force  as recently shown experimentally  <cit> . the exceptional allelic diversity usually observed in natural populations, both in terms of the number of specific alleles as well as in terms of amino acid diversity, provides the potential to adapt to a given parasite spectrum.

in the sequenced turtles, we found  <dig> different alleles suggesting that the mhc class i diversity in the endangered loggerhead turtle is not particularly low compared to other endangered species such as the namibian cheetah  <cit>  or the european bison  <cit> . from a conservation perspective, the fact that numerous individuals carry a unique allelic repertoire indicates the importance of preserving this diversity. furthermore, our results show that turtles possess up to  <dig> different mhc alleles, suggesting at least one event of duplication. since the number of functional mhc loci in the genome represents the bottleneck for adaptation to parasites and pathogens, it might be selectively advantageous to retain duplications at these loci  <cit> . on an evolutionary time scale, the number of loci within a species is not fixed and may vary over time in a birth-and-death process of gene duplications and deletions  <cit> .

it is also worth noting that we found evidence for mhc class i amino acid sites evolving under positive selection. this further supports the view of balancing selection also acting on mhc evolution in turtles. with our dataset, we not only tackled the puzzling evolutionary question of the maintenance of mhc polymorphism but also showed that gene conversion and recombination between copies exist - both playing a role in the generation of high allelic polymorphisms  <cit> . recombination between loci may explain the occurrence of sequence variants that are particularly divergent, which may then provide particular advantage against parasitic attack. since many classical mhc genes occur as clusters of functionally intact, duplicated genes, interlocus recombination through unequal crossing-over may also generate sequence polymorphism  <cit> .

finally, with our dataset we were also able to investigate the relationship between individual mhc diversity and a fitness relevant trait. identifying relevant fitness traits is complex in marine turtles as reproductive success cannot be followed over generations. numerous studies, nonetheless, have found that larger turtles achieve a higher clutch size e.g.  <cit> . here, our results suggest that individuals with an intermediate mhc diversity were larger than those with either high or low diversity. several studies have reported a relationship between individual mhc diversity and fitness traits, supporting either an advantage for an intermediate diversity  <cit>  or for increased heterozygosity  <cit> . an intermediate diversity is thought to be due to a combined action of parasite-mediated selection and an excessively strong negative t-cell selection that takes place under high individual mhc diversity  <cit> . in the case of the loggerhead turtles, up to four mhc alleles seems rather low to trigger increased costs of negative t-cell selection. however the best estimates obtained from mathematical models suggest that such costs can exist with an individual number of expressed mhc molecules in the range of  <dig> to  <dig>  when combining both mhc class i and class ii  <cit> . this can then apply to the loggerhead turtles. besides the tropical python, this is the second report of higher individual fitness measure with intermediate mhc class i diversity in reptiles. this correlation may stem from either an advantage of individuals with intermediate mhc diversity being able to better fight off parasites and therefore allocate more energy to growth, or from non-random mortality with regards to mhc. this would result in larger individuals, with intermediate mhc diversity, being older. both hypotheses are not mutually exclusive but at this stage cannot be disentangled. another possible explanation is that our data reflect an advantage to heterozygote individuals over homozygotes which would also be predicted by the heterozygote advantage theory . in either case of an optimal diversity or an advantage to heterozygotes, our results suggest an associated cost of homozygosity, a major concern for endangered species such as the loggerhead sea turtle.

CONCLUSIONS
the mhc class i data presented here can serve as an important launching point for studies of conservation genetics, particularly with regard to disease resistance/susceptibility in the loggerhead turtle and other endangered species. over the last two decades, the mhc has emerged as a valuable complex of genes for evaluating the relative influence of natural selection versus drift and migration on the levels of genetic variation in populations. this is important when considering that selection and adaptation may have its greatest effect on functionally important genes, including genes affecting resistance to pathogens. evidence for natural selection of the mhc in the loggerhead turtle adds additional insights into the evolution of this gene complex in a phylogenetically basal lineage and demonstrates the potential importance of mhc in the sustainability of an endangered population.

