BACKGROUND
cell-matrix interactions are key components of many physiological processes in health and disease. frequently these interactions result in changes in cellular motility, morphology, and/or growth, and so quantitation of these changes is useful for comparing matrix and soluble factor effects and for assessing sensitivity of cells to varying concentrations of these factors  <cit> . a variety of methods are used to measure cell migration, including most commonly the transwell assay  <cit>  often modified by fluorescence quantitation  <cit> , and less commonly the under-agarose migration assay  <cit> , the soft-agarose drop method  <cit> , the phagokinetic track motility assay for phagocytic cell types  <cit> , wound healing  <cit> , and time-lapse video microscopy.

although the transwell assay has been applied to random migration  <cit> , video time-lapse microscopy provides advantages by yielding actual speeds of individual cells and additional features of motion, e.g. persistence  <cit> . the video time-lapse approach has been applied since the late 1930's using film-projected images and manual methods for tracking cell paths for determination of velocities  <cit> . the introduction of video imaging and computer-assisted methods of tracking have aided this approach  <cit> . however, even with computer-assisted methods, analysis of video time-lapse images can be labour intensive, particularly if the data have been gathered over extended time periods, and the opportunities for human fatigue and inadvertent selection using such methods may introduce bias. moreover, the normal cell culture environment must be maintained during imaging. although sophisticated studies are being conducted within special chambers  <cit>  or under mineral oil  <cit> , an ideal system would incorporate acquisition of images simultaneously from multiple wells under normal culture conditions maintained throughout the entire experiment.

a fully automated system for acquiring and analysing time-lapse images over extended time periods from multiple wells within  <dig> well plates has been developed  <cit> . the system includes an electronically controlled incubated cell culture environment for continuous monitoring over extended periods. automated image analysis is used to determine cell morphological properties and cell location, and proprietary algorithms are used to construct cell paths or tracks through time, yielding magnitude and direction of motion. cell proliferation is also monitored based upon processing of the same set of images. the data set provides a rich source of unbiased quantitative information about cell behaviour that can be accessed at the individual cell level and filtered in a manner similar to gating in flow cytometry. here we apply this technology to examine responses of osteoblast-type cells to surface coatings of extracellular matrix compounds that may be involved in osteoblast differentiation and growth. this study is part of an ongoing effort seeking to uncover underlying factors that influence osteoblasts in the process of osteogenesis and in the dysregulation of this process leading to osteoporosis.

RESULTS
differential cell velocity on different ecm coatings
km <dig> cells and mg- <dig> cells were chosen as models for this study because of their potential for differentiation into cells with osteoblast-like phenotypes. km <dig> cells, from primary human bone marrow stroma  <cit> , have been shown to secrete bone-type alkaline phosphatase upon differentiation . the mg- <dig> cell line, originating from a human osteosarcoma  <cit> , exhibits characteristics of bone forming cells including high levels of  <dig> -2d3-responsive alkaline phosphatase activity and osteoblast-like regulated synthesis of osteocalcin and collagen type i  <cit> . responses in cell motility may reflect functional changes that accompany osteoblast migration into areas of newly forming bone.

for km <dig> cells and to a lesser extent for mg- <dig> cells, increased migratory activity on laminin coated surfaces in comparison with the other extracellular matrix compounds, collagen type i, collagen type iv, and mock-coated plastic, is evident when viewing time lapse video sequences . individual cell tracks were automatically constructed by the software algorithms , and the tracks are seen to be longer on laminin i coated surfaces than on collagen type i, collagen type iv, or mock-coated plastic for km <dig> cells over the same time period . track length over equal time intervals correlates with velocity, and so these images demonstrate faster migration of km <dig> cells on laminin-coated surfaces. it is not clearly evident from visual inspection whether less-pronounced effects are occurring in either cell type with the other surface coatings, and to what extent, if any, the effects are changing over time.

data selection for single live-cell velocity
automated multi-well image acquisition and analysis provides the potential to examine biological response for multiple cell types, compounds, and doses simultaneously and continuously over extended periods of time, but the data must be judiciously selected. from each image, multiple objects were segmented and tracked, and a set of filtering criteria was uniformly applied from the outset, based upon logical principles . in addition, most view-fields included surface imperfections or adherent particles that were segmented as objects, some with areas within the range of single cells. such objects are easily ignored and often go unnoticed when using manually assisted methods of analysis, but they present challenges for automated image processing. stationary objects became particularly apparent when object positions were plotted over time in  <dig> dimensions . tracks from stationary objects form nearly straight lines along the time dimension, whereas live cell tracks exhibit more arbitrary excursion in the x,y plane. it is also evident from this figure that stationary objects were often segmented and tracked throughout the extended time period of the experiment, and their cumulative contribution to the data was therefore more significant than was apparent from a 2d view of accumulated tracks such as that shown in figure  <dig> 

for a given track, the maximum excursion in either the x or y direction is called the "fence size", and an additional filter based upon fence size was applied to exclude data from stationary objects. in order to establish fence size filter levels and to verify minimum loss of live-cell data, we devised a program to manually review and score track segments according to whether they originated from live cells or from stationary non-cell objects. for both cell types, fence sizes of  <dig> microns or less appeared to include the majority of non-cell objects without appreciable inclusion of live cells, and so filtering was conservatively applied at this level . the larger mg- <dig> cell area limit is associated with greater segmentation error that is in turn associated with larger fence sizes; thus the  <dig> micron filtering criterion was more of a compromise for slowly moving mg- <dig> cells than for km <dig> cells. having implemented these data filtering measures, we present overall data summaries from three experiments. it should be mentioned that this approach would not be valid in cases where significant numbers of live cells remained stationary on the culture surface.

kinetics of velocity response
automated quantitation demonstrated that cells responded to the higher concentration laminin coatings with increased cell velocity over an elapsed time period up to three days, at which time in one of three experiments cells exceeded the 30% confluence cut-off for velocity measurement . a significant but less pronounced effect for collagen type i coating in comparison to mock-treated plastic and collagen type iv coating was also evident. both cell types exhibited higher initial velocities on laminin and collagen type i surface coatings compared with plastic, even during the initial 4-hour time interval.

a conspicuous feature of these results is that mg- <dig> cells accelerated throughout the time period regardless of surface treatment and even on mock treated plastic, whereas km <dig> cells exhibited constant or slowly declining velocities on mock coated plastic and on collagen type iv coated surfaces. the continued acceleration of mg- <dig> cells may be verified visually in time-lapse images , but this behaviour was not perceptible to the unprepared eye prior to quantitative analysis. the kinetic data output from the automated system provides an obvious advantage in this regard for screening and discovery purposes over non-kinetic methods such as the transwell assay. statistically significant effects were observed for collagen iv in comparison to plastic based upon the entire data set from three experiments over  <dig> hours elapsed time , even though measurement values frequently overlapped between these two groups. once again, sufficient data are provided by the automated system to demonstrate moderate effects that are not likely to be significant using other methods.

velocity dose-response
dose-response curves indicate that km <dig> cell velocity increased approximately  <dig>  um/min with each  <dig> fold increase in laminin coating solution concentration across the range of concentrations tested, whereas for collagen type i, the cell velocity appeared to maximize at approximately  <dig>  um/min above control levels with the  <dig> ug/ml coating solution . for mg- <dig> cells, more modest increases in velocity were observed. average velocity appeared to maximize at levels approximately  <dig>  um/min and  <dig>  um/min above control levels with the  <dig> ug/ml coating solution concentrations for laminin and collagen type i, respectively. average velocity levels were not significantly increased with collagen type iv coating solutions above those observed for mock-coated plastic for either cell type.

velocity measurement heterogeneity
there are many possible ways to visualize and to quantitatively summarize the data. for the kinetic and dose-response analyses above, a velocity measurement was included for each object at every time point when the set of criteria were fulfilled, i.e. the object area was in the specified range for each cell type, the track connected across at least  <dig> points, the track fence size was greater than  <dig> microns, and the total area occupied by cells was less than 30% of the total image area. the population heterogeneity of these measurements under different treatments over a 24-hour time period is illustrated in figure  <dig>  the distributions are positively skewed and appear unimodal for km <dig> cells but exhibit evidence for bimodality for mg- <dig> cells, suggesting the possible continued presence of a subpopulation of stationary non-cell objects in the measurements. under the higher area-filtering limit for mg- <dig> cell objects, larger fences would be expected for stationary non-cell objects; but attempts to increase the fence-size filter resulted in significant loss of records from cell-like objects without eliminating the bimodality . velocity measurements up to  <dig>  um/min were recorded. each measurement represents an average over at least three segments  up to as long as  <dig> segments ; the relative contribution from tracks of each size for each bar in the histograms is indicated by colours . it is evident that a significant proportion of tracks were longer than  <dig> segments and that shorter tracks were more numerous in the velocity range associated with live-cells  as opposed to the range associated with non-cell stationary objects . at similar cell densities, more rapidly migrating cells are more likely to terminate tracks by colliding or leaving the viewfield .

the individual cell velocity distribution modes were noticeably shifted toward higher velocities with laminin and to a lesser extent with collagen type i surface coatings, in comparison with mock-coated plastic and collagen type iv. these histograms provide a more descriptive picture of the nature of the response of the cell populations to the surface treatments than that provided by measures of central tendency alone, without invoking complex statistical models.

to provide sufficient numbers of objects for reliable averaging, triplicate wells were coated and seeded for each treatment/dose/cell type combination. single cell counts, i.e. the average number of objects identified in each image that met the area-range criteria for single cells, and for which velocity measurements were included in the kinetic, dose-response, and velocity distribution histograms, are shown in figure  <dig>  there was a tendency for more motile cells to break free of clusters, i.e. to "scatter" , and this tendency gave rise to and is reflected in the greater number of single cells on laminin coated surfaces. for km <dig> cells, single cell numbers eventually declined as crowding from cell growth contributed to a greater proportion of cells in clusters. for mg- <dig> cells, slightly increasing numbers of single cells were observed despite growth toward increasing levels of confluence; this increase correlates with, and possibly resulted from, accelerating motility .

alternative approaches to data analysis can be used to examine the heterogeneity of velocity measurements at the individual cell level over time, and to ask such questions as: do subsets of fast and slow cells exist, or do all cells show a wide range of speeds over time? how long can a rapidly moving cell maintain rapid motion? is there evidence that individual cells require resting periods? how does cell-cycle phase affect velocity? an example of velocity histories at the individual cell level is shown in figure  <dig>  more specific analysis at this level may form the basis of a subsequent report; findings of the current study afford an ability to assign significance levels to the instantaneous peaks and troughs of such non-smoothed data .

technical precision and quality control
the performance capabilities of the automated system, including inter-well variation that is associated with plate manufacture, pipeting, and other operations, may be examined in terms of the technical precision of measurements between replicate wells within experiments . the abundance of data that can be automatically gathered without constraint over time , leads to robust precision estimates, shown here to be proportional to velocity measurement values.

since the velocity data are not normally distributed , we examined histograms for standard deviation from triplicate sets as an approach to graphical estimation of quality control limits . for mg- <dig> cells, all replicate data appeared to be "well contained" by an upper bound of  <dig>  um/min, with only two outliers  among almost  <dig>  triplicate sets. for km <dig> cells,  <dig> % of the data were contained within an upper limit of  <dig>  um/min, leaving  <dig> questionable sets out of almost  <dig>  triplicate sets. manual examination of some of these sets revealed the presence of surface blemishes in close proximity to each other that gave rise to oscillating tracks between them in images from one well of the set. the regularity in these false tracks may provide a mechanism for filtering them out of the larger data set in future experiments. these data establish a benchmark for monitoring quality in future studies and for inter-experiment and inter-lab comparisons.

segmentation/outline error
a surrogate for the empirical evaluation of the total variability associated with both stage noise  and object segmentation variability  would ideally consist of inert cell-like objects that remained stationary on the surface. in figure  <dig> above, we showed that tracks associated with fence sizes below  <dig> microns arose predominantly from stationary non-cell objects of similar area to single cells, and here we consider using these objects, excluded from the live cell analysis, as logical surrogates for estimating system variability. the average velocities of such objects at each fence size were nearly identical for all three experiments, demonstrating system stability with respect to stage noise and image segmentation parameters .

a clearer picture of the proportional contribution to the average velocities from non-cell and live-cell objects is shown by the velocity distributions for fence sizes below  <dig> microns versus those above  <dig> microns, respectively . the system velocity output at the individual object level for stationary non-cell objects is seen to cluster about a mode of  <dig>  um/min, and approximately 90% of the measurements fall between  <dig> and  <dig>  um/min. taken in conjunction with figure  <dig>  these data support an estimate of approximately ±  <dig>  um/min for the uncertainty in velocity measurements due to stage noise in combination with object segmentation variability.

comparison of automated tracking versus manual tracking
comparison of the results from automated tracking with manual tracking further validated the accuracy of the system, the efficacy of the fence size filtering method, and the individual fidelity of cell tracks from example image sets. velocity histograms prepared from all data obtained by both methods show that similar treatment effects were obtained . moreover, if we assume that the velocity distributions acquired from manual tracking are more truly "accurate" because only known live-cells were tracked, then this comparison further supports the validity of the "fence-size filter" method to discriminate non-cell stationary objects. this is because removal of the red, small-fence-size data from the histogram bars for automated tracks  brings them more in line with the manual track histograms . thus, this comparison shows that we are not excluding appreciable numbers of stationary live cells by applying the fence-size filter, and that the automated data for velocity is very similar in quality to that obtained manually.

to more specifically compare manual versus automated tracking on a point-by-point basis, we developed an algorithm to match object positions from automated analysis with manually tracked cell locations from each image. a necessary component of this comparison is determining the precision of each method, and so both methods were performed in replicate on the identical image sets. standard statistical methods of comparison were applied to the matched velocity data. regression analysis for a perfectly precise system would yield slope equal to one and intercept equal to zero, producing a 45° line of identity in an x-y plot. such a result was obtained for replicate analyses by automated tracking, i.e. almost  <dig>  individual cell locations were identically analysed when the original "jpeg" images were reprocessed. when comparing the test system versus a reference system, an observed slope less than one and intercept greater than one for a regression line would imply that the dependent variable is "accurate" in a mid-region, but is somewhat overestimated at low values and underestimated at high values. these features were evident from regression analysis of automated versus manual tracking, but also for the second replicate versus the first replicate manual tracking exercise, pointing out limitations in the precision of manual tracking as a reference method .

to better understand the magnitude of these errors in practice, we examined the actual differences in locating cell positions by the automated and manual tracking methods. our data set consisted of  <dig> cell positions that were co-located by automated tracking and by the first and second manual exercises according to the matching algorithm . no single position can be considered the "true" position; however, the differences between replicates can be used to estimate precision, s, according to the relationship, s = 1/v <dig> times the standard deviation of the differences, where the differences retain the sign; for example, if the second comparison measurement is larger than the first, the sign is negative. by this approach, for the first and second manual exercises, the precision was  <dig>  and  <dig>  pixels in the x and y coordinates, respectively. for the comparison between automated tracking and manual tracking the precision ranged between  <dig>  to  <dig> , but when automated tracking was compared with the mean from the two manual tracking exercises, the precision improved to  <dig>  and  <dig>  pixels in the x and y coordinates, respectively. thus, the automatically determined cell positions were closer to the mean positions from the two manual determinations than any individually determined position was to any other. under the settings used, a distance of  <dig> pixels corresponded to an error of less than 1/ <dig> inch, easily within the realm of human error for mouse-clicking on a monitor.

finally, the time-resolved fidelity of individual tracks may be examined in detail in 3d scatter plots of the x and y locations over time . here we show all cell positions for which the first manual tracking matched automated tracking and/or the second manual tracking exercise. replicate manually tracked cell positions are represented along the full length of most tracks. automatically tracked cell positions show more frequent gaps resulting from merging and branching, but they are nevertheless represented along the majority of the positions for most tracks. altogether, these data provide ample support for the accuracy and fidelity of the automated tracking method.

cell proliferation
as cell numbers increased over time, the total area of the segmented objects naturally increased, and initially we used this sum divided by the average area of separate individual cells for estimation of total cell numbers per view-field. such numbers are seen to increase exponentially, and the slope of log-transformed cell number can be used to estimate doubling times for comparison of growth rates . the linearity of the log scale plots and the high density of data points permit estimation of area-doubling times, over time periods as short as one to two days during the "clean" exponential growth phase, which persisted for  <dig> to  <dig> days. however, quantitative analysis of cell growth rates by the area-based method of estimating cell numbers was set-aside when we compared manually scored cell numbers with area-based estimates . the area-based method increasingly underestimated actual cell numbers with increasing levels of cell confluence.

regardless of the non-linearity of area-based cell numbers, the monitoring of cell growth based upon total cell area provided extremely valuable information. within experiments, the log-based slopes were similar for the different treatments, with the pronounced exception of laminin and km <dig> cells in the second experiment, even when starting with different initial seeding densities and when absolute cell numbers differ considerably over time as was evident in the three experiments performed for this study. a faster doubling rate for all treatments in the first experiment contrasted with slower doubling in the second and third experiments for both cell types. treatment-related patterns occurred within experiments that were not evident between experiments, and even without quantitative analysis it is clear that no reliable pattern of surface-treatment effect on cell growth can be found. hazards are evident, however, if conclusions were to be drawn from a more limited number of experiments, even with convincing within-experiment data.

one can speculate on possible causes for the between and within-experiment patterns shown here. for the second experiment, seeding densities were unusually low, and an atypical initial period of cell death was evident in the time-lapse videos during the first day after plating  and is shown also by the unusual "lag phase" in the log-based charts for both km <dig> and mg- <dig> cells in the second experiment. typically, healthy cells under normal conditions begin exponential growth immediately upon re-plating, as evident in the linear log-based graphs for the first and third experiments from the point of initiation up to the point of confluence. the departure evident for the second experiment in the growth charts holds implications for variability between experiments in the velocity data presented above . standardization of procedures and testing for robustness are called for. the value of our system for assisting in such efforts is prominently evident in these charts, apart from the question of treatment-related effects on growth in this study. in future studies, consistency in growth parameters could be made a prerequisite for acceptability of results for other parameters; here the results serve to demonstrate system potential.

discussion
this study demonstrates the applicability of a fully automated image acquisition and analysis system for quantitative measurement of cell motility and for monitoring cell proliferation in a relatively high-throughput manner. simultaneous comparison of multiple treatment variables in a  <dig> well plate format over extended periods of time is possible. here we show how various surface coatings of extracellular matrix compounds can induce increased velocity in two types of osteogenic cell lines, how these responses vary over time periods of more than three days, and how they vary by surface coating concentration, i.e. dose-response. we show that laminin and to a lesser extent collagen type i surface treatments brought about increased migratory activity, while collagen type iv did not, in comparison to mock-coated plastic for km <dig> cells and mg- <dig> cells. we show further how the extensive multiparametric output can be used to selectively isolate data of interest for improvement of bio-informational content and for characterization of system performance.

we believe our system is the first to accomplish full automation of time-lapse motion analysis of cells in culture, broadening the scope of application well beyond the practical limits imposed by manually interactive methods. image sets consisting of hundreds to thousands of scans from up to  <dig> locations over extensive time periods  can be acquired and batch processed, first to segment cell-like objects and clusters of such objects, and subsequently to construct tracks for the segmented objects over time. quantitative data is seamlessly exported to a sequel server data base from which results are presented in various forms as shown here. the relational data base is absolutely necessary for handling the large volume of multi-parametric data – over three million records for this study, including one for each object at each time point containing more than  <dig> fields of positional, textural, morphological, and motility-related data. additional fluorescence measurements are also commonly used  <cit> .

our analysis contrasts in some respects with the exquisite optical characteristics and advanced analytical details of migratory activity achieved in systems where parallel plane surfaces are provided by specially constructed chambers . such non-conventional culture environments overcome the meniscus problem, but are not readily adaptable to simultaneous analysis of multiple treatment conditions in a high throughput manner. most importantly for screening and discovery purposes, our system preserves the essential features of trajectory analysis that were emphasized by friedl and co-workers for evaluating subtle changes that reveal treatment effects on cell locomotion  <cit> .

to support the introduction of fully automated cell tracking, we have included a thorough analysis of measurement variability, system errors, and accuracy. biological differences between individual cells dominated the velocity measurement heterogeneity for the cells chosen for this study, while stage noise, cell segmentation, and cell positioning were shown to be relatively minor sources of error. for more slowly moving cells, i.e. those with velocities less than  <dig>  um/min, the latter relatively minor errors will result in large coefficients of variation under current conditions. rational data-filtering methods, such as exclusion of data from non-cell stationary objects based upon "fence size" and exclusion of data from objects with areas outside of single-cell ranges , yielded further improvements to the detectability of biological response from single cells. the accuracy and validity of these approaches were supported by comparison of the automated data with data from manually tracked cells. a significant feature of this analysis was the finding that, in general, automatically determined cell positions were closer to the mean positions from manual tracking than the replicate manual positions were to each other. thus a major limitation of this comparison was the imprecision of manual tracking.

on the other hand, the perfect precision of automated tracking represents a two-sided coin. it will precisely repeat any errors, posing an obstacle to data control based upon monitoring internal consistency. at the same time, small variations in processing variables can be readily applied, tested, and evaluated. for example, in current experiments, we are exploring the possibility of obtaining better "average" cell positions by acquiring replicate non-identical images closely spaced in time, e.g. one minute apart, for characterizing motion over longer intervals, typically 30-minutes. such an approach should improve precision and segmentation reliability at the individual cell level, while simultaneously providing a foundation for routine control based on inherent data consistency. the ability to perform automated batch processing will in due course be utilized more broadly for quality control and for optimization of image processing variables. advantage can be leveraged from perfect precision by applying and evaluating systematic changes to variables of a contrast enhancement algorithm, for example, followed by repeated cell segmentation and cell track processing of representative image sets, such that cell track lengths, in terms of linked segments, would be maximized for non-collision-related scenarios. automated routines for such optimization are not yet implemented, but are entirely feasible.

in seeking higher levels of automation, however, it is important to continue to manually monitor for and evaluate consistency between the raw data input and the processed data output. for each cell type, and for varying treatment conditions, processing variables are checked and evaluated. with each experiment, we manually verify that cell segmentation and cell track formation proceed reliably throughout representative regions of the image sets. the processing software presents the operator with cell outlines and tracks as shown in figure  <dig> , and spotfire™ visualization software is used extensively to verify consistency in the quantitative data. tracking patterns dominated by short fragments indicate, for example, problems requiring adjustment in image processing variables. representative image sets are first examined for such problems before initiating batch processing of the full experiment; but it is not impractical to automatically reprocess image sets from an entire experiment when evidence demonstrates a need for it. it should be pointed out that most of the refinements in data filtering, thresholding, and so on for this study were conducted at the level of data base querying, not at the level of image processing or track construction. whereas image processing requires hours to complete for a full experiment image set, data base queries can be run and re-run in a matter of minutes, and so the effect of changing thresholds or "gates" may be readily examined and interpreted using statistics or visualization software such as spotfire™. part of the beauty of automated analysis lies in our ability to make incremental improvements in both image processing and data querying approaches over time, leading to increasingly more accurate and reliable data. in contrast, manual analysis will remain decidedly imprecise and variable over time.

quantitative results from other published studies further support the general accuracy of our system. for example, huttenlocher et al. reported speeds ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  um/min for individual cho cells plated on fibrinogen coated surfaces and later reported average speeds of approximately  <dig>  um/min for myoblasts on fibronectin using manually-assisted computer based methods  <cit> . similarly, ware et al. reported maximal average velocities of a 3t3-derived cell line of approximately  <dig>  um/min and presented histograms for individual cell velocities ranging from near-zero to approximately  <dig>  um/min on a mixed extracellular matrix derivative in the presence and absence of epidermal growth factor  <cit> . it has been shown that experimental conditions such as ph and temperature, among others, can have a profound influence on motility  <cit> , nevertheless, reported velocities for adherent cells in other published studies are consistent with our findings.

determining cell proliferation using area-based measurement was shown to be vulnerable to non-linearity between area and cell numbers. but area-based growth curves exhibit exponential characteristics of high quality, and so automated quantitative monitoring of total cell area can be highly informative and useful. image processing algorithms for segmentation of individual cells within colonies or clusters using transmitted light will yield more reliable data as improvement continues with auto-focusing and contrast optimisation. the use of nuclear fluorescence staining is a reliable alternative for automated cell counting, but known stains are toxic and therefore were not used in this study. application of a mathematical adjustment factor based upon 'calibration' with manual or fluorescent counts might be considered; the risk here is that treatment effects could be masked, so this approach has not been used.

velocity enhancement of osteogenic cells with extracellular matrix compounds provided a useful illustration for this pilot investigation of the automated system. it should be pointed out that collagen extra-cellular matrices consist of a 3d network of polymerised fibers, and that the 2d non-polymerised surface coatings used here may not reveal representative cellular response to the normal polymerised form of the extracellular matrix. an unexpected finding from this study was the continued acceleration of mg- <dig> cells on mock-coated plastic as well as on the extracellular matrix compound coated surfaces in contrast to km <dig> cells that did not accelerate on mock-coated plastic or collagen type iv coated surfaces. trypsinization cleaves cell adhesion receptors at the time of replating, and it is possible that the re-synthesis and transport of such receptors played a role in the kinetics of the responses shown in this study. the effects of such recovery would not seem to explain the continued acceleration of mg- <dig> cells through several cell cycles, however. migration inducing-factors secreted by osteoblasts have been reported  <cit> , and it is possible that an effect from such a factor is involved here. alternatively, mg- <dig> cells may secrete extra-cellular matrix proteins that gradually accumulate on the surface to enhance migration rates.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates performance of a system for fully automated, time-resolved, and high throughput analysis of cell migration and proliferation, applied to continuously growing cultures in standard 384-well plates. this format permits the study and comparison of cellular responses to a large number of different treatment conditions, as shown here for three different extracellular matrix coatings on cultureware plastic for two different osteoblast-type cell lines. the simultaneous determination of multiple parameters at the individual cell level affords opportunities for data-base filtering and mining in order to select biologically relevant information. the automated velocity analysis has been demonstrated to be accurate within a level of uncertainly that is imposed by manual analysis of cell velocity from time-lapse image sets. data quality and system performance measures have been developed that can serve as a basis for the design and quality control of large scale experiments for which this system is broadly applicable.

