BACKGROUND
pheromones are secreted chemicals recognized by members of the same species  that convey information about individual members. the vomeronasal organ  of terrestrial vertebrates is responsible for pheromonal responses that evoke social and reproductive behaviors, including male territorial aggression, sexual preference, and sexual maturity . these responses are thought to be mediated by at least two unrelated gene families, referred to as v1rs  <cit>  and v2rs  <cit> , encoding g protein-coupled receptors  that are expressed on surfaces of sensory neurons in the vno.

in addition to being the principle chemoreceptors in the olfactory and gustatory sensory systems, the large gpcr superfamily has prominent roles in transducing signals for diverse ligands, including ions, hormones, neurotransmitters, nucleotides, and photons  <cit> . the gpcr repertoire has a common seven transmembrane structure, and mammalian gpcr proteins are classified into six major families: the peptide-binding secretin types, the adhesion types that contain n-terminal domains with motifs implicated in cell adhesion functions , the glutamate types , the frizzled types, the taste <dig> types , and the large set of rhodopsin types   <cit> . v1rs share a distant relationship with the taste2- and rhodopsin-types of gpcrs that bind ligands within transmembrane cavities .

v1r gene repertoires vary significantly among species. in mouse and rat, there are a total of approximately  <dig> v1r genes from  <dig> phylogenetically distinct subfamilies  <cit> ; members of each subfamily tend to be clustered at one or two chromosomal locations, reflective of a recent history of expansion by tandem duplications. in human and chimpanzee, the v1r repertoire consists almost entirely of non-functional pseudogenes, consistent with the loss of vno function possibly concurrent with the advent of trichromatic color vision during primate evolution  <cit> . surprisingly, the dog genome encodes only five intact v1r genes  <cit> , the cow and opossum genomes encode less than a third the number of v1rs as mouse  <cit> , and several other mammalian species  seem to similarly exhibit reduced vno function as compared to rodents. therefore, rodents appear to be exceptional with respect to their reliance on the vno and v1r gene repertoires for mediating pheromone responses.

the mouse and rat v1r repertoires have modulated significantly since these two species diverged. in general, orthologous relationships between genes and syntenic relationships between clusters are difficult to map as a result of lineage-specific duplications and deletions. two striking examples of delineation between the two species are the complete deletion of two subfamilies  in rat that represent the largest gene cluster in mouse, and the independent generation of two subfamilies  in both mouse and rat from a small number of ancestral genes in the presumptive ancestor  <cit> . moreover, the v1ra/v1rb duplications in both species appear to have occurred over a very short period of evolution just following mouse-rat speciation, probably driven in part by a wave of line repeat integration within the locus  <cit> . these observations suggest that adaptive modulation of v1r repertoires were important in the reinforcement of interspecies communication barriers in the period immediately following speciation.

unlike the odorant receptors of the main olfactory system, which exhibit ligand promiscuity as part of a combinatorial system of odor recognition , the v1rs of the vno might respond to a very narrow range of ligands, if not exclusively to one ligand  <cit> . moreover, while odorant receptor sensory neurons of the main olfactory system exhibit responsiveness in a concentration-dependent manner, the subset of vomeronasal sensory neurons responding to a particular stimulus do not change with the concentration of that stimulus. these observations suggest that different members of a v1r subfamily detect highly specific ligands, implying that modulation of subfamily repertoires could modulate physiologically distinct functions.

little is currently known about v1r function. a recent knockout of the entire v1ra-v1rb cluster in mouse perturbed normal patterns of female aggression and caused male mice to show reduced sexual behavior towards females  <cit> . similarly broad effects in sexual and social behaviors are evident in mice genetically deficient in trp <dig>  a protein required for vomeronasal neuronal signalling  <cit> . the low resolution of these phenotypes and the apparent phenotypic overlap between mice deficient in a subset of v1rs and those fully deficient in v1r response suggest that individual v1rs make combinatorial or additive contributions to broad behavioural patterns, as opposed to each v1r directing a distinct behaviour. to our knowledge, the hypothesis that v1rs contribute to the establishment of mating barriers between species has not yet been investigated.

it is presumed that one function of pheromones is the establishment of prezygotic mating barriers so that unproductive mating is not attempted . prezygotic mating barriers can quickly arise to prevent non-productive interbreeding attempts between subpopulations otherwise capable of mating  <cit> , and therefore, modulation of pheromones and their receptors might be especially important for selective breeding within sympatric populations. for example, the mediterranean short-tailed mouse, mus spretus, is sympatric with certain subspecies of mus musculus in parts of southern europe and north africa. no hybrids of these two species have been observed in nature, suggesting that they will not interbreed , even though they can produce viable offspring in the laboratory  <cit> . these two species diverged approximately  <dig>  million years ago  <cit> ; with an estimated neutral substitution rate of ~1% per million years  <cit> , we expect that typical orthologs will be ~98% identical between the two species.

in this study, we compare v1ra and v1rb gene repertoires in mus spretus and mus musculus in order to investigate whether, even over these very short evolutionary periods and in a background of very high sequence identity, these v1r repertoires exhibit the dynamic functional modulation observed between mouse and rat. our results indicate that functional modulation of rodent v1r repertoires has occurred, albeit by diverse evolutionary paths, supporting the hypothesis that adaptive changes in these v1r repertoires have contributed to the delineation of even very closely related species.

RESULTS
we produced a mixture of mus musculus v1r probes composed of 200– <dig> bp pcr products from three members of the v1ra and four members of the v1rb subfamily . we confirmed probe specificity by conducting a southern blotting of musculus bac clones known to contain v1r sequences from the v1ra, v1rb, v1rc, v1rh, and v1ri subfamilies; only clones containing v1ra/v1rb sequences hybridized to our probes . we then used these v1ra/v1rb probes to screen the chori- <dig> spret/ei bac library . we identified  <dig> positive clones; we expected to identify approximately  <dig> positive clones given the redundancy of the library  and the anticipated size of the v1ra/v1rb cluster . we sequenced the ends of all  <dig> bacs and confirmed that all non-repeat bac-end sequences were unambiguously orthologous to the v1ra/v1rb locus in the most recent musculus genome assembly . these bac-end sequences, along with an independent southern blot restriction fragment analysis of the isolated clones, were used to select a minimal tiling path of four bac clones that we thought would span the entire spretus v1ra/v1rb cluster, with the two flanking bacs extending out to at least one non-v1r gene at either end of the cluster. these four bacs were then subjected to shotgun sequencing, yielding near 'comparative-grade' finished sequence as described in blakesley et al.  <cit>  .

probes of the indicated size were generated by pcr using gene-specific primers. a list of musculus v1r gene sequences with at least 90% nucleotide identity to each probe illustrates that the probe mixture should efficiently hybridize to bac clones containing any of the entire musculus v1ra/v1rb repertoire.

production of a mus spretus sequence assembly reveals a conserved synteny map
we mapped contigs from spretus bac sequences onto the most recent musculus assembly using pipmaker . we generated a presumptive locus assembly of ordered/oriented spretus contigs that maximizes contiguous alignment between the two species . chained alignments between musculus and spretus sequences encompass ~ <dig> kb, or approximately 68% of the spretus assembly and 67% of the musculus assembly. the remaining portion of the two mouse sequences that cannot be unambiguously aligned consists predominantly of repeats that have integrated or deleted in one but not the other lineage . it is possible that this presumptive assembly is incorrect if there have been additional evolutionary events that have disrupted local synteny. however, we note that the resulting spretus sequence produces an array of putative orthologous v1r genes that exactly matches the order and orientation observed in musculus.

the synteny map shown in figure  <dig> reveals three ambiguities. first, the spretus sequences at one end of the cluster have subregions that exhibit lower than expected levels of orthology. as noted, neutral sequences are expected to diverge ~2% between the musculus-spretus split, and yet, orthologous sequences in the vicinity of the musculus v1rb <dig> gene, as well as other subregions , exhibit unexpectedly high divergence . the v1rb7-yua. <dig> are closest mutual homologs in the same relative position and orientation in their respective clusters, and therefore are putative orthologs, yet exhibit a synonymous substitution rate  of ~17%, which is much greater than should be the case in the roughly one million years since the two mus species diverged. it seems likely that these subregions have been subject to gene conversion events in one or both species that have obscured what is otherwise a much closer relationship. nevertheless, this high level of sequence divergence might underlie divergent functions between these orthologs.

second, the spretus locus appears to have deleted a segment in the vicinity of the musculus v1ra8-v1rb <dig> genes, although it is possible the segment is missing at this phase of sequence completion . in musculus, the similar v1ra <dig> and v1ra <dig> paralogs exhibit a ds = ~ <dig> %, consistent with a duplication event that occurred prior to the musculus-spretus split. therefore, the absence of v1ra <dig> in the spretus assembly is more consistent with loss in spretus than gain in musculus. the fact that v1rb <dig>  the next gene in the musculus cluster, is also missing in spretus reinforces the hypothesis that a segmental deletion that includes both v1ra <dig> and v1rb <dig> occurred in the spretus lineage.

third, the spretus locus is unresolved in the vicinity of the musculus v1ra3-v1ra <dig> paralogs . this region is near the junction of the two middle bacs . there is no apparent overlap in these two bacs , although both bacs have highly similar subsequences as a consequence of each having possible orthologs to v1ra3/v1ra <dig> . ds values predict that paralagous duplications in this region occurred prior to the musculus-spretus split , and yet the ds values of cross-species comparisons are greater than expected for orthology . therefore, the evolutionary history relating these four homologs might again be obscured by lineage-specific gene conversions. we also note that no putative ortholog to the yuc.7pg v1r pseudogene , located just downstream of yuc. <dig> on ch35-336j <dig>  is present in the musculus assembly, possibly indicating that lineage-specific rearrangements might have disrupted synteny in this region. further resolution of this phylogeny would require higher-quality and more complete sequence across this region, so that the full v1r content/positioning and surrounding non-coding gene blocks through this region could be more rigorously analyzed.

there is a low level of lineage-specific line integration
we previously observed that the v1ra and v1rb subfamilies underwent a burst of duplications independently in both the mouse and rat lineage shortly after these two species diverged  <cit> . the timing of these gene duplications was correlated with the timing of line repeat integrations at this locus, possibly suggesting a cause-effect relationship. as in musculus and rat, line repeats are abundant within the spretus v1ra/v1rb locus, comprising ~39% of the sequence and clearly demarking this v1r gene cluster from surrounding line-poor non-v1r territory . as noted above, a significant fraction of the broken synteny between musculus and spretus is line content present in one but not the other lineage. however, unlike with mouse versus rat, where lineage-specific line integration accounted for the vast majority of broken synteny, we find very little evidence for lineage-specific line integration since the spretus-musculus split . therefore, the line  blocks present in one but not the other mus species are more likely due to lineage-specific deletion, recombination, and/or gene conversion of pre-existing line content.

the percent gc base composition , total repeat content , line repeat content , sine repeat content , ltr repeat content , and other repeat types  are shown for the ~721-kb musculus and ~717-kb spretus sequences encompassing the v1ra/v1rb gene cluster. the fraction of the total line repeat content annotated by repeatmasker with < <dig> % substitution  and < <dig> % substitution  is bolded.

species-specific modulation of functional orthologs
v1r orthologs are easily identified based on two criteria: first, orthologous pairs occupy the same relative position and orientation in the syntenic map ; and second, orthologous pairs exhibit synonymous substitution  rates approximating the expected ~2% in codon-aligned sequences . noted exceptions with conserved synteny but with higher than expected ds levels  and where orthologous relationships are ambiguous  are discussed separately below. a phylogenetic tree of spretus v1r genes and pseudogenes that includes members of the v1ra and v1rb subfamilies from musculus and rat illustrates these orthologous relationships .

putative orthologs for mus musculus and mus spretus are shown in the order they appear in their respective clusters. italics indicate likely pseudogenes. synonymous substitution rates  for orthologous pairs are typically in the 2–4% range . a range of ratios for synonymous to non-synonymous substitution rates  are evident; two pairs possibly subject to adaptive selection with ds/dn <  <dig> are bolded.

this tree suggests that the rodent ancestral cluster probably had at least five v1r genes, four from the v1ra subfamily  and one from the v1rb subfamily. the v1ra9-like ancestor at one end of the cluster has been deleted in rat, and the v1ra16-like ancestor at the other end of the cluster became a pseudogene in mouse. the three other ancestral genes  duplicated independently in the mouse and rat lineages . therefore, the functional repertoire is significantly different between mouse and rat, driven by lineage-specific mutations, deletions and duplications.

we do not identify any lineage-specific v1r duplications since the musculus-spretus split. the yud.3-mus.a7-mus.a <dig> clade in figure  <dig> shows an apparent musculus-specific duplication, however as noted previously, the synonymous substitution rate  between the a7-a <dig> pair is ~ <dig> %, or much greater than ~2% expected for the spretus-musculus split, and thus, the paralogous duplication probably occurred before the two mouse species diverged. therefore, this clade is better explained by spretus-specific gene deletion of the a <dig> homolog . in addition, the yub.3-yuc.6-mus.a4-mus.a <dig> clade  also shows apparent species-specific duplications, however as noted previously, neither the spretus pair  nor the musculus pair  exhibit a low enough synonymous substitution rate to be consistent with post-speciation duplication. instead, it seems more likely that a paralogous duplication occurred prior to the musculus-spretus split, and that the unexpected topology of this clade is due to noise in the analysis or to gene conversion events that might have obscured relationships. therefore, in contrast to mouse and rat, the musculus-spretus v1ra/v1rb repertoires have not significantly diverged by lineage-specific gene duplications, a result that seems consistent with the observed low incidence of lineage-specific repeat activity.

instead, divergence of v1ra/v1rb repertoires between spretus and musculus is evident by selective loss of function . of the eight orthologs in the v1ra1-like clade, two have apparently become pseudogenes in musculus. of the three orthologs in the v1ra7-like-v1ra9-like clade, one has apparently deleted in spretus. and of the seven orthologs in the v1rb clade, one has deleted and another has become a pseudogene in spretus. therefore, of the  <dig> v1ra/v1rb genes presumed to be functional in the common mus ancestor, five  have lost function in one but not the other mus lineage.

we emphasize however, that additional v1r sequences could reside within the remaining gaps in the current spretus sequence assembly. we compared in silico digests of the bac sequences by three separate restriction endonucleases  to the same generated in the laboratory and imaged on a high resolution gel electropherogram. this comparison of sequence to physical data allows a validation of sequence assembly  for each bac. from this analysis, we estimate that all gaps internal to each bac assembly are < <dig> kb , too small to be expected to contain additional v1r gene blocks . it is also unlikely that a v1r gene resides between the leftmost two bacs  in the spretus assembly, since based on mapping to the musculus assembly, the missing inter-bac region is only ~ <dig>  kb and this region does not contain a v1r gene in musculus. in contrast, the unresolved region between the two middle bacs  might be > <dig> kb and is likely to contain several v1rs. in particular, identification of the complete set of the "a3-like" and "a4-like" homologs in spretus, and their evolutionary relationship with v1ra <dig> and v1ra <dig> in musculus, will require the identification and analysis of a genomic dna clone that spans this gap in our assembly. thus, it remains possible that additional functional divergence between spretus and musculus will be revealed by future sequence from this region.

evidence for positive selection among orthologous pairs
it has been previously noted that rodent v1r homologs exhibit unusually low ds/dn ratios as compared to typical gene pairs in these species  <cit> , suggestive of a tendency for adaptive selection, presumably to meet changing niche- and species-specific requirements. previous studies have focused on mouse paralogs, rat paralogs, and mouse-rat homologs, but not mouse-rat orthology, because orthologs cannot be unambiguously assigned due to excessive lineage-specific duplications that obscure orthologous relationships. in the current study, we specifically investigated selective pressures acting on putative functional orthologs, an investigation made possible by the unambiguous assignment of orthologous gene pairs.

we observe that two orthologous pairs, yub.2-mus.a <dig>  and yuc.1-mus.b <dig> , exhibit greater non-synonymous than synonymous substitution rates . this observation is consistent with adaptive selection acting on these pairs since the musculus-spretus split. selection for new amino acids in these v1r proteins could indicate divergence from ancestral functions, and therefore, these v1rs might contribute to additional functional delineation between the two species. it is important to note that with so few nucleotide substitutions accumulated between these orthologs , ds/dn ratios can be misleading due to small sample sizes. for example, we cannot assert that the ds/dn ratio for the yub.2-mus.a <dig> pair is significantly different than neutrality , a possibility if one or both genes have become cryptic pseudogenes . the argument for adaptive selection between yuc.1-mus.b <dig> is much more compelling, where  <dig> of  <dig> observed mutations have caused amino acid changes.

in order to assess the possible biological significance of amino acid substitutions observed in these two v1r gene pairs, we mapped mutations onto predicted protein structures. we compared these locations to other gene pairs presumed to be under purifying selection  . non-synonymous mutations in the six v1r pairs presumed to be under purifying selection have accumulated more frequently within transmembrane domain- <dig> , tm <dig>  and the intracellular loop between tm <dig> and tm <dig>  non-synonymous mutations in yub.2-mus.a <dig> and yuc.1-mus.b <dig>  the two v1r pairs postulated to be under positive selection, also exhibit a bias for accumulation within the intracellular loop between tm <dig> and tm <dig>  but exhibit a greater incidence of amino acid change in tm <dig> and tm <dig>  three non-synonymous mutations  have accumulated within tm <dig> , whereas no amino acid substitutions are observed in this transmembrane domain among the other intact genes . five non-synonymous mutations  have accumulated within tm <dig> , whereas only one amino acid substitution is observed in this transmembrane domain among the other intact genes . interestingly, previous analysis of mouse-rat gene pairs indicated a paucity of non-synonymous mutations within tm <dig> and tm <dig>  <cit> , raising the possibility that different regions of the v1r structure adapted during the mouse-rat split than during the musculus-spretus split.

the size  of predicted domains structures  and the locations of the  <dig> most conserved amino-acid residues in rodent v1r proteins are shown. the incidence of non-synonymous mutations in six orthologous gene pairs  with ds/dn >  <dig>  were compared to two orthologous gene pairs  with ds/dn <  <dig> . numbers shown are the incidence of occurrence  within a particular structural domain .

at higher resolution, we observe an interesting mutational trend for yub.2-mus.a <dig> and yuc.1-mus.b2: a tendency to accumulate non-synonymous substitutions immediately adjacent to the most universally conserved amino acid residues . assuming a random distribution, we would expect a 21% incidence of amino acid changes immediately adjacent  to the  <dig> most well-conserved residues . this expectation is slightly greater than what we observe for six gene pairs presumed to be evolving under purifying selection . in contrast, 35%  of the amino acid changes in yub.2-mus.a <dig> and yuc.1-mus.b <dig> occur immediately adjacent to these well-conserved residues. note that only in one of these eight cases did the well-conserved amino acid itself change, therefore this bias would appear to have more to do with modulating rather than eliminating the function of these conserved residues. analysis of a larger sample size when additional mus spretus v1r sequences become available are required to further evaluate the significance of these observations, and elucidation of the physiological significance of these amino acid changes awaits structure-function and ligand-binding studies.

CONCLUSIONS
we have generated ~ <dig> kb of genome sequence encompassing a v1r putative pheromone receptor locus  in mus spretus. the genome features of this locus resemble the syntenic locus in mus musculus, including a comparable number of v1r genes with little evidence for gene duplication/deletion, organized in a comparably sized region flanked by the same non-v1r genes on either side. these two mouse v1r loci also exhibit a similar high density of line repeat content that appears to have predominantly integrated just before and since the mouse-rat split. although disruptions in synteny are largely accounted for by the presence/absence of line repeat content in one or the other lineage, these lines appear to be too old to have integrated by retrotransposition since the musculus-spretus split, and thus, seem to have either arrived by other mechanisms or been lost in one of the lineages. therefore, line integrations and v1r gene birth/death processes are not characteristics of the divergence between musculus and spretus, in contrast to the previous observations made for mouse and rat. instead, functional v1r repertoires in musculus and spretus appear to have diverged by adaptive evolution in which complementary v1r subsets have deleted along the two lineages and specific orthologs appear to be subject to diversifying selection and gene conversion. while the evolutionary paths differ, the outcome is similar among mouse and rat species: nearly half of the mouse v1r repertoire  have been subject to dynamic modulation, consistent with the hypothesis that even very closely related species, such as mus musculus and mus spretus that are separated by roughly ~ one million years, have evolved species-specific chemosensory functions.

