BACKGROUND
the ancestry of all living land plants  can be traced back to a single colonization event from a charophyte green alga. in other words, the tremendous diversity we see in land plants today--from mosses to redwoods and orchids--all descended from a single common ancestor that colonized land 430- <dig> million years ago  <cit> . uncertainty remains concerning the precise relationships between embryophytes and their algal relatives  <cit> , but there is no serious doubt that the origin of land plants occurred from within the charophytes. there are six orders of charophyte green algae that, when embryophytes are included, comprise the streptophyta sensu lato   <cit> : the mesostigmatales, chlorokybales, klebsormidiales, zygnematales, coleochaetales and charales. both phylogenetic and fossil evidence suggest that these orders are extremely old lineages, comparable in age to the land plants  <cit> . therefore, an understanding of the biology of land plants based on comparative genomics would benefit greatly if data were available from these organisms. unfortunately, in most cases the genome size is poorly characterized, the tools of molecular genetics are not well developed, or cultures are difficult to maintain. consequently, the acquisition of genomic data from these organisms has lagged other lineages. to move toward comprehensive genomic analysis of charophytes, we undertook est analysis of two representative charophytes, spirogyra pratensis and coleochaete orbicularis.

despite there being significant genomic resources available for the broader group of green algae, including chlorophyta, there is only one published est library to date that directly bears on the charophytes, that of mesostigma viride  <cit> . mesostigma is a unicellular, monotypic genus that in some analyses is placed as sister to the rest of streptophytes  <cit> , although other studies have placed it as a sister to all other green algae  <cit> . in either case, its est library is a valuable resource for this study. most taxonomic and ecological diversity in the green algae resides in the chlorophyta, a large clade sister to the streptophytes. among the important organisms in this sister clade are the model organism chlamydomonas reinhardtii and the ecologically significant ostreococcus tauri. both of these organisms have fully sequenced and published genomes  <cit> .

according to darwin's centralizing theme of descent with modification, one would predict that all land plant genes should have a homolog in the charophytes unless there was horizontal gene transfer from a non-plant organism, or unprecedented neofunctionalization. however, any one lineage of charophytes might be expected to have lost or modified some of these in the  <dig> million years or more of independent evolutionary history that separates each lineage from embryophytes. in this context, it is to be expected that land plant genes and their associated molecular pathways either originated in the charophytes or, if more ancient, were retained along these green algal lineages leading up to the colonization of land. thus, it is important to sample broadly among the charophytes if the homologs of key embryophyte genes are to be identified.

in recent years pcr-based approaches have been used to fish out specific land plant genes of interest in the charophyte lineages, but advances in sequencing technologies have now made it far more efficient to gather high-throughput genomic data and work backwards, using plant gene models to annotate the putative homologous genes. sequencing expressed sequence tags  is an efficient first pass at gathering a large portion of the genomic coding regions. we undertook here an analysis of two distantly related charophyte taxa: spirogyra pratensis transeau  and coleochaete orbicularis pringh. . both of these lineages are essential to understanding the placement of land plants in the context of their nearest living green algal relatives. in addition, evidence of land plant molecular pathways, such as the ethylene response pathway, in the charophytes would reveal the origins of key plant molecular processes.

RESULTS
est statistics
our sequencing effort for spirogyra pratensis yielded  <dig>  5' sanger reads plus  <dig>  gs flx standard  <dig> sequences; coleochaete orbicularis yielded  <dig>  5' sanger reads plus  <dig>  gs flx titanium  <dig> sequences . the average length of sanger sequences was  <dig> bp  or  <dig>  bp  before trimming for low quality and vector sequence. the average length for the raw  <dig> reads differed between the older gs flx standard and newer gs flx titanium sequencing technologies of  <dig> and  <dig> bp, respectively. the  <dig> sequences for each species were trimmed of vector and low-quality sequences, and then clustered by agencourt. the  <dig> assembly along with the raw sanger reads were then clustered together using our in-house pipeline . this two-stage clustering method reduced the demand on computational power for the final assembly . it also allowed for careful tracking of each sequencing effort contributing to the final assembly. the average length of unigenes  in the combined  <dig> and sanger sequence assembly was  <dig> bp for c. orbicularis and  <dig> for s. pratensis.

summarizing the composition of the clustered ests is complex due to our two-step assembly procedure  . results from the coleochaete orbicularis cap <dig> assembly produced  <dig> unigenes:  <dig>  contigs and  <dig>  singletons with the average length of contigs at  <dig>  bp and singletons at less than half of that at  <dig> bp. the spirogyra pratensis-combined assembly resulted in  <dig>  unigenes:  <dig>  contigs  and  <dig>  singletons . the singletons category actually comprised several types of data: 454-only contigs from the first assembly, single  <dig> reads and single sanger reads. most of the singletons were in fact 454-only contigs for both est libraries . the number of reads per unigene was low on average, with the vast majority of unigenes comprising only one to five reads . a few contigs had higher numbers of reads, the most numerous being one s. pratensis contig with  <dig> reads.

because ests are, by definition, sequences derived from messenger rna, it follows that they should all contain at least a portion of protein-coding sequence, but several forms of contamination are possible. our sequencing effort included 5' sanger sequencing plus  <dig> sequencing, which is generated from sequencing shorter reads from sheared cloned inserts. due to this strategy, we expected to recover the 5'  utr and some portion of the coding sequence. however, in addition to mrna, there is a chance of contamination in the est library from non-coding nucleic acids, such as rrna, trna and genomic dna. these contaminants were removed from the final unigene set after estscan determined the putative coding regions in the sequences. by definition only the putative protein coding sequences were included in the final unigene set. out of  <dig>  total unigenes in spirogyra pratensis, 25%, or  <dig> , had no coding region detected. coleochaete orbicularis had a lower percentage of non-coding contaminants, at 16%, or  <dig>  sequences in which no protein-coding region was detected.

taxonomic assignment
although every attempt was made to produce axenic cultures, including streaking and isolation off agar plates, antibiotic treatments, and zoospore isolation, we settled on "very clean" cultures. because of this we anticipated a few contaminants based on low bacterial contamination observed when we grew the culture on agar plates. for this reason, the unigenes  were blasted against the ncbi non-redundant  nucleotide database using blastx for taxonomic lineage assignment. eight major taxonomic categories were recovered as top hits for each spirogyra pratensis and coleochaete orbicularis: archaea, viruses, bacteria, fungi, chlorophyta, streptophyta, various other eukaryotes, and unigenes with no significant hits . the proportion of hits for each species was very similar and therefore will be summarized together. about 10% of hits were possible contaminants  and roughly 2-3% were hits to the other lineage of green algae, chlorophyta . the remaining ~85% were split fairly evenly between the top hit being a streptophyte  or no hits returned at all . a significant percentage of ests received no hits at all: 41% and 48% for s. pratensis and c. orbicularis, respectively. in this class of unknown unigenes, a significant portion of the sequences did not contain a protein prediction using estscan  <cit> . about half of the spirogyra "no hits" and one-third in the coleochaete "no hits" category were not included in the predicted protein set of unigenes, which means they are most likely a mixture of genomic and non-coding rna contaminants. that leaves about 20% and 28% of putative novel genes in s. pratensis and c. orbicularis, respectively.

because genbank does not have uniform taxon sampling across the tree of life, it is important not to place too much significance on the blast based lineage assignment for the unigenes. for example, a small fraction of hits to metazoan taxa  most likely represents either a conserved protein domain or an ancestral gene lost in land plants, and not a metazoan contaminant. likewise, blast hits to bacteria and fungi, unless evaluated individually, should be treated with caution. on the contrary, this means that up to 10% of the ests from each of these species could be derived from bacterial and fungal contaminants and not from the charophyte for which it's assigned. the analyses in this manuscript were largely focused on the unigenes that had similarity to land plant genomes, so it is unlikely that contaminant unigenes affected any of our major conclusions.

orthologous genes
the results of the lineage assignment introduced the question of how many genes in each est library are actually shared with chlorophytes vs. streptophytes. to address this question, the protein predicted unigenes for coleochaete orbicularis and spirogyra pratensis, plus complete proteins from chlamydomonas reinhardtii  and arabidopsis thaliana  were included in an all-vs-all pair-wise blastp. the reciprocal best hits  between any two, three or four species were interpreted to be orthologs if all pair-wise possibilities in the ortholog set were each other's reciprocal best hit. all rbh overlaps are displayed in a venn diagram . the total number of unigenes  for each species can be obtained by adding up all the numbers in the respective ovals. for example, a set of  <dig> unigenes are rbhs for all four species. a different set of  <dig> unigenes are rbhs for the charophytes + chlamydomonas, but not for arabidopsis.

although there are many overlaps to report, the most interesting results from this analysis concerns the overlap between our species of interest and its overlap with chlorophytes vs. streptophytes. looking at pair-wise comparisons only, c. orbicularis shares  <dig>  orthologs with arabidopsis vs.  <dig> with chlamydomonas. spirogyra pratensis has a similar pattern, with  <dig>  shared arabidopsis orthologs and  <dig> shared chlamydomonas orthologs. this pattern holds up with three-way rbhs: c. orbicularis + s. pratensis share  <dig> orthologs with arabidopsis verses  <dig> with chlamydomonas. 

a list of genes hypothesized to be important in early land plant colonization, or "green genes," was generated from graham et al.  <cit> . each of these genes had at least one hit between the two libraries, except for the mads domain, which had no hits in either library . the following genes had at least one hit in both coleochaete orbicularis and spirogyra pratensis: rsw <dig> , gem1/mor <dig> , ctr <dig> , and meristem layer <dig> . wuschel and gnom  were only found in c. orbicularis and the expansins were only found in s. pratensis. a moss  and a chlorophyte  were included as references. although all of these are significant blast "hits"  they can only be interpreted as genes of interest. any orthology determination would need a more vigerous follow-up analysis.

cdss of noted genes were blasted against protein databases of two reference genomes, physcomitrella patens and chlamydomonas reinhartii, and our two charophytes, coleochaete orbicularis and spirogyra pratensis. only blastx hits below e- <dig> are reported.

gene ontology
the gene ontology  categories recovered from blast2go analyses were summarized by the proportion of unigenes annotated in each go level  <dig> category . the complete set of proteins for arabidopsis thaliana was included in the analysis as a relative proportional measure since the go assignments were all derived from a. thaliana annotations. overall, spirogyra pratensis and coleochaete orbicularis unigene sets were remarkably similar in relative proportions, but they deviated from a. thaliana in several categories. three categories stood out in biological processes : both green algae were underrepresented in cellular metabolic process and regulation of biological quality , but they were overrepresented in the biosynthetic processes category . for molecular function , the green algae unigenes were overrepresented in transferase activity , hydrolase activity  and nucleotide binding , but they were underrepresented in the transcription factor activity  and in oxidoreductase activity categories . for cellular compartment  annotations, the green algae unigenes were slightly over-represented in many categories, but deviated most drastically in their underrepresentation in membrane and intracellular organelle part categories .

discussion
both charophyte est libraries are very land plant-like. more specifically, most of the transcriptome is more similar to embryophytes  than to other green algae in the chlorophyte lineage . there are some exceptions, however, which are interesting. looking just at blast hits against ncbi's non-redundant  protein database, 2%  and 3%  of the transcriptome had a top hit to a chlorophyte in spirogyra and coleochaete, respectively. while this is only a small fraction of total unigenes, it suggests possible shared ancestral genes between the chlorophyte and streptophyte lineages that were lost along the land plant lineage. for example, there are flagellar-associated proteins in both spirogyra  and coleochaete  that have top blast hits to chlamydomonas and ostreococcus, but that have no hits to arabidopsis or any other land plant. plants lost their flagellate cells in the gymnosperms, which left angiosperms with no motile cells. it follows that the flagellar-associated proteins would also be lost in flowering plants, infact, analysis of the much more ancestral moss genome revealed a loss of flagaller associated genes  <cit>  that are found in other green algal and animal genomes <cit> . the fact that there are no significant land plant hits suggests that these proteins were lost or underwent substantial sequence divergence in the early land plants. also interesting is the mere presence of flagellar-associated proteins in spirogyra, which lacks motile cells entirely. containing genes for an absent structure further supports the evolutionary placement of this lineage as being derived from flagellate ancestors. an earlier hypothesis had the zygnematales grouped with other non-flagellate organisms in a separate phylum defined by lack of motility  <cit> , which our data clearly reject.

the overwhelming similarity to land plants also is revealed in a separate analysis in the identification of orthologous genes between our two green algae, chlamydomonas and arabidopsis, as shown in the venn diagram . the charophytes share two to three times as many orthologs with arabidopsis than they do with chlamydomonas. both the blast analysis and the ortholog identification reinforce the overall similarity between these lineages of green algae and land plants. of course, a robust phylogeny of any given gene is needed before firm conclusions can be made regarding its gain or loss along the plant lineage. the point here is that even a simple blast analysis or ortholog identification can reveal key genes to target for follow-up study.

there are a large number of putative novel genes in both est libraries . the term 'novel' is being used here to refer to genes with no obvious similarity to a model-organism sequence: i.e. new to scientists, not necessarily to the charophytes. we are classifying the unigenes as novel if they satisfy two criteria: they contain a protein-coding region predicted by estscan  <cit>  and no blast hits returned against the ncbi non-redundant protein database. the closest fully sequenced genomes to the charophytes at the time of this publication are several embryophyte genomes, including physcomitrella patens and arabidopsis thaliana  and chlamydomonas or ostreococcus in the chlorophyte lineage   <cit> . because of the relative distance between charophytes and their nearest sequenced organisms, it is not surprising that they would contain genes with no obvious similarity to the current published genome-scale sequences. there are two alternative explanations for the enlarged amount of "ests without blast hits". first, the short sequences may represent non-conserved portions of genes, and, second, independent  <dig> sequence stretches may correspond to the same novel gene, but they do not overlap due to their limited sequence length. this last caveat would apply across the entire set of clustered set of ests for both species. aside from these concerns, most of these novel sequences do appear to be unique, at least within the available data. a pair-wise blast between the s. pratensis and c. orbicularis sets of novel unigenes only revealed a small amount of overlap: out of  <dig>  s. pratensis novel genes, only  <dig> had a hit in c. orbicularis. in addition, the reciprocal blast revealed only  <dig> hits in the reverse direction. none were reciprocal best hits.

the gene ontology analysis presents a summary of transcript diversity relative to the annotated gene diversity in arabidopsis. where there are significant differences in the proportion of genes in a category, the determination cannot be made whether there were fewer genes expressed or that there are actually fewer genes encoded in the genome--and the same goes for the relative over-expression. the observation that both charophyte green algal ests were so proportionally similar in their gene expression categories suggests that we are not missing any major class of gene expression and that we have captured a fairly wide range of transcript diversity representing the source genome's diversity. spirogyra and coleochaete are separated in evolutionary time by 500- <dig> million years and they do not share a similar gross morphology. but the fact that they are so alike in transcript proportion, as compared to a flowering plant, is interesting in terms of their evolutionary placement in the streptophyte lineage. the green algae showed significant difference with respect to arabidopsis in most go categories, but only a few were markedly divergent.

the under representation of charophyte genes in some of the biological process categories  is not surprising. although biological complexity is not easily defined, it seems clear that embryophytes have a larger number of cell types and are adapted to a wider range of environmental conditions than are charophyte algae, and consequently would be expected to have a higher proportion of genes expressed in categories involving organismal complexity. both charophytes were significantly underrepresented in their proportion of cellular metabolic process transcripts compared to arabidopsis. according to the gene ontology consortium's  description of this category --the chemical reactions and pathways by which individual cells form chemical substances  <cit> --it stands to reason that the diversity and abundance of transcripts in this class would be higher in an organism with more diverse cell types, such as the flowering plant taxon, arabidopsis. the same interpretation goes for other underrepresented categories including cell communication, response to endogenous stimulus and regulation of biological quality. the latter category had the most extreme underrepresentation of the biological processes categories and consequently may be one of the more interesting categories in the study of the origin of land plants. biological quality is defined by goc as "a measurable attribute of an organism or part of an organism, such as size, mass, shape, color, etc." the charophyte transcripts annotated to this category were similar to genes involved in cell shape, such as diminuto  <cit> , and various expansins  <cit> . it is logical to expect that the proportion of genes associated with cell quality would increase with organism complexity and our results are consistent with this prediction.

the explanation becomes less clear in cases where there is overrepresentation of charophyte genes in a given biological process category relative to arabidopsis. because we are comparing proportions of genes present and not the actual number found, it is possible that there might be a greater number of genes in arabidopsis compared to one of the charophytes. but the proportion relative to the other categories is lower in our analysis. that said, one of the more extreme overrepresentations  of charophyte genes occurs in the biosynthetic process category, which is defined by "the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances; typically the energy-requiring part of metabolism in which simpler substances are transformed into more complex ones"  <cit> . examples of charophyte genes that are annotated in this category are ribosomal proteins, ef-1-alpha-related gtp-binding proteins, replication proteins, translation initiation factors and atp binding proteins. these are all core functioning genes and therefore are not expected to diversify with increasing complexity. it is likely the case that the charophyte transcriptomes contain a larger proportion of core functioning genes when compared to arabidopsis, simply because they are lacking diversity in the other classes. another way to look at it is that coleochaete and spirogyra cells are analogous to plant parenchyma and are enriched for the kinds of metabolic processes that occur in parenchyma, and not due to any trend towards increasing diversity of genes in charophyte biosynthetic processes. this probably also holds true in the photosynthesis category, where both charophytes show a significant overrepresentation of genes relative to arabidopsis. an alternative hypothesis would be that, lacking structural complexity, charophytes have evolved a broader range of biochemical responses to the environment. as with most est studies, we cannot rule out the possibility that the apparent over-representation might be a sampling artifact due to non-normalized cdna or incomplete coverage.

ontology by cellular compartment  reveals one extreme difference in the membrane category whereby the charophytes are extremely underrepresented. it follows that parenchymatous tissue  would involve an increased level of cell-to-cell communication requiring many more membrane proteins than would a filamentous organism, like spirogyra, or a two-dimensional disk-shaped form, like coleochaete.

ultimately, we are interested in specific genes that allowed a lineage of charophytes to colonize land so successfully and give rise to land plants. because the experimental approach was a survey, and because the work reported here constitutes just a part of the overall effort to gather transcriptome data for all of the charophyte orders, we are highlighting genes of interest to follow up for further study. it is encouraging that most of the genes identified by graham et al.  <cit>  as likely to have been important in the colonization of the land have solid hits and perhaps even true orthologs in both coleochaete orbicularis and spirogyra pratensis . a couple of the more interesting genes associated with asymmetric cell division  have hits in coleochaete, but not spirogyra. this is consistent with the morphology of the organisms; spirogyra, an unbranched, filamentous alga does not have asymmetric cell division, but coleochaete definitely does. no significant blast hits of the graham et al. genes were found in the ests of the earliest diverging streptophyte, mesostigma virde. another interesting finding is the presence of ethylene biosynthesis and signalling pathway genes , long thought to be unique to land plants. this finding suggests that ethylene might be utilized in the charophytes. wang et al.  <cit>  showed that chara spp.  showed ethylene binding activity similar to that of land plants, so it is not too surprising that these genes should be present in other charophyte lineages. however, to the best of our knowledge, evidence of ethylene-signalling genes in charophytes has not been shown before this study.

* indicates the ethylene binding domain  is present in the blast hit.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed est data from two species of charophyte green alga, spirogyra pratensis and coleochaete orbicularis as a first step toward complete genome analyses. algal cultures were grown and collected in various life stages as well as at different times during the day. all of these factors were part of an effort to maximize the total number of transcripts available for each pulled est library. we combined both sanger and  <dig> sequencing technologies to obtain as much sequence coverage as possible. both of the resulting est libraries gave a nice diversity of transcripts , with the  <dig> sequences contributing to most of that transcript diversity. this is especially pronounced when looking at the sequencing source of the singletons: sanger reads only contributed a small fraction of the total singletons in both est libraries , and the  <dig> data alone covered most of the sequences obtained by sanger sequencing. although there have been just a few  <dig> transcriptome sequencing efforts to date  <cit> , our results suggest that for studies of this type,  <dig> sequencing alone could largely replace traditional sanger sequencing. in summary, the specific genes we mention in this paper , along with the gene ontology analysis and ortholog identification, reinforce our finding of the overall genomic similarity that these two charophytes have to land plants.

