BACKGROUND
natural populations of numerous species are currently threatened by anthropogenic environmental changes such as habitat loss, chemical pollution, and invasive species. one of the factors with wide ecological effects is global climate change . climate change is a major threat for the earth’s biodiversity, and the persistence of many populations will depend on their ability to respond to changing climatic conditions by means of  range shifts,  phenotypic plasticity, and/or  evolutionary adaptations. of these, evolutionary adaptations are potentially of very high importance since climate change imposes intensified and novel selective pressures on organisms. this is true even in the case of range shifts and phenotypic plasticity because first, individuals that disperse into new areas are likely to experience altered selection owing to, for instance, different photoperiod  and species interactions   <cit> . second, phenotypic plasticity is unlikely to be optimal outside those environmental conditions under which it evolved  <cit>  and it may be costly, with negative fitness effects  <cit> .

a necessary prerequisite for evolutionary change by means of natural selection is within-population heritable genetic variation in the traits subject to selection. typically, fitness-related traits are considered to show heritable variation and thus evolutionary potential in nature  <cit> . this is also the case with some of the traits examined under climate-change mediated selection since phenological traits often show significant heritability . studies on key defence traits against altered climatic conditions , however, indicate limited or even complete lack of genetic variation . furthermore, even if the traits under selection are heritable, the expression of genetic variation in them may be environment-dependent so that genetic variation found under benign environmental conditions is reduced in challenging environments  <cit> . thus, if environmental change that leads to strong selection also reduces the expression of genetic variation, this will limit its expected response to selection  <cit> . similarly, the strength and/or sign of genetic covariation among traits may change  <cit> , which could also affect trait evolution under climate change conditions  <cit> .

so far, few empirical studies have examined genetic variation in organisms’ performance in relation to changing climatic conditions , and they have focused on a limited set of traits . therefore, a need to investigate adaptability to climate change across a broader range of traits as well as organisms remains. it is especially important to consider evolutionary potential in life-history traits and defences against natural enemies  since they can strongly influence organisms’ fitness both directly and through species interactions. here, we experimentally examined within-population genetic variation at family level in such traits at typical and heat wave temperatures as well as in their thermal reaction norms between the temperature treatments in a freshwater snail, lymnaea stagnalis. we chose to focus on heat waves since their increasing frequency and severity has been suggested to have an even greater impact on natural populations than the gradual increase in average temperatures . we quantified snail size, fecundity and immune function because of their high importance for fitness and their potential to alter species interactions . using multiple traits also allowed us to test environment-dependence of family-level covariation among them.

RESULTS
snails exposed to 25 °c were larger at the end of the study compared to snails maintained at 15 °c . they were also more likely to oviposit  and they produced a higher number of eggs . snail size and the number of oviposited eggs also showed significant family-level variation . their responses to the high temperature were, however, consistent across families, indicated by statistically non-significant interaction terms between temperature and family  and mainly parallel reaction norms between the temperature treatments .table  <dig> anovas for shell length, number of oviposited eggs, and immune parameters

f
p

at × f as the error term

factors are water temperature , family , and block . the effect size ƞ <dig> shows the proportion of total variance explained by each factor


fig.  <dig> shell length  of l. stagnalis snails. estimated marginal means  for  <dig> families after maintained in two temperature treatments  for seven days. families are arranged according to their rank order  at 15 °c, and they are connected between the treatments using reaction norms


fig.  <dig> number of eggs oviposited by l. stagnalis snails. estimated marginal means  for  <dig> families after maintained in two temperature treatments  for seven days. families are arranged according to their rank order  at 15 °c, and they are connected between the treatments using reaction norms




exposure to 25 °c reduced snail immune defences . however, examined immune parameters differed in their responses to temperature . haemocyte concentration of snail haemolymph did not differ between snails maintained at 25 °c and 15 °c, while po-like activity and antibacterial activity were reduced at the high temperature . we found significant family-level variation in all immune traits . furthermore, family-level variation in po-like activity interacted with temperature, indicated by a significant family-by-temperature  interaction  and crossing reaction norms between the treatments . this suggests genetic variation in the response of snails to high temperatures in this trait.fig.  <dig> immune activity of l. stagnalis snails.  haemocyte concentration ,  phenoloxidase -like activity , and  antibacterial activity  in  <dig> families after maintained in two temperature treatments  for seven days. families are arranged according to their rank order  at 15 °c, and they are connected between the treatments using reaction norms




at 15 °c, we found significant positive genetic correlations between snail shell length and po-like activity as well as between shell length and the number of oviposited eggs . at 25 °c, the relationship between shell length and po-like activity was non-significant while the observed positive genetic correlation between shell length and the number of oviposited eggs remained . furthermore, haemocyte concentration and po-like activity were positively, and the number of oviposited eggs and antibacterial activity were negatively correlated at 25 °c . the observed family-level variation/covariation in the examined traits was unlikely to be due to differences in neutral genetic variation since snail families did not differ in heterozygosity, estimated using microsatellite markers .table  <dig> genetic correlations  between shell length, number of oviposited eggs, and immune parameters

 <dig> *** 
 <dig>  
 <dig> ** 
− <dig>  
− <dig>  
 <dig>  
 <dig>  
− <dig>  
− <dig>  
− <dig>  
estimates are calculated separately at 15 °c  and 25 °c . significance levels : * p <  <dig> , ** p <  <dig> , *** p <  <dig> 




discussion
on-going global climate change poses a serious threat for natural populations unless they are able to evolutionarily adapt to changing environmental conditions  <cit> . we examined family-level variation and covariation in life history and immune defence traits in a laboratory stock of a natural population of the freshwater snail l. stagnalis at typical  and heat wave  temperatures, as well as family-level variation in the responses of these traits to the high temperature . exposure to 25 °c increased size and reproductive output of snails while immune defence  was reduced. we found high family-level variation in all examined traits in both temperature treatments. the observed genetic correlations among traits were mainly positive. one negative genetic correlation  was found at 25 °c. these findings suggest that high temperatures may not strongly reduce the potential of the examined traits to respond to natural selection. however, the responses of most traits to the high temperature were similar across snail families, indicated by parallel reaction norms. only the negative effect of the high temperature on one immune defence trait  showed family-level variation, which indicates that for some families the cost of exposure to high temperatures is lower and hence could be selected for.

temperature-induced phenotypic changes in fitness-related traits are common in nature . the observed increase in the reproduction and size of snails when exposed to elevated temperatures is also found in other ectotherms . these effects are most likely due to high metabolic activity, which can increase the amount of resources allocated to reproduction and growth  <cit> . the observed decrease in immune activity at the high temperature is also in line with the results from other taxa  and may be due to altered resource allocation towards growth and reproduction rather than immune defence . variation in the responses of different immune parameters to high temperatures  could be a result of the other functions of some immune traits beside defence , which could change the hierarchy of resource allocation among them .

we found high family-level variation, suggesting genetic variation and thus adaptive potential in all examined traits in both temperature treatments. it is important to note that in studies utilising maternal sibships, such variation could arise not only due to additive genetic variance but also due to dominance variance and/or non-genetic maternal effects . in our study system, however, the latter effects have been reported to be very weak in determining the variation in the examined traits  <cit> . in studies conducted using other organisms, the effect of challenging environmental conditions on the amount of genetic variation in key life history traits in natural populations has been shown to vary  <cit> . however, most studies have reported only limited genetic variation in growth and reproduction of organisms under harsh environmental conditions . this indicates that lack of adaptive potential could prevent evolutionary responses to climate-mediated selection in many species. for instance, in drosophila, especially species with narrow geographical distribution show very little genetic variation in desiccation and cold resistance  <cit> . in other taxa, also widely distributed species show genetic limitations for evolutionary responses  <cit> . possible reasons for this are, among others, local adaptation, bottleneck events, or historical events of strong directional selection  <cit> .

in our study, genetic correlations between the examined traits indicated a genetic trade-off only between reproduction and antibacterial activity of haemolymph. interestingly, this negative genetic correlation appeared only at the high temperature. the emergence of trade-offs when exposed to challenging conditions could be due to resources becoming scarce when protection and repair mechanisms are activated, which can lead to allocation trade-offs among traits  <cit> . a potential evolutionary consequence of such environment-dependent trade-offs is limited responses of traits to selection under climate change  <cit> . in this study, negative genetic correlations were scarce, and thus adaptation processes at high temperatures may not be significantly limited by trade-offs in this system. it is, however, possible that the examined traits are traded off with some other traits.

in spite of high family-level variation in the examined traits, genetic variation in their responses to the high temperature was limited . this is in line with studies on birds that found plastic responses, but little evidence for heritability of the slope of thermal reaction norms for reproductive traits such as laying date and clutch size, which indicates limited potential for temperature-mediated evolutionary responses in these traits . however, in other studies, genetic variation in thermal reaction norms for life history traits  is found and is suggested to provide the genetic potential for adaptive responses to high temperatures . we found family-level variation in the response of snails to a heat wave temperature only in one of the examined immune traits . this suggests that the price snails need to pay for increased size and reproduction by compromising immune defence may be variable across individuals with different genetic backgrounds and thus show adaptive potential. therefore, families experiencing the lowest costs may be selected for.

CONCLUSIONS

l. stagnalis snails responded to an experimental heat wave by increasing reproduction and size while reducing expression of immune defence traits. most of these traits showed high family-level variation at both control and heat wave temperatures. however, responses to the high temperature were similar in most traits across different families . only po-like activity showed family-level variation in reaction norms between temperatures, which suggests that the cost snails need to pay for increased reproduction and size shows genetic variation and thus potential for adaptive evolution. the only genetic trade-off was found at the high temperature. thus, our results suggest abundant adaptive potential in the examined traits, but only limited genetic variation in their thermal reaction norms.

