BACKGROUND
therapeutic hiv vaccine clinical trials typically involve the collection of whole blood specimens from hiv+ patients at multiple study sites, and the shipment of collected samples to a central location for pbmc isolation and evaluation  <cit> . generally, clinical researchers prefer to harvest and cryopreserve pbmc from blood samples collected at pre-determined time points, and perform assays at a later date or after a number of samples have been accumulated. cryopreservation and the evaluation of samples at a central location have become standard procedures for minimizing operator dependent variability and to improve the precision and accuracy of immunoassays  <cit> . there are two typical whole blood collection options available to clinical investigators,  collection in evacuation type/vacutainer® tubes and  collection in vacutainer® cpt™ . with collection method , samples are collected and shipped to a central location for pbmc isolation using ficoll density gradient separation, while with collection method  whole blood samples are collected, and processed by centrifugation at the collection site, and then shipped to a central location for pbmc recovery.

previous studies have shown that many factors can have an effect on t cell functional responses including shipment, storage, sample age, cryopreservation, and thawing  <cit> . some of these studies conclude that immunophenotyping, proliferation assays and functional assays should only be done on fresh samples  <cit> , while others  <cit>  have determined that use of frozen pbmc is a feasible option for monitoring of immune function. therefore, for studies involving t cell responses as a measure of immune function, it is desirable to know that pbmc samples are processed and handled in a manner that will not degrade the ability of the cells to respond to activation stimuli. it is likewise important that enough viable cells are available after pbmc isolation and/or cryopreservation to perform the desired studies and that the processing method not be technically complex. compared to cpt-processing, ficoll density gradient separation is typically a more labor-intensive process requiring an operator with more technical expertise and as such, could result in operator variability with regard to cellular recovery. thus, to determine if cpt-processed samples can be used as a standard replacement for ficoll-processed samples, we compared the two pbmc collection and processing methods, using whole blood specimens from  <dig> hiv+ patients that were shipped to a central location, to ascertain if one method had a significantly different effect on viability, recovery and t lymphocyte responses in antigen specific functional assays than the other method. since cryopreservation of patient samples has become a standard practice in many clinical trials, the effect of cryopreservation of pbmc collected by both methods was also evaluated in this study.

RESULTS
to evaluate the effects of cpt and ficoll processing on hiv+ blood specimens, the study was designed as depicted in the flow chart in figure  <dig> 

cellular viability
viability of the pbmc was assessed immediately after pbmc preparation  and again immediately after thawing . the median viability of ficoll-processed fresh pbmc was significantly higher than that of ficoll-processed cryopreserved pbmc . there were no significant differences between cpt-processed fresh or cryopreserved pbmc. viability of ficoll-processed fresh pbmc was significantly higher compared to cpt-processed fresh pbmc . the viability of cryopreserved pbmc was always greater than 90% for both processing methods and the differences in viability of the cryopreserved pbmc prepared by either method were not significant.

cellular recovery
there were no significant differences between the recoveries  of fresh or cryopreserved pbmc processed using ficoll or cpt. the mean number of viable cells recovered from cpt-processed fresh pbmc was  <dig>  ×  <dig> viable cells/ml of blood and the mean yield of ficoll-processed fresh pbmc was  <dig>  ×  <dig> viable cells/ml of blood . the median recovery of viable pbmc after cryopreservation  was equivalent for cpt-processed  and ficoll-processed  samples .

functional responses to antigen
the functionality of cd <dig> positive  t cells, as measured by ifnγ expression, in fresh or cryopreserved pbmc, processed by both methods was not significantly different when stimulated with cmv-pp <dig> peptide mix  or hiv-p <dig> peptide mix . the functionality of cd <dig> negative  t cells was significantly different  between cpt-processed and ficoll-processed fresh pbmc for cmv-pp <dig> peptide mix activation with the overall cpt-processed response being higher than that of the ficoll-processed. after cryopreservation there was no significant difference between the methods . there were no significant differences for hiv-p <dig> peptide mix activation in the fresh or after cryopreservation comparisons within the cd8- group .

discussion
the immunological monitoring of antigen-specific t cell responses is becoming a commonly used assessment tool for therapeutic hiv trials  <cit>  and as such, standardization of sample handling and control of assay variables have become an important necessity. in an effort to minimize operator and inter-assay variability, and improve precision and accuracy, clinical specimens from hiv+ patients are typically collected at different sites and sent to a central location for processing and testing  <cit> . this also facilitates the accumulation and archiving of samples  for testing at a future time. archiving of samples is a desirable study feature, especially when single-cell assays, such as cytokine flow cytometry  are used. staining multiple samples, accumulated over time, from the same donor can potentially minimize within-donor variability, and can also provide a means for avoiding time or operator related staining inconsistencies. therefore it is desirable to know that samples are handled in a manner that will not compromise the ability of the cells to respond to activation stimuli, that the viability of the cells is not significantly altered, and that enough cells are recovered to perform the desired assays. this study represents an analysis of the effects of pbmc processing method and cryopreservation on viability, recovery and functional response of hiv seropositive whole blood samples. specimens from  <dig> hiv+ donors were shipped to a central location for processing and analysis. since cryopreservation and thawing can have deleterious effects on the viability, recovery and function of pbmc  <cit> , a consensus cryopreservation method  <cit>  was used for all samples. the same individual performed all pmbc processing , counting, cryopreservation, functional assays, staining, and analysis to minimize operator variability.

the viability of a sample at the time of cryopreservation will help predict the viability when the sample is thawed. the low viability of a cryopreserved sample can adversely affect in vitro functional responses  <cit> . disis, et al state that viabilities of > 70% predict consistent responses by t cells in functional studies <cit> . it is therefore important that functional assays be performed with samples that are cryopreserved using methods optimized to preserve cellular viability  <cit> . in this study we report that ficoll-processed fresh pbmc have significantly better viability than cpt-processed fresh pbmc. however, after cryopreservation there was no significant difference between the two methods, indicating that if frozen samples were to be used, both methods would perform equivalently. it is unclear as to why the ficoll-processed fresh pbmc have a better viability than the cpt-processed fresh pbmc, but since rbc are present only in the shipped specimens that are eventually processed by ficoll, one could speculate that the rbc presence could be involved in maintaining viability. the fact that the viability is not adversely impacted by cryopreservation and thawing  indicates that archived samples are acceptable to use in functional studies and should perform equivalently to fresh samples. it should also be noted from the viability results in figure  <dig> that, for five cpt processed donors, the viability of the fresh sample was lower than the viability of the thawed cryopreserved sample. one explanation for this could be counting error , as there is little chance that cellular viability would improve after cryopreservation. another possible reason could be related to the removal of dead cells from post-thaw washes. despite this discrepancy, there is no significant difference between the viability of the total fresh and total cryopreserved cpt processed samples.

an important consequence of cryopreservation and thawing, that requires consideration, is diminished cell numbers. the number of cells recovered can be affected by the wash steps involved and by variations with regard to the number of cells originally placed in the freezing vessel. since it was important to ensure that a sufficient number of pbmc were obtained to complete the comparisons for each processing method, twice as much whole blood was collected for the cpt method as was collected for the ficoll method. this feature was designed into the study because of reports from other investigators  that cpt-processing routinely yields less pbmc per ml of whole blood than ficoll-processing yields. as it turned out, the difference in the mean number of viable cells recovered by the ficoll process  and the cpt method  was not significant . in situations where samples are cryopreserved for evaluation at a later date, the numbers of fresh recovered pbmc are important because they determine the number of cells available for freezing and ultimately the post thaw recovery numbers as well. in this study the median post-thaw recovery of viable cells was approximately 50% of the viable cells originally cryopreserved for samples processed by both methods, and we did not see a significant difference between these recoveries. thus, the pbmc processing method used should not matter when samples are to be used post-cryopreservation. however, considerable numbers of cells were lost  from the majority of donors in this study for both processing methods. the reason for the cell loss was not investigated in this study, but has been reported by other investigators  <cit> , and because of this loss it is essential that the investigator collects an excess of sample in order to ensure recovery of sufficient numbers after cryopreservation no matter which processing method is used to obtain the pbmc.

cytokine flow cytometry  assays can be used to rapidly determine the ability of whole blood or pbmc to respond to antigenic stimuli  <cit> . if the handling or processing of samples has adversely affected a sample, changes in the cytokine response may be evident. the four-color flow cytometry assay employed for this study uses ifnγ expression as a readout for the functional performance of pbmc after shipping, processing and cryopreservation. the comparison of the magnitude of the response to the antigenic stimuli used in this study  demonstrate that for the cd3+/cd8+ t cells there were no significant differences in response for either processing method, both fresh and after cryopreservation. for the cd3+/cd8- t cells, a significant difference was seen between the freshly processed cpt and ficoll samples in response to cmv-pp <dig> peptide mix, although the median responses are almost identical . from figure  <dig>  it appears that this difference may have been due to one "outlier" sample however, subsequent statistical analysis, that excluded the outlier, still gave a significant response .

for the cfc assays performed in this study, all the functional response data shown are the result of subtracting the background  response. occasionally, an elevated background response  was observed. in a study of healthy cmv+ donors it was found that spontaneous cytokine production was the result of cmv-responsive cells being reactivated in-vivo  <cit> . in this study it is not known if the unstimulated response is a result of in-vivo stimulation, sample manipulation or some other mechanism. for cd3+/cd8+ t cells, the backgrounds were generally higher in the samples that were cryopreserved prior to stimulation, with the background of the cryopreserved ficoll-processed samples being significantly higher  than the background of the cryopreserved cpt-processed samples . the differences in backgrounds of cd8+ t cells between fresh and cryopreserved samples, among all the donors, were not significant for either processing method . similar to cd3+/cd8+ t cells, the backgrounds for cd3+/cd8- t cells were elevated in the cryopreserved samples prepared by both methods, and an increase in the background of the fresh ficoll-processed samples was also observed . there was a significant difference  in unstimulated response of cd8- t cells between the fresh and cryopreserved cpt-processed samples .

the dot plots in figure  <dig> demonstrate ifnγ staining in unstimulated, cmv-pp <dig> peptide mix- and hiv-p <dig> peptide mix-stimulated pbmc for one of the donors in this study. it was noted that the staining patterns varied depending on the processing condition and this appeared to be true with all the donors although there was no pattern that could be consistently matched to a particular processing method or activation condition . because of this, it would seem prudent that an experienced technician monitor all analysis in order to insure that the analysis gates are adjusted properly, with the ultimate goal of minimizing a potential source of assay variability <cit> .

previous investigators <cit>  have demonstrated that pbmc and whole blood perform similarly when assessing antigen-specific responses in both cd4+ and cd8+ t cell subsets, with cfc assays, when no sample shipment was involved. however, as discussed above, pbmc are the standard sample used for clinical studies and as such this study was done to compare the pbmc processing methods. it is apparent from the data presented here that cpt-processed pbmc performed equivalently to ficoll-processed pbmc, especially with regard to the fact that no matter which process was used, samples did not lose functional activity upon cryopreservation and thawing.

CONCLUSIONS
with fresh samples, ficoll-processed pbmc demonstrated significantly better viability as compared to cpt-processed pbmc. with cryopreserved samples, cpt-processed pbmc demonstrated better viability as compared to ficoll-processed pbmc but the difference was not significant. fresh and post-cryopreservation recoveries were not significantly different between the two processing methods. we also conclude that whether fresh or cryopreserved pbmc are used, cpt is an efficient system for the collection of functionally active hiv+ pbmc as there was only one instance  in which the results vary significantly. the results of this comparative study indicate that pbmc prepared by either method perform equivalently and that the use of cpt to prepare pbmc from whole blood could be a viable alternative to using ficoll density gradient separation when samples are collected at multiple study sites and sent to a central location for processing and evaluation.

