BACKGROUND
the peoples and languages of the cross river region
the cross river region  is situated in the extreme southeast of nigeria, with its headwaters in the adjacent parts of cameroon. the land to the north east of the cross river region  is now generally accepted as the approximate location from which the expansion of the bantu-speaking peoples began between three and five thousand years ago  <cit> . bantu languages are now spoken throughout most of sub-saharan africa south of the equator. the cross river region was also a major source of slaves during the atlantic slave trade with calabar, at the confluence of the cross and calabar rivers, becoming both the region's principal urban centre and one of the trade's most active ports.

linguistically the cross river region, for its size, is one of the most diverse in the world with more than  <dig> distinct languages still in daily use. currently the accepted classification identifies 'bantoid' and 'cross river' as the two most important language groups found in the region , though williamson & blench  <cit>  argue that cross river and bantoid are sufficiently similar to be grouped together while still falling under benue-congo. the best studied subgroup within cross river is lower cross, which is itself comprised of some twenty languages  <cit>  including anaang, efik, ibibio and oron and is spoken over most of the lower region of the cross river basin. evidence from comparative linguistics, oral tradition  <cit>  and documentary material  <cit>  indicate that the lower cross languages together with the people that speak them are in the process of separating and spatially dispersing. connell & maison  <cit>  suggest the major dispersal, with perhaps one or two earlier exceptions, began approximately 500- <dig> years ago and appears to have consisted of a general movement towards the coast from an inland-situated homeland, possibly due to pressure from incoming and expanding igbo .

the primary branching of bantoid is of north and south bantoid. north bantoid is comprised of mambiloid, and more controversially dakoid and tikar . south bantoid comprises numerous subgroups, including bantu . those in proximity to the cross river region include tivoid, grassfields, beboid, nyang and importantly for this study, ekoid, which contains ejagham.

another language grouping found partly in, but primarily to the west of the cross river region, is igboid, which consists mainly of a range of igbo lects. despite the geographical proximity of igboland to the cross river basin, igboid languages are classified as west benue-congo  <cit> , which reflects the considerable time  since the existence of a common parent  of igbo on the one hand and cross river and bantoid on the other .

genetics and language
comparative studies of differences among languages and uniparental genetic systems in populations have provided interesting insights into human history and social behaviour. most studies have addressed relationships over a broad geographical canvas with considerable emphasis on the link between long-range language dispersals and the spread of agriculture  <cit> . more recent work has begun to examine, and find, relationships between linguistic and genetic variation at a finer scale . however such studies have yet to be applied to populations in sub-saharan africa.

because of their location  and linguistic and cultural diversity, the peoples of the cross river are of considerable interest to linguists , historians and other researchers interested in the mechanisms and implications of population movements. as variation in ethnic identities, cultural practices, oral histories and languages of the peoples of the cross river are so well described with many tongues believed to have separated hundreds, and in some cases thousands, of years ago this region provides an excellent opportunity to examine possible associations of language and uniparental genetic differentiation on a fine scale.

aims of this study
in this study the non-recombining portion of the y-chromosome  and mitochondrial dna  in multiple well-characterised groups in the linguistically diverse cross river region are analysed in one of the most densely sampled and well-defined human sub-saharan african datasets collected to date from a localised geographic area. groups speaking six different benue-congo languages that are well established in the cross river region are included: anaang, efik, ejagham, igbo, ibibio and oron. dna samples were collected from multiple locations and at various levels of ethnic identity .

the principal aim of this study was to establish whether or not there has been substantial inter-language group gene flow in the cross river region. a crude expectation of just over 10% for the level of gene flow per generation between different language groups  can be generated based on the whether the parents of individuals collected for this study spoke the same primary language . while in a sociological-anthropological context it may appear that language is a strong factor in mate choice, under a simple wright island model, with 'islands' of at least  <dig> individuals, we expect a fixation index of at most  <dig>  with this migration rate, a very low value that indicates a substantial amount of gene flow between 'islands'  <cit> . however it should be noted that the sociological information on inter-group gene flow is based on data from only the last two generations before present and this high value of 10% may be only be a recent phenomenon and have very little effect on genetic structure.

african genetic diversity and its positive correlation with both geography and language has previously been well described at the continent-wide scale for both uniparental and autosomal markers  <cit> . however attempts to investigate the relationship at finer scales, for example within language families, have demonstrated this relationship breaking down on occasion. whether this is a real and widespread phenomenon or simply a result of the unsuitability of the datasets utilised with regard to sampling density is unclear. having a good understanding of the relationship between geographic/linguistic scale and human genetic variation is important from linguistic, anthropological and medical perspectives. therefore, in order to compliment existing studies conducted at very broad scales we also examined the cross river region within the somewhat intermediate geographical context of west central africa by analysing additional groups resident in the neighbouring northwest province  of cameroon and more distant ghanaian populations . gene flow between these three regions is likely to be low given the large distances involved and therefore observable differences among the nry and mtdna profiles of these three regions would be expected in comparison to the cross river scale. finally this study will also provide vital additional information on the overall pattern of genetic variation in sub-saharan africa such as the distribution of the widespread y-haplogroup e1b1a and its subclades.

RESULTS
investigating potential language structuring in the cross river region
using pooled datasets of speakers of the six different linguistic groups sampled in the cross river region  the hierarchical analysis of molecular variance -based fixation indexes were not significant at any nry  or mtdna  level  . however to take into account any differences between language groups due to differences within language groups each clan was analysed separately but within a framework where they were hierarchically grouped by their language spoken. again the amova-based fixation indices for among-language-group differences were not significant at any nry or mtdna level of analysis .

symbol following value indicates significance level of fixation indices p-values: * =  <dig>  < p <  <dig> , $ =  <dig>  <  <dig> , # = p <  <dig> . each grouping is followed, indicated by 'n', by the number of groups and, if applicable, the number of individual populations analysed.

though the fixation indices discussed above indicate a lack of among-group structure a small number of significant individual pairwise differences were observed at every nry and mtdna level 

we conducted simulations  replicating nry uep haplogroup and six microsatellite  haplotype and mtdna hypervariable segment - <dig> haplotype population dynamics in the cross river region under realistic demographic parameters. the number of significant  population pairwise genetic distances observed  was much less than expected even for migration rates as high as  <dig>   using simulated data. in addition the simulations showed that at such high migration rates the simulated amova-based fixation indices were still not as low as for our observed data and that most population pairwise significant differences were stochastic  and of a transient nature . thus the results of our simulations are compatible with the scenario of the cross river region being a homogenous system with high inter-group migration.

cross river region and igboland
calabar is considered a particularly cosmopolitan city where different ethnicities reside together at an unusually high frequency for the cross river region as a whole. therefore two groups from igboland to the west of the cross river region  were added to the inter-language group analysis to take into account the potentially unusually high levels of inter-ethnic admixture that may have taken place involving igbo from calabar. the amova-based fct  values  were not noticeably different at any nry or mtdna levels when the ig-n and ig-e were grouped with the igbo-speaking group from calabar  and none of the fct values were significant . however there was a notable and substantial increase in the number of pairwise significant differences involving the two igboland groups and other cross river clans  , especially for ig-n at the uep and uep+ms levels where 22/ <dig> comparisons were significantly different at the 5% level .

the cross river region within the context of west central africa
using three pooled datasets consisting of the  <dig> cross river region clans, five ghanaian groups and three cameroonian nwp groups  respectively, pairwise etpd showed significant differences at the 1% threshold between all three datasets at all nry and mtdna levels while nry rst and mtdna k <dig>  genetic distances were also significant at the 1% threshold . once again, to account for possible within-region differentiation the cross river clans and ghanaian and cameroonian groups were analysed within a framework where populations were also hierarchically grouped by their country of origin. the amova-based fixation indices for among-country-group differences were significant at the 5% threshold using rst and were significant at the 1% level using uep defined haplogroups and uep+ms haplotypes and at both levels of mtdna analysis.

the cameroonian nwp populations tended to demonstrate more pairwise significant differences  than ghanaian populations when compared to cross river clans   . pairwise comparisons via genetic distances and etpd   also show that at the uep+ms, rst and mtdna haplotype levels  pairwise comparisons between ghanaian and cameroonian populations were highly significant. it was noticeable that the amova-based fixation index for the cameroonian nwp alone was highly significant at all levels  except based on mtdna k <dig> distances, while ghana was more homogenous, only showing significance at 5% at the uep level .

principle co-ordinate  plots of nry and mtdna genetic distances at various levels of resolution showed a general pattern  at all levels where the cross river populations clustered together, with the cameroonian and ghanaian populations tending to lie on the periphery of this cluster and cameroonian populations being noticeably more disparate than the more homogenous ghanaian populations.

are there correlations of genetic distances and geographic and linguistic distances?
a mantel test of correlation between genetic and linguistic distance for the cross river clans showed no correlation at any nry or mtdna level   apart from at the uep+ms level . this correlation, albeit only moderately significant, was maintained even when the comparison was controlled for geographic distance . no correlation was found between genetic and geographic distance at any level, even when holding linguistic distance constant . consistent with the increased number of significant pairwise differences described earlier, expanding the cross river dataset to include the igboland populations did reveal significant correlations between both nry uep and uep+ms fsts and both geographic and linguistic distance.

significance code is the same as table  <dig> 

when the  <dig> cross river region populations were considered with the five ghanaian and three cameroonian groups highly significant correlations were found between genetic and linguistic distance  at all nry and mtdna levels. highly significant correlations were also found between genetic and geographic distance at the uep and mtdna k <dig> levels  while using the mtdna fst distance produced a significant correlation at 5% significance . when a partial mantel test was applied a contrasting pattern was observed such that the correlation with linguistic distance was maintained at the uep+ms, ms and mtdna fst levels while the evolutionarily deeper uep and mtdna k <dig> distances showed correlations with geographic distance, though all p-values were noticeably increased.

nry haplogroup distribution
ten haplogroups were observed in the cross river dataset  . the overall modal haplogroup was e1b1a <dig>  closely followed by e1b1a <dig>  . in the majority of clans  the e1b1a <dig> haplogroup was modal . a median-joining network constructed using all non-singleton nry microsatellite haplotypes  displayed two striking features. firstly br* haplotypes appeared in two distinct clusters. given the particularly crude assignment of nry to this haplogroup, which encompasses a number of prominent subclades, it is likely that at least one of these represent the sub-saharan african-specific haplogroup b, while the other cluster may contain a typically non-sub-saharan african haplogroup  introgression during the slave trade.

modal nry types shown in bold type.

secondly the presence of e1b1a*, e1b1a <dig> and e1b1a <dig> haplogroups dominated the network but with substantial haplotype sharing among all three clades, consistent with a relatively recent common genealogical origin at the e1b1a root. one haplotype , which has previously been identified as a possible signature type for the expansion of the bantu-speaking peoples  <cit>  , stands out as the most frequent and is predominantly found within e1b1a <dig>  examining each haplogroup separately  shows that e1b1a <dig> haplotypes are tightly clustered around this haplotype in a star-like manner while e1b1a <dig> is more diffusely spread with multiple high frequency haplotypes implying a longer evolutionary period since this haplogroup arose. this is reflected in the substantially lower average squared distance  values for e1b1a <dig> compared to e1b1a <dig>  , which can be interpreted as younger time to the most recent common ancestor  estimates  <cit>  . e1b1a*  is very diffuse with regard to microsatellite haplotypes, which suggests that further uep delineation may be informative.

we compared our west central african data for  <dig> of  <dig> microsatellites to data from previous studies in sub-saharan africa , included ethnic groups that were both geographically very close and distant to our own populations . of the  <dig> ethnic groups compared , only  <dig> possessed a 5-microsatellite version of the potential bantu signature haplotype. a pco plot  based on rst  showed ethnic groups from northern cameroon and gabon to be noticeably differentiated from all other sub-saharan african population, a consequence of a high frequency of typically asian nry lineages  <cit> . with regard to the remaining populations, there was no clear correlation with geography though our west central african population did demonstrate similarity with the majority of their geographic neighbours, while being slightly more differentiated from the geographically distant angolan and tanzania ethnic groups. however there was a somewhat unexpected difference with the cameroonian ewondo and ngumbacam samples.

mtdna distribution
torroni et al.  <cit>  have previously warned against the dangers of mtdna haplogroup classification based solely on hvs- <dig> data. a median-joining network of all samples colour coded by their expected haplogroups as defined by salas et al  <cit>   does demonstrate some assignment errors but in general good clustering around predicted haplogroups is observed. in addition the wtti ratios  for the four populations considered  were close to those previously reported for african datasets , which suggests the data presented here are reasonably problem-free. typical of sub-saharan africa, l2a  <cit>  is the most frequently observed haplogroup, though at substantially higher frequency in ghana . l3e is the most frequent l <dig> clade with l3e <dig> being predominant while other haplogroups that have previously been found in west central africa, such as l0a, l1b, and l1c, are all found at appreciable frequencies in our dataset. interestingly, while present in the cross river region and cameroonian nwp, l3e <dig> is absent from ghana, while l0a is found at a very low frequency.

direct comparison to existing hvs- <dig> haplotype data  via fst values  , ignoring ca-bt , revealed a stronger geographic correlation in comparison to the nry data, with a decent clustering of our west central african populations to other cameroonian groups and clear differentiation with samples from angola, rwanda, zimbabwe and mozambique. interestingly, the more west african populations of senegal and sierra leone grouped tightly with our populations.

discussion
cross river region homogeneity
the overall genetic homogeneity observed in the cross river region was consistent with estimates of current gene flow derived from recent sociological data and demonstrates that major language differences, such as between igbo and the lower cross languages, can be maintained in the presence of substantial gene flow over a significant period of time. however, the case presented here involves the majority languages spoken in the region. it remains to be seen whether such high levels of gene flow also apply to groups speaking less common languages , where increased genetic isolation may aid  in conserving identity of the group. it is also notable that despite the populations in the region being primarily patrilineal, a lack of genetic structure was observed for both the nry and mtdna, though it is not possible to conclude whether this is due to equal male and female migration rates as the mutational properties of the nry and mtdna polymorphisms analysed are not directly comparable.

when the two igboland groups were compared to the cross river region clans a large proportion of pairwise comparisons between the two regions demonstrated significant differences. the igboland groups, despite being in close proximity to each other, even demonstrated differences between themselves, suggesting perhaps that the cross river region may be more homogenous than is typical for the broader region . one factor that may have contributed to the cross river region's homogeneity was its position as a major slave post , which may have led to an unusually high level of inter-ethnic group mixing over as long as  <dig> years and thus significantly increased gene flow among speakers of different languages. intriguingly some nry haplogroups that are possibly  indicative of european ancestry , j and possibly f, g, and i) are found at very low frequencies amongst the cross river samples and may have entered the cross river gene pool as a consequence of male introgression of slave traders.

some caution must be exercised in over-interpreting the data presented here. mantel and partial mantel tests did reveal, albeit with a moderate p-value, a significant correlation between genetic and linguistic distance at the nry uep+ms fst level in the cross river region. it could be suggested that, at least for the nry, further microsatellite typing may eventually differentiate the apparently homogenous cross river region and our results simply reflect a lack of marker resolution. however, given the large number of uep+ms and hvs- <dig> haplotypes in our dataset, including a number of singletons, it seems unlikely that the allele frequencies amongst the different populations would not have drifted apart over a number of generation without gene flow being a major force within the cross river system, as demonstrated by the simulations conducted to examine the effect of gene flow on population genetic structure. increasing the marker resolution would certainly help differentiate individuals  but not necessarily populations and are unlikely to aid in measuring gene flow within a particular system of populations. the clear interpretability of our results also help justify the continued use of uniparental genetic systems when investigating demographic history, the advantages of which have previously been described by underhill and kivisild et al.  <cit> .

west central african differentiation
when the cross river region was analysed alongside the cameroonian nwp and ghana strong genetic differentiation was observed between all three regions at all nry and mtdna levels. the level of differentiation is somewhat reduced for evolutionary deeper analysis such as at the nry uep level, as observed by the high e1b1a*, e1b1a <dig> and e1b1a <dig> frequencies in all three regions, while the increased differentiation observed at finer scales of genetic resolution is a result of, as expected, highly restricted  gene flow more recently due to the large geographic distances involved. however it is also appears that a simple isolation by distance model is not adequate to fit the pattern observed.

despite being geographically much closer, the cameroonian nwp populations are noticeably more differentiated from the cross river region than ghanaian populations, as seen clearly seen in the pco plots , with the cameroonian nwp populations demonstrating the greatest differentiation both between each other and non-cameroonian populations at the nry uep+ms fst and mtdna fst levels. linguistically the distance between the cross river region and both the cameroonian nwp and ghana  is much less pronounced than the corresponding geographic distances. as a consequence mantel and partial mantel tests show a stronger correlation between genetic and linguistic distance at finer genetic resolutions. however, the meaningfulness of these correlations is somewhat questionable, given that while the broad relationships of the languages considered here are generally accepted, the lexicostatistics that the actual distances between languages are based on are at best a first estimate with numerous potentially problematic approximations . while both are clearly involved  at some level, not until more reliable language distance estimates are generated can the relative contributions of geography and language to genetic divergence amongst these west central african populations be assessed.

the substantial amount of genetic differentiation within the cameroonian nwp may be driven by the extreme topography of the region, which is a largely highland area with many valleys, hills and mountains  and thus presents significant physical barriers to gene flow between neighbouring populations. as the rate of linguistic separation may well also be increased by such physical barriers it is possible that at smaller geographical scales where the topography is particularly varied, language will be a better guide to genetic differentiation than geography alone, though the desire to maintain a separate identity within close quarters is also likely to major force for shaping genetic heterogeneity.

e1b1a <dig> and the expansion of bantu-speaking peoples
though not the primary focus of the study, the typing of the u <dig> marker  <cit>  permits important new insights into the demographic processes influencing haplogroup e1b1a. while none of the populations studied here are narrow bantu speakers, the star-like network of e1b1a <dig>  especially in comparison to e1b1a <dig>  coupled with a recent tmrca based on the level of haplogroup specific microsatellite diversity of 1866- <dig> years   hint at men with nry that belong to this subclade playing a prominent role in the expansion of the bantu-speaking peoples. this possibility is further reinforced by the haplotype that has been observed at high frequencies amongst bantu-speaking populations, including south africa  being observed almost exclusively within e1b1a <dig> in our dataset. thus further typing of u <dig> in other bantu-speaking populations along both streams of the proposed expansion may yield important clues to the movement of bantu-speaking farmers.

our cross river and cameroonian nwp datasets are located adjacent to the proposed source of proto-bantu and their similarity for the nry to other populations both neighbouring and more distant demonstrates the potential impact of the expansion of bantu famers in homogenising the nry profile of sub-saharan africa. for example, the south african bantu speakers are barely more differentiated from our west central african dataset than the bamileke. this pattern is in contrast to that seen for mtdna, where our west central african populations are more easily differentiated from the more geographically distant southern african populations, consistent with previous data  <cit>  that suggests a more gradual and short range movement of female lineages than men during this migration period. haplogroups l0a, l1c, l2a, l3e and l1e have all been associated with the expansion of bantu-speaking farmers  <cit>   and their substantial presence in our cross river and cameroonian nwp datasets, and in some circumstances absence from the more westerly ghanaian dataset , certainly add weight to these claims.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have been able to elucidate that languages and peoples can move independent of each other within the cross river region of nigeria, a finding that will be of considerable interest to linguists working on aspects of language contact. a major reason we have been able to gain insight at such a fine geographic scale is the quality of the dataset assembled. there has, unfortunately, been a tendency when examining african genetic diversity to utilise datasets of small size with samples of undeclared origin and relationships. the practice of assembling dense dna sample sets of known and detailed provenance, as previously called for by anthropologists and linguists  <cit> , will be the most vital aspect when conducting studies to answer the many complex questions likely to be encountered in the course of unravelling demographic histories of geographically restricted african ethnicities.

