BACKGROUND
since darwin and wallace, the study of island inhabitants has greatly influenced evolutionary and ecological research  <cit> . in many respects, crater lakes are the aquatic equivalent to islands. like islands, the small size, distinct boundaries, simplified biota, young age, geographical isolation and frequently well-known geological history of crater lakes makes them well-suited to study the diversification of sister taxa  <cit> . the physical isolation of crater lakes means that after the first seeding by a colonizing lineage evolution may proceed rapidly in situ. indeed, crater lakes have provided the most compelling examples of sympatric ecological speciation of fishes, particularly cichlid fishes  <cit> . intralacustrine speciation in depauperate habitats  typically proceeds due to disruptive ecological selection  <cit> , though the rapidity, strength and completeness of this process depends on a number of population and environmental factors  <cit> . well-known examples of this phenomenon include the benthic and planktivorous populations of sticklebacks  <cit> , introduced salmon populations  <cit>  and whitefish  <cit>  in isolated lakes.

cichlid fishes are pre-eminent non-model organisms for the study of ecological speciation because of their trophic polymorphism and rapid evolution  <cit> . mesoamerican fishes of the midas cichlid species complex  are particularly variable in trophic characteristics such as body shape and pharyngeal jaw morphology, as well as maintaining a striking colour polymorphism  <cit>  . one of the most renowned examples of ecological differentiation in the species complex is the elongate, open-water species amphilophus zaliosus, which evolved from a high-bodied benthic ancestor by sympatric speciation within nicaragua's oldest crater lake, lake apoyo  <cit> . a similarly elongate but evolutionarily independent endemic species is also found in crater lake xiloá  <cit> . an additional trophic polymorphism of midas cichlids is fleshy, hypertrophied lips, which is believed to be involved in harvesting invertebrates from between cracks and recesses  <cit> . this character is absent from most crater lake midas cichlid populations  <cit>  and is best known from amphilophus labiatus, a species that occurs in the two largest and shallowest lakes in the region, the great lakes managua and nicaragua  <cit> . apoyeque is the only crater lake that harbours a sizeable population of midas cichlids with hypertrophied lips; the origin and diversity of this population is the focus of our current study.

western nicaragua is underlain by an extremely active volcanism that has resulted in at least eight crater lakes that exist today . one of the youngest of these is apoyeque . the volcano last erupted only about  <dig> years ago  <cit>  and then filled with ground- and rainwater to become a crater lake. the lake is small  yet deep   <cit>  and, because of its steep cone shape, has a fairly small littoral zone   <cit> . 'apoyeque' means 'salty water' in the regional náhuatl language and the lake is so-named because of its high mineral content  <cit> . located on the chiltepe peninsula, apoyeque lies next to crater lake xiloá and great lake managua and yet its high crater walls  and lack of water connection make it completely aquatically isolated.

despite the crater lake apoyeque's young age and isolation, it is home to an abundant population of midas cichlids . there are two phenotypes living in the lake: one with normal citrinellus thin lips  and one with pronounced fleshy, or hypertrophied, lips . the lake is otherwise depauperate in species, only housing some small live-bearing fishes  and, less abundantly, the predatory cichlid parachromis managuense  <cit> .

in the present study, we test whether the two phenotypes  of midas cichlid in apoyeque originated by sympatric differentiation promoted by ecological divergence. given the intralacustrine diversification of midas cichlids in other crater lakes, we hypothesize that this trait of thin- or thick- lips may be a novel or alternative axis of ecological differentiation exploited by crater lake cichlids. first, we infer the colonization history of crater lake apoyeque using population genetic and coalescent approaches, in the context of neighbouring lakes managua and xiloá. we specifically assess evidence for a single or multiple colonization events and see whether the age of the population corresponds to the geological age of the lake. second, we compare ecological  and morphological  variation between thin- and thick-lipped fishes to see whether this character is associated with distinct niches, sex or maturity, or morphological difference. third, we assess the role of disruptive natural selection in driving incipient speciation by comparing the distribution of phenotypes and genetic differentiation in apoyeque's midas cichlid population, with the expectation that ecological diversification should result in a bimodal distribution of ecologically relevant traits.

RESULTS
colonization and population genetics of apoyeque and neighbouring lakes
genetic diversity and differentiation
using multiple approaches to assess genetic diversity with  <dig> nuclear microsatellite loci and mitochondrial dna sequences, the midas cichlid population in lake apoyeque is the least genetically diverse relative to the midas cichlid populations from nearby lakes . only four mitochondrial dna  haplotypes were found among the  <dig> individuals sequenced from crater lake apoyeque . the most abundant haplotype in apoyeque is also found in xiloá and in the great lakes managua and nicaragua . three haplotypes unique to apoyeque are much rarer . each of these apoyeque-specific haplotypes is one-step apart from another apoyeque haplotype and, to date, all are unique in the entire midas cichlids species complex of nicaragua , suggesting that they evolved in situ within the crater lake.

the pronounced lack of microsatellite genetic variation within the apoyeque midas cichlid population, and its genetic distinctiveness from neighbouring lakes, can be visualized in the separation along axis  <dig> and the tight clustering of apoyeque individuals in the factorial correspondence analysis . midas cichlid fish populations in lakes apoyeque, xiloá and managua are all significantly genetically differentiated from each other at mtdna  and microsatellite loci .

coalescence inference of origin and time of colonization
apoyeque could only have reasonably been colonized from either of its neighbouring lakes, managua or xiloá: all other lakes are geographically much more distant . inferred from gene flow analyses in migrate <cit>  , lake managua is the primary ancestral population of apoyeque: migration from managua to apoyeque was estimated to be two to four times higher than the rate of migration from xiloá to apoyeque. based on isolation-with-migration coalescence analyses , the divergence time between the populations of apoyeque and its founding population from lake managua  was estimated to be about  <dig> years ago . the effective population size of apoyeque was estimated to be approximately  <dig> times smaller than that of the ancestral population in great lake managua .

apoyeque's extant midas cichlid population probably originated from a single founding event. historical migration  was estimated to be negligible  and there was a single probability peak for population divergence in the ima analysis .

eco-morphological variation within apoyeque
frequency of thin- and thick-lipped individuals
we collected exemplars of thin-and thick-lipped mature adults and juvenile fishes in apoyeque. twenty percent of the adult individuals were thick-lipped  and 24% of the juveniles were thick-lipped . additionally,  <dig> thick-lipped and  <dig> thin-lipped specimens were not classified to age or sex . there is no difference in the number of thick-lipped fishes in any of the four groupings . thus, from our total collection 19% of fishes were thick-lipped and 81% were thin-lipped.

body shape and size
body shape of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes differed significantly . thick-lipped fish had narrower, longer mouths, were slightly deeper bodied and their body mass was shifted to the anterior relative to thin-lipped fishes . shape was sufficiently different between the two lip morphs that most individuals could be correctly classified based on body shape alone . body shape remained significantly different when the lip landmarks  were excluded .

the body size  of adult thin- and thick-lipped midas cichlid fishes did not differ .

specifically focusing on head morphology, head width at the eyes was different for thin- and thick-lipped fishes . the two morphs had similar head widths at the snout . in other words, the snout width of thin- and thick-lipped fish does not differ but the head is thinner and more tapered in the thick-lipped fishes.

lip size
lip size did not differ between sexes . thus, the extent of lip hypertrophy is not related to sex. however, adults  had larger lips relative to their body size than juveniles . indeed, lip size clearly increased with body size . a plot of lip size by body length  demonstrates how the increase of lip size differs between the two morphs . the quadratic lines of best-fit differ markedly between thin- and thick-lipped fishes: the y-intercept is higher and the slope steeper in thick-lipped fishes. thus lips get proportionally larger with maturity, age or size.

diet
the gut contents of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes were markedly different, as implied by a significant interaction between the volume of prey type and morph , a schoener's niche overlap index of  <dig>   <cit>  and assortative clustering of the two morphs in multi-dimensional diet space . the guts of thick-lipped fishes tended to contain more benthic crustacea, insect fragments and larvae while the guts of thin-lipped fishes contained more white algae , fish and snails .

muscle tissue of adult thin- and thick-lipped fishes had different carbon  and nitrogen  signatures  . thin-lipped fishes were typically slightly 13c depleted  compared to thick-lipped fishes  and had higher ∂15n values , suggesting that, on average, thin-lipped fishes fed at a slightly higher trophic level.

lower pharyngeal jaws
as the absolute pharyngeal jaw size significantly influenced its shape , we corrected for allometric effects using regression . pharyngeal jaw shape  differed significantly between thin- and thick-lipped fishes . thick-lipped fish have a narrower horn, longer jaw and two smaller rear teeth. principal coordinates analysis corroborate these regions as having the most variation . thin-lipped fishes can be generally characterized as more molariform and thick-lipped fishes as more papilliform .

disruptive selection and phenotypic differentiation
quantitative eco-morphological traits are expected to have a bimodal distribution under disruptive selection. in order to test this, we first assessed whether the distribution of adult phenotypes for each eco-morphological trait fits a normal distribution . lip size , body shape, lower pharyngeal jaw shape, stable isotope values of δ13c and gut contents significantly deviated from a single normal distribution . stable isotope values of δ15n showed poor fit to a normal distribution  and were included in further testing. for the traits of lip size, body shape, lower pharyngeal jaw shape and diet , a bimodal distribution  was strongly supported over a unimodal distribution by the corrected akaike information criterion  values . stable isotope values were less clearly bimodal: values of δ 15n moderately supported better fit to a bimodal distribution while values of δ13c equally supported either a uni- or bimodal distribution.

data are composed of raw or multivariate data. low p values for goodness-of-fit suggest poor fit of the data to a single normal distribution. Δaicc is the difference in model aicc for a single- compared to a two-component model. levels of support for one model over the other are described in the methods. frequency histograms and normality plots can be found in additional file  <dig> 

aicc, akaike information criterion; mds, multidimensional scaling.

genetic differentiation within apoyeque
there was no genetic differentiation at microsatellite loci between the population of thin- and thick-lipped fishes in apoyeque . there was genetic differentiation in mtdna haplotypes between the population of thin- and thick lipped fishes , though it is not strongly statistically significant.

discussion
rapid intralacustrine eco-morphological differentiation
analyses of ecologically relevant traits indicate that thick- and thin-lipped fishes occupy two distinct niches in sympatry within the small and extremely young crater lake apoyeque. the two morphs have a different diet, as reflected by schoener's index  and a clustering into separate multi-dimensional diet space . thick-lipped fishes tend to have a diet richer in benthic crustacea and insect prey . they are also enriched in δ13c and depleted in δ15n stable isotope values compared to thin-lipped fishes , which may suggest a greater use of littoral prey  <cit> . the pharyngeal jaws of thick-lipped fishes are significantly thinner in shape, i.e. characteristically more papilliform . papilliform-jawed midas cichlids in other crater lakes are more insectivorous  <cit> , as they also tend to be in apoyeque, reflecting the established correlation between diet and jaw in cichlids. in contrast, thin-lipped fishes tend to be more molariform, with thicker jaws and broader teeth . molariform jaw morphology is associated with more efficient snail crushing and a benthic diet in midas cichlids  <cit>  and cichlids generally  <cit> , and also here in apoyeque. we found that the shape of pharyngeal jaws was significantly affected by jaw size, which may support the hypothesis that pharyngeal jaws change shape over time depending on diet  <cit> .

lip hypertrophy is found in males and females at similar frequencies and the relative size of the lips does not differ between the sexes. hence, lip hypertrophy is not a sex-linked character. nor is lip hypertrophy a character that develops only after maturity: it was found at similar frequencies in adults and juveniles. however, lip size increases with body length, indicating that the hypertrophy may get more pronounced with age. the relationship of increasing lip size with body size is not the same for thin- and thick-lipped fishes. instead, thick-lipped fishes show a much more dramatic increase of lip size with body size . therefore, it would be interesting to build upon our research by studying trophic variation at across life history stages, a possible role of plasticity or feedback between ecological niche and lip hypertrophy, and genetic influences on lip hypertrophy.

although ecological differentiation between lip morphs is clear, overall body shape  and head widths differ between lip morphs only subtly, albeit significantly. indeed, the body shape difference between other midas cichlid species, such as syntopic thin-lipped a. citrinellus and thick-lipped a. labiatus in the great lakes managua and nicaragua, is much more pronounced  <cit>  than what we found between the orthologous thin- and thick-lipped morphs in apoyeque. in this regard, it is important to note that the thin- and thick-lipped midas cichlids in apoyeque are morphologically, genetically and geographically distinct from the midas cichlids in lakes managua and nicaragua , indicating that they are not simply allotopic populations of a. citrinellus and a. labiatus.

disruptive selection in sympatry is expected to result in a bimodal distribution of quantitative eco-morphological traits. this is because intraspecific competition and negative frequency dependent selection result in higher fitness of extreme over intermediate phenotypes . such a pattern has been demonstrated under ecological speciation in nature but is notoriously difficult to quantitate . in apoyeque midas cichlids, lip size and a variety of eco-morphological traits that are reflective of trophic niche-body shape, pharyngeal jaw shape, stomach contents and δ15n-are all found at frequencies predicted under frequency-dependent fitness and disruptive selection. specifically, these traits better fit a bimodal rather than unimodal distribution . secondary contact could also result in a bimodal distribution of phenotype, but cichlid ecology, a single colonization event and no genetic evidence for secondary admixture , suggests this is not the case in apoyeque. extensive empirical and theoretical research suggests that disruptive selection can drive multimodal eco-morphological differentiation and, with even partial non-random mating, result in incipient adaptive speciation  <cit> .

despite the bimodality of phenotype, we find no equivalent differentiation in nuclear genetic markers between thin- and thick-lipped midas cichlids in apoyeque . this absence of differentiation may be due to very low population genetic polymorphism, a young population with younger divergence, or weak or absent assortative mating; field observations will be necessary. however, we do find population differentiation in the mtdna haplotypes . while marginally statistically non-significant, this represents a substantial sympatric genetic differentiation within apoyeque based on eco-morphology. to put it in context, this is one-third of the differentiation found among allopatric midas cichlid populations of lakes managua vs. xiloá . more striking is that the mtdna divergence between morphs within apoyeque exceeds that of the different thin- and thick-lipped species, a. citrinellus and a. labiatus, in the great lake nicaragua . it is presently unclear what processes are at work that would result in panmixia at nuclear loci and differentiation at mtdna in this young, sympatric, genetically depauperate midas cichlid population and this should be the focus of future research.

our finding of eco-morphological differentiation with low genetic differentiation could suggest that lip morph is plasticity, polymorphism or incipient speciation. we discuss these alternatives below.

midas cichlid species and ecological traits
hypertrophied lips are an overt species-specific character related to ecology in cichlids  <cit> . it has evolved independently in different environments and species complexes of various new world  and old world cichlids . it is considered to be a diagnostic trait: among the scores of described cichlid species , we know of none for which the character of hypertrophied lips is a described intraspecific polymorphism .

for example, the nicaraguan great lake midas cichlid species a. citrinellus and a. labiatus are discerned primarily by lip morphology, although they also differ in head shape, snout angle, feeding behaviour, anterior teeth, fin position and length  <cit> , pharyngeal jaws  <cit>  and body shape  <cit> -much like the two morphs of midas cichlid in apoyeque. in contrast to these differences, some meristic values overlap between a. citrinellus and a. labiatus and the extent of lip hypertrophy varies within populations  <cit> . further, neutral genetic differentiation between those two species is low or absent  <cit> . this is a conundrum because young eco-morphological variants  in various crater lakes can be discerned genetically . thus, early researchers of nicaragua's cichlids vacillated on the issue of polymorphism versus speciation but concluded that the weigh of evidence argued for two midas cichlid species in the great lakes, a. citrinellus and a. labiatus  <cit>  and all currently published research proceeds under the assumption that they are different species. in the laboratory, a. labiatus mate assortatively and resultant offspring have thick lips , suggesting that this trait is involved in sexual isolation by assortative mating and has a strong genetic component. mate choice experiments between a. citrinellus and a. labiatus have, to our knowledge, never been published. certainly, further research is needed on 'lippiness' and this is a research topic that we are currently undertaking from ecological, behavioural and genetic perspectives.

therefore, although at present we cannot completely rule out that being thin- or thick-lipped is an intrapopulation polymorphism or plasticity in apoyeque, we consider it quite unlikely. instead, we suggest that the ecological differentiation between thick- and thin-lipped eco-morphs in apoyeque represents a case of ecologically distinct, sympatric incipient sister species. moreover, lips may be one of the very few examples for a 'magic trait'  <cit> -a trait that combines disruptive natural selection and assortative mating and that also  might lead to speciation in sympatry. low or absent genetic differentiation between morphs does not contradict incipient ecological speciation because it is an overly conservative estimator  <cit>  and neither microsatellites nor mtdna sequences robustly differentiate other species of midas cichlid that differ in lip character  <cit> . it may be that the same ecological, genetic or behavioural factors responsible for low meristic and genetic divergence between a. citrinellus and a. labiatus in nicaragua's great lakes are also at play in apoyeque. further research on the association of eco-morphological divergence, such as lip hypertrophy, with reproductive isolation is needed in all midas cichlids.

in other nicaraguan crater lakes, intralacustrine divergence of midas cichlids has occurred with a different set of ecological traits-primarily body elongation  <cit> . in some cases this progressed to full species status with phenotypic, meristic and molecular divergence, such as in lakes apoyo  <cit>  and xiloá  <cit> . though thick-lipped midas cichlids are rather common in apoyeque , they are found only sporadically in crater lake masaya  and extremely rarely in crater lake xiloá , and are believed to be completely absent in many crater lakes . this suggests that hypertrophied lips is not the ancestral state in this species complex and instead may only arise under particular ecological conditions and genetic backgrounds.

crater lake colonization
the dearth of genetic variability sampled in apoyeque midas cichlids is consistent with coalescence analyses that indicated a very recent founding of apoyeque  by a single colonization event. the coalescent methods we employed here have been used to infer the age of african cichlid species because the recent speciation in many cichlid species hinders lineage-based phylogenetic methods  <cit> . even if this method underestimates the colonization time, all geological and genetic evidence indicate that the apoyeque population is extremely young  and the most genetically depauperate of all the crater lake midas cichlid populations  <cit> .

how a high walled crater lake could be colonized by fishes is a tantalizing question for history. some possibilities include being transported by birds , momentary subterranean aquatic connections caused by volcanic and tectonic movements or being flung in by hurricanes or funnel winds with water transfer between neighbouring lakes; spectacular though these phenomena seem, they have been reported scientifically for many years . it is also possible that the population of fish in apoyeque was seeded by humans, as is proposed for other lakes  <cit> , but this seems less plausible because the lake is quite difficult to access and is not located next to any human settlement. the presence of a large population of small poeciliid fish in apoyeque, which would not likely be purposely introduced for food or sport, argues that natural colonizations may be more likely than human introductions. regardless of the historical mode of arrival, our data suggest that the extant population of midas cichlid fishes colonized apoyeque only once and very recently.

is crater lake colonization rare? if crater lake apoyeque is about  <dig> years old, but the midas cichlid population within is only about  <dig> years old, did the lake stand devoid of fish all the time in between? one possibility is that cycles of extinction and re-colonization may be relatively frequent in the early life of a crater lake. occurrences such as remnant volcanic activity, fumerole activity  <cit>  or periodic gas releases and rising of toxic waters  <cit>  may exterminate a crater lake's fish fauna. for example, locals of the area report that apoyeque occasionally 'boils' and 'all' of the fish die . such a fish kill was observed in january  <dig> in lake masaya, though clearly not all fish died . in that case, apoyeque may have been colonized previously, followed by an extinction event, and the extant population only arrived within the past  <dig> years. additional comparative phylogeographic investigations across lakes and species will help in addressing these questions, but ultimately a crater lake's colonization history may remain speculative.

founder events, novel habitats and speciation
nicaraguan crater lake environments, being small, deep, clear, mineral-rich isolated waters, are very different from the large, shallow, turbid waters of the ancestral great lakes. this represents a major shift in ecological niche for midas cichlids and may allow for the rapid evolution of new phenotypes  <cit> . to date, we have largely relied on models to suggest how long phenotypic divergence and speciation may take after colonisation of a new environment. those estimates vary greatly: some model suggest  <dig>  <dig> generations may be sufficient for the emergence of ecologically differentiated species under favourable conditions  <cit> , or possibly much faster  <cit> . based on field collected data, especially for fish, other authors  <cit>  argue that ecological speciation or morphological diversification can occur on timescales of only tens to hundreds of generations. here, we have demonstrated that ecological divergence can begin in sympatry on historic time scales of a minimum of  <dig> years.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of our study suggest:  a case of ecological and morphological differentiation of sympatric midas cichlids to exploit divergent niches, with associated weak population divergence at mtdna; and  that this eco-morphological divergence occurred very quickly after colonization of a crater lake habitat. midas cichlids in apoyeque are geographically and genetically isolated from neighbouring populations, and morphologically distinctive  <cit>  and, thus, evolutionarily independent from other populations. whether thin- and thick-lipped midas cichlids in crater lake apoyeque are a single polymorphic species or two incipient species cannot yet be determined with certainty but, based on cichlid biology in general and patterns of genetic and eco-morphological variation in apoyeque in particular, we suggest that thin- and thick-lipped fishes may be sympatric incipient species.

