BACKGROUND
our understanding of a protein's role in a biological system strongly depends on its placement in a network of protein-protein interactions , or interactome. recently, interactome data sets involving proteins from various microbial species have been constructed using experimental  <cit>  and inferred data  while numerous databases have been created to store and disseminate this information . bacterial proteomes are particularly attractive subjects for interactome analysis due to their manageable size. the proteomes of many bacterial species include only a few thousand proteins, suggesting that they are about an order of magnitude smaller than their counterparts in many animals and plants. therefore, most bacterial species provide more tractable interactomes compared to the human genome that has more than  <dig>  protein coding genes  <cit>  and more than  <dig>  predicted ppis  <cit> .table  <dig> comprehensive experimental microbial interactome sizes


c. jejuni

e. coli

h. pylori

m. loti


 t. pallidum

 s. cerevisiae

 s. cerevisiae

 s. cerevisiae

 s. cerevisiae

asambourg et al.  <cit>  estimated the yeast interactome size to be ~ <dig>  ppis, based on  <dig> interactions among well-studied proteins curated from the literature




nearly all published bacterial interactomes have been created using either the yeast two-hybrid  system or affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry analysis . although e. coli is the only bacterial species with a comprehensive interactome that has been studied by both y2h  <cit>  and ap/ms  <cit>  methodologies a comparison of both methods surprisingly showed largely non-overlapping interaction data sets. in the y2h data set of  <dig> e. coli ppis roughly  <dig> were found outside of known protein complexes  <cit> . similarly, roughly a third of ~ <dig> interactions that are thought to occur in protein complexes were detected by the y2h approach, indicating that existing methodologies in isolation produce incomplete datasets  <cit> .

a way to overcome such problems is to combine not only different datasets from the same species but also data from different species. although cross-species interactome approaches have been recently presented for human and yeast protein sets  <cit>  no comprehensive comparison of bacterial interactomes currently exists. while the majority of reports focus on one interactome , far fewer include data from more than one set of interactions, and just two recent reports  <cit>  have investigated  <dig> or more out of  <dig> available large-scale bacterial interactome datasets. one of these studies provides an analysis of bacterial genomes in terms of their predicted functional complexity rather than the exact interactions in their interactomes  <cit> . other studies dealt with four or five published interactomes , presenting only a general discussion of the evolution of protein networks  <cit>  or a review of ways to mine high-throughput experimental data to link gene and function  <cit> .fig.  <dig> citation analysis of the bacterial interactome literature. publication counts include all papers that cite at least one of a total of  <dig> published bacterial interactome studies 




one of the most promising applications of interactomics is in the analysis of protein function. in a “guilt by association” approach  <cit> , ppis provide context to proteins by considering functional roles of their known interaction partners. for example, a protein that interacts predominantly with metabolic proteins probably has a role in metabolism as well. in particular, such a method has been applied as part of the analysis of interactomics data  <cit> . as part of a guilt-by-association approach, proteins and their interaction networks may be compared through their participation in orthologous groups . specifically, ogs are defined through non-supervised, taxonomy-limited methods  <cit>  and reduce the complexity of interaction networks by joining proteins of similar sequence and potentially similar function. an orthology-based approach may be species-independent and can allow interaction networks of different species to be used to predict uncharacterized, conserved interactions as well as to provide an evolutionary basis for the reasons an interaction may not be present. although analyses of conserved networks have been performed  <cit> , in some cases alongside interactome studies  <cit> , they have generally been limited by low proteome coverage in the underlying interactomes.

here, we combine experimentally-derived, previously published ppis from  <dig> bacterial species and strains to form a consensus meta-interactome, using orthologous groups  of proteins to combine all known interactions into a single network. notably, we observe that such a network shares characteristics of single species interactomes. furthermore, the augmentation of single species interaction networks with a bacterial meta-interactome boosts our ability to predict functions of the underlying proteins, given its dramatically increased information content. finally, we utilize such a bacterial meta-interactome to predict interactome sizes of species for which incomplete interaction data is available.

RESULTS
the bacterial meta-interactome resembles individual interactomes in structure
to compare interactions across multiple species, we first mapped proteins to orthologous groups . as a source of information about ogs, we utilized the eggnog database  <cit> , expanding the idea of clusters of orthologous groups  <cit>  constructed from numerous organisms. as a source of ppis in bacteria we utilized the intact database  <cit> . furthermore, we accounted for the protein interactome of mesorhizobium loti  <cit> , a ppi data set that was not available in the intact database. in particular, we accounted for all experimental sources of ppis, suggesting that the majority of interactions  have been found in e. coli and c. jejuni . based on the total set of roughly  <dig>  interactions between proteins in the underlying organisms, we merged their ogs, resulting in a meta-interactome with nodes and edges of differing weights . in total, we obtained a consensus meta-interactome of  <dig> orthologous groups that are embedded in web of  <dig>  weighted links, covering  <dig> distinct bacterial species and strains . such a network consisted of  <dig> connected components that included  <dig> self-connected nodes. moreover, the largest component pooled  <dig> % of all nodes. in fig. 2d, we observed that the majority of ogs in the meta-interactome corresponds to a single protein while the majority of links is composed of one interaction . since the average weight of links is  <dig>  ±  <dig> , we can consider our network as largely unweighted. as a consequence, we found that the average path length in the unweighted network is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  while the diameter of the network is roughly  <dig>  indicating small world network characteristics  <cit> . the average number of neighbors is  <dig>  ±  <dig> , an average that is likely influenced by the presence of several broadly-defined ogs. since these large ogs contain thousands of members across hundreds of genomes in some cases, we treat them as groups of paralogs  <cit> . demonstrating the scale-free tendency of many similar networks  <cit> , we found that the distribution of the number of neighbors has a fat tail.fig.  <dig> consensus meta-interactome. a a breakdown of source species of the meta-interactome shows that ppis in e. coli or c. jejuni contributed to more than half of the total set of interactions in the meta-interactome. b we defined the pool of interactions between proteins in different bacteria as the meta-interactome. to account for homologous proteins, we considered groups of orthologous proteins  as nodes in a consensus meta-interactome. in particular, we weighted links between ogs by the underlying number of observed interactions between proteins in such groups. c the main component of the consensus meta-interactome pools  <dig> % of all ogs. our graphical depiction suggests that the majority of ogs consist of one protein, while such groups are mostly linked by one underlying ppi. d more quantitatively, we found that the majority of ogs in the consensus meta-interactome indeed have only one protein while a minority of groups includes many proteins. e the distributions of the number of ppi that connect proteins in different ogs  as well as the number of neighboring ogs decay as a power-laws




functional annotation of orthologous groups
single interactomes are known to have many gaps, indicating ppis that went undetected in experimental studies  <cit> . since a missed interaction in one study may be found in an independent study through evolutionary conservation of the corresponding interacting proteins, a meta-interactome network potentially reveals such gaps. as such, we assume that links between orthologous groups in the consensus meta-interactome may be indicative of undetermined ppis between orthologs in the corresponding organisms. counting the number of bacteria a given ppi was observed in we found that relatively few interactions appear in multiple bacterial species . in particular, we found  <dig>  interactions that occurred only in a single species,  <dig> appeared in two species while only  <dig> interactions occurred in three or more species.fig.  <dig> conserved and cross-functional interactions in the consensus meta-interactome. a counts of ppis in the consensus meta-interactome network. nspecies indicates the number of distinct bacterial species contributing the interaction; a value of  <dig> denotes an interaction observed for a single species only. for each count, subsets denote how many ppis involve two, one, or zero interactors of known function . b significant connections between functional classes are mediated by the underlying ppis in the consensus meta-interactome. for each class combination we calculated a z-score that reflects the significance of the interaction density between classes and class coverage. while interactions mostly appear between the same classes, we also observe that most functional cross-talk emanates from ogs with translational as well as posttranslational functions




any single bacterial proteome may contain hundreds or even thousands of proteins of unknown or unclear function. out of more than  <dig>  interactions, less than  <dig>  involve two interactors of unknown or unclear function . due to limited cross-species overlap, just a small subset of fewer than  <dig> interactions is observed in more than one species and involves one or more interactors of unknown function.

certain functional groups contribute more extensively to the meta-interactome than others, potentially reflecting the occurrence of more common types of ppis across bacteria in general. in fig. 3b, we determined the overrepresentation of functional crosstalk between orthologous groups based on the underlying interactions between different proteins in the consensus meta-interactome. in particular, we determined a log-odds ratio of the observed and expected frequencies of interactions between ogs of the corresponding functional classes, allowing us to calculate a z-score . while most interactions appeared between the same classes, significant cross-talk mostly emanated from ogs with translational as well as posttranslational functions .

to determine the impact of the consensus meta-interactome on our ability to predict functions we generated a network of functionally annotated orthologous groups that were composed of ppis between proteins in e. coli. in particular, we randomly sampled 80% of all functionally annotated ogs  <dig> times to predict the functions of the remaining 20%. using a stochastic model  <cit>   every og is represented by a profile, reflecting the probability of having a certain function. applying different probability thresholds for the presence of a functional annotation, we determined roc curves, and measured the area under the curve as a measure of the prediction quality . in comparison, we considered all remaining interactions in the consensus meta-interactome, demanding that each og was functionally annotated. analogously, we randomly sampled 20% of annotated ogs that appeared in the original network of ogs based on interactions in e. coli. notably, we observed a shift toward increased values of the area under the roc curve. such a difference was statistically significant , suggesting that the augmentation of the underlying network with interactions from other bacteria significantly improved the quality of functional predictions . analogously, we found similar results when we considered ppis in c. jejuni . based on our random samples, we calculated the fraction of correctly predicted functions of ogs as a function of the degree in the underlying og networks of e. coli and c. jejuni . specifically, we observed that increased number of links corresponds to elevated levels of prediction accuracy of a given og. in the main plot of fig. 4c, we assessed the impact of the consensus meta-interactome on the accuracy of predicted functions of ogs. comparing frequencies of correctly predicted ogs, we found that the prediction of ogs with low degree was especially improved.fig.  <dig> the consensus meta-interactome improves functional predictions. a predicting the functions of sampled ogs we observed that the addition of the consensus meta-interactome allowed for better functional prediction . connecting functionally annotated orthologous groups  if they harbored interacting proteins of e. coli we randomly sampled 20% of all ogs  <dig> times and utilized the remainder to predict the functions of the sampled ogs. as a measure of the prediction quality we calculated the area under the roc curve. in comparison, we augmented the underlying e. coli specific network of ogs with remaining links in the underlying consensus meta-interactome. b we obtained similar results when we considered ogs that were initially connected by interactions between proteins of c. jejuni. in the inset of  we calculated the fraction of correctly predicted functions of ogs as a function of the degree in the underlying og networks of e. coli and c. jejuni, suggesting that increased number of links corresponds to elevated levels of prediction accuracy. assessing the impact of the consensus meta-interactome on the accuracy of predicted functions of ogs, we observed that the functional prediction for ogs with low degree was improved




to harness the power of the consensus meta-interactome, we used the network of ogs to predict the functions of otherwise functionally unknown orthologous groups. in fig.  <dig>  we observed that most ogs were clearly involved in translational functions and posttranslational modifications. notably, such results corresponded well to the observations that most functional crosstalk emanated from these functional classes .fig.  <dig> functional prediction of uncharacterized orthologous groups. functional similarity of interacting orthologous groups in the network. each orthologous group  occupies a single row in the heatmap. a node’s degree in the consensus meta-interactome is shown on the right. each column is a single functional category




the meta-interactome predicts interactomes and their size
the construction of a meta-interactome as described above can be utilized to predict the interactome of any species with or without interaction data. we used the consensus meta-interactome as a model to predict any potential interactions in a given proteome independently of the availability of protein interactions in the underlying organism. in particular, we considered all interactions between ogs that contain proteins of a given proteome of an underlying organism. as such, we consider all proteins of the given proteome interacting, when we find their corresponding ogs interacting. as a consequence, the interactome of a well-studied species such as e. coli can be improved by predicting yet undetected ppis using data from a related but distinct species.

this simple prediction method was used with all protein-coding genes from each of several representative bacterial species of varied genome and proteome size . out of all  <dig> bacterial species shown, six have had comprehensive protein interactomes published, and the data is reflected in the total number of proteins participating in ppis with experimental evidence. to obtain a starting point for our predictions, we used the interactome size estimation methods developed by stumpf et al.  <cit> . these methods primarily depend on the number of interactors and interactions in an experimental interactome to predict the true interactome size and therefore account for interactions not detected in the interactome. here, we used the stumpf et al. methods with three different counts of interactors and interactions: those from each of the six published interactomes, the larger counts found in the meta-interactome, and the fraction of the interactome derived from experimental data. in cases where a given species has been the subject of just one comprehensive interactome study , the counts provided by the first option are very similar to the third. considering a set of reference proteomes , we found that interactome sizes thus obtained appear to increase linearly with the proteome size of the underlying bacterial species . this is based on the assumption that the average number of interactions  per protein remains roughly the same, except in cases of genomes that increased by additional paralogs . for example, the e. coli genome codes for more than  <dig> unique proteins, and more than  <dig> of which have been found to participate in at least one ppi in one or more studies. the b. subtilis genome codes for roughly the same number of unique proteins but fewer than  <dig> of these proteins have been found to participate in ppis. however, b. subtilis has also been studied much less extensively, hence these numbers do not reflect the true number of interactions in a cell.table  <dig> predicted bacterial interactome sizes


n/a

n/a




n/a
n/a

n/a

n/a

n/a



amethod of stumpf et al.  <cit> 


bpublished interactomes are those specified in table 1


the interactome size prediction methods in this study are the results of predicting that two different orthologous group members will interact as long as members of the two groups have been observed interacting in any bacterial species. the resulting totals are shown in the second column ). results from the interactome size prediction method used by stumpf et al.  <cit>  are shown here for comparison: where possible, these are used with interaction and interactor totals from published interactomes . two hybrid approaches are also presented, with the input for the stumpf method provided by the total counts of interactors and interactions predicted by the interactome  or by the experimentally-observed interactions in the meta-interactome only . the final column provides the count of proteins in each respective proteome along with the fraction of those proteins present in the meta-interactome, including all proteins involved in functional predictions


fig.  <dig> predictions of maximal interactome size. based on the consensus meta-interactome we show the upper bounds of predicted interactome size  as a function of proteome size. each point corresponds to the uniprot reference proteome of a single species 




the more interactions are detected, the fewer are left to be predicted. as a result, unstudied or incomplete interactomes have the largest potential for prediction. for instance, there are very few ppis known from streptococcus pneumoniae: just  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins coded for in the s. pneumoniae r <dig> genome have experimental interactions in intact. our predicted interactome for this protein set increases that total to  <dig> proteins . similar results are seen for b. subtilis and for mycobacterium tuberculosis.

discussion
biological differences vs. technical differences in interactomes
published interactomes vary in size and composition across different studies and species, rendering them difficult to compare. in the case of campylobacter jejuni, a genome of  <dig> orfs yielded an interactome of more than  <dig>  distinct ppis from yeast two hybrid  screens using ~90% of the orfs, or  <dig> in total  <cit> . by contrast, the interactome of m. loti as reported by shimoda et al.  <cit>  includes just over  <dig> ppi though its proteome contains  <dig> predicted proteins. these discrepancies are clearly determined by different coverage: in the case of the m. loti interactome, the full genome was used as yeast two hybrid preys but only  <dig> of  <dig> genes were used as baits. this subset was curated as per the goals of the study and therefore represents a conscious technical difference between interactomes.

the comparison of interactomes also reveals unavoidable methodological discrepancies. more than half of the ppis contributing to the meta-interactome were observed using two hybrid methods, offering some methodological consistency, yet these methods may vary in technical implementation details such as protein expression conditions, growth conditions, or even the exact yeast or bacterial strains used. as we have shown previously, even when exactly the same protein pairs are tested by y2h assays, small differences in the experimental protocol can yield dramatically different results  <cit> . inclusion of affinity purification and mass spectrometry  approaches introduces another concern: ap/ms methods typically infer interactions from co-purification through a spoke model approach  while two hybrid methods generally screen for binary interactions only. we have previously estimated that the spoke-model approach over-estimates the number of ppis by about 3-fold  <cit> .

in this study, we have attempted to reduce the impact of technical differences between interaction studies by focusing on the subset of interactions that we pooled from multiple species. this approach is especially effective for minimizing the influence of potentially erroneous spoke model interactions, as the bulk of these interactions in the meta-interactome are from just two species . in the meantime, we believe a cross-species approach is helpful for identifying expected ppi in interactomes. as seen in fig. 3a, fewer than one thousand og vs. og interactions in the meta-interactome have been observed in more than one bacterial species, yet more interactions should be conserved across any two pairs of bacterial species.

finally, some differences among interactomes may be due to real distinctions in genetics and physiology. many processes show considerable genetic variation in bacteria, even when they are traditionally considered to be highly conserved. for instance, ribosomes are surprisingly malleable  <cit>  as are flagella  <cit> , cell division proteins  <cit>  or protein complexes in general  <cit> . a more complete meta-interactome should therefore shed light on the biological differences between species.

meta-interactomes reveal broadly-conserved interactions involving proteins of unknown function
of all og-og interactions involving ogs of unknown or unclear function , fewer than  <dig> are seen in more than  <dig> different species . highly conserved ppis are thought to serve more fundamental processes in a cell , hence we identified well-conserved interactions for function prediction. the most frequently observed ppis  across species are interactions among enzyme subunits, e.g. the alpha and beta subunits of tryptophan synthase which is a well-studied interaction. a selection of interactions involving interactors of less clear function are shown in table  <dig> table  <dig> conserved interactions involving ogs of unclear function

interactor a
 --
 --
thermus thermophilus, myxococcus xanthus
thermosynechococcus elongatus, synechococcus elongatus
campylobacter jejuni, helicobacter pylori
nostoc sp. pcc  <dig>  synechococcus elongatus
campylobacter jejuni, helicobacter pylori
campylobacter jejuni, helicobacter pylori
all interactions in this table have been observed in at least  <dig> ppis across bacterial species of at least two different genera, with species identified in the species column. a more complete list and an explanation of abbreviations can be found in additional file 5





this list omits broadly-conserved self-interactions, such as those among histidine kinases . an orthology-based approach is more informative when used with interactions among proteins in different groups  than with interactions among proteins of the same og as individual protein identities are ignored in the consensus meta-interactome. we have made the assumption that cross-og interactions are more likely to indicate cross-function interactions and are therefore of great relevance to functional context. this idea is illustrated by the mdb and ndh- <dig> complexes:

mdab
 proteins figure prominently in the meta-interactome. mdab was first identified as modulator of drug activity  <cit>  and is still annotated as such in most databases. later, wang et al.  characterized it as a novel antioxidant protein similar to nadph nitroreductases which play an important role in managing oxidative stress essential for successful colonization of h. pylori in its host  <cit> . its mutants are unable to colonize human host cells  <cit> . however, the mdab interaction network indicates another unrelated function as it interacts with three motility related proteins in three different species: a chemotaxis protein  from h. pylori, flagellin c  from c. jejuni, and chemotaxis protein chew  from e. coli k- <dig>  we suggest that the colonization phenotype is related to its motility rather than oxidative stress. in fact, motility is critical for initial colonization of h. pylori in its host cells  <cit> . flac in particular is well characterized as an important factor for host cell invasion in c. jejuni  <cit> .

ndh- <dig> complexes
interactions between components of a protein complex can be reconstructed from the meta-interactome interactions. the cyanobacterial ndh- <dig> membrane protein complexes provide a good example: these proteins belong to widely-conserved family of energy converting nadh: quinone oxidoreductases which are unique to organisms capable of photosynthesis. many distinct ndh- <dig> complexes may coexist in cyanobacteria to carry out different functions like respiration, cyclic electron transfer and co <dig> uptake . at least four ndh- <dig> complexes are predicted in cyanobacteria in synechocystis  <dig>  usually called l, l’, ms, and ms’. each complex is composed of a basal complex  associated with variable subcomplexes of ndh and cup subunits . each complex has a different function: for example, ndh-1 l and l’ are responsible for respiration and cyclic electron flow and ndh-1ms/ms’ for co <dig> uptake. the multitude of functionality of cyanobacteria is possible due to the presence of a great diversity of ndhd  and ndhf  gene families. it is possible that with sudden changes in co <dig> levels, cyanobacteria can flexibly use the ndh-1 m basal subcomplex and change contents of its variable subcomplex to form ms and l complexes  <cit> .fig.  <dig> the ndh- <dig> complex as an example of conserved interactions. a an ndh component interaction network from multiple species. each node in this network corresponds to a single orthologous group and is labeled with the corresponding group member in cyanobacteria . groups are colored as in part b; groups in gray have predicted accessory functions. interactions between any proteins in two groups are shown as edges. edges are colored as noted in the key. b a model of the ndh-1ms complex in cyanobacteria. figure after  <cit> . each box corresponds to a protein or group of proteins; those labeled with a single letter are ndh proteins. dotted lines indicate alternate complex forms. see  <cit>  for further details




an example of the ndh-1ms  network in synechocystis  <dig> and t. elongatus bp- <dig> is shown in fig. 7a and a corresponding model is provided in fig. 7b. only one similar interaction  is observed in e. coli. cupa  has been found to interact with ndhf , ndhd1-d <dig> , and an unknown protein  to form the ndh-is  sub-complex. members of enog410906a, though coding for protein of unknown function, have sequence similarity to fasciclin superfamily proteins associated with cell adhesion in plants and algae species. korste et al.   <cit>  found a similar protein  in synechocystis  <dig> and q8dma <dig> in t. elongatus bp- <dig> and designated it as cups, a small subunit of the ndh-1ms complex  <cit> . the nmr studies showed that though the protein was structurally similar to the fasciclin superfamily, but was not associated with adhesion, contrary to fasciclin superfamily proteins, given its intracellular location. though cups has been shown to interact with ndhd/ndhf/cupa, its function is still unknown. this network data not only provides clarity about the interaction of ndh- <dig> complex proteins but also predicts a probable respiratory function for the members of enog410906a. cyanobacterial meta-interactome networks  clearly show that the ndhh subunit interacts directly with all associated subunits, a point which had been missing in all predicted structures of ndh-i.

meta-interactomes predict interactome sizes
if we assume that the average degree of a protein remains the same, independent of the proteome, then interactomes should grow linearly with proteome size and thus with genome size . however, bias in the available data is likely creating distorted predictions: the e. coli data point  nearly does not fit the trend and most of the ppi predictions we can make originate with e. coli data. additionally, predicted interactome sizes are limited by the number of unannotated or highly unusual genes in a genome. the largest genomes in this set, from p. aeruginosa and m. loti, contain ~ <dig> and  <dig> genes without orthology predictions, respectively. further annotation of these genes or interactions among their products may allow for interaction predictions more like those for other species. total counts of og vs. og interactions corresponding to each taxon in the meta-interactome are provided in additional file 6; in many cases, the meta-interactome contains just one interaction for a given species and hence suggests candidates for further exploration .

proteome size is likely just one trait contributing to the overall complexity of a species  <cit>  and we may consider the interactome of that species to represent one facet of its complexity. some methods used to estimate interactome size were intended for use with human or yeast proteins rather than those from bacteria  <cit> . another confounding factor is that false positives are likely to grow exponentially with increasing proteome size, e.g. because a fraction of proteins interact non-specifically with hydrophobic surfaces.

the meta-interactome approach is an intentional abstraction. it is intended to underscore the bacterial cross-species commonality and conservation of protein interactions among currently available interaction data. as a result, this approach is limited by at least three main factors: limitations of protein-protein interaction screens, limitations of publicly-available data, and constraints on orthology prediction. all experimental interactomes are inherently incomplete and may include numerous false positives and otherwise erroneous results. the authors of these studies employ different filtering approaches and likely interpret their results based on expectations . most of the available interaction data for bacterial proteins has focused on just a handful of species. additional screens of proteins from more diverse sources across the bacterial tree of life will reveal a universe of yet unknown functions, just as gene sequences did for genetic diversity.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we have assembled a set of more than  <dig>  unique ppis between bacterial proteins to perform cross-species interactome comparisons. the combined set, or meta-interactome, allows us to define a set of interactions observed across multiple species. though this set is much smaller than expected, this result highlights the ongoing challenge of duplicating results of interactome screens. in an effort to address this challenge, we use the meta-interactome as a model for bacterial species without comprehensive interactome results, such as bacillus subtilis and salmonella enterica. we also employ the meta-interactome as a predictive tool to assign functions to uncharacterized proteins. these efforts and the methods presented here will allow researchers pursuing new interactome studies to easily predict the potential scope of their own results. as more bacterial interactomes reach completion, the interactions occupying prominent locations in a meta-interactome will likely reveal novel, broadly-conserved biological phenomena and appealing anti-microbial targets.

