BACKGROUND
although the importance of stochasticity in gene expression has been anticipated more than three decades ago  <cit> , the existence of a strong stochastic component in gene expression has only recently been experimentally demonstrated, showing that, despite constant environmental conditions, isogenic cells do show significant fluctuations in their gene-expression levels  <cit> . moreover, regulated stochasticity, and its resulting phenotypic diversity, has been shown to be involved in several biological processes  <cit> , including cell differentiation  <cit> , development  <cit> , virus decision-making  <cit> , and bacterial survival during environmental stress  <cit> .

many studies have shown that the average expression level of a gene depends strongly on its genomic location  <cit> . in cultured cells, the silencing position effect  is a well-characterized example of the influence of chromatin on gene expression; with a stably integrated transgene, a progressive silencing of the reporter occurs, at a rate that strongly depends on the integration site  <cit> . several studies based on treatments with 5-azacytidine  and with trichostatin a  have shown that dna methylation and histone acetylation play a pivotal role in this process. indeed, these treatments reverse the extinction of the transgene  <cit> . almost all of these studies, however, have focused on the mean value of gene expression, and only a few have addressed the question of the relationships between stochastic gene expression and chromatin, in either yeast  <cit>  or higher eukaryotes  <cit> .

initially conducted in prokaryotes  <cit> , experiments to explore the molecular causes of stochastic gene expression were rapidly extended to yeast models  <cit> . these experiments suggested that, other than trivial aspects such as small molecule numbers, more sophisticated causes, such as chromatin remodeling, were important players in stochastic gene expression  <cit> . more precisely, of the various possible sources of stochasticity, one in particular, namely locus-dependent chromatin dynamics  is a promising candidate to explain the regulation of stochastic gene expression. this role of chromatin was highlighted by the work of becskei et al., who in  <dig> showed the existence of genomic domains in the yeast genome, which produce a low transcriptional noise   <cit> . the following year, by analyzing the variability of mrna levels from tandemly and non-tandemly integrated pairs of transgenes in mammalian cells, raj et al. identified the influence of genomic domain on transcriptional noise, suggesting the importance of the switching rate between chromatin states via remodeling. gene activation or inactivation would occur in cases of chromatin decondensation or condensation, respectively  <cit> . to analyze the effect of chromatin remodeling on promoter activation and therefore on stochastic gene expression, raser and o'shea used yeast strains lacking components of the chromatin-remodeling complexes. a major conclusion of their work was that the alteration of chromatin-remodeling enzymes resulted in changes in stochastic gene expression  <cit> . however, most of these studies have tried to link chromatin dynamics to stochastic gene expression using indirect approaches  <cit> .

in many situations, from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, simple mathematical models describing the transcriptional dynamics as a two-state process have been shown to account effectively for the stochastic expression of a gene  <cit> . indeed, the two-state model, also known as the 'random-telegraph model'  <cit> , now constitutes a standard in the field. this model assumes that the promoter switches randomly between two states, 'on' and 'off', with only the former allowing initiation events to occur. these transitions could correspond to several mechanisms, including assembly and disassembly of specific complexes, progression through the cell cycle, or the recruitment of the locus into transcription factories  <cit> . in many cases, evidence supports the hypothesis that these 'on' and 'off' states primarily reflect alternative chromatin configurations  <cit> .

recently, using a short-lived luciferase protein, suter et al. monitored transcription at high temporal resolution in single mammalian cells, and identified bursts of transcription, a mechanism previously suggested in prokaryotes and eukaryotes  <cit> . using the random-telegraph model, they characterized the temporal patterns of transcriptional bursts for different genes, and obtained the distributions of the 'on' and 'off' times  <cit> . harper et al. performed a complementary analysis of transcriptional bursting in single mammalian cells  <cit> . by quantifying the time dependence and cyclic behavior of the transcriptional pulses from the prolactin promoter, they estimated the length and variation of both transcriptionally active and inactive phases. both studies point to the existence of a refractory 'off' period, but they diverge on the role of chromatin remodeling; in contrast to the suter study, in which chromatin environment seemed to play a secondary role in shaping bursting patterns, harper et al. concluded that chromatin remodeling may play an important role in the timing of transcriptional bursting. finally, based on time-lapse fluorescence microscopy experiments, coupled with the use of the two-state model, dar et al. gave a recent comprehensive study on noise in mammalian cells  <cit> . in their work, these authors suggested that transcriptional bursting, as opposed to constitutive expression, dominates across the human genome. moreover, by analyzing more than  <dig>  distinct genomic loci, they found that both frequency and burst size vary by chromosomal location. therefore, the role of chromatin dynamics in the control of stochastic gene expression in higher eukaryotes remains a central matter of debate.

in a preliminary study, our group showed, using isogenic cell populations expressing a fluorescent reporter, that modification of chromatin marks, using chromatin-modifying agents such as 5-azacytidine  and trichostatin a , induced significant effects on mean fluorescence intensity  and normalized variance   <cit> . we also showed that tsa and 5-azac had different effects on nv, whereas their effects on mfi were similar. finally, investigating the possible reversibility of the effects identified by flow cytometry after the drug treatments, we found that mfi, nv, and the shape of the fluorescence distributions tended to return to their initial values after the treatment end. this result, which shows full reversibility of the cellular system after important modifications of the chromatin state, suggests that cells could be able to temporally modify their level of stochastic gene expression via modifications of chromatin marks, before returning to their initial physiological state.

to assess the possible influence of chromatin-opening/closing dynamics on the stochasticity of gene expression, the next step was to combine biological experiments with a modeling analysis. for that purpose, we generated a series of clonal isogenic cell populations from chicken erythrocyte progenitors . these populations were stably transfected with a unique copy of a reporter-gene coding for the red fluorescent protein mcherry, but the reporter was inserted at different chromosomal positions in each clone . using flow-cytometry measurements, we found substantial clone-to-clone differences in the stochastic expression of the reporter. in particular, some of the clones had very similar mfi but different nv values. because the only difference between these clones was the genomic location of the reporter, the observed differences in stochastic gene expression must stem from the chromosomal positioning effect, such as locus-specific dynamics of the chromatin surrounding the transgene. to evaluate whether chromatin dynamics significantly affect the stochasticity of gene expression, we treated some clones with 5-azac and tsa. cell responses to these drugs clearly showed that both mfi and nv were affected, indicating that the chromatin environment of the reporter gene plays a significant role in the stochasticity of its expression. this result confirmed preliminary conclusions obtained by our team  <cit> . by fitting a two-state model to the experimental data, we provided a mechanistic interpretation for the clone-to-clone diversity of expression patterns, in terms of differences in chromatin dynamics. more specifically, based on both analytical derivations  <cit>  and simulations  <cit> , we explored the dynamics of the model and iteratively refined its kinetic parameters. the outcome was an accurate reproduction of the distribution of expression levels before, during, and after drug treatment.

our current study supports the view that expression dynamics is strongly driven by short and infrequent transcriptional bursts, as previously described in other models, including mammalian models. however, the major advance of this work is that, whereas the duration and intensity of bursts did not show strong clone-to-clone differences, the time between bursts was found to depend strongly on genomic location and was broadly affected by drug treatments that affect chromatin. hence, the position-dependent opening dynamics of chromatin emerges as a key determinant of the stochasticity in gene expression.

RESULTS
we generated a series of clones stably transfected with the mcherry reporter, driven by the cytomegalovirus  promoter, then using splinkerette pcr  <cit> , we retained six clones showing a unique reporter insertion site . these clones were then analyzed by flow cytometry, yielding for each of them the full distribution of fluorescence, and the corresponding mfi and nv . it is important to emphasize that the six clones differed only in their reporter insertion sites. based on the nv, a robust indicator of the stochasticity of gene expression  <cit> , the clones could be sorted from the most to the least stochastic, in terms of reporter-gene expression as follows: c5>c7>c11>c3>c17>c <dig>  moreover, analyzing the relationship between nv and mfi, we concluded that there is no direct linear relation between these two parameters. indeed, certain clones displayed similar mfi but very different nv values . this important dispersion of the points, around the inverse tendency between nv and mfi values, also suggests that mrna abundance fluctuations were not the major source of intrinsic noise in this context.

an explanation of these observations comes from a previous preliminary study, in which we investigated whether chromatin dynamics are involved in these observed differences  <cit> . using the same cellular clones  we performed the 5-azac and tsa treatments that would act directly on chromatin by two different molecular means. our results showed that for the two drugs, modification of chromatin dynamics had clear consequences for stochastic gene expression  <cit> . however, in this previous study, we did not assess how chromatin influences stochastic gene expression.

thus, for this purpose in the current study, we fitted these data to a two-state model of gene expression, and evaluated to what extent chromatin dynamics act on stochastic gene expression. under the assumption that all parameters but those describing the dynamics of chromatin would be identical in all the clones, we performed an iterative screening of model parameters. this allowed us to find these common parameters, and to characterize the position-specific dynamics of chromatin for each individual clone .

description of the model
the choice of the model used to analyze our biological data was crucial. two models are classically used to describe transcriptional stochasticity: 1) a poisson model, in which the gene has, at each instant, a given chance to produce an mrna,  <cit>  and 2) a random-telegraph model, in which the gene additionally switches randomly between an 'on' state, in which transcripts are produces in line with poisson dynamics, and an 'off' state, in which no transcripts are produced  <cit> . the poisson model is known to lead to a direct linear relationship between mfi and nv on a log-log plot   <cit> . because such a relation was not sufficient to describe our data , we adopted the more general random-telegraph model. it cannot be excluded that extrinsic noise may also participate to some degree in the observed fluorescence distributions. however, observing a variety of distributions for different insertion sites of the reporter  strongly suggests that the major source of noise is intrinsic. indeed, as sources of extrinsic noise are independent of the reporter, they were expected to have somewhat similar effects in all the different clones. in addition, given the long mrna and protein lifetimes in our system , only the very slow extrinsic fluctuations are likely to affect the protein levels of the reporter.

because flow cytometry quantifies protein fluorescence, the model must describe the expression process up to the protein level  and requires an additional parameter to convert protein quantity into fluorescence intensity . thus, for each clone, the model had seven parameters: kon and koff , respectively describing the rates of chromatin opening and closing, ρ and γ, describing the transcription and translation rates, ρ˜ and γ˜, describing the transcript and protein degradation rates, and finally, a linear coefficient α, representing the fluorescence intensity of a single mcherry protein in the arbitrary unit measured by the flow cytometer. in order to fit the model, the optimal set of parameters must be identified, under the assumption that ρ, γ, ρ˜, γ˜ and α are identical in every clone, but that kon and koff  are clone-specific. from this point, we refer to the five former parameters as the 'transcription-translation parameters' and to the two latter ones as the 'chromatin-dynamics parameters'. because we had six clones, we actually had to determine  <dig> parameters  + 5) in order to fully specify the model and to ultimately estimate the chromatin-dynamics parameters for each clone. for these  <dig> parameters, the two degradation rates  were determined experimentally from inhibition-based experiments . we found respectively that ρ˜ =  <dig>  × 10-3/min  and γ˜ =  <dig>  × 10-4/min . the sensitivity of our results with regard to uncertainty in these experimentally determined values will be discussed later. these values are consistent with average mrna and protein half-lives previously measured in mammalian cells   <cit> . following this, we needed to find the optimal values of a set of  <dig> parameters to fit the experimentally measured fluorescence distribution of the six clones.

several methods can be used to find such a parameter set. in particular, there are various optimization methods available, such as simulated annealing. however, because the model-experiment comparisons in our study involved stochastic simulations, the objective functions that have to be minimized  are only estimated up to a certain error level. although small, this error level makes most optimization algorithms inadequate. indeed, these algorithms rely on estimating the gradient or hessian of the objective function, based on a finite difference procedure . in a context where successive estimations of the objective function, even for the same parameters, may display random variations, these optimization algorithms are clearly doomed to failure. overcoming this issue would require both running extremely long and computationally intensive simulations to minimize the error, and using coarse variation steps in the gradient-estimation procedure, which could result in numerical instabilities during the optimization.

for this reason, we decided to conduct a systematic parametric exploration, as this is a procedure that does not require local smoothness of the objective function. in addition, a single evaluation of the objective function represents a heavy computation load; for example, involving thousands of realizations of a gillespie simulation that are followed over long periods of simulated time . in this context, a systematic parametric exploration allows massive parallelization of the computations on a grid. the sequential evaluation imposed by optimization algorithms makes this approach prohibitive. however, because the systematic exploration still requires intensive computations, we used iterative screening of the model parameters to progressively reduce the parameter space that has to be simulated.

this iterative screening was based on three steps in which we successively used analytical derivations on the model , additional experimental data , and finally, stochastic simulation . thanks to these successive screenings, we were able to reduce by a factor of  <dig> the number of parameter sets to be simulated, thus making the problem computationally tractable. in the following sections, we describe the three screening steps and the results we obtained from them.

first screening of model parameters, based on mean and variance of fluorescence intensity
mathematical derivations by paulsson from the two-state model  <cit>  analytically provided the values of mfi and nv as a function of all parameters: kon, koff , ρ, γ, ρ˜, γ˜ and α. by inverting these equations , we were able to compute the chromatin-dynamics parameters  for each clone from: 1) the experimentally measured mfi and nv of the clone, 2), the experimentally determined values of ρ˜ and γ˜, and 3) the unknown transcription-translation parameters . thus, only three transcription-translation parameters remained to be determined, making their combinatorial exploration computationally tractable.

we explored wide ranges of these parameters that included all biologically relevant values  <cit> :  <dig> values for ρ ,  <dig> values for γ , and  <dig> values for α   <cit>  . for each triplet , we computed kon and koff for each of the six clones from their experimental values of mfi and nv. of the  <dig>  initial parameter sets, only  <dig>  led to valid solutions, with the others leading to negative values for kon or koff for at least one clone. figure 2b shows the  <dig>  possible pairs of values  that resulted from this exploration for all the clones. it was found that, although the chromatin-dynamics parameters could be the same order of magnitude, the mean open time  was markedly shorter than the mean closed time . this is characteristic of a transcriptional activity in which mrna production events occur in brief bursts separated by longer silent periods.

the result of this first screening still produced more than  <dig>  valid parameter sets, with the values of kon and koff spanning large intervals. this emphasizes that nv and mfi alone are not sufficient to identify, for a specific clone and therefore for a given genomic insertion site, the parameters that best explain the observed distribution of fluorescence.

second screening of model parameters, based on response to treatments with chromatin-modifying agents
in order to reduce the ranges of solutions, we conducted additional experiments in which we modified the global dynamics of chromatin in both the cells and the model. we first treated three clones with the two chromatin-modifying agents tsa and 5-azac. as expected, tsa treatment, which leads to chromatin decondensation  <cit> , induced an increase in mfi over time . 5-azac treatment, which inhibits chromatin condensation  <cit> , produced the same effect as tsa treatment, but to a much lower extent. it is noteworthy that measures such as mfi, nv, and the fluorescence distributions tended to return to their initial values after removal of tsa and 5-azac, indicating full reversibility of the cellular system, and therefore a conservation of physiological conditions  <cit> .

based on these additional data, we could then exclude all transcription-translation parameter sets that did not account for the observed increase in expression levels even if the chromatin was considered as constantly open . it is important to emphasize that we made the assumption that the tsa and 5-azac treatments affected only the chromatin-dynamics parameters. using this strategy, we were able to reject 86% of the parameter sets, thus we kept only  <dig> transcription-translation parameter sets for further analyses. figure 3b shows the chromatin-dynamics parameter sets , corresponding to the transcription-translation sets that were kept. all retained cases had in common that the mean open time 1/koff was very short compared with any other timescale in the model . hence, the actual duration of the bursts could not be estimated because two parameter sets with different koff  but an identical number of mrnas produced per active period will exhibit similar distributions. for instance, if, on average,  <dig> mrnas are produced during bursts that last  <dig> seconds or during bursts that last  <dig> minutes, the results will be practically identical because mrnas decay with a half-life of more than  <dig> hours. hence, as in other studies  <cit> , we could not determine the parameters koff  and ρ, but only their ratio ρ/koff , that is, the mean number of mrnas produced during a burst. this new effective parameter, referred to as 'burst size', reduces by  <dig> the number of parameters in the model. at a higher level, protein synthesis/degradation noise is only important in cases where there is a low copy number  <cit> . because low protein abundance would not be detected in a cytometry measurement, this source of noise is marginal compared with the noise from transcription and mrna synthesis/degradation. for instance, even for the least variable clone , a mean protein level as low as  <dig> copies would only contribute less than 5% to the measured nv. hence, the parameters γ and α directly compensate for each other, and can be grouped into a single effective parameter, 'α·γ' , reducing again by  <dig> the number of fitting parameters.

reformulating the sets of  couples retained after the second screening  in terms of , as shown in figure 3c, we observed relatively similar ranges of values for the mean burst size ρ/koff for the six clones . by contrast, the mean closed time of chromatin seemed to be highly clone-dependent, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> hours for clone c <dig> and c <dig> to more than  <dig> days for c <dig> and c <dig> . this suggests that the chromatin-opening dynamics depend on the clones, and therefore on the chromatin environment of the reporter.

third screening of model parameters, based on full distribution of fluorescence
to select the best parameter set from the  <dig> remaining sets, we simulated distributions of fluorescence corresponding to the remaining parameter sets, and compared them with the fluorescence distributions measured by flow cytometry. for each parameter set, we used a stochastic simulation algorithm   <cit> , to simulate  <dig>  cells per clone, and then computed the resulting fluorescence distributions. background fluorescence levels were added to the simulated distributions by convolution with the fluorescence distribution of the negative control-cell population . the resulting values were then compared with the six experimental distributions using a kolmogorov-smirnov test.

analyzing the comparison scores  from the kolmogorov-smirnov test of the  <dig> parameter sets, we were able to identify the subsets of parameters, and therefore the corresponding chromatin dynamics, that were the best fit to the distributions measured by the flow cytometer . note that most sets correctly fit the experimental data , showing that the previous screening had already selected the correct parameter sets. the final parameter sets are shown  in figure 4b. for five of the six clones, we were able to generate distributions similar to those measured by flow cytometry . however, when analyzing the bi-modal clone c <dig>  we found that the simulated distribution fit only the high modality of the fluorescence distribution. this third screening supports our previous observation about the relatively similar mean burst size between the clones but the significantly different mean closed times . looking at the chromatin-dynamics parameter set that best fit the flow-cytometry distributions for all clones , our study revealed that for the six clones, mean burst sizes were between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mrnas per burst, and mean closed times between  <dig>  minutes  for the fastest clone to  <dig>  minutes  for the slowest clone. however, it is important to note that, taking into account the full range of viable parameters  clone dynamics could be fit with similar values for their mean burst sizes  whereas their mean closed time had to be different .

amean closed times  are expressed as minutes.

bmean burst sizes  are expressed as mrnas.

chromatin dynamics at genomic insertion sites and sensitivity analysis
by combining biological experiments, analytical computations and stochastic simulations, we were able to estimate all the model parameters that best fit the measured flow-cytometry distribution for the different integration sites. we now used some of these parameters  to directly estimate the possible chromatin-dynamics parameters for any couple , each corresponding to a different genomic insertion site of the reporter. we also used these parameters to estimate the sensitivity of the model  in a biologically relevant parameter space. indeed, we were able to use the best set of transcription-translation parameters that we obtained, along with a modified paulsson's equation system, to determine the mean closed time of chromatin and the mean size of transcriptional bursts from the mean and nv of any similar construction  measured by flow cytometry . this can be represented by two three-dimensional graphs: one for the mean closed time and one for the mean burst size. it should be noted that both graphs are linked because each couple  corresponded to a single couple . two important elements could be derived from these three-dimensional graphs. first, as shown in panel a, the mean closed time was determined mainly by the nv value, whereas mfi only had a marginal contribution . in other words, whatever the average transcriptional activity, the mean closed time could be derived directly from the variability in expression levels, highlighting the informational content of stochasticity in gene expression  <cit> . by contrast, it can be seen from panel b that, to compute the mean burst size, both measures are necessary. interestingly, the results presented here show that, for our cell lineage, fluorescence distributions, which are relatively easy to measure by flow cytometry, coupled with a pertinent and robust analysis, allowed us to obtain valuable information about the chromatin-dynamics parameters.

finally, we determined how the reported values  are affected by uncertainty in the experimentally determined mrna and protein half-lives by conducting sensitivity analysis on equation  <dig> . we found that variations of ±5% of either mrna or protein half-life resulted in variations in mean closed time and mean burst size that were always smaller than 5%. we therefore concluded that any experimental uncertainty in the mrna and protein half-lives would only marginally affect the parameter values obtained through the model.

testing and validation of the model following a dynamic evolution of the chromatin state
to test the contribution of chromatin dynamics to stochastic gene expression and the quality of the parameter set we obtained, we used our model to simulate a situation in which the chromatin dynamics were profoundly modified. for this, we used the flow-cytometry data from the tsa-treated clones c <dig> and c <dig> . during tsa treatment, the distributions of fluorescence, reflecting the expression of the mcherry reporter, gradually shifted to higher fluorescence values . according to our study, to obtain such dramatic effects, the dynamics of chromatin at the reporter insertion locus must have been modified by reducing the mean closed time, increasing the mean burst size, or a combination of both. because both parameters affect the transcriptional activity of the reporter, all the possible combinations that can account for the observed change in expression form a line in the mean closed time/mean burst size space . we explored the chromatin dynamics for parameter sets lying along this line, and found the set that best fit the new flow-cytometry data. as for the previous experiments, we systematically explored the different parameter sets by sampling  <dig> points on the line between the two extreme situations mentioned above. it should be noted that, for this exploration, we considered the transcription-translation parameter set as constant, identical to the one computed previously . we found that the tsa treatment seems mainly to modify the chromatin mean closed time; for the two clones used in this experiment, tsa reduced the mean closed time from more than  <dig> day  and more than  <dig> days  to  <dig> and  <dig>  hours respectively . by contrast, mean burst size seemed to be increased only slightly. to support this result, we performed stochastic simulations with the retained chromatin-dynamics parameters to generate fluorescence distributions that we compared with the experimental flow-cytometry distributions . for the two clones, the simulated distributions correctly fit the flow-cytometry values at the end of the tsa treatment . however, for the first time point , the simulated fluorescence distribution was shifted relative to the biological experiment.

the evolution of the comparison score between the measured and simulated data  confirmed that during the first hours of treatment the simulation was a poor fit to the flow-cytometry data. however, after  <dig> hours, a significant improvement occurred, and after  <dig> hours of treatment, the scores measured for the two clones were equivalent to those measured before the tsa treatment . this clearly demonstrates that the model correctly rendered the new chromatin dynamics at steady state, although it was not able to fully reproduce the transient period. this is probably due to the kinetics of the drug effect, which was considered immediate in the model  whereas, in real cells, the chromatin modifications probably take place more gradually, thus delaying the activity of the drug.

to illustrate the consequences of the new chromatin dynamics on the transcription and translation induced by the tsa treatment, figure 6d shows ssa simulations of the cell dynamics for the two clones before and after treatment. owing to the low frequency of chromatin-opening events before treatment, a period of more than  <dig> days is shown whereas the tsa treatment was simulated for only  <dig> hours. the simulation clearly indicates the effects of tsa treatment on the chromatin dynamics and emphasizes the increased frequency of the chromatin-opening events, resulting in an increase in mrna and protein concentrations.

discussion
the importance of stochasticity of gene expression in many key cellular activities was appreciated many decades ago, and is now supported by strong experimental evidence  <cit> .

analyzing stochastic expression of a stably integrated fluorescent reporter in six isogenic cell populations, differing only in their reporter integration site, this study provides new evidence suggesting that the local chromatin environment  influences stochastic gene expression. our results are in agreement with previous studies on hiv gene expression, where it was shown that the existence of different fates for infected cells correlated with the virus-integration sites  <cit> , and that transcriptional burst size and burst frequency vary depending on the virus-integration sites  <cit> . this chromosomal positioning effect on stochastic gene expression was also shown in yeast and in mammalian cells  <cit> , suggesting the existence of genomic local domain-level noise, probably under the control of the switching rate of chromatin between the open and closed configurations  <cit> . the biological function of this domain-level noise is not yet completely understood. batada and hurst showed in yeast that genomic domains that enable low noise act as sinks for essential genes, for which noise is more deleterious than for nonessential ones  <cit> , suggesting an evolutionary pressure for shaping low-noise genomic domains. it is to be noted here that local chromatin dynamics is not the sole difference between the integration sites; other genomic features, possibly correlated with chromatin states, could also be involved. we are currently investigating such a question on a genome-wide scale.

using a two-state model, we found that the observed nvs and mfis for each clone alone are not sufficient to identify efficiently, for a specific chromatin environment, a restricted set of parameters that best explain the observed differences between the six clones. we thus used a more complex strategy exploiting the full distribution of fluorescence as measured by flow cytometry. by mixing analytical models, complementary experiments, and stochastic simulations, we progressively identified the parameters that best fit the flow-cytometry distributions. the final set of parameters we obtained was able to reproduce accurately the experimental data for all clones except the unique bi-modal one, c <dig>  for which the simulated distribution fit only the high modality. this bi-modal distribution observed for clone c <dig> could be due to: 1) specific chromatin dynamics related to the genomic insertion site of the reporter, or 2) a genetic mutation event affecting the reporter-gene integrity and resulting in two genetically distinct subpopulations. in the first case, if the transition rates between active and inactive states are extremely slow relative to transcript and protein degradations, each promoter state would be relatively stable, and this transcription regime could result in bi-modal protein expression  <cit> . however, in the context of a two-state model, the value of the distribution between the two modes normally reflects the transient dynamics taking place after the gene switches from one state to the other, producing distribution tails from each mode towards the other. for clone c <dig>  this part of the distribution between the two well-separated modes was notably low, almost null. this indicates that the passage from one state to the other was extremely rare, so rare that the protein half-life  is negligible in comparison. such a slow dynamic is unlikely to be caused by chromatin dynamics. indeed, during the submission of this work, very recent experimental evidence suggested that the bi-modal distribution of clone c <dig> arose from a genetic mutation of the reporter . this event induces extinction of the transgene in a subpopulation of c <dig>  and the appearance of the low modality . including this subpopulation in the fitting process would therefore induce a bias. consequently, we re-ran the analysis, taking into account only the five clones showing a unimodal distribution. the chromatin-dynamics parameter set that best fit the flow-cytometry distributions for all clones presented in figure 4b remained identical , in accordance with the fact that the initial fitting process fit only the high modality of c <dig> and ignored the low one.

after selection of the best parameter sets and characterization of the chromatin dynamics for each clone, our work provided elements suggesting that the chromatin state is essentially dominated by the closed state, as previously shown  <cit> , but most importantly, that the chromatin environments of the clones clearly differed in their mean closed time. indeed, for all clones, the mean burst sizes roughly comprised between  <dig> and  <dig> mrnas per burst, which is consistent with previous quantifications  <cit> , whereas the means closed times were much more markedly clone-specific . this result suggests that the duration of the chromatin closed state could explain the basal stochastic gene expression differences observed between the six clones, in contrast to the mean burst size, for which values overlapped when considering all the best parameter sets. therefore, the mean closed time could be an essential relevant parameter involved in the regulation of stochastic gene expression. the simulation demonstrated the existence of a highly bursty transcription process. it is noteworthy that a previous study using the cmv promoter did not observe such transcriptional bursts or intervals of inactivity  <cit> ; however, that study used timescale analysis with a window that was significantly shorter than that used in our work. the use of the cmv promoter was essential for our study. in addition to overcome technical bias , the fact that, using a strong promoter, we found significant differences between clones in gene-expression dynamics, and therefore genomic-integration sites, suggests that the source of the observed noise is related to the gene context . the study strongly suggests that similar results could be obtained using a weaker endogenous promoter. recent literature seems to corroborate this hypothesis; in the recent work of dar et al., the authors showed that the genomic-integration site influences burst kinetics, with a the promoter type having a marginal influence  <cit> . understanding promoter-specific effects would require abolishing the context effect that is, performing a study using different promoters in a controlled genomic location. this is currently being addressed in our group.

the results presented here also show how, using a two-state model and fluorescence distributions measured by flow cytometry, possible chromatin-dynamics parameters can be identified. in this study, the filtering of promoter activity by mrna and protein dynamics allows inference of temporal information from a steady-state measurement . in this regard, the mrna and protein half-lives are the components that define the range of timescales that can be assessed from the experiment. using destabilized reporters  <cit>  would probably improve the precision of our approach towards faster timescales, provided that the fluorescence signal remains sufficiently strong to be detected by flow cytometry. in such cases, it should be possible to resolve burst duration  and transcription rate  separately. note, however, that having half-lives that are too short could impair the ability to probe long timescales, such as the time between bursts. in addition, resolving experimentally the full distribution of chromatin open/closed times  is only possible with single-cell time-lapse experiments  <cit> .

finally, using our mathematical model, we simulated a situation in which the chromatin dynamics were directly modified by tsa. as expected, tsa treatment activated the mean reporter-gene expression  <cit>  and seemed to increase the fraction of time spent in the 'on' phase, probably as a result of a permissive chromatin state  <cit> . the direct consequence of this treatment was a gradual shift of the distributions towards higher fluorescence values. after testing several possible chromatin dynamics leading to chromatin opening, our model was able to produce simulated distributions that efficiently fitted the flow-cytometry values during most of the tsa treatment. moreover, the results suggest that tsa treatment does not increase the duration of the individual 'on' phase, but rather increases the frequency of these phases by reducing the duration of the 'off' phase, thus globally increasing the relative proportion of 'on' phases, and hence increasing the transcriptional activity. it should be notes that, owing to the instantaneous modification of the chromatin dynamics imposed in the model, the simulated distributions were a poor fit to the flow-cytometry data during the first stage of the treatment, whereas they were a perfect fit at the end of the treatment. in order to analyze the kinetics of chromatin opening, a significant improvement of our model would be to perform more precise modeling of treatment kinetics leading the new chromatin dynamics. our study highlights the importance of chromatin-opening events in the regulation of transcription. it suggests that, to fine-tune the level of expression variability of a gene, higher eukaryotic cells might act on the chromatin mean closed time. this result provides new clues about the mechanisms involved in stochastic gene-expression regulation by chromatin remodeling.

our work suggests that the probability of chromatin entering an open state is a key determinant of gene expression in our system. a recent study in escherichia coli, using a somewhat different strategy, identified that the koff parameter  was the main parameter used by the bacterium for gene upregulation  <cit> , which is therefore in sharp contrast to our own results. this might be related to the different biophysical nature of the 'on' and 'off' states in prokaryotes versus eukaryotes, owing to the specific nature of chromatin in eukaryotes. finally, our results also emphasize the very slow dynamics of chromatin. indeed, this work suggests that, depending on the genomic location of the transgene, chromatin can stay in a closed state for days, switching only occasionally to an open active state. this emphasizes the slowness of the stochastic-expression process. however, it is important to note that even if chromatin seems to be a major player in regulating gene-expression noise, we did not explore the numerous other possible sources of stochasticity such as cellular division  <cit> , elongation dynamics  <cit> , the combinatorial interplay of complexes at the promoter  <cit> , presence of transcription factories  <cit> , and other spatial aspects  <cit> . solutions for dissecting the contribution of all the components of the regulation of stochastic gene expression could be found by 1) dedicated experimental studies, as for example in the recent work by singh et al., in which the authors proposed a method to discriminate between mrna birth/death and promoter fluctuations as intrinsic sources of noise  <cit> , coupled with 2) a progressive increase in the model complexity based on advances in our understanding of the different mechanisms involved in the stochasticity of gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we highlight the importance of the dynamics of chromatin in the control of cell-to-cell variability. our results suggest that long periods of 'off' time  followed by brief period of 'open' times  can best explain the observed difference between clones in terms of stochastic gene expression. this paves the way for future studies exploring the role of chromatin dynamics at a more local scale.

