BACKGROUND
stromules   <cit>  are protrusions of the plastid envelope with a diameter of usually less than  <dig> μm  <cit> . these filament-like structures are highly dynamic and can extend and retract within seconds  <cit> . although tubules extending from the plastid surface had been described in a monograph about plastids in  <dig> , their significance and morphological relevance was recognized only after development and improvement of suitable fluorescence microscopy techniques. in particular, the generation of transgenic plants expressing chimeric proteins consisting of green fluorescent protein  fused to chloroplast targeting transit peptides allowed the first detailed analysis demonstrating the presence of stromal proteins within these structures  <cit> . over the past years, stromules were found in a variety of vascular plant species, non-vascular plant species and green algae  which suggests evolutionary conservation of these structures and implies that they might play an important role in all members of the viridiplantae. despite significant progress in understanding the importance of certain cytoskeleton elements and motor proteins for stromule maintenance  <cit> , the function of stromules remains elusive. one way to approximate their role in plant cells is to search for physiological conditions which lead to the induction of stromules.

stromules are found at relatively high frequency, for example, in sink tissues like ripening tomatoes  <cit> , in leaf samples placed on sucrose-rich medium as well as in by <dig> cell cultures  <cit> . in all these instances, the cells showing high stromule frequency are exposed to a relatively high concentration of carbohydrates which suggests a link between the presence of sugars and stromule formation. here, we have tried to elucidate this potential correlation by measuring the influence of exposure to different sugar solutions on stromule frequency in a model plant tissue, notably the upper leaf epidermis of arabidopsis thaliana.

we found in our experiments that stromule formation is strongly induced in epidermal plastids after application of sucrose and glucose. the specificity of this induction is confirmed by the inability of either fructose, sorbitol and mannitol to induce the same reactions. furthermore, stromule induction by sucrose and glucose is not restricted to epidermal plastids but can likewise be observed in chloroplasts of the palisade parenchyma.

RESULTS
upper leaf epidermis as suitable model tissue for stromule induction
for the intended experiments, a suitable model system is required that allows both controlled exposure to sugar solutions and easy analysis of sufficiently high numbers of plastids. we chose arabidopsis thaliana as model plant, notably a transgenic line  which constitutively expresses fnr/egfp, a chimeric protein composed of the chloroplast targeting transit peptide of ferredoxin-nadp-oxidoreductase  fused to egfp, a derivative of green fluorescent protein with enhanced fluorescence properties  <cit> . due to the resulting green fluorescent stroma, plastids and stromules can easily be visualized in this transgenic line by conventional epifluorescence microscopy . in order to avoid exposure of plant material to external sugars during cultivation which might interfere with the intended sugar induction experiments soil grown plants were used. the upper epidermal tissue of rosette leaves was chosen for these studies because it facilitates relatively easy data acquisition. due to the flat shape of these cells and the comparably low number of plastids , all plastids and stromules within a given cell can be monitored by epifluorescence microscopy in a z-stack consisting of less than  <dig> focal planes . furthermore, its surface is not as textured as that of the lower epidermis with its emersed vascular veins, which would impede microscopic imaging.

stromule frequency is not influenced by cell size
to identify changes in the chosen model tissue a suitable stromule parameter is needed. stromule frequency , i.e. the proportion of plastids showing at least one stromule, has been previously used for quantification of changes induced by experimental treatments to epidermal cells of nicotiana benthamiana  <cit>  and occurring during ripening of tomato fruit  <cit> . because sf is a proportion, waters and colleagues  <cit>  introduced the 'stromule index' for statistical analysis and graphical display, which represents the arcsin transformed sf . sf, as it has been used before, is based on the comparison of sf estimated for individual cells. this necessitates the cell context to be considered and requires imaging of plastids and cell boundaries. not having to consider the cell context would allow for streamlined imaging and data analysis but would presuppose that cells of different size do not differ in sf. our measurement of the size of  <dig> cells from  <dig> leaves  shows that the upper epidermis of arabidopsis thaliana is composed of cells of very different size  with small cells dominating the epidermis by number . as illustrated in figure 1c, the number of plastids per cell  is positively correlated with cell size . in order to test if stromule frequency changes with cell size, cells were pooled into size classes incrementing by  <dig> μm <dig>  the respective sf was calculated by dividing the total number of plastids exhibiting stromules by the number of all plastids within a given size class. as figure 1d shows, a correlation of cell size and sf is unlikely in this tissue . taking this into account, stromule frequency in the upper epidermis can be estimated without considering the cell context, which makes imaging cell boundaries unnecessary.

stromule frequency varies in untreated leaves
in order to determine the variability of sf in untreated tissue, sf of  <dig> leaves from different plants was estimated. the box plot shown in figure 1e illustrates that 50% of the samples had a sf ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  with a median of  <dig> , while in few cases  leaves showed markedly deviating frequencies . by using different leaves for different time points in a time course experiment, such variation could mask potential inducing effects. therefore, we used leaf squares from a single leaf for a given time course experiment.

stromule formation is induced by extracellular sucrose
the most prominent transport sugar present in the phloem sap of plants is sucrose  <cit>  which is usually unloaded from the phloem into the apoplast of the sink tissue. sucrose is also the main carbon source in media used for plant tissue culture. in both types of cells, stromules have been observed in high abundance  <cit>  which suggests that the presence of sucrose in the apoplast of plant cells might support stromule formation. in order to experimentally test this hypothesis, we infiltrated leaves of arabidopsis thaliana with a buffer solution  supplemented with  <dig> mm sucrose, a concentration routinely used in arabidopsis thaliana tissue culture medium.

we used vacuum infiltration of the leaf tissue to ensure fast and uniform exposure of cells to the solution. at distinct time points , single samples of a given leaf were analyzed independently from each other by fluorescence microscopy . after image processing, the number of plastids with or without stromules was counted for each sample allowing determination of sf. each treatment was carried out three times. the resulting changes in sf are shown as mean values along with the 99% confidence intervals in figure 2a . as illustrated by the graphs in figure 2a and the microscopic images depicted in figure 2b and 2c, sf increases dramatically during the first  <dig> min of exposure to  <dig> mm sucrose . after  <dig> min, maximal sf is observed and further exposure to the sucrose solution leads to slowly decreasing sf. control leaf samples were treated as described above except that apw lacking sucrose was used for infiltration. in these samples, only marginal increase in sf compared to non-infiltrated samples was observed  demonstrating that the presence of sucrose, and not the vacuum treatment of the leaf tissue, is responsible for stromule induction.

like other sucrose-induced physiological reactions, e.g. anthocyanin accumulation in arabidopsis thaliana seedlings or alpha-amylase induction in barley embryos  <cit> , the increase in sf is concentration dependent. infiltrating tissue samples with solutions of  <dig> mm,  <dig> mm or  <dig> mm sucrose suggests correlation of sf and sucrose concentration of the infiltration medium . however, a further increase in sucrose concentration  did not lead to an additional increase in sf suggesting a kind of saturation effect. furthermore, we have never observed sf exceeding 60%, i.e. even under "optimal" inducing conditions approximately 40% of all plastids in a sample are yet devoid of visible stromules.

induction of stromule formation is not an osmotic effect
in order to elucidate whether sucrose induction of stromule formation is merely an osmotic effect, the experiments were repeated with solutions of mannitol and sorbitol, which are both not part of the primary carbon metabolism and are routinely used to apply osmotic stress  <cit> . in neither case did vacuum infiltration result in significant increase in sf . instead, infiltration of sorbitol led even to a mild inhibition of stromule formation demonstrating that changes in osmotic conditions cannot be the reason for the stromule induction observed in the presence of sucrose. this suggests that stromule formation can be elicited specifically by sugars present during primary carbon metabolism.

however, not even all of these sugars are capable of inducing stromule formation. if sucrose is replaced by either glucose or fructose in the infiltration experiments only glucose was able to induce stromule formation, whereas fructose treatment did not lead to any change in sf . although the process is not well understood, it is widely accepted  that extracellular fructose generated by sucrose-cleavage in the apoplast is imported into the cell. considering that intracellular fructose can be converted to phosphorylated glucose, stromule induction is probably not caused by an overall increase in cell metabolic activity but likely depends on specific metabolic and/or signaling pathways.

stromule formation requires de novo protein synthesis in the cytosol
the apparent influence of metabolic activity on stromule formation was further analyzed by sucrose induction experiments performed in the presence of inhibitors of protein biosynthesis. if the sucrose solution is additionally supplemented with cycloheximide , which inhibits the activity of 80s ribosomes and thus is used to prevent translation in the cytosol  <cit> , we observed complete inhibition of stromule formation . in contrast, control experiments performed with sucrose solutions supplemented with  <dig> % dmso, the solvent of chx, did not show any inhibitory or inducing effect  confirming the specificity of this reaction. on the other hand, neither streptomycin nor spectinomycin, which are used to prevent translation within plastids by inhibition of the 70s ribosomes  <cit> , affected sucrose-triggered stromule induction . this indicates that de novo synthesis of nuclear encoded proteins but not of those encoded by the plastid genome is required to mediate the signal from apoplastic sucrose accumulation to stromule formation.

sucrose-dependent stromule formation is observed also in the palisade parenchyma
in order to examine if fully developed chloroplasts are also competent for stromule formation following sucrose and glucose treatment, the image stacks obtained in the experiments shown in figure 2a were additionally screened for the presence of palisade parenchyma cells. this photosynthetically active tissue carries fully developed chloroplasts. indeed, we detected in the images taken for sucrose, glucose, apw and sorbitol treatments not only sufficient amounts of chloroplasts but found that those chloroplasts showed stromule induction characteristics indistinguishable from those of the epidermal plastids. while solutions of sucrose and glucose led to pronounced induction of stromule formation, neither sorbitol nor the buffer control had any stimulatory effect . even the maximal sf determined for epidermal cells after sucrose induction  was observed for the chloroplasts of the photosynthetically active cells. it should be noted though that the detection of stromules in these cells was complicated by the dense packing of most chloroplasts. furthermore, many chloroplasts of parenchyma cells in the field of view were not captured in the images and could thus not be considered for estimating stromule frequency. both factors might have contributed to the relatively large confidence intervals. however, our data still clearly demonstrate that stromule induction by selected sugars is not restricted to the plastids found in the upper leaf epidermis and suggests that the mechanism leading to stromule formation is conserved among diverse plastid types.

discussion
in the present study, we aimed to establish an experimental system facilitating the reproducible induction of stromule formation in living plant tissue in order to make these enigmatic structures better accessible to systematic investigation. a possible connection between extracellular sugars and stromule formation has been suggested by several reports concerning high stromule frequency in heterotrophic cell cultures and sink tissues. using the upper leaf epidermis of a transgenic arabidopsis thaliana line harboring green fluorescent plastid stroma as model tissue, we addressed the influence of extracellular sugars on stromule formation.

stromule formation is specifically induced by sucrose and glucose
we found that formation of stromules is specifically induced only by a subset of sugars generated in plants. while vacuum infiltration of either sucrose or glucose leads to a significant increase in sf, an inducing effect of fructose or mannitol cannot be observed. infiltration of sorbitol leads even to a mild inhibition of stromule formation. thus, our data suggest that stromule formation is most likely due to neither osmotic effects nor the result of the presence of metabolizable sugars in general. instead, it seems that specific signaling pathways involving sucrose and/or glucose play a role in the induction process.

the role of sucrose in signal transduction is difficult to evaluate despite the fact that there is strong evidence for sucrose-specific intracellular and extracellular sensing mechanisms operating in plants  <cit> . since sucrose is efficiently cleaved into fructose and glucose, both in the apoplast and in the cytosol by invertases and sucrose synthase, the signaling function of sucrose is difficult to distinguish from that of its cleavage products - glucose or udp-glucose. glucose sensing, on the other hand, is already understood in some detail. in particular, the intracellular enzyme hexokinase <dig>  has been identified as a key player in this process. beside its enzymatic activity, hxk <dig> is an important glucose sensor. isoforms of this enzyme are present within plastids as well as associated with mitochondria. the latter isoform is also found in the nucleus where it is part of a protein complex involved in gene regulation  <cit> . in addition to hxk <dig>  further potential glucose sensors have been reported, which alternatively or additionally might be involved in glucose induced stromule formation  <cit> .

at this stage, it is not known if sucrose and glucose can act as independent signals for stromule formation or if the sucrose induction observed is caused by the release of glucose after sucrose cleavage. likewise, the question remains to be answered as to whether the stromule inducing signal is sensed extracellularly or intracellularly.

it should be kept in mind that changes in extracellular sugar levels might not only influence the carbohydrate metabolism of a cell but may be a cause of stress for the plant cells potentially leading to the induction of stress signaling pathways  <cit> . further experimental evidence is therefore required to substantiate the presumed interdependence of stromule formation and carbohydrate metabolism. hence, our next experiments will address the question if glucose and sucrose generate independent stromule inducing signals and if internal changes in sugar levels are sufficient to change stromule frequency .

stromules may support metabolite exchange
although several possible functions for stromules have been suggested and discussed  <cit> , the final role of stromules in plant cells remains still enigmatic. the observation of stromules or other envelope protrusions being in direct contact with mitochondria and peroxisomes led to the suggestion that formation of envelope protrusions, like stromules, supports photorespiration  <cit>  by increasing the interactive surface between the organelles and, in turn, facilitating efficient metabolite exchange. however, experimental evidence that these organellar connections become more frequent under photorespiratory conditions, which would support this assumption, is yet missing.

alternatively, the increase in interactive plastid surface by stromule formation may have more general consequences on the interaction of plastids with the cytosol or other organelles, which might be particularly relevant under conditions of increased demand of metabolite import or export across the plastid envelope membranes  <cit> . indeed, our results demonstrating stromule induction by sucrose and glucose seem to support this hypothesis. apoplastic glucose and/or sucrose are particularly prominent in sink tissue and heterotrophic cell cultures. the non- or less-photosynthetically active plastids of these cells import large amounts of glucose- <dig> phosphate from the cytosol in order to generate the atp and nadph needed to fulfill their metabolic functions, which in turn originates from extracellular sucrose or glucose pools. on the other hand, triose phosphates, which are simultaneously produced in this process, are exported back into the cytosol. this continuous need for import and export of metabolites in heterotrophic tissue might explain the high stromule abundance in by <dig> cells as well as in non-green tissue like ripening tomato fruits and dark grown seedlings. furthermore, it could explain why chloroplasts, which generate atp and nadph by photosynthetic processes, are reported to show generally lower stromule frequencies than non-green plastids  <cit> . the fact that chloroplasts develop stromules to a similar extent as epidermal plastids after vacuum infiltration of glucose or sucrose seems to be contradictory at first glance. however, it is well established that under high sugar conditions source activity is suppressed and sink activities are triggered  <cit> . naturally, this change occurs during fruit development  <cit> , a process that in tomato fruits goes along with an increase in stromule frequency and length  <cit> . furthermore exposure to extracellular glucose and sucrose induces major changes in gene expression  <cit> . such a change might thus take place also by our sucrose and glucose treatments, since the cycloheximide experiments demonstrate the requirement of de novo protein synthesis for stromule induction.

CONCLUSIONS
while up to now only speculations about stromule related processes were possible, the present study provides experimental evidence, which suggests a possible involvement of stromules in carbohydrate metabolism. this supports the idea of stromules being involved in optimizing metabolite exchange. the stromule inducing capacity of glucose and sucrose, important metabolites and signal molecules, provides experimental evidence for the involvement of a typical sugar sensing mechanism in stromule regulation. however, the sugar sensing mechanism and signaling cascades involved remain still unknown and require further investigation. our model system, the upper leaf epidermis of arabidopsis thaliana, may provide a useful tool for solving these questions.

