BACKGROUND
it is well known that gene expression is a highly stochastic, or noisy, process  <cit> . the cause of this stochasticity lies in the fact that many components are present in low concentrations within a cell. when low numbers of molecules are present, continuum rate expressions based on mass action kinetics are no longer valid. for simple systems, consisting of the expression of 1– <dig> genes, the stochasticity has been characterized as 'intrinsic noise'  <cit> . fluctuations in the states of other cellular components may also affect the gene expression indirectly, and this effect is classified as 'extrinsic noise'. however, in real systems composed of multiple genes with multiple interactions, it is of primary importance to study and quantify the effect of the stochasticity due to intrinsic noise, and separate its effect from that of extrinsic noise  <cit> . for well-studied systems where the interactions are known, intrinsic noise can be computed using simulation methods such as the stochastic simulation algorithm  of gillespie  <cit> , and other exact and approximate stochastic simulation methods  <cit> . one such system is the gal network of saccharomyces cerevisiae. in this work, we characterize the intrinsic noise of the gal network in response to variations in glucose concentration.

the gal system codes for genes that are responsible for protein expression involved in the leloir pathway . the gal network of s. cerevisiae is activated by galactose and inhibited by glucose. in a wildtype strain, gal4p is a transcriptional activator whose synthesis is regulated by glucose concentration. the synthesis is repressed at high glucose concentrations. the activity of gal4p as a transcriptional activator is controlled by a repressor, gal80p, which is also a member of the gal system. gal3p, a galactose sensor, binds to gal80p to release its effect on gal4p. thus, in the presence of galactose, gal3p and gal80p are bound to each other, and this allows the free gal4p to bind to the upstream activating sequence  to express gal genes. the binding of gal3p and gal80p is initiated by intracellular galactose. the amount of intracellular galactose is controlled by the amount of permease gal2p , which transports it from the extracellular medium. however, in the presence of glucose, a kinase  binds to the upstream repressing sequence  of certain gal genes and gal <dig> to repress their synthesis. mig1p is a constitutively expressed  <cit>  global repressor protein, whose activity is regulated through a phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle  <cit> . in the presence of glucose, it is believed that snf <dig> kinase  is inactivated through a mechanism that is not clearly understood  <cit> . under these conditions, mig1p is predominantly in the dephosphorylated state and translocates into the nucleus  <cit>  to repress genes by binding to the urs of various genes. in s. cerevisiae, three different mechanisms can be observed for glucose repression through mig1p. expression is repressed directly by binding of mig1p to the urs of genes such as suc <dig> and gal <dig>  <cit> . in the gal/mel regulon, mig1p represses the structural  and regulatory  genes indirectly through gal4p. in this case, mig1p represses only the expression of the activator, and thus indirectly represses the structural genes   <cit> . in addition, a set of structural genes  as well as a regulatory gene  have a urs for mig1p binding as well as an upstream activation sequence  for the transcriptional activator  <cit> . intuitively, by repressing the genes through a common activator such as gal4p, the cell achieves the repression in a coordinated fashion, instead of repressing each gene through an independent urs. however, the above reason alone does not explain why only a few genes are repressed through an activator. an analysis based on steady state modeling of the mig1p dependent repression revealed that a transcriptional hierarchy could be established solely through the various mechanisms existing for glucose repression, without sacrificing amplification and sensitivity  <cit> .

stochastic analysis of the gal system has also been reported; however, studies have focused on the response of the system to galactose , and on the role of the gal3p and gal80p regulatory mechanisms  <cit> . other studies include a study of the transcriptional regulation of the metabolism of galactolysis and glucolysis and their integration with the gal genetic network  <cit> . in the current study, to analyze the role of various mechanisms of glucose repression on the stochastic behavior of the gal network, we consider a mutant strain of s. cerevisiae lacking gal80p. it should be noted that in the absence of gal80p, the activity of the transcriptional activator gal4p is solely controlled through the effect of glucose concentration. further, the role of gal3p is also negated due to the absence of gal80p; thus, such a mutant strain will constitutively express gal genes even in the absence of galactose, and will respond only to variations in glucose concentration. the stochastic analysis reveals mechanisms for which the effect of inherent stochasticity is high. both the regulators, gal4p and mig1p, are essential for complete repression by glucose with low noise. we also present experiments to determine whether the noise in the gene expression can be correlated to the variability at the phenotypic level.

RESULTS
the stochastic model was simulated to obtain steady state distributions of the gal gene expression at various glucose concentrations. these distributions were computed as fractional gene expressions. the steady state distributions of fractional protein concentrations were computed from the fractional gene expression in the manner described in the section on simulation. figure  <dig> shows the mean of the distributions for the expression of mel <dig> gene. shown in the figure are the expression of individual simulations , and the mean expression from these simulations. we also present representative distributions of the expression across the simulations at three specific glucose concentrations . these distributions may be taken to represent the distributions in a cell population. we have chosen a low glucose concentration , an intermediate concentration in the sensitive region for expression, and a high glucose concentration indicating low expression for the distributions. the maximum mean fractional expression of mel <dig> is 70%, which matches reasonably well with steady-state experimental data  <cit> . at lower glucose concentrations, the variability in the distribution is high . at high glucose concentrations, the variability is much lower . the variability decreases along with the level of expression as glucose concentration is increased. the sensitivity of the response, reported in terms of hill's coefficient, is  <dig> , which indicates a steep response.

next, we conduct a similar analysis for the expression of gal <dig> gene, and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  gal1p is fully expressed at low glucose concentrations and almost completely repressed at high glucose concentrations, as has been demonstrated in experiments  <cit> . the variability is low at low and high glucose concentrations, and gal1p demonstrates switch-like behavior at intermediate concentrations . the switch-like behavior is seen in the second histogram, where the frequency for intermediate expressions is very low, but higher frequency is observed at the extremes . this is because of the steep nature of the response curve, indicative of a sensitive response . figure  <dig> shows the expression of gal2p, which is a permease that transports galactose from the extracellular medium. gal2p has two binding sites for gal4p and none for mig1p, while gal1p has one binding site for mig1p along with two binding sites for gal4p. gal2p is fully expressed at low glucose concentrations, but has a leaky expression  at high glucose concentrations. also, the variability in the expression at intermediate glucose concentrations is relatively high, indicating a broad distribution. this is in direct contrast to the behavior of gal1p. the hill's coefficient is  <dig> , much lower than that for gal1p.

since there are two mechanisms of repression of gal genes, our next studies attempt to decipher the individual role of each of the repressors, gal4p and mig1p. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the mel <dig> gene for an in silico mutant strain lacking the uas for gal4p. in such a strain, it can be observed from the figure that glucose cannot completely repress the expression of mel1p. the degree of leakiness in the response is very high . the histograms shown in panel 'b' demonstrate that there is high variability at all glucose concentrations. the variability at low glucose concentration  is comparable to or smaller than that in the original strain , but the variability at other concentrations has increased. figure  <dig> shows the expression of gal1p for the same in silico mutant strain lacking gal4p. the expression is again very leaky  at high concentrations, and glucose cannot completely repress the expression of gal1p, either. an important observation is that the switch-like behavior of gal1p is lost, and the variability is higher at all concentrations, but especially so at higher glucose levels. this implies that gal4p is essential for complete repression of gal genes and to obtain crisper switching between the expression states.

we have also conducted simulations for the corresponding expressions of these genes in another in silico mutant strain lacking the urs for mig1p. the expression is similar to that observed for the original gal <dig> mutant strain, with marginally higher variability . the leakiness and variability are obviously lower than in the other in silico mutant strain lacking the uas for gal4p. in the case of the in silico mutant strain lacking the urs for mig1p, ηh is  <dig>  for gal <dig> expression and  <dig>  for mel <dig>  this indicates that mig1p imparts a part of the sensitivity seen in the original gal <dig> mutant strain. the in silico mutant strains analyzed did not demonstrate any significant change in the half saturation constants as compared to the original gal <dig> mutant strain. these results indicate that gal4p is a more dominant regulator than mig1p for these two genes.

the above simulation results demonstrate that stochastic effects in the gene expression are significant in the gal system for the gal <dig> mutant strain of s. cerevisiae. a relevant question that can be raised at this point is whether this stochastic variability is transmitted to the phenotypic level of growth. to investigate this, experiments were conducted using a gal <dig> mutant strain precultured on different glucose concentrations . the precultured cells were streaked on plates containing melibiose , galactose  and sucrose . figure  <dig> overlays the mean and variability  of the normalized number of colonies formed on the plates on the simulated distributions from figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  it must be noted that we have normalized the mean expression of the simulations based on the simulations yielding higher than 5% protein expression. this is to ensure a fair comparison with the experimental data. the normalization for the experimental cfu  only takes into account cells that have expressed and grown, and the normalization described above places the simulation results on the same basis. this is because we assume that the cells with lower than 5% expression do not grow. for all the three substrates, the simulation trends of the response were in close agreement with the colonies experimentally observed. for the melibiose plates, the variability in the colonies formed was high for cells precultured at low glucose concentrations, and reduced for cells precultured on high glucose concentrations. this is in agreement with the trends for the expression of mel <dig> predicted by the simulations. for the galactose plates, the cells precultured at intermediate glucose concentrations  have the largest variability, and the variability reduces significantly in both directions. for the sucrose plates, the variability in colonies formed increases slightly in the direction of increasing precultured glucose concentration.

discussion
s. cerevisiae is capable of growing on various carbon sources in its natural habitat. the organism prefers to grow on glucose in the presence of other carbon sources such as galactose, melibiose and sucrose. this requires the existence of a transcriptional mechanism to regulate the uptake of the other sugars. this transcriptional mechanism is known and well-studied  <cit>  in yeast. specific to the glucose regulation of the uptake of the three carbon sources , two mechanisms have been identified. for example, mig1p, a repressor activated by glucose, and gal4p, a transcriptional activator inhibited by mig1p, are independent regulators in the regulation of mel <dig> . in this case, the mel <dig> gene has one binding site for both mig1p and gal4p. also, for the regulation of gal <dig> , there are two binding sites for gal4p and one for mig1p. in the case of suc <dig> , there are two binding sites for mig1p, and the regulation is independent of gal4p. thus, the regulation of suc <dig> is controlled by only one mechanism, but with two binding sites. these varied mechanisms and their hierarchy allow the organism to efficiently utilize and switch from one carbon source to the other  <cit> .

our current study provides insights into the stochastic effects of the various mechanisms described above on the expression of gal and suc <dig> genes. the analysis clearly demonstrates that the glucose repression on the uptake of other sugars is indeed noisy, resulting in high variability in the gene expression. furthermore, the stochastic noise is directly dependent on the mechanism prevailing for a specific gene. the conservation of signal amplification and sensitivity observed in the steady state analysis was also confirmed in our stochastic simulations. for mel <dig>  the variability is high at low glucose concentrations, and lower at high glucose concentrations. for gal <dig>  the variability is lower than that for mel <dig> at both extremes of glucose concentration. the only difference in the mechanism of glucose repression of gal <dig> and mel <dig> is the presence of an extra gal4p binding site on gal <dig>  this additional binding site essentially helps in lowering the variability for gal <dig> expression. this result is similar to one described in  <cit> , where it was shown that basal transcription levels  for gal7p were reduced with extra binding sites. thus, the presence of both the repression mechanisms for expression of gal1p leads to a switch-like response to glucose, with the expression residing either in the completely expressed or repressed states. gal2p, which only has binding sites for gal4p, shows a steep response curve; however, there is considerable variability at intermediate glucose concentrations, and the response is not switch-like as for gal1p. this implies that the repression mechanism involving mig1p plays a role in establishing a switch-like response in protein expression. a possible reason for the absence of mig1p in the regulation of gal2p is that the galactose uptake must be metabolized in a graded manner. gal1p, which is downstream of gal2p in the metabolic pathway, catalyzes intracellular galactose and atp to galactose-1-phosphate, thus determining the amount of intracellular substrate and the energy status. this makes gal1p a crucial enzyme in the leloir pathway of galactose uptake, as it determines whether the pathway is switched on or not. also, the expression of gal2p is leaky at high glucose concentrations, indicating that the system is ready for galactose uptake as soon as gal1p expression switches on in response to the absence of glucose. for expression of suc2p, the response is similar to that for gal2p in terms of variability and leakiness. however, the steepness of the response curve is lower than that of gal2p. suc <dig> is regulated only by mig1p with two binding sites, and the higher sensitivity associated with the gal4p repression mechanism is not seen here. since sucrose is a carbon source not linked to the galactose metabolic pathway, it may have evolved to be regulated only by mig1p, so as to provide a graded response. gal4p expression is leaky at high glucose concentrations, as it is a global transcriptional activator and needs to be available to switch on the system. there is variability at all glucose concentrations, which is the result of having only one binding site for mig1p. tight regulation of gal4p is anyway not essential, since all that is required is a graded response to glucose.

the roles of the various mechanisms were also investigated by simulating the stochastic model on in silico mutant strains generated by eliminating individual mechanisms. the results clearly indicate that both the mechanisms are necessary for complete repression at high glucose concentrations. the mechanism involving gal4p is a more dominant mechanism to regulate noise and stochastic effects than the mechanism involving mig1p. however, at low glucose concentrations, the two binding sites present for mig1p are sufficient to lower the noise in the expression. this is in contrast to the expression of mel <dig>  at low glucose, which shows high variability. to conclude, the study indicates that multiple mechanisms tightly regulate the variability and expression at high glucose concentrations, while multiple binding sites for the regulators control the variability at lower glucose concentrations. the motif of multiple regulatory mechanisms having a role in reducing variability has been observed in simulations on the gal3p and gal80p mechanisms in a wild type strain of s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

we also conducted growth experiments on agar plates to investigate the variability at the phenotypic level. such experiments would indicate if the noise introduced at the transcriptional level is transmitted to the phenotype. our experiments indicate a similar trend in the variability in growth as that of the simulated gene expression for all the three substrates. for example, high variability was observed in the mel <dig> expression in the simulations at low glucose concentrations. this was also observed in the growth experiments on melibiose for cells precultured on low glucose concentrations. the dynamics of the growth experiments also confirmed that the cells demonstrate similar variability as observed in simulations, and tend towards the variability observed in the low glucose limit with time.

specific mechanisms utilized by the cell to regulate expression of different genes responsible for the uptake of various carbon sugars by glucose demonstrate different levels of noise. the hierarchy in the variability introduced in the transcriptional mechanism sets up a corresponding hierarchy in the uptake of different sugars. in the case of glucose repression, the variability is highest for sucrose at high glucose concentrations, followed by galactose and melibiose. this results in sucrose being taken up before galactose and melibiose. however, at low glucose concentrations, the variability observed for growth on galactose was lower than that observed for melibiose, resulting in galactose being taken up before melibiose. thus, the prevailing mechanisms result in a hierarchical uptake of sugars, in the order glucose, sucrose, galactose and melibiose.

thus, the different mechanisms demonstrated different noise characteristics at the gene expression level, and this differentiation was carried through to the phenotypic level of growth. this may have important implications on the understanding of the effect of 'intrinsic' and 'extrinsic' noise  <cit>  in the glucose repression in the regulation of gal/suc <dig> genes. the experiments showed the same trends as the simulations, but with slightly lower variability, possibly implying modulation of the noise through metabolism and cell division, leading to the phenotypic response.

CONCLUSIONS
transcriptional regulation involves protein-dna interactions, and these involve reactants that are present in low concentrations, leading to the presence of stochasticity. this stochasticity may influence the phenotypic response of an organism. we have demonstrated that the stochasticity at the transcriptional level in glucose repression on the uptake of other substrates in yeast is transmitted to its growth. this implies that the intrinsic noise propagates through the metabolism and growth. the mechanisms involved in the transcriptional regulation and their variability set up a hierarchy in the phenotypic response. more experiments are needed in a single cell to measure the variability at the transcriptional, translational and metabolic levels. further, studies on mutants obtained by disrupting specific mechanisms will provide more insights into the relationship between mechanisms and stochasticity. studies on other transcriptional regulation systems and organisms are needed to generalize the relationship between noise and the phenotypic response. finally, simulations incorporating models of metabolism  <cit>  and dynamic experiments elucidating transitions between protein distributions  <cit>  will provide a quantitative link between the genetic and the phenotypic levels.

