BACKGROUND
during the last decade, important advances have been made in our understanding of nutrition of achlorophyllous, heterotrophic plants  <cit> . beyond the classical plant-parasitic taxa, a strategy called mycoheterotrophy  has been shown in more than  <dig> species within several plant clades, showing patterns of convergent evolution to heterotrophy  <cit> . mh plants receive carbon from soil fungi colonising their roots, forming the so-called mycorrhizal symbiosis  <cit> . mh in adult  life phases has evolved repetitively among orchids  <cit> . recent advances were made in identifying mycorrhizal fungi of mh plants by molecular methods, thus revealing their ultimate carbon source, the photosynthesised carbon of autotrophic plants associated with the same mycorrhizal fungi in most cases.

pcr amplification and sequencing of the fungal ribosomal dna from mycorrhizae allowed identification of mh mycorrhizal fungi in more than a dozen mh orchid species  <cit> , as well as in several mh species among ericaceae  <cit> , gentianaceae and corsiaceae  <cit> , and burmanniaceae  <cit> . all these studies identified a very specific association, that is, of each mh species with fungi from a single genus or even a sub-clade within a genus. most fungi involved are mycorrhizal partners on other autotrophic plants, forming arbuscular mycorrhizae   <cit> . as exceptions, some tropical orchids associate with saprobic fungi  <cit> , but are often specific too. aside from these tropical exceptions, the fungal associates of most mh plants suggest that a carbon flow from surrounding autotrophic plants to the mh plants, via the shared mycorrhizal fungus, is likely to occur.

for temperate mh plants, the stable isotope composition of mh plants supports nutrition on ectomycorrhizal  fungi. natural abundances in 13c and 15n are major tools in ecology to detect the food source of an organism  <cit> . most organisms have a 13c abundance similar to their food source, and indeed mh plants have similar or slightly higher 13c abundances than associated fungi  <cit> . as an exception, however, ecm fungi are richer in 13c than autotrophic plants  <cit> . although the reasons for this fractionation are unclear  <cit> , it entails a difference in 13c abundance between autotrophic and mh plants  <cit> . 15n accumulates along food chains, due to a fractionation at each trophic level  <cit> , and its abundance usually increases in the order autotrophic plants < ecm fungi ≤ mh plants  <cit> . moreover, 14c labelling experiments have provided direct evidence that mh orchid and ericaceae receive assimilates from surrounding trees through shared mycorrhizal fungi  <cit> .

current investigations are strongly biased toward mh plants from temperate regions. for example, with the exception of a recent study  <cit> , few n and c isotopic analyses have been performed on tropical mh plants. the locations of the laboratories involved, and perhaps the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora  <cit> , may have limited research on mh species in tropical regions. however, dense cover in tropical forests, which select for light-independent nutrition, provides a useful opportunity to study mh plants. indeed, among the ca.  <dig> mh orchids, more than 90% occur in tropical regions, including a diversity hot spot in tropical asia where  <dig> species grow  <cit> . there have been recent investigations on mycorrhizae from tropical orchids, but they exclusively focused on green, epiphytic species . they revealed more or less specific associations with the fungal clades found in autotrophic temperate orchids, the 'rhizoctonias'  <cit> . this group of otherwise parasitic and saprobic fungi encompasses ceratobasidiales, tulasnellales and sebacinales , and is absent from mh species

our aim was to investigate the identity of the fungal partners and specificity of the association of tropical asiatic mh orchids, and to compare the putative origin of their carbon with that of temperate mh orchids. in this study, two important factors were taken into account. first, ecm fungi are absent from some tropical forests  <cit> . we thus focused on tropical asiatic forests that are dominated by ecm fagaceae and dipterocarpaceae tree species  <cit> . here, as in temperate forests, am, ecm, and various saprobic fungi are available, as well as rhizoctonias associated with green orchids  <cit> . second, we focused on mh species from a clade already studied in temperate regions to control for differences resulting from the orchids' phylogenetic position. the neottieae, in which mh species arose several times  <cit> , are well studied in temperate regions, where they reveal specific associations with ecm fungal clades: thelephoraceae in cephalanthera austinae  <cit> , russulaceae in limodorum abortivum  <cit> , and sebacinales in neottia nidus-avis  <cit> .

the tropical asiatic neottieae tribe encompasses  <dig> mh species from the enigmatic genus aphyllorchis  <cit> , and thus represents one of the most diversified mh genera. the position of aphyllorchis among the neottieae is still not supported by molecular data  <cit> , and even its monophyly is questioned  <cit> . in this study, we focused on three mh species occurring in ecm forests from thailand, namely aphyllorchis montana, a. caudata and cephalanthera exigua . assuming phylogenetic conservatism for the traits under study, and based on temperate species already investigated, we expected them to be specifically associated with narrow ecm clades, and to use tree photosynthates by way of shared ecm fungi. our aims were, within thailand forests and for these three species, to test these predictions, that is,  to confirm that aphyllorchis belongs to neottieae;  to identify fungal associates of the three species;  to infer their fungal specificity level; and  to investigate their isotopic content in 13c and 15n, to infer their carbon source.

RESULTS
phylogenetic position of aphyllorchis spp. and c. exigua
based on three markers , the neottieae tribe was monophyletic and included the two aphyllorchis under study . thaia saprophytica, a green species from thailand, had a basal position, but two markers  were not obtained for this species and this limited the support level. identical topologies at genus level were found, although with lower support levels, when using the three markers separately . the genera epipactis, listera and cephalanthera were monophyletic, but this, together with their relative positions, remained weakly supported. the position of c. exigua within the genus cephalanthera was well supported, and the two aphyllorchis species clustered together as a well-supported sister clade to the european genus limodorum.

molecular identification of root fungi
forty a. montana individuals  produced  <dig> simple pcr products, representing  <dig> restriction fragment length polymorphism  types,  <dig> of which were successfully sequenced. in addition, we successfully cloned eight multiple pcr products that produced  <dig> different sequences . blast identifications showed that 83% were putatively from ecm fungi, 4% from rhizoctonias, 3% from endophytes and 10% from saprobic fungi . ecm fungi belonged to diverse taxa, mainly russulaceae, thelephoraceae and clavulinaceae. endophytic fungi and thanatephorus sp., a typical orchid mycorrhizal fungus, were found each from a single sample, on individuals also displaying ecm fungi. thirteen different saprobes were identified, each occurring only on a single sample, except resinicium sp. and malassezia sp. . saprobes were mainly basidiomycetes  and ascomycetes . in all, 15% of orchid individuals did not reveal any ecm fungus, 45% of the individuals revealed a single ecm sequence , and all remaining individuals associated with two to four ecm fungi , sometimes on the same root . thus, orchid individuals had diverse partners . in seven samples, two different sequences were detected by cloning. in five individuals  only, identical fungal sequences were retrieved from different roots.

98°55'00" e
98°55'19" e
98°51'48" e
98°51'27" e
101°33'39" e
101°42'05" e
101°44'09" e
98°55'00" e
98°29'09" e
99°20°84"e
α f: fagaceae; d: dipterocarpaceae.

β for species sampled for isotopic studies, see figure  <dig> 

nine a. caudata individuals  produced  <dig> simple pcr products that belonged to  <dig> rflp types, nine of which were successfully sequenced . four multiple pcr products were cloned and produced eight different sequences . apart from an endophyte, found only once , all sequences were putatively ecm, and mainly belonged to russulaceae, thelephoraceae and sebacinales . among all individuals, 55% displayed a single ecm fungus, whereas 45% displayed two to three ecm fungi. as for a. montana, no fungal taxon was shared by all individuals.

nine c. exigua individuals  from one population produced  <dig> simple pcr products belonging to  <dig> rflp types that were all sequenced. putative ecm fungi dominated the fungal community , with some rhizoctonias  and saprobes . thelephoraceae represented 65% of identified fungi, and one  was even found in  <dig> samples arising from seven individuals. putative ecm helotiales and naucoria sp. were found in one sample each, as well as saprobes including trichoderma sp.  and other ascomycetes . in all, six out of nine individuals exclusively associated with thelephoraceae, two displayed two different ecm fungi, with a dominance of thelephoraceae , and one displayed only helotiales. thus, thelephoraceae were the preferred fungal associates of c. exigua.

molecular identification of a. montana fungal pelotons
the identity of fungi colonising mycorrhizal cells was assessed on peloton pools  from two a. montana individuals at doi suthep # <dig> . on amd <dig> , two pools revealed a helotiales  already found on the same individual, and four revealed a russulaceae  already found on other doi suthep # <dig> individuals . on amd <dig> , two fungi already found on the same individual were recovered, namely a clavulinaceae  and a thelephoracae , while cloning on another pool revealed a mix of the two previous fungi and a russulaceae . on both individuals, four pools did not amplify. these data corroborated that  several ecm fungi were mycorrhizal on the same individual, even the same root, and  ecm asco- and basidiomycetes were mycorrhizal on a. montana.

analysis of the fungal community analysis
russulaceae, by far the most represented on a. montana and a. caudata , were phylogenetically over-dispersed , further supporting the low specificity of mycorrhizal association. even fungi identified from the same individual did not cluster together , and different russulaceae species sometimes colonised the same root . considerable internal transcribed spacer  variations in thelephoraceae  forbade phylogenetic analysis, but sequences were not more similar within than between orchid species .

using a threshold of < 97% of its variation to delineate species,  <dig> species were recorded in a. montana,  <dig> in a. caudata and  <dig> in c. exigua. in all, 94% of these species were represented by a single sequence. only four species occurred on more than one individual, and were all from the same a. montana population . rarefaction analyses provide similar trends when  considering either all fungi or ecm fungi only;  making the analysis at fungal family or species level; and  pooling all populations or separating them to calculate mean values for each species. in every case, curves for a. montana and a. caudata were similar , and higher than for c. exigua, so that the low fungal diversity in this species was not a sampling artefact. in detrended component analysis , no differences in ecm fungal community were found between a. montana populations  or between the two aphyllorchis species . in contrast, the c. exigua ecm fungal community differed from two aphyllorchis species . neither the forest type nor the geographical origin had a significant effect . results were unchanged when considering all fungi. thus, c. exigua strongly differed in fungal community structure from the two aphyllorchis species, both quantitatively and qualitatively.

stable isotope analyses
we tested by analyses of natural content in stable isotopes and c/n ratio whether ecm fungi were potential c sources for the mh orchids. at doi suthep # <dig> , significant differences for both δ13c and δ15n occurred in the order autotrophic boesenbergia rotunda < other autotrophic plants <a. montana ≤ ecm fungi . c/n ratio values were higher for autotrophs than for fungi  and a. montana : the latter two were not significantly different , but significantly lower than autotrophs . δ13c values and variations in δ15n and c/n ratio were congruent with a food chain from autotrophs to ecm fungi and a. montana.

at doi suthep # <dig>  δ13c was higher for a. caudata than for autotrophic plants but  lower than for saprobic fungi. a. caudata had δ15n intermediate between the different saprobic fungal species, but higher than autotrophs . unfortunately, no ecm fungi were found, but since they are expected to have lower δ13c and higher δ15n than saprobes  <cit> , they may well be the orchid's c and n source. most samples had similar c/n ratio values . the a. caudata ratio  did not significantly differ from that of saprobic fungi  and was  higher than that of autotrophs . these results did not reject the hypothesis of a food chain from autotrophs to ecm fungi and a. caudata.

at doi pee pan nam, significant differences for δ13c occurred in the order autotrophic non-orchid plants < ecm fungi plus the orchids cheirostylis montana <c. exigua . c. exigua and the fungal species had significantly higher δ15n than all autotrophic non-orchid plants, and cheirostylis montana showed an intermediate  value between these two groups. c. exigua c/n ratio  did not differ from that of cheirostylis montana  and one ecm fungal species , but these values were significantly lower than for other ecm fungi , which, in turn, had a significantly lower c/n ratio than non-orchid autotrophic plants . these results suggested that  c. exigua could receive c and n from ecm fungi, and also that  cheirostylis montana may receive part of its c from fungi.

discussion
we show for the first time that  at least some aphyllorchis belong to the neottieae tribe;  tropical  neottieae associate with ecm fungi; and  that they are likely to use their ecm fungi  as a c source. this is congruent with what is known from temperate neottieae species  <cit> , but we provide here the first isotopic evidence that tropical mh orchids associate with ecm fungi. furthermore, in sharp contrast to the high specificity hitherto found in all investigated mh species  <cit> , and especially mh orchids  <cit> , mycorrhizal associations in the two aphyllorchis species studied here revealed a very low specificity, while c. exigua proved to be more specific.

tropical mh neottieae associate with ecm fungi
in temperate regions, ecm fungi consistently associate with roots of neottieae, both green  <cit>  and mh  <cit> . here, we found that most root fungi had a putative ecm ecology. although endophytes, saprobes and some rhizoctonias were also found, peloton analysis in a. montana only recovered ecm fungi. the mycorrhizal status of putative endophytes and saprobes remains questionable, as in previous studies on cephalanthera spp.  <cit> . ecm fungi are common in dipterocarpaceae and/or fagaceae forests of south-east asia  <cit> , and especially of thailand  <cit> . the most frequent taxa in this study  are also the most abundant under dipterocarpaceae  <cit> , where clavulinaceae and sebacinales clade a are also known  <cit> . while temperate neottieae often associate with taxa forming hypogeous fruit bodies , little evidence for this trend was found here . relatively wet conditions in the investigated forests may explain this, since hypogeous taxa have been shown to be adapted to dry environments  <cit> . yet, hypogeous taxa such as sclerodermataceae exist in thailand  <cit> . moreover, the absence of hypogeous taxa remains difficult to confirm  from sequencing data only, and  in a context where the fungal diversity remains poorly explored.

a. montana and a. caudata harboured a highly diverse ecm community , very similar for the two species , dominated by russulaceae and thelephoraceae, the latter also dominating on c. exigua. russulaceae are specific associates of the mediterranean limodorum abortivum  <cit> , a sister species to the genus aphyllorchis ; however, the species found here were unrelated to the r. delica clade mycorrhizal on l. abortivum . c. exigua specifically associated with thelephoraceae, which are specific associates of the related north american mh c. austiniae and colonise, although not exclusively, green european and asiatic cephalanthera spp.  <cit> . the existence of some phylogenetic inertia in fungal preference within neottieae  is an appealing possibility that deserves further study, including more species and a more robust phylogeny of this tribe. with the possible reversion of some epipactis sp.  <cit> , we confirm here that the neottieae lost association with the rhizoctonias  and became associated with ecm fungi irrespective of their global localisation .

tropical mh orchids offer considerable diversity in ecology of associated fungi. ecm fungi have already been found in some tropical mh orchids, such as lyophyllum shimeji  or ecm ceratobasidiaceae . most species associate with non-ecm fungi, that is, parasites  <cit>  or saprobes  <cit> , a fungal ecology never found in temperate mh orchids. this fungal diversity is reflected in the fact the mh gastrodia nana and epipogium roseum, both mycorrhizal with saprobic fungi  <cit> , also occur in the thailand forests where this study was carried out . in this framework, it is tempting to speculate that other factors, such as contingency or phylogenetic inertia, contribute to the ecology of the fungus in tropical orchids. for neottieae, the previously mentioned shift from rhizoctonias to ecm fungi  <cit>  allowed diversification in ecm forests, not only in temperate regions where such forest dominates, but also in tropical forest harbouring ecm trees. the analysis of mycorrhizal partners in the few neottieae occurring in tropical america and africa, as well as in some of the other  <dig> aphyllorchis species in tropical asia  <cit> , is now pending, to allow the construction of a global phylogeographic scenario for the neottieae.

tropical mh neottieae likely receive c from nearby ecm trees
since ecm fungi almost exclusively receive c from host trees  <cit> , the investigated mh species may indirectly exploit the nearby trees, by way of mycelial links. this was described for temperate species  <cit> , and corroborated by the high, fungal-like 13c and 15n in mh plants  <cit> . here, our isotopic analyses show similar patterns, congruent with c transfer from trees to mh species, via ecm fungi, for tropical sites.

as in temperate ecosystems, δ13c were higher for fungi than for autotrophs  <cit> ; unfortunately, the sampling did not allow comparison between saprobic and ecm fungi on each site. values of δ13c tended to be equal or higher for mh orchids as compared with ecm fungi at doi suthep # <dig>  and doi pee pan nam . at doi suthep # <dig>  where no ecm fungi were available, saprobic fungi were higher in δ13c. since saprobes usually tend to have higher δ13c than ecm fungi  <cit> , this site may not contradict the common trend at the two others. although it is often assumed that δ13c are identical in ecm fungi and mh plants  <cit> , some ecm fungi from the same site can be  <dig> to 2‰ lower in δ13c than mh plants  <cit> . whether the differences observed here are specific to these tropical models or the result of ecm sampling unrepresentative of the mycorrhizal species is an open question. however, the difference in δ13c between mh and autotrophic plants  was in the range observed in temperate ecosystems , whereas more diverse values were found for mh orchids associated with saprobic fungi .

investigated mh orchids tended to have higher δ15n and equal to lower c/n ratio values than ecm fungi, as expected between two consecutive levels in a food chain, respectively due to isotopic fractionation for 15n  <cit>  and the loss of respiratory c  <cit> . in all, the isotopic data are congruent with a c flow from autotrophs to mh plants by way of shared fungi. since they do not exclude other scenarios, only a direct labelling of tree photosynthates would definitively assess whether mycelial links between trees and orchids allow a flow to mh plants. in this regard, the putative scenario and c and n data obtained here do not differ from those observed in temperate mh orchids. the existence and roles of common mycorrhizal networks have often been speculated in tropical ecosystems  <cit> , but rigorous demonstration is still lacking: inter-plant c transfers are striking indirect evidence of their existence  <cit> .

mixotrophy in tropical orchids
in temperate regions, green plants phylogenetically related to mh plants recover part of their c from their mycorrhizal fungi, especially among orchids  <cit> . this photosynthetic and partially mh nutrition, also called mixotrophy, is considered as an adaptation to understorey conditions, with low light levels. it can thus be expected in dense tropical forests, but has not yet been demonstrated  <cit> . mixotrophy entails 13c and 15n natural abundances intermediate between those of fully autotrophic and mh plants  <cit> . here, cheirostylis montana at doi pee pan nam had 13c abundance significantly differing from autotrophs and closer to that in ecm fungi and a. caudata. since the 13c content  is too low for a c <dig> photosynthetic metabolism  <cit> , mixotrophy is likely to occur. a linear two-sources mixing model  <cit> , with mean δ13c values of autotrophs and mh plants as references, suggests that 82% of its c was of fungal origin .

mycorrhizal partners of cheirostylis montana have not been investigated yet, but deserve further attention. indeed, most research on tropical orchid mycorrhizae deals with epiphytic species, and only a few terrestrial species have been studied, using in vitro isolation techniques that revealed only rhizoctonia fungi  <cit> . however, several ecm fungi are difficult or impossible to isolate  <cit> , and therefore molecular approaches are strongly recommended in future attempts to identify fungi of tropical terrestrial orchids. using such approaches, tropical ecosystems may provide model systems for the examination of mixotrophy in diverse species beyond orchids.

absence of mycorrhizal specificity in aphyllorchis spp
the lack of mycorrhizal specificity in a. montana and a. caudata is unexpected for mh species. such a low specificity, observed both at population and individual levels , is very unusual among orchids  <cit> , but has been found in some mixotrophic neottieae in the genera cephalanthera and epipactis  <cit> . aphyllorchis species associated with various ecm fungi at the population, individual, root and cell levels , and no obligate or constant partner was identified. in contrast, c. exigua associated quite specifically with thelephoraceae, and suggested that our design did allow detection of specificity. moreover, rarefaction curves confirmed that for whatever sampling effort, c. exigua presented a lower diversity . since aphyllorchis fungal communities look like ecm communities from tropical regions  <cit> , they may even reflect a random sampling of available ecm fungi by orchids' roots. however, given our limited knowledge of ecm diversity in thailand forests, we do not know whether there is over- or underrepresentation of ecm fungal taxa colonising nearby trees. interestingly, sclerodermataceae, which are common in thailand dipterocarpacean forests  <cit> , were absent in orchid roots. we thus cannot exclude some limited mycorrhizal preference in aphyllorchis spp. an intriguing consideration is that specificity in green or mh orchids, like c. exigua , correlates with short roots , whereas non-specific species, such as aphyllorchis spp., have long roots .

aphyllorchis species contrast with the highly specific temperate mh neottieae studied so far, such as neottia nidus-avis  and c. austinae . ironically, aphyllorchis' closest phylogenetic relative, the mixotrophic limodorum abortivum , specifically associates with the russulaceae  <cit> . a strong trend toward specificity is reported in nearly all mh plants  <cit> : individuals are associated with a narrow fungal clade of fungus, and specificity results in local specialisation or even specialisation toward distinct genotypes within populations  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, the only reported exceptions are  two taxa of am fungi in mh african burmannia congesta and sciaphila ledermannii  <cit> ;  saprobic basidiomycetes in the caribbean mh wullschlaegelia aphylla  <cit> , an orchid distantly related to neottieae; and  the case of another mh orchid, erythrorchis cassythoides  <cit> . other tropical mh orchids are specific . thus, tropical mh orchids exhibit different specificity levels, as reported for tropical green epiphytic orchids  <cit> .

there are two caveats to the conclusion of non-specificity. firstly, we do not know whether all or only some of these fungi are providing c: functional specificity cannot be ruled out. nevertheless, no constant partner was identified, suggesting that several different fungi can provide c. secondly, mh nutrition is also taking place at germination and early seedling development in orchids, since seeds have very few reserves: we do not know whether seedlings exhibit fungal specificity. in cephalanthera spp., only a subset of fungi present in adult plants are efficient at this stage  <cit> , and some orchids change or diversify their partners over their lifespan  <cit> . indeed, if seedlings also have a large host spectrum, aphyllorchis spp. may not be limited by availability of fungal partners. they are widespread but remain rare, with loose populations . thus, a different specificity in early life stages cannot be excluded in aphyllorchis, and requires further investigation. several observations of the association during in situ germination were obtained in temperate regions, after sowing seeds in mesh bags  <cit> , but this remains to be applied in tropical ecosystems.

why is fungal specificity low in tropical mh orchids?
interestingly, the few non-specific mh plants reported so far occur all in tropical ecosystems  <cit> . although this may be pure coincidence, it may suggest some particular features of mh plants and/or fungal communities in tropical ecosystems. specificity in biological interactions reveals variable latitudinal patterns, ranging from higher specificity in the tropics  to similar or lower specificity . difference between latitudes thus relates more to the functioning of each interaction. however, the raison d'être of mh specificity remains poorly understood in temperate mh species. two non-excluding models were proposed, namely functional co-adaptation and parasitic co-evolution  <cit> . functional co-adaptation states that the mechanism reversing the c flow  requires fine plant adaptations to fungal physiology, and that specific adaptations are better than universal ones . however, the many shifts of fungal partners during the evolution of mh lineages  <cit>  are not predicted by this model. parasitic co-evolution assumes that mh plants parasitise their mycorrhizal fungus , although there is no direct evidence of detrimental effects  <cit> . in this case, specificity would evolve within an arms race between the fungus and the mh plant: first, epiparasitic plants can only associate with exploitable fungi that are somehow resistant to epiparasitism , then both partners may select for adaptations reducing the cost of this association, and such adaptations makes the association more and more specific. as a result, few co-evolved plant-fungus combinations are successful, and evidence for local adaptation in mh populations  <cit>  and co-evolution with fungi  <cit>  support this. our study and a few others  <cit>  suggest that these mechanisms at least do not apply to tropical mh plants.

we propose a common reason to explain non-specificity in  any mixotrophic plants, and  tropical mh orchids. in both cases, the c demand would not be very costly for the fungus. we respectively assume that  mixotrophic plants have limited c requirements, because of their photosynthesis, and  due to better tree photosynthesis  in the tropics, tropical ecm fungi receive a greater c flow. in both cases, the c uptake would be relatively negligible, as compared with the c demand of mh plants on temperate ecm fungi. thus, functional co-adaptation and/or parasitic co-evolution would not apply in tropical regions since avoidance mechanisms are selected only if the cost of avoidance is lower than the cost of interaction  <cit> . this statement remains speculative, since we know little about the c budget in individual mycelia, and comparative fungal physiology in tropical versus temperate regions. more studies of orchid-fungal diversity in tropical ecosystems are required to support it. making this assumption, specific mh plants and also some specific temperate mixotrophic plants  would simply go beyond a threshold in terms of c loss for the fungus, thus entering the co-adaptation and/or parasitic co-evolution process leading to specificity. alternative explanations remain possible: heterogeneous environments make generalists fitter than specialists  <cit> . unfortunately, we do not know the structure and spatial heterogeneity of ecm at our sampling sites, and there is even some evidence that tropical ecm communities are less diverse than temperate ones .

CONCLUSIONS
all neottieae examined to date in both temperate and, now, tropical ecosystems have been found to associate with ecm fungi. in most cases, they receive c from ecm mycelial networks linking them to nearby trees, as shown by their isotopic content. during neottieae evolution, specificity arose repeatedly, but unexpectedly this turns out to be unrelated to full mh nutrition; in spite of several shifts in fungal partners, some phylogenetic inertia may have occurred. the lack of specificity is encountered for a few other tropical mh plants, suggesting that mh and fungal organisms from tropical ecosystems may differ functionally from their temperate analogues. this and the observation of mixotrophy in green orchids calls for more focus on mycorrhizal associations of terrestrial herbaceous plants in the tropics, to know more on the taxonomic position of their fungi and functional diversity  of their mycorrhizal association.

