BACKGROUND
the mitochondrial genome  is considered a model system for studying genome evolution, and a good molecular marker to reconstruct the phylogeny of metazoa, both at high and low taxonomic level. in general, evolutionary genomics and phylogenetic studies are strictly related, because the understanding of the evolutionary peculiarities of a given character greatly facilitates the evaluation of its suitability as phylogenetic marker. for phylogenetic purposes, the mitochondrial sequences of single or multiple genes or regions are commonly analysed by traditional molecular evolutionary methods. however, besides the sequence itself, genome-level features have been proposed as powerful phylogenetic characters  <cit> . gene arrangement, gene content, trna secondary structures, and changes in genetic code are all mitochondrial genome-level characters, used to clarify some controversial phylogenetic relationships, especially at high taxonomic levels. however, the phylogenetic reliability of these characters needs to be investigated more in detail, considering the variability of the mitochondrial genome in metazoans.

the mtdna of metazoa is a small circular genome, of around 14– <dig> kb in length, characterized by a compact structure with no introns and short intergenic regions. only one large non-coding region is typically present in the genome and is known as the control region , because it is assumed that elements controlling replication and transcription of the genome are located in this region, although functional studies have been carried out only in vertebrates and a few other species  <cit> . in most invertebrate mtdnas where only short non-coding regions are present, the cr has sometimes been tentatively identified through the presence of repeated sequences, secondary structures, or a strong compositional bias, because these features are often associated with the control region  <cit> . the mt gene content is extremely conserved and typically consists of  <dig> genes encoding two rrnas,  <dig> trnas, and  <dig> proteins, all of which are components of the respiratory chain complexes. variations in gene content are rarely due to changes in the protein-coding gene complement, and mostly concern changes in the content of trna genes. indeed, only the atp <dig> gene, encoding for subunit  <dig> of atp synthase, is lost in platyhelminthes  <cit> , and in most mollusc bivalvia  <cit>  and nematoda  <cit> . on the contrary, drastic changes in trna gene number are related to the usage of a modified genetic code  <cit>  or are restricted to specific taxonomic groups. thus, the mtdna of cnidaria encodes only for one or two trnas   <cit> , whereas the mtdna of porifera usually present extra and/or duplicated trnas in variable number, but can also have an incomplete trna set  <cit> . in addition, the loss or duplication of one or few trna genes occurs sporadically in many taxa, sometimes associated with changes in gene order. mitochondrial gene arrangement varies both across phyla and within a given phylum, and exhibits a high degree of variability in invertebrates  <cit> , while the vertebrate gene order is almost frozen and highly similar to that of lancelets   <cit> . extensive gene rearrangements have been observed in mollusca  <cit> , nematoda  <cit> , and some arthropod lineages such as hemipteroid insects  <cit>  and several parasitic groups  <cit> . although gene order is generally conserved at low taxonomic levels, such as within a genus or a family, exceptions have been reported in the most diverse taxonomic groups, even those commonly characterized by a stable gene order. for example, within vertebrata, salamanders of the family plethodontidae show extensive gene rearrangements, moreover the presence of pseudogenes and additional gene copies testifies to ancient duplications of large mt regions  <cit> . similarly, lancelets of the genus epigonichthys shows an inversion and several gene translocations, explained by recombination and tandem duplications, respectively  <cit> . genome rearrangements at intra-genus level have been observed in mollusca and arthropoda, such as in marine gastropods of the genus dendropoma  <cit> , bivalves of the genus crassostrea  <cit> , and even between gender-specific mtdnas of bivalves with doubly uniparental inheritance . in particular, the extent of rearrangements in dui mitotypes ranges from several gene inversions, duplications and transpositions in inversidens japanensis, to an almost-identical or identical gene order in tapes philippinarum and mytilus galloprovincialis  <cit> . among arthropods, chigger mites of the genus leptotrombidium  show translocation of a trna gene and duplications of non-coding and rrna sequences, in addition to an overall gene order drastically different from the arthropod ancestral gene order  <cit> . finally, parasitic flatworms of the genus schistosoma exhibit extensive rearrangements due to translocations of protein-coding and trna genes  <cit> .

the investigation of gene rearrangements in closely related species, such as congeneric species, can be extremely useful to discover the mechanisms underlying gene order variability, as it allows the observation of recent rearrangements and even the identification of intermediary stages of the process itself. to date, the mtdna of more than  <dig> metazoan species has been sequenced but the taxon sampling is highly biased towards vertebrates and arthropods , with few or no complete genome sequences available for many taxonomic groups . the availability of congeneric mt genomes is also extremely limited. within tunicata, traditionally considered the basal subphylum of chordata , the mtdna has been completely sequenced only in one representative of the class thaliacea  and four representatives of the class ascidiacea, including three species of the genus ciona. surprisingly, substantial gene rearrangements have been observed within the genus ciona  <cit> , and have significantly contributed to demonstrate the existence of two cryptic species in ciona intestinalis  <cit> . moreover, ascidian mt genomes show several unusual features compared to other chordates, such as a modified genetic code  <cit> , a fast nucleotide substitution rate  <cit> , a gene order extremely rearranged compared to other chordates and metazoans  <cit> , the presence of two distinct trna-met genes  <cit> , and the absence of a discernible control region  <cit> . these features suggest that further investigations on tunicate mtdna should be of interest. indeed, the highly variable gene order observed even at intra-genus level in the currently limited tunicate sample suggests that this taxon may be a good model for the investigation of mechanisms of genome rearrangement. moreover, the unexpected evolutionary dynamics of the mtdna of tunicates suggests caution in the usage of this molecule to reconstruct the phylogeny of chordata, which is in turn a prerequisite to understand the origin of vertebrata  <cit> . as first step to verify the reliability of tunicate mtdna as phylogenetic marker in chordates, it is fundamental to increase the number of available sequences.

to investigate the variability of ascidian mtdna at low taxonomic levels, we have sequenced the complete mtdna of the two congeneric ascidians phallusia fumigata and phallusia mammillata, and carried out detailed comparisons of the structural and evolutionary features of ascidian mtdnas at the intra-genus level. the phallusia genus was chosen for this study as it belongs to the same order as ciona  but to a different family , thus the divergence between these organisms is adequate to confirm whether the intra-genus evolutionary dynamics observed in ciona are a common ascidian trait.

RESULTS
gene content
the mitochondrial genome of both phallusia species contains the canonical set of two rrna genes  and  <dig> protein-coding genes, including the atp <dig> gene previously considered absent in tunicates  <cit> . the complement of trna genes is unusual, being different between the two congeneric species and with respect to other ascidians. in accordance with the tunicate mt genetic code  <cit> , two trna genes for leu, ser, and gly codons have been identified. in addition, tunicate mtdnas specify two trna-met, one with the common 5'-cau-3' and the other with the unusual 5'-uau-3' anticodon, thus the canonical trna set for tunicates consists of  <dig> trnas  <cit> . both trna-met genes have been found in phallusia mtdnas, confirming the hypothesis that this is a general feature of ascidian mtdna. however, the trna-asp gene  is lost in both genomes, and in p. fumigata two extra trna genes have been identified: an additional gene for trna-ile , and a trnx gene that can be folded into two alternative cloverleaf structures showing different anticodons . the two copies of trni are almost identical, a situation similar to that found in the mtdna of the distantly related species halocynthia roretzi, where there are two almost identical copies of trnf  <cit> . in conclusion,  <dig> trna genes are present in the mtdna of p. mammillata, and  <dig> in p. fumigata.

genome size and compactness
the mtdnas of p. mammillata and p. fumigata are  <dig> and  <dig> bp long respectively, which is consistent with the typical size of chordate mt genomes. surprisingly, the mtdna of p. mammillata is  <dig> %  shorter than that of p. fumigata, a somewhat unexpected observation give the almost identical size of the mtdna of the three ciona species .

the more compact structure of the p. mammillata mtdna compared to p. fumigata is highlighted not only by the smaller genome size but also by the higher number/percentage of gene overlaps, and the lower percentage of non-coding  sequences. as reported in table  <dig>  overlapping gene pairs account for  <dig> bp in p. mammillata, and  <dig> bp in p. fumigata . thus, there are six and three overlapping gene pairs in p. mammillata and p. fumigata, respectively, with only two overlapping gene pairs common to both species -trnt). in parallel, the percentage of nc sequences is quite low in the more compact mtdna of p. mammillata  and higher in p. fumigata  . distinct from the phallusia genus, the three species of ciona reveal almost identical values of gene overlap , and a notably lower %nc only in c. intestinalis sp. b   <cit> . overall, the involvement of both nc total size and gene overlaps in the determination of mtdna compactness is demonstrated by the highly significant negative correlation between these parameters in a comparative analysis between all the ascidian mtdnas .

a sequence ac numbers are reported in additional file  <dig> 

a sequence ac numbers are reported in additional file  <dig> 

b number of non-coding sequences, including spacers  <dig> bp long.

c the location of nc sequences is defined by flanking genes.

in conclusion, different evolutionary trends toward compactness have shaped the mtdnas of the phallusia genus, giving rise to substantial differences in genome size between p. mammillata and p. fumigata. by way of contrast, the compactness is almost the same in the three mtdnas of the genus ciona, where mtdna size variability is mainly due to differences in nc size  <cit> .

non-coding regions
no single non-coding region comparable in size to the control region of vertebrates is found in the mtdna of the two phallusia species.

nc sequences constitute 21– <dig> short intergenic regions , and the nc size distribution is quite different between the two species . indeed, five nc longer than  <dig> bp are present in p. fumigata but none in p. mammillata. moreover, variability in nc size distribution is common to all other analysed ascidians . the largest nc region is more than two times longer in p. fumigata compared to p. mammillata, as observed in c. savignyi compared to the two c. intestinalis species .

the position of nc regions longer than <dig> bp is not conserved in ascidians. indeed, only one nc region is located exactly in the same position in the two phallusia species . similarly, only one nc region is located in a similar but not identical position in the three available ciona species .

no significant sequence similarity has been found between nc sequences of the two phallusia species, neither between any of these nc and those of other ascidians.

sequence similarities between nc of the same mtdna have been found only in p. fumigata . in particular, the block nc-trni2-nc shows a 95% identity over  <dig> bp to the block nc-trni1-rrns, including an identical sequence  <dig> bp long . the nc located between cox <dig> and trng contains a sequence  <dig> bp-long duplicated in the region downstream nad <dig> . moreover, this  <dig> bp-long sequence constitutes a repeat located upstream and downstream of the gene pair trng-nad <dig>  similarly to the situation found in c. intestinalis sp. a, where a completely different sequence,  <dig> bp-long, flanks the gene pair trnk-nad <dig>  <cit> . thus, in both c. intestinalis sp. a and p. fumigata, a completely different duplicated sequence is located upstream and downstream a gene pair including a trna gene  and nad <dig>  these sequences can be explained as remnants of gene rearrangement events involving nad <dig> and occurred independently in the two species, or as sequences that promoted the rearrangement event. alternatively, they could also be unknown functional sequences involved in the regulation of nad <dig> expression.

additional elements characterize the long nc regions of p. fumigata: two palindromes  <dig> bp long are found in the nc upstream of the duplicated trni genes ; a trna-like secondary structure, with sequence similarity to the beginning of trna-pro, has been found in the nc- <dig> bp . it is striking that palindromes or trna-like structures have often been identified in the control region of metazoans, which suggests they may be involved in the mt replication or transcription processes.

in conclusion, nc regions appear highly variable in number, size, sequence and location in the phallusia as in the ciona genus suggesting that a high variability in nc is quite common between closely related ascidian species. the extensive reorganization of nc regions could partially be related to the extensive changes in gene order, indeed a process of "duplication-random gene loss" can generate nc fossil sequences, as remnants of duplicated genes erased by evolution.

gene order
in both phallusia species all genes are transcribed from the same strand, as in other tunicates so far studied.

gene order is extremely rearranged between p. mammillata and p. fumigata: only nine gene blocks, including about half of the total mitochondrial genes, are conserved in both species, and the largest of these blocks consists of only three genes . the breakpoint analysis confirms this observation , as the relative breakpoint distance is very high and quite close to the value expected for random permutations . moreover, gene rearrangements are not due to a high mobility of trna genes, indeed omitting the trnas the relative breakpoint distance between phallusia species increases  and only two gene blocks appear conserved .

a relative breakpoint distance calculated dividing the pairwise breakpoint distance by the number of genes shared by corresponding genomes, for a dataset including all mt genes , and a dataset without trna genes .

b dn  and ds  calculated on the  <dig> mt protein-coding genes according to the codon substitution model of goldman and yang  <cit> .

c percentage of amino acid identity calculated on the  <dig> mt-encoded proteins

d substitutions per sites calculated according to the gtr model  <cit> .

gene rearrangements in the phallusia appear to be more extensive than those observed in the ciona and in other congeneric protochordate pairs . as reported in figure  <dig>  only the trna-cys gene  is translocated in c. intestinalis sp. a compared to c. intestinalis sp. b  <cit> , whereas between c. intestinalis sp. a and c. savignyi there are six translocated genes   <cit> . thus, the ancestral gene order state could be reconstructed quite easily for the ciona genus but not for phallusia, where several duplication/transposition steps will be required to relate the two gene orders. on the contrary, gene order is almost invariant in lancelets , with translocations and inversions found only in the genus epigonichthys, specifically only in e. lucayanus compared to all other lancelets studied  <cit> .

gene order comparisons among all tunicate mtdnas, both with and without trna genes, do not identify large gene blocks shared by most species. thus, including all genes, only cox2-cob is conserved in all tunicates, probably because of the orf overlap , and trnr-trnq is conserved in almost all ascidians except for p. mammillata . excluding trna genes, no additional or largest gene blocks appear conserved in all tunicates or ascidians, and only nad4l-cox <dig> is shared by the order phlebobranchiata .

the absence of a consensus gene order for ascidian mtdna complicates comparisons with the almost frozen gene order of vertebrates and cephalochordates  <cit> . the few instances of gene blocks shared by tunicates and other-chordates appear due to fortuitous similarities, rather than to a common evolutionary origin, as indicated by their presence in only one or few tunicates. for example, the trnv-rrnl gene pair is shared by vertebrates, cephalochordates, and phallusia species , but it is absent in all remaining tunicates including other phlebobranches of the genus ciona . similarly, the gene block rrns-trnv-rrnl is shared only by vertebrates and p. fumigata. although these gene blocks are quite primitive, as indicated by their presence even in other deuterostomes, their occurrence only in the phallusia genus among all tunicates suggests that this may be the result of multiple gene rearrangements, rather than the remnant of a primitive gene order.

although complete mtdna sequences are still underrepresented for ascidians, it is evident that gene rearrangements are frequent in this group, and quite common at low taxonomic levels at least in the order phlebobranchiata. it should be verified if intra-genus rearrangements are frequent even in ascidians belonging to the remaining orders of stolidobranchiata and aplousobranchiata. the evolutionary trend of ascidians toward gene rearrangements is completely different from other chordates, and even from other metazoans. in most metazoans, mitochondrial gene order has been demonstrated to evolve in a non-clocklike, saltatory manner, and changes are commonly described as rare, unique events unlikely to be subjected to reversion or convergent evolution  <cit> . therefore, this genome-level character has been considered highly reliable as a phylogenetic marker . in ascidians, the frequent gene rearrangements could impair the reliability of this feature as a phylogenetic marker. this high frequency of rearrangement could also imply differences in the ascidian gene rearrangement mechanisms compared to other metazoans. gene rearrangements are commonly explained by a process of "tandem duplication-random gene loss"  <cit> , assuming that duplicated portions of the mtdna can be generated by several processes, and that supernumerary copies of each gene will be selected at random to be subsequently eliminated  <cit> . a few cases of mt gene rearrangements have been explained by different mechanisms, such as a tandem duplication process followed by non-random gene loss based on gene transcriptional polarities, suggesting that functional constraints could overcome the random process of gene loss  <cit> . finally, intra- and inter-genome illegitimate recombination has also been observed  <cit> , or hypothesized  <cit>  in organisms such as nematodes and mites. as simple speculation, the high frequency of rearrangements in ascidians could be due to a completely different mechanism, or to the exacerbation of one of the previously hypothesized mechanisms . the "duplication-random gene loss" model does not fit well the gene rearrangements of the phallusia genus, because a large number of gene movements are required to explain the observed gene order, however it is still compatible with the situation found in the ciona. thus, the high frequency of gene rearrangements observed in ascidians could be partially related to the existence of long divergence times between morphologically closely related species. moreover, the absence of data on the replication process and the location of control region in ascidian mtdna prevents further speculations on the rearrangement process. indeed, in most metazoan mtdnas the replication origins act as hot spots for gene rearrangements  <cit> , suggesting that components of the replication machinery are involved in the step of segmental duplication.

sequence divergence
in the protochordate sample here analysed, there is no statistically significant correlation between the relative breakpoint distance and the evolutionary rate of rrna or protein-coding genes, although in arthropods a general correlation between the rate of genome rearrangement and the rate of nucleotide substitution has been found  <cit> . however in our small sample, species pairs with the highest gene rearrangements also exhibit the highest sequence divergence in both cephalochordata and ascidiacea .

considering the single mitochondrial-encoded proteins, cox <dig> is the most conserved protein , whereas atp <dig>  nad <dig> and nad <dig> are among the less conserved proteins in all analysed ascidians .

base composition
as reported in table  <dig>  the g+c content of p. mammillata and p. fumigata mtdnas is significantly higher than that of other ascidians . the trend toward a gc-rich genome is even more pronounced at the third codon position  of protein-coding genes, where the g+c content is  <dig>  ±  <dig> % in phallusia and  <dig>  ±  <dig> % in remaining ascidians. this high g+c content is due to the strong increase of g in phallusia compared to remaining species . indeed, in other ascidians the most common base is t, and the t/g ratio is always higher than one, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in p <dig>  on the contrary, in both phallusia species the g content is almost as high as the t content, thus the t/g ratio is close to one and becomes lower than one at p <dig> in p. fumigata. at intra-genus level, base composition is constant in phallusia and quite variable in ciona, as shown by the standard deviation of the average gc content calculated on p <dig> in intra-genus comparisons .

a all: whole mitochondrial genome.

b p3: third codon position of the  <dig> protein-coding genes.

an asymmetric distribution of complementary bases between the two strands is observed in all ascidians: on the coding strand, the gc-skew is positive and the at-skew is negative, with absolute values of both skews quite low in most species . surprisingly, the compositional asymmetry can be different even between species with a similar g+c content. indeed, in the phallusia genus the gc-skew at p <dig> is quite different between the two species , although the g+c content is almost the same .

the high variability of base composition in ascidians has a strong influence on synonymous codon usage and even on amino acid composition of mitochondrial proteins. thus, leucine is the most abundant amino acid in ascidians  as in other metazoan mt proteins but the usage of the two codon families  is very different between ascidian species . similarly, agr and ggn glycine codon families are used differently between species , as consequence of the different g content. strong differences in amino acid abundance are also observed for amino acids encoded by quartet codons, such as ala-gcn  and val-gtn , and some amino acid encoded by at-rich codons . in all these cases, the standard deviation of the amino acid content exceeds 30% of the average value .

protein-coding genes
as already reported, cox <dig> and cob genes overlap in both phallusia species and in all other tunicate mtdnas so far sequenced . this gene overlap could be responsible of the linkage between cox <dig> and cob , preventing gene rearrangements involving these two genes. est analyses have demonstrated that cox2-cob genes are transcribed to a single bicistronic mature mrna in c. intestinalis sp. a and in h. roretzi  <cit> . thus, a bicistronic mature mrna for cox2-cob can be hypothesized even in phallusia. the conservation of this overlap could be due to the need to produce a bicistronic mrna or to a functional constraint at protein level, such as the need to preserve a specific amino acid pattern in the upstream orf . a careful analysis of the overlap region shows that the sequence included in both orfs encodes for an amino acid region not conserved at the c-terminal region of cox <dig>  but well conserved at the n-terminal of the cob protein , where an arginine is present in all analysed deuterostomes. thus, a functional constraint at protein level for this gene overlap can be excluded.

in p. mammillata, there are two additional cases of overlapping orfs: nad1-nad <dig>  with a  <dig> bp overlap, and nad4l-cox <dig>  in the latter case, a complete taa stop codon for nad4l is located  <dig> bp inside cox <dig>  giving rise to a nad4l protein showing a longer c-terminal region with no similarity to other tunicate nad4l. assuming the existence of an incomplete stop codon, a nad4l with no frame overlap and length consistent to the homolog of p. fumigata can be inferred . as in the case of cox2-cob, a frame overlap for nad4l-cox <dig> implies the presence of a bicistronic mature mrna, whereas an incomplete stop codon implies the synthesis of distinct polyadenylated transcripts and the presence of a polyadenylation signal downstream nad4l. it is interesting that even in h. roretzi, nad4l gene exhibits a complete stop codon well inside the downstream trna gene, that is  <dig> bp downstream of the predicted incomplete stop codon  <cit> .

most phallusia genes are inferred to have a complete termination codon, except for cob of p. fumigata and nad4l of p. mammillata . such abbreviated stop codons are assumed to be completed to a taa codon during the process of maturation and polyadenylation of precursor polycistronic transcripts, as demonstrated by experimental data in mammals  <cit>  and by "in silico" analyses of mt ests in two ascidians  <cit> . in these cases, a complete stop codon is often located a few bases downstream of the incomplete one, as a mechanism to prevent a translational readthrough in case of incorrect transcript maturation  <cit> . curiously, this situation does not hold in phallusia, given that complete stop codons are well inside the downstream gene in both cob and nad4l genes where an incomplete stop codon has been found .

as expected from the high g content , the preferred stop codon is tag in p. fumigata  while in p. mammillata tag and taa are equally used as stop codons . similarly, the preferred start codon is gtg , and most inferred start codons end with a g  .

cytochrome b
the cytochrome b protein  of phallusia and other tunicates is significantly shorter than in other deuterostomes, indeed the cob mean length is  <dig> ±  <dig> amino acids in tunicates, against  <dig> ±  <dig> in other deuterostomes . this length difference is due to the lack of a carboxy-terminal sequence of 10– <dig> amino acids, which is highly conserved from vertebrates to echinoderms and even in xenoturbella. the lost region include the enk consensus sequence, with a negatively charged amino acid  conserved in all analysed deuterostomes, and a positively charged amino acid in the last position of the consensus  . cob is a membrane-spanning protein whose structure has been widely studied both at evolutionary and functional level  <cit> . this protein consists of three functional domains, each evolving at a different rate: an intermembrane, a transmembrane, and a matrix domain. the intermembrane domain is the one that evolves most slowly, because it contributes structurally to the qo redox center. the transmembrane domain consists of eight hydrophobic helices, including those binding the two heme prosthetic groups  <cit> , and is characterized by a preponderance of conservative amino acid changes  <cit> . the matrix domain includes three extramembrane loops protruding into the mitochondrial matrix, the n-terminal and c-terminal segments of the protein. this domain is poorly conserved, with amino acid replacements fitting neutral evolutionary expectations and reflecting the relative lack of function of this region  <cit> . moreover, a previous analysis of more than  <dig> cob from bacteria to mammals has shown that the last  <dig> c-terminal residues of this protein are highly variable and that the immediately upstream h helix is one of the two least conserved transmembrane helices  <cit> . the cob fragment lost in tunicates is the c-terminal segment of the matrix domain, thus the tunicate protein terminates with the hydrophobic transmembrane h helix . the poor conservation of this region in cob of other organisms is compatible with a full functionality of this truncated protein. moreover, the c-terminal segment following the h-helix is lost also in cob of trypanosomes  <cit> , and greatly shortened or lost in some arthropods, nematodes and molluscs .

rrna genes
rrns is of similar size in the two phallusia species , whereas rrnl is significantly longer in p. fumigata than in p. mammillata because of the presence of an additional  <dig> bp-long sequence at the 5' end . however, the additional rrnl sequence can be also considered as a non-coding region located upstream rrnl . indeed, a long nc region has been also annotated upstream rrnl in c. intestinalis sp. a and sp. b, where the 5'end of this gene was tentatively determined based on sequence conservation between orthologous genes of the three available ciona species  <cit> . in general, the lack of transcripts and experimental data on mt rrnas prevents the exact identification of the rrna boundaries, and leaves open the possibility of the existence of non-coding regions flanking these genes.

the rrna length of phallusia species confirms a previous observation showing that tunicates have some of the shortest rrnas among deuterostomes and even among metazoans  <cit> , their size being comparable to the shortest rrnas of nematodes and platyhelminthes  <cit> . indeed, the average size of tunicate rrnas is  <dig> ±  <dig> for rrns, and  <dig> ±  <dig> for rrnl, against an average rrna size in other deuterostomes of  <dig> ±  <dig> for rrns, and  <dig> ±  <dig> for rrnl .

trna genes
the mtdna of both phallusia species lacks the trna-asp gene . we sought this gene without success on both genome strands, even as an unusual cloverleaf structure with only a standard anticodon arm, or as a common cloverleaf structure with a non canonical asp anticodon . the absence of the trnd is inconsistent with the phallusia codon usage, indeed the percentage of gay codons for asp is similar between phallusia and other ascidians . moreover, the gat codon is preferred over gac, as expected from compositional data . the mitochondrial import of a nuclear-encoded trna-asp could functionally compensate the lack of trnd in the mtdna. alternatively, it is possible that a highly modified mitochondrial trnd, with a transcript maturated through rna-editing, has not been identified in the mtdna because of its unusual secondary structure. both mechanisms, trna import in mitochondria and trna-editing by anticodon modification, have been observed in marsupial mtdna  <cit> .

in both phallusia species, three trnas , and -cys) show an unusual cloverleaf structure .

in trna-asn, the spacer between the dhu and anticodon  stems is  <dig> nt long, instead of the canonical  <dig> nt  <cit> . this configuration also holds for trna-asn of the stolidobranch h. roretzi and the thaliacean d. nationalis but not for other phlebobranches .

the trna-ser retains a dhu-arm with a stem  <dig> bp long and a large loop , while in most metazoans the dhu-arm is replaced by a loop of variable size  <cit> . this peculiar cloverleaf structure has not been found in other trna-ser of analysed tunicates and deuterostomes , and it is probably a derived character of the phallusia genus or of a narrow ascidian group.

the trna-cys lacks the dhu arm, which is replaced by a loop  <dig> nt long, and shows several mismatches in stem base pairing compared to remaining trnas  . among analysed deuterostomes , this feature is shared by ascidians of the order phlebobranchiata  and by cephalochordates. moreover, literature data report that the dhu arm of trna-cys is sporadically lost also in vertebrates such as acrodont lizards  <cit>  and the tuatara sphenodon punctatus   <cit> . thus, current data suggest that the ancestral secondary structure of trna-cys in deuterostome was the standard one, and that the dhu arm was lost independently in multiple lineages. moreover, the non-canonical structure exhibited by trna-cys even in some protostomes and flatworms  <cit>  could indicate a tendency of this trna to better tolerate alterations of the cloverleaf structure.

it is remarkable that in ascidians unusual trna cloverleaf structures with lack/acquisition of the dhu-stem have been found in trna genes differing for the last nucleotide of the anticodon sequence  and 5'-gca-3' in trna-cys). exchanges in amino acid specificity of these trnas by a single nucleotide mutation in the anticodon or relaxed constraints related to the anticodon specificity could explain this observation.

as previously reported, the mtdna of p. fumigata presents two trni, and a trnx gene encoding for a trna with uncertain anticodon specificity .

the two copies of trni are about  <dig> kb apart and differ only by two nucleotides at the 3' end of the amino acid  stem: trni- <dig> is located in a position similar to the orthologous gene of p. mammillata , thus it is likely to be the ancestral trni gene; trni- <dig> is in the middle of a large duplicated sequence, embedded between two non-coding regions , thus probably arose by a recent gene duplication event. the region including trni- <dig> reported in figure  <dig> could be the result of a "duplication-random gene loss" mechanism, with the gene loss step not having occurred yet.

the trnx gene is part of the trna cluster trnr-trnq-trnx-trny, and contains a sequence  <dig> bp-long showing 93% identity to a portion of the downstream trny gene . with slightly different boundaries, the trnx gene can be folded into two canonical cloverleaf secondary structures with a distinct amino acid specificity : a trna isoacceptor for tyr , as expected by the sequence similarity to trny; and a trna isoacceptor for thr, with the 5'-ugu-3' anticodon overlapped to the anticodon of the alternative trna-tyr structure. in both cloverleaf structures the anticodon is preceded by u and followed by the purine a, and there are only few mismatches in the stems , thus both structures are compatible with functional trnas. moreover, the low sequence similarity of trnx of p. fumigata with both trny and trnt of p. mammillata suggests that trnx is not the true ortholog of these genes but a newly acquired gene .

in p. fumigata a similarity like that observed between trnx and trny is found also in the upstream gene pair trnr-trnq . indeed, trnr contains a sequence  <dig> bp-long showing 85% identity to the downstream trnq gene, including a  <dig> bp-long identical sequence . in other ascidian mtdnas, the genes trnr and trnq do not share any identical long sequence , however the trnr-trnq gene arrangement is conserved in all available ascidians, except for p. mammillata. these data could suggest that an alloacceptor gene recruitment mechanism  <cit>  gave origin to these trna genes in p. fumigata, consistent with the existence of a single nucleotide difference between the anticodons of trnr  and trnq . however, evolutionary reconstructions based on trna sequence similarity are unable to support this hypothesis, because of the low resolution of most nodes of the tree .

CONCLUSIONS
the newly determined mtdnas of phallusia species and the comparative data reported here highlight the strong differences in mtdna evolutionary dynamics between ascidians and remaining chordates.

apart from the genetic code  <cit> , our comparative analyses identify and/or confirm some mt features as distinctive of ascidians, and possibly of all tunicates, that is: same transcriptional polarities of all genes; presence of two trnm genes with different anticodon specificity; short rrnas, comparable in size to the shortest mt rrnas of nematodes and platyhelminthes; and a "truncated" cytochrome b protein lacking the c-terminal tail, which usually protrudes into the mitochondrial matrix.

the most striking ascidian features is the high frequency of gene order rearrangements, which is observed even in congeneric ascidians of two distinct genera  and is not restricted to the trna genes, which often show an unstable mt genomic position. this extreme plasticity may represent a valuable source of data to study the mechanisms of gene rearrangement. indeed, the analysis of gene order variability at low taxonomic distances increases the probability of identifying intermediary states of the rearrangement process and/or of observing ongoing rearrangement events. on the other hand, rapid gene rearrangements could impair the usage of gene order as phylogenetic character at high taxonomic level  but will promote its usage to investigate speciation events  <cit> .

changes in trna secondary structure, trna content, length and position of nc regions, and compositional properties constitute an additional source of variability in ascidian mtdna. in particular, the variability of nc regions even at intra-genus level suggests that regulatory elements controlling replication and transcription, commonly assumed to be located in nc regions, can be taxon-specific or extensively overlapped to coding sequences. of course, the functional importance and reliability of the above-mentioned features as "ascidian mitochondrial signatures" need to be further investigated in a wider ascidian sample.

