BACKGROUND
in the post-genomic era, the study of networks has obtained unprecedented attention and network-based analyses have played fundamental roles in biological research. indeed, most genes and proteins function through a complex network between them rather than on their own  <cit> . recently, advances in high-throughput experimental technologies have made an ever-increasing amount of data on protein interaction networks  available. pins provide a novel perspective for the study of the principles driving the evolution of living organisms.

in the study of the evolution of pins, one of the most basic and important problems is to explore how the pin originated and grew. many researchers have tried to answer the question by multiple approaches. by the theoretical modeling, several evolutionary models of pins have been established  <cit> . by the analyses on real pins, several interesting and possible mechanisms have been uncovered  <cit> . based on the finding that proteins of similar phylogenetic profiles tend to interact with each other, qin et al. for the first time presented the hypothesis that the evolution of pins has undergone the additions of clustered nodes  <cit> .

previous studies on the evolution of pins focus either on the individual protein level  <cit> , interaction level  <cit> , functional module level  <cit>  or the whole network level  <cit> . few study the evolution of pins from the perspective of network motifs  <cit> . network motifs are referred to as recurring interconnected patterns of specific topology in complex networks, and may represent the simplest building blocks of cellular machines  <cit> . meanwhile motifs are found to be evolutionarily conserved topological units of cellular networks, which suggests that they are of biological significance  <cit> . further, compared with functional modules  <cit> , owing to the definite definition of motifs, they can be explicitly identified and enumerated in various cellular networks  <cit> .

considering the advantages of network motifs, in this paper, we explore the evolution of pins from the perspective of network motifs, and try to provide further evidence for the hypothesis that the evolution of pins has undergone the additions of clustered interacting proteins. first, we classify proteins based on their original time, and analyze the tendency between proteins of the same/different age classes to form motifs in the pin. further we investigate whether co-origins of motif constituents are affected by motif topologies and biological functions. then we focus on those age-homogeneous motifs whose constituents are of the same age class, and analyze the evolution and functions of their members. finally we discuss how our findings support the hypothesis of the clustered additions and the underlying driving force of the clustered additions.

RESULTS
the tendency between proteins of the same/different age classes to form motifs
to understand the evolutionary history of pins from the network motif perspective, we first analyze the tendency between proteins of the same/different age classes to form motifs in the pin.

we classify proteins based on their original ages. in our work, we use orthologous groups of orthomcl  <cit>  to construct the phylogenetic profile and further to assess the original age of the protein. each orthologous group of orthomcl is composed of orthologs and only "recent paralogs" whose sequences are similar and thus functions are likely to remain similar. "ancient paralogs" whose sequences have diverged and thus functions are likely to diverge are assigned into different orthologous groups, and thus their ages are assessed separately. therefore, using this method, we can crudely assign the original age of a protein to the time when it obtained today's function. actually, there is no single, optimal method to define the original age of a protein, especially for the protein derived from duplication which is a big source of new gene origins  <cit> . on the one hand, even though we can crudely assess the time when the duplication event happened, in most cases it doesn't make sense to distinguish which copy is the ancestral one and which copy is the created one from this duplication  <cit> . therefore, it seems improper to assign the original age of one of the duplicates or both of them to the time when the duplication event happened. on the other hand, for the research on the growth of pins, it is also improper to assign the original age of all proteins derived from the direct or indirect duplication of a common traceable earliest ancestral protein to the time when the traceable earliest ancestor emerged, because new proteins directly or indirectly from the ancestor are continuously produced at various stages during the evolution of pins after this ancestor was created. and these today's descended proteins are likely to have been functionally significantly divergent from each other and from the ancestor. therefore, in our work, we try to define the origin of a protein, taking the phylogeny and meanwhile the  function as reference. especially for a protein from duplication, when it evolved to obtain significantly divergent sequence and function from its ancestor, it is thought to be new. this definition of the original age simply takes sequences and functions as reference, which not only avoids the troublesome reconstruction of the original and evolutionary process of proteins, especially proteins from duplication, but also provides us opportunities to infer the evolutionary process of today's pins from the functional perspective.

as shown in figure  <dig>  we classify the yeast proteins into  <dig> age classes based on taxonomy  <cit> . the most ancient yeast proteins with age  <dig> are those which originated in the common ancestor of three domains of tree of life  . proteins of the second class with age  <dig> are those whose traced ancestors appeared before the radiation of eukaryota  . those with age  <dig> emerged before the split of fungi and other fungi/metazoa . those of the fourth class evolved before the split of s. cerevisiae and other fungi . the youngest class contains proteins found only in s. cerevisiae .

to study the interconnection tendency between protein nodes of the same/different age classes, based on network motifs, we define "evolutionary motif modes" to characterize particular interconnected patterns of proteins of the same/different age classes . we compute empirical p -value for each kind of evolutionary motif mode with specific topology to check the statistical significance of its enrichment or depletion in the real pin . based on the credible yeast pin of dip_yeast_core  <cit> , we find that for the motifs with specific topology, the number of evolutionary motif modes ranges from enrichment to depletion as their constituents gradually change from those of the same age class to those of different age classes . the results indicate that in the pin, proteins of the same age class tend to interact with each other and further to cluster into motifs, while proteins of different age classes tend to avoid interacting with each other and further to avoid forming motifs.

a for # <dig>  # <dig>  #2- <dig>  # <dig>  #3- <dig>  #2- <dig>  # <dig> and #4- <dig>  upper-tailed p -values  are listed, and for the other evolutionary motif modes, lower-tailed p -values  in the parentheses are listed. those lower than  <dig>  are highlighted in bold. b labels for evolutionary motif modes . c considering the length limitation of the table, here for 5-motif we only show four representative motif modes of six representative kinds of topology. actually for all possible motif modes and topologies, the results are consistent .

we obtain the similar results on other pin datasets, such as yeast_hc  <cit> , hprd_human_high  <cit> , dip_yeast  <cit>  and hprd_human_all  <cit>  , of which the last two datasets are not well qualitatively controlled and thus are of relatively low quality. the similar results across different datasets indicate that the conclusion above is robust on different data quality and even different organisms.

here we group ten representative time points into five age classes for yeast based on taxonomy . actually all the conclusions in this paper keep unchanged across different classifications of age groups . in addition, as we know, many ribosomal proteins are evolutionarily conserved and old. the ribosomal proteins in the pin may influence our results. we find that when removing the ribosomal proteins annotated by funcat  <cit>  from the pin of dip_yeast_core, all the results in the paper still hold .

the influence of topologies and biological functions on co-origins of motif constituents
proteins of the same age class tend to form motifs, while those of different age classes tend to avoid forming motifs. this finding means that in the pin, age homogeneity of motif constituents is higher than random expectation. in this part we further analyze whether age homogeneity of motif constituents is different for different classes of motifs with special topology or/and function in the real pin. for this purpose, we introduce the "age homogeneity rate" and the "age homogeneity ratio". the "age homogeneity rate" is referred to as the fraction of motifs whose constituents are of the same age class among a class of motifs with specific topology or/and function. the "age homogeneity ratio" is defined as the ratio of the age homogeneity rate of the real network to its random expectation, which can measure the extent to which a class of motifs with specific topology or/and function affect co-origins of their constituents.

we observe that in the pin of dip_yeast_core, motifs with different topologies indeed have different age homogeneity rates , while this phenomena is absent in random networks . especially, among the motifs with a special number of nodes, the age homogeneity rates seem to be correlated with the topological saturation . to quantify this relationship, we test the correlation between motifs' topological saturation  and their age homogeneity , and the correlation between the clustering coefficient and age homogeneity for single proteins  . in both cases we observe week but significant positive correlations. furthermore, by analyzing the age homogeneity ratio, we find that the constraints of motifs with a special number of nodes and edges forcing their constituents' co-origins seem to rise as the number of nodes and edges increases.

a age homogeneity rate is referred to as the fraction of the motifs whose constituents are of the same age class. b age homogeneity ratio is defined as the ratio of the age homogeneity rate of the real network to its random expectation which is calculated as the average age homogeneity rate of the  <dig> random networks . c considering the length limitation of the table, here we only show six representative kinds of topology for 5-motif. actually for all possible topologies of 5-motifs, the results are consistent .

to find out whether the biological functions of the yeast proteins within the motifs affect their age homogeneity, here we only take those motifs whose constituents share at least one common functional category into account, and assign such motifs to the common functional class. first, we find the conclusion that the age homogeneity of motif constituents is higher than random expectation holds for most classes of motifs with specific function . further, we find different biological functions have different age homogeneity rates  and age homogeneity ratios: motifs belonging to functional classes of protein fate, protein synthesis, and transcription tend to have high age homogeneity ratios, while those belonging to functional classes of energy, signal transduction and metabolism low co-original constraints.

functional 
a protein functional categories are based on funcat functional classification system  <cit> . here we list their abbreviations and please refer to table s <dig> in additional file  <dig> for the details. b we list upper-tailed empirical p -values , which are lower than  <dig>  are highlighted in bold. c please refer to the footnotes of table  <dig> for the definitions of age homogeneity rate and age homogeneity ratio.

finally, we also check the joint impact of motif topologies and functions on co-origins of motif constituents . we find the conclusion that age homogeneity of motif constituents is higher than random expectation is also true for most classes of motifs with specific function and topology. different combinations of biological functions and topologies have different joint constraints forcing co-origins of motif constituents based on their age homogeneity ratios.

evolutionary rates and functions of the proteins within motifs whose constituents are of the same age class
to further analyze the evolutionary history of the pin from network motifs, we focus on those age-homogeneous motifs whose constituents are of the same age class and analyze them from the following aspects.

first, by computing the evolutionary rates, we find the proteins within the age-homogeneous motifs co-evolve to a significantly higher degree than those participating in the other motifs . then, we further observe that the constituents of these motifs with constituents of the same age class tend to share the same biological functions . from the other point of view, the proteins within the motifs whose members share at least one common functional category tend to be of the same age class, compared with those within the other motifs . further, compared with the other motifs, these age-homogeneous motifs tend to be within protein complexes . finally, we find these motifs also tend to have dense intraconnectedness , which is consistent with the finding that the motifs of high topological saturation tend to be of high age homogeneity .

binary
a the definition of "functional homogeneity rate" is similar to that of "age homogeneity rate". it is calculated as the number of motifs whose members share at least one common functional category divided by the total number of motifs.

in  <dig>  wuchty et al. found in yeast, proteins that participate in the motifs are more conserved than those that don't  <cit> . here we further find that compared with the other motif constituents, proteins participating in age-homogeneous motifs significantly tend to co-evolve, share the same functions and be densely interconnected, and these motifs tend to be within protein complexes.

discussion
evidence for the hypothesis of the clustered additions from network motifs
in  <dig>  based on the finding that proteins of similar phylogenetic profiles tend to interact with each other  <cit> , qin et al. first presented the hypothesis that the evolution of pins has undergone the additions of clustered nodes. here we find proteins of the same age class not only tend to interact but also tend to form motifs , which presents a more direct support for the hypothesis of the clustered additions. here, "the addition of clustered interacting proteins during the evolution of pins" means that several proteins along with the interactions between them originated and joined the pin during a relatively short period of time.

we further explore the possibility of the clustered additions by discussing two alternative scenarios which could lead to the formation of these today's age-homogenous motifs. one scenario is that these proteins formed motifs just during almost the same period of time when these proteins originated, that is, they were clusteredly added during this period of time, and the other is that the interactions between these constituents gradually appeared during a long period of time after these constituents originated, and ultimately formed today's motifs from separated nodes. from the intuitive and parsimonious view, we support the former one. as we know, protein interactions are frequently conserved across multiple organisms  <cit> , which is also the theoretical basis for protein interaction prediction using orthologs  <cit> . in our study, proteins within these age-homogeneous motifs significantly tend to share similar phylogenetic profiles , which means these proteins significantly co-occur in different genomes. we have already known they form motifs in yeast. then based on the conservation of interactions, we can speculate that their co-occurring orthologous hits are likely to form motifs in other species. when a motif exists in multiple species, from the most parsimonious perspective, the motif existed in the ancestral species rather than gradually formed in child species independently. this suggests that the proteins within today's age-homogenous motifs formed motifs during almost the same period of time when these proteins originated, that is, they are much more likely to be clusteredly added to the pin during evolution.

meanwhile, co-evolution  and functional homogeneity  of the constituents within these age-homogenous motifs are consistent with their clustered additions. it is likely that after these proteins' traced ancestors were clusteredly added to the pin , they together played a functionally important role, and thus underwent similar inner and outer pressure and co-evolved to further maintain steady motif structure to "guarantee" biological functions.

our results from network motifs suggest that the proteins within age-homogeneous motifs tend to be clusteredly added historically during a  period of time. however such tendencies of clustered additions are affected by topologies and biological functions. motifs with specific function and dense topology were more likely to be clusteredly added to the pin .

the impact of "recent paralogs" on the issue of the clustered additions
in our work, the recent paralogs in an orthologous group which are likely to retain the similar functions will be traced to the same origin and thus be assigned the same original age, which will result in some age-homogeneous motifs in which some members are  paralogous to other members. the members of such age-homogeneous motifs may not be thought to be clusteredly added to the network during the  period of time when these members originated. because at the original time of these members, there is only one ancestor of these paralogous members and such age-homogeneous motifs' ultimate formation depends on the later  duplication event. however actually we find the fractions of such motifs with recent paralog pairs among all the age-homogeneous motifs are small, which are only  <dig> % for 3-motifs and  <dig> % for 4-motifs.

evidence for the hypothesis of the clustered additions from protein complexes
another evidence for the additions of clustered interacting nodes comes from the analyses of yeast protein complexes  <cit> . we find there are significantly more age-homogeneous complexes whose constituents are all of the same age class than random expectation based on  <dig> experiments established by randomizing the corresponding relationships between proteins in the yeast genome and their ages. further, among the other age-heterogeneous complexes, there are also significantly more complexes which are significantly enriched with members from a special age class  than random expectation . these results still hold when only considering protein complexes without recent paralog pairs  .

functional constraints as the possible driving force of the clustered additions
qin et al. used natural selection to explain the additions of clustered nodes  <cit> . they thought that a new function likely requires a group of interacting new proteins and the growth of pins is under functional constraints. indeed, we find co-evolution  of the constituents of these age-homogeneous motifs, which suggests functional significance for a cluster of interacting proteins. also we find proteins within these age-homogeneous motifs tend to share the same biological functions  and these motifs tend to be within known protein complexes . all the results indicate that these motifs of the same age class tend to be functionally significant. what is more, as we know, protein complexes are definite functional modules in the pin. their analytic results  provide powerful evidence for functional constraints as the driving force of the additions of clustered interacting nodes.

CONCLUSIONS
in the pin, proteins of the same age class tend to form motifs while those of different age classes tend to avoid forming motifs. the constituents within the motifs with specific function or dense topology tend to be under high co-original constraints. further the proteins participating in the motifs with members of the same age class tend to be densely interconnected, share the same functions and evolve at similar rates, and these motifs tend to be within protein complexes. these results suggest that the age-homogeneous motifs historically tend to be clusteredly added to the pin, especially those with dense topology and specific function, providing evidence for the hypothesis of the additions of clustered interacting nodes from the network motif perspective for the first time. our results also suggest functional constraints may be the underlying driving force for such clustered additions.

