BACKGROUND
the number of currently solved protein structures  <cit>  is about two orders of magnitude lower than the number of known amino acid sequences  <cit> . despite intensifying efforts in protein structure determination, particularly structural genomic initiatives   <cit> , this large gap will probably remain for a considerable period of time. in protein evolution, structure tends to be much more conserved than sequence, and sequence-based inference of homology usually indicates structural similarity between proteins  <cit> , exceptions to this rule being very rare  <cit> . there are, however, numerous cases of remote evolutionary relation undetectable by sequence and clear from the comparison of structures. furthermore, non-homologous proteins can acquire similar structure topology  as a result of structural convergence. given all these scenarios, complete genomic sequence information alone is insufficient for a detailed classification of the protein world, which can be achieved by a comprehensive experimental determination of structures. however, using the currently known fraction of protein structures, it is possible to analyze the relations between sequence- and structure-based groupings, and to extrapolate these relations to the whole set of genomic sequences. this extrapolation may allow estimating important general features of the whole protein world, such as the total number of superfamilies of remote structure-based homologs, the total number of folds, the distribution of sequence-based families among superfamilies and folds, etc. knowledge of these features  provides better understanding of evolution and current diversity within the protein universe, and  sets benchmarks for structural genomic efforts to sample the whole variety of protein structures.

several groups have analyzed these features, producing widely varying estimates of  <dig> to  <dig> total sequence-based families comprising  <dig> to  <dig> folds  <cit> . recently taken approaches  <cit>  were parametric: they assumed a certain random model for the distribution of sequence-based protein families between different folds and estimated the parameters of this distribution by fitting to current structural data. using these parameters and the estimated total number of sequence families, the total number of protein folds was derived. although the suggested distributions often produce a very good fit for the classification of known structures, the parametric approach has several drawbacks: such estimates depend on the assumed random model, the parameters of the chosen distribution are frequently sensitive to aberrations in the used data, and can potentially change in time, with more structural data accumulated.

a related problem that has not been fully addressed in the past is the systematic bias in the selection of targets for structure determination. an assumption of previous parametric approaches is that the current set of structurally characterized families represents an unbiased random sample of all families. this assumption may potentially be wrong, for example due to the greater attention of the structural biology community to more prominent families of wider biological importance. is the set of all currently known structures biased? is there a bias in target sampling by sgi? how has sgi affected the bias in the overall population? this is one set of questions that we approach in this article. we find that, compared to the whole family set, the population of currently solved families has a systematic bias, which decreases with time as more structures are solved. the population of families that have been initially solved by sgi does not have an apparent bias, but this population so far comprises a minor fraction of all solved families.

another set of questions concerns general composition of the whole set of protein structures. here, we combine the inference of relations between sequence domains from  <dig> complete genomes represented in the cog database  <cit>  with homology-based structure prediction, and analyze the dynamics of structure prediction for sequence families over the last  <dig> years. in this analysis, we assume neither a specific form of random model nor unbiased representation of the whole protein set by the families with known structures. however, we assume that the current set of these families includes a considerable statistical sample even for under-represented family categories. we also assume that the sampling bias, if it exists, changes gradually and relatively slowly in time, so that it is possible to make predictions of sampling for the future. these assumptions are supported by currently observed data. based on our analysis, we estimate the total number of structure-based superfamilies and folds in the cog database as ~ <dig> and ~ <dig>  which is respectively four and three times higher than is currently assigned to the cog database.

RESULTS
to identify independently recurring segments in cog sequences, we use the adda database  <cit> . similar adda-based segments within each cog are grouped together, followed by complete linkage clustering of segments from different cogs . this clustering produces  <dig> smogs  in total  <dig> cogs.

statistics of structure prediction
to make structure predictions for smog sequences, we use all individual smog segments as queries for blast, rps-blast and psi-blast  <cit>  searches against  the astral  <cit>  representatives of structural domains and  other smog segments. these searches allow us to  map scop domains on the regions in smog fragments and  map different smog fragments on each other and propagate structure predictions between highly similar regions within the same smog . in each smog, we consider sequence regions that are assigned to the same scop superfamily and cluster these regions by sequence similarity, forming "domains from orthologous groups of proteins" .

based on the similarity to domains in scop  <dig> , structure was assigned to sequence segments in  <dig> smogs  that belong to  <dig> cogs . among individual sequence representatives with less than 50% identity in each cog, full-length or partial assignments were made for 66% sequences. the general statistics of structure assignments for genomes of various taxa is shown in table  <dig>  similar regions assigned to same scop superfamilies were clustered in  <dig> dogs. in the majority of smogs with structure predictions , structural assignments fully cover the sequence . within this set of fully covered smogs, the majority  includes a single covered region. prevalence of smogs covered by a single structural domain shows a general correspondence between sequence-based modules and structural domains. the remaining 7% of fully covered smogs  include segments that can be split in multiple structural domains, pointing to inconsistencies between sequence-based domain decomposition and definition of structural domains in scop.

contradictions and errors in structure assignments
to assess potential errors and inconsistencies in dogs, we analyze two types of contradictions between structure assignments to smog fragments and domain definitions by scop. first, we consider overlapping sequence regions in dogs that are assigned different scop superfamilies. we find  <dig> such cases, where two dogs with different superfamily assignments intersect within the same cog sequences. this number comprises ~8% of total  <dig> possible dog intersections . the vast majority of these cases involve assignment of related scop superfamilies to the same region . we reduced this set by excluding scop folds that are known to contain homologous superfamilies, such as multiple rossmann-type folds, tim-barrels, beta propellers, etc. after the reduction, only  <dig> overlapping dog pairs are left. manual analysis of these cases suggests that a major part  of these pairs still correspond to homologous superfamilies, or to mutidomain superfamilies with individual domains homologous to other superfamilies. in the remaining set, which includes real contradictions between superfamily assignments, we find two main sources of errors, both occurring in multidomain sequences. first, excessive alignment extension by psi-blast can lead to incorrect structure assignment for unrelated fragments adjacent to homologous domains. second, a wrong superfamily assignment can be made for a domain inserted in another domain .

an interesting additional source of contradiction is a local structural and sequence similarity of functionally important regions within globally different domains  <cit> . in thirteen cogs, same sequence regions are assigned both to canonical 4fe-4s ferredoxins of alpha+beta fold and to all-alpha ferredoxins. although these two types of ferredoxins are unlikely to be related, psi-blast detects a significant sequence similarity of their functional motifs around the fe-s cluster-binding sites. structure comparison  <cit>  reveals a local structural similarity of these sites, although they are surrounded by completely different structural scaffolds.

as another type of contradiction between our domain assignments and domain definitions in scop, we consider scop domains split into multiple dogs. to detect these contradictions, we analyze sequence regions from different dogs that are mapped to adjacent parts of the same scop domain. we find such regions in  <dig> pairs of dogs, which comprise  <dig> % of total  <dig> dog pairs sharing the same cog. most of these dog pairs belong to the same smog, suggesting that smog boundaries rarely cut a scop domain. there are only fifteen cases of adjacent dogs from different smogs, with scop domain being split by the boundary between sequence-based adda modules.

thus, the number of contradictions introduced by structure assignments to smog fragments is reasonably low. these contradictions are mainly due to the errors in automated domain delineation and sequence comparison, and to the inconsistencies between sequence-based comparison and scop classification. these inconsistencies are caused by homology between many scop superfamilies and by the presence of multidomain fragments in scop.

growth of total number of assigned scop superfamilies with number of solved smogs
given today's structure assignments, how can one predict the total number of scop superfamilies and folds in the whole cog database? the simplest approach is to follow the growing number of assigned superfamilies with more smogs "solved" each year, and to extrapolate this growth to the total smog set. figure  <dig> shows the numbers of different scop superfamilies and folds in solved smogs as functions of the number of solved smogs, each point representing a year from  <dig> to  <dig>  

these plots provide at least two observations. first, the number of solved smogs has tripled from  <dig> till  <dig>  and comprises approximately a third of all smogs. meanwhile, the total numbers of assigned scop superfamilies and folds in cog have doubled, comprising approximately  <dig> superfamilies and  <dig> folds. second, both the numbers of newly solved smogs and of newly assigned superfamilies/folds stay approximately the same each year . this linear growth is in contrast with the exponential growth of the number of solved individual structures and emphasizes the high redundancy of currently solved structures in terms of homology-based structure prediction. given the current numbers of newly solved smogs per year, all  <dig> smogs would be solved in  <dig> to  <dig> years. extrapolating the plots in fig.  <dig> as lines to the total number of smogs produces the estimates of ~ <dig> scop superfamilies and ~ <dig> folds in the whole dataset.

these simplistic estimates would be reasonable if the current population of solved smogs represented an unbiased sample of the whole smog set. however, this is not the case: there has been a general tendency to solve structures of families with larger numbers of homologous proteins, resulting in under-representation of smaller, less connected groups that frequently correspond to separate new superfamilies and folds. this bias makes the estimate by linear growth a conservative lower estimate. to evaluate this bias, we map the set of solved smogs onto the network of sequence-based connections between all smogs, and compare the resulting subgraph to the whole network.

smogs with many links to other smogs are more likely to be solved
we link smogs to each other with various linkage stringency. as a criterion for linking smogs  <dig> and  <dig>  we use the portion w of sequences in smog  <dig> that, as psi-blast queries, provide detection of sequences in smog  <dig> with e-value below e .

as nodes in the graph of sequence-based links between smogs, the sample of solved smogs is biased toward highly linked nodes. figure 3a shows distributions of node degrees  for all smogs and for the sets of smogs solved in  <dig> and in  <dig> . comparison of the  <dig> graph to the total distribution shows that to date almost all smogs with >~ <dig> links are solved, in contrast with ~20% among poorly linked smogs. a similar bias is observed at different stringencies of smog links, for all cutoffs of e and w. this bias probably reflects a greater interest of the structural community in solving proteins from larger families with many sequence-based homologs. comparison of graphs in  <dig> and  <dig> shows that although with time this distribution becomes closer in shape to the total distribution, the bias toward highly connected smogs still persists. the set of all structures produced up to date by projects of structural genomic initiatives  also shows a similar bias in the population of covered smogs . however, the majority of these smogs was already linked to non-sgi structures solved earlier.

to assess how the bias toward highly linked smogs changes with time, we build the differential version of the node degree distribution. this distribution is based on the set of smogs that are solved exactly in a given year, i.e. smogs whose oldest assigned structures were deposited in pdb this year. figure 3b shows the distributions of node degrees for smogs solved in  <dig> and  <dig>  as compared to smogs that were first solved by sgi, and the total distribution for all smogs. the fraction of poorly linked smogs is higher in  <dig> than in  <dig>  but the distribution is still skewed compared to the total. interestingly, smogs that are first solved by sgi obey a distribution very similar to the overall set. this distribution is consistent with the random sampling of solved smogs from the whole population, reflecting a much smaller bias in the set of sgi targets compared to other solved structures.

relations between scop superfamilies and clusters of smogs
given the over-representation of highly connected smogs in the solved population, we estimated the total number of scop superfamilies in the cog database by  clustering smogs by sequence similarity at various linkage stringencies, and  monitoring and extrapolating into the future the relations between smog clusters and scop superfamilies.

smog clusters may roughly correspond to the superfamilies, but this correspondence is never perfect because  many scop superfamilies are related and sequence similarity between them can be detected;  some superfamilies include distant homologs whose similarity can be detected only by structure analysis and not by psi-blast; and  unrelated superfamilies may be erroneously included in the same smog cluster by linking multidomain sequence segments or by spurious psi-blast hits. rather than improving the accuracy of domain prediction and similarity searches, we consider the last factor  an inherent property of the network and assume that this factor is independent of time. we change the input from all three factors by varying the stringency of links between smogs, from no connections at all  to the most relaxed linkage criteria, and obtain estimates of total number of superfamilies for each stringency level.

we consider distributions of the number of superfamilies in a cluster  and of the number of clusters covered by a superfamily . these distributions allow for precise calculation of the total number of superfamilies m in a given set of solved smogs. the formula involves the total number of clusters n along with <m> and <n>, the average number of superfamilies assigned to a cluster and the average number of clusters corresponding to a superfamily  in methods). to predict the total number of superfamilies m* in the whole smog set, we monitor the changes in distributions fm and gn with the growth of the solved smog set in time, make predictions <m>* and <n>* of <m> and <n> for the whole dataset, and apply formula , given the total number of smog clusters n. since n is known exactly, and <m> and <n> change slowly, we expect the relative error of our estimate m* to be within a reasonable range . to evaluate the consistency of our estimates, we consider smog clustering based on various linkage stringencies, make predictions of m* for each stringency, and compare the results. we apply the same considerations to the estimation of the total number of folds. however, since folds much more frequently include proteins with no sequence similarity, the relative error for the estimates of the number of folds should be larger than that for superfamilies.

distributions fm and gn mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaadaaeqbqaaiabd2gatjabdagamnaabaaaleaacqwgtbqbaeqaaaqaaiabd2gatbqab0gaeyyeiuoaaaa@346e@ decrease with m as approximately m1-γ. thus, the value of <m> is not significantly affected by possible aberrations in the tail caused by fluctuations in the small number of clusters with many assigned superfamilies.

the giant cluster includes superfamilies of highly populated folds , as well as non-related superfamilies added as parts of multidomain smogs or due to spurious psi-blast hits. with more relaxed linkage criteria, the number of superfamilies in the largest component grows from being close to other smaller components  for the stringent linkage to larger sizes  for more inclusive cutoffs . the growth occurs by the inclusion of other clusters in the largest component. this inclusion is more likely to happen to larger clusters, which makes the continuous part of the distribution steeper .
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaadaaeqbqaaiabd2gatjabdagamnaabaaaleaacqwgtbqbaeqaaaqaaiabd2gatbqab0gaeyyeiuoaaaa@346e@ and reduces the influence of the giant component on the growth of <m>.

estimates of total numbers of superfamilies and folds
the changes in distributions fm and gn  result in a relatively slow growth of both the average number of superfamilies assigned to a smog cluster <m>  and the average number of clusters corresponding to a given superfamily <n> . the values of <m> for the current population of solved smogs range from  <dig>  for no links allowed  to  <dig>  for the most relaxed linkage cutoff . the fastest growth of <m> is provided by the clusters with the most stringent linkage criteria: since  <dig>  the value has increased by 18%, which corresponds to ~2% per year and ~ <dig> % per solved smog. for more relaxed linkage criteria, this growth is slower .

the current values of <n> are between  <dig>  for the most relaxed linkage and  <dig>  for separate smogs . as in the case of <m>, the fastest growth of <n> is observed for the clusters with the most stringent linkage criteria: the maximal increase since  <dig> is ~15%, which corresponds to <~2% per year and ~ <dig> % per solved smog. for more relaxed linkage criteria, this growth is slower; the slowest growth of ~ <dig> % per year  is observed for the most inclusive linkage .

the shape of the observed curves and the slow relative rate of the growth allows for linear approximations. extrapolating these curves to the total number of ~ <dig> smogs provides the estimates of <m>* and <n>* in the whole smog set . given these estimates and the total number of clusters for each linkage stringency, we calculate predicted total numbers of superfamilies. as shown in table  <dig>  all predictions fall in the range of  <dig> ±  <dig> superfamilies.

in a similar fashion we make predictions of the total number of different folds. we consider the distributions of number of scop folds in a cluster and of number of clusters covered by a fold , and estimate their average values  for the moment when all smogs are solved . these estimates show the same general correlation with the linkage stringency as <m>* and <n>* for superfamilies. having <mfolds> and <n>fold at various linkage stringencies, we calculate predicted total number of folds using formula . these predictions are in the range of  <dig> ±  <dig> folds .

discussion
here, we analyze protein sequences from  <dig> complete genomes included in the cog database, make homology-based predictions of their structure, and monitor the dynamics of these predictions in time, with the accumulation of experimentally solved structure templates. these templates currently allow for structure prediction in approximately a third of sequence-based modules , a fraction approximately three times greater than it would have been possible to predict with the structure set available in  <dig> 

we find a significant bias in the sample of smogs with assigned structure, compared to the whole population of smogs. targets chosen for structure determination tend to be located in highly populated areas of sequence space, where many homologous families can be found. in contrast, the overall set of smogs that were initially solved by structural genomic initiatives  is very similar to a random sample from the whole population. although it contributes only to a minor fraction of all presently solved smogs, the growing sgi output in future should further reduce the sampling bias.

since many sgi projects are aimed at determining structures of previously unknown folds, one might expect even the opposite bias toward "singleton" families among those solved by sgi. the apparent absence of such a bias in our data might possibly be attributed to several factors. first, the present-day size of this smog sample is still relatively small , and the opposite bias might become pronounced when the sample grows. second, the set of unsolved smogs comprises the majority  of the overall population, and a targeted random selection of the unsolved smogs that are not connected to the solved families may produce a sample similar to the overall population. third, some of individual sgi projects have different preferences in target selection, e.g. focus on a particular proteome, which may increase the representation of domains with many sequence homologs. another possible systematic factor is the exclusion of the proteins experimentally challenging in terms of crystallization and structure determination, which might affect the distribution of solved sgi targets.

many previously proposed estimates of the total number of different folds assume random sampling of families from a certain distribution of number of families per fold. most of the suggested approaches are conceptually similar. assuming a specific random model of sampling sequence families for structure determination, the observed distribution of families among folds is fitted with a certain analytical function. this function and its optimized parameters are considered to represent the population of folds and families in the whole protein world. the total number of sequence families is either estimated independently or based on the estimates of others. finally, given this number and the proposed form of the distribution, the total number of folds is derived. different assumptions about the random model, shape of the distribution, and total number of families resulted in varying estimates. alexandrov and go  <cit>  assumed normal distribution , whereas wang  <cit>  assumed uniform distribution . to reflect the currently observed prevalence of folds with one or few families, skewed model distributions were used: zhang and delisi  <cit>  assumed geometric distribution , govindarajan et al.  <cit>  used stretched exponent , wolf et al.  <cit>  used a logarithmic distribution , whereas coulson and moult  <cit>  modeled the distribution by a three-part function and provided varying estimates for different assumed numbers of families .

here, given the observed bias in the sample of families with assigned structure, we choose a non-parametric approach to the estimation of the total numbers of different superfamilies and folds in the cog database. this approach has several main differences from those previously proposed. first, the sequences do not have to be assigned a single superfamily or fold. this consideration is more realistic, given the presence of related superfamilies and even folds in the current scop classification, and the possibility of multiple assignments to undetected multi-domain sequences. second, our approach does not assume the solved families to be a representative random sample of the family population. third, instead of a single grouping of protein sequences into families, we produce various groupings  that emerge at different clustering stringency. finally, although our approach requires a rough correspondence between the sequence-based clustering and scop classification, we allow for errors in the inference of sequence similarity. these errors lead to the emergence and approximately linear growth of the giant cluster, consistent with a constant low probability for a certain smog to be included in the giant component. we consider such errors an inherent random noise and assume that their frequency stays approximately the same in time.

our approach allows for a bias in the sample of families with solved structure and does not require the bias to be constant in time. however, our extrapolation assumes that the change of this bias is gradual, the assumption supported by the currently observed data . this assumption provides for continuity in the changes of distributions fm and gn  and relatively slow changes of the average numbers of superfamilies and folds per sequence cluster  and of the average number of clusters with a superfamily or fold assigned . another important assumption is that clustering by sequence similarity is loosely similar to the grouping of domains in superfamilies/folds, which leads to steep continuous parts in distributions fm and gn declining faster than 1/m. this steep decline ensures that the average values <m> and <n> are hardly affected by potential aberrations in the tail, where individual "large" clusters and superfamilies/folds are located. although the distributions become less sharp with more structures solved, as reflected by the decrease in the exponent γ of power-law approximation , this modest decrease is not likely to have a serious effect on the contribution of the tail in the future

we pay special attention to estimating the number of scop superfamilies because this level of classification presents a more tractable grouping of protein world. by definition  <cit> , superfamilies include homologous domains, with homology inferred from sequence and structure comparison. grouping into superfamilies has fewer deviations from purely sequence-based clustering than grouping into folds, which does not imply homology. this provides for less uncertainty in the estimate of the total number of superfamilies. a more general reason for our attention to the superfamily level is that the fold category, loosely defined as major types of structure topology, leaves much more space for subjective interpretation, and classification of proteins into folds is less based on the internal properties of the protein set, such as evolutionary connectivity in the case of superfamilies.

in this work, we build on the initial high-quality grouping of proteins from the whole genomes provided by the cog database. confining the protein set to cog makes our consideration more tractable but puts more restrictions on the results. in particular, our results are valid for major widespread protein superfamilies and folds that are included in the cog database. the cog database  <cit>  does not include smaller families with two or less orthologous representatives in different genomes, which amounts to ~25% of all individual sequences in the genomes considered. since cog includes mainly prokaryotic genomes, our results may not cover exclusively eukaryotic superfamilies and folds. according to the whole-genome surveys  <cit> , such folds comprise 15–18% of all scop folds. thus, our estimates may serve as lower bounds of the total numbers of superfamilies and folds in the whole protein world. the distance between these bounds and the optimal estimates depends on how well the cog database represents the whole population of protein folds.

although each newly sequenced genome adds a number of new proteins with no detectable sequence similarity to other proteins, the 3d structures of such "singletons" suggest that they usually possess already known structural folds . thus, proteins in the cog database probably provide a representative sample of major structural folds, and the presented estimates may be fairly close to the total numbers of major protein folds and superfamilies.

CONCLUSIONS
we present the estimates of the total number of structural superfamilies and folds in the cog database of protein sequences from  <dig> complete genomes. mapping protein domains with predicted structure onto the graph of sequence-based connections between all domains, we found that the choice of targets for structure determination is biased towards more populated regions of sequence space. this bias is absent among the subset of targets whose structure was initially solved by structural genomics initiatives. the total number of structural superfamilies and folds in the cog database are estimated as ~ <dig> and ~ <dig>  which is respectively four and three times higher than the numbers of superfamilies and folds that can currently be predicted in cog proteins.

