BACKGROUND
the rosaceae comprise a moderately large family, with an estimated  <dig> genera and approximately  <dig>  sexual species  <cit> , that include several economically and nutritionally important crops cultivated worldwide, such as apples , plums , pears , cherries  and peaches .

among the rosaceae are blackberries , with growing market interest due to recent discoveries about the beneficial effects of polyphenols for human health  <cit> . therefore, increasing polyphenol levels will likely result in healthier fruits. however, despite the agricultural and biological importance of rubus, knowledge of the genetics and genome is limited. so far, genomic efforts have focused largely on other rosaceae, including apple , strawberry , peach  and pear  for which whole genome sequencing has been completed by combining traditional sanger, roche and next-generation illumina ga sequencing technologies  <cit> . many genomic resources for these rosaceae species are available on the genome database for rosaceae website  <cit> .

the genus rubus is classified into  <dig> subgenera, and at the same time is divided into sections or subseries. economically, the most important subgenus is rubus, with more than  <dig> species  <cit> . during the domestication of blackberries, parentals with desirable traits such as large, sweet fruits, thornlessness and high yield have been hybridised, resulting in complex hybrids comprising elite commercial lines.

the variety rubus spp. var. lochness is a high yielding tetraploid  blackberry, and one of the most widely cultivated varieties. its origin is scottish, with parents scri 74126ra <dig> x scri 75131d <dig> hybrid complex, obtained in  <dig> in invergowrie, scotland, by the scottish crop research institute  <cit> . it is a mixture of races, among which the most prominent are “comanche” and “merton thornless”. the parents came from scotland and north america, and include european species; rubus ulmifolius, r. trivialis, r. strigosus, and r. armeniacus. commercially, the term often used is fruticosus, although from a botanical point of view, it is more accurately described as rubus spp. var. loch ness.

the lack of dense genetic maps, large high-throughput marker collections, and suitable mapping populations has limited gene isolation and breeding in blackberry. several rubus genes have been reported, mainly related to fruit quality, especially genes encoding the enzymes of phenylpropanoid metabolism, and resistance to diseases  <cit> , but most of these are derived from raspberry  and none of them have been cloned and characterized molecularly in blackberry.

currently, there are more than  <dig>  million ests in the ncbi public collection  <cit> . however, less than  <dig>  est sequences are available collectively for all the rubus species, and approximately  <dig>  for all the species in the rosaceae family, compared to more than  <dig>  and  <dig> million ests available for arabidopsis and zea mays, respectively.

rna-seq is a powerful tool for transcriptome analysis and uses deep-sequencing technologies to produce millions of short cdna reads. the resulting reads are either aligned to a reference genome or reference transcripts, or assembled de novo  to produce a genome-scale transcription map that consists of both the transcript structure and level of expression for each gene at any particular developmental stage  <cit> .

here, we describe the generation of almost  <dig> billion nt bases using illumina rna-seq technology, and the detection of  <dig>  consensus sequences. these sequences are functionally annotated and represent the first rubus sp. transcriptome. we show that de novo assembly using trinity  <cit>  and a later annotation with blast interrogation of different databases is complementary to alignment to a reference sequence with soapaligner/soap <dig>  <cit> , using as a reference, the genome sequence a species of the same family , but a different genus, fragaria. access to the sequence of the ripe blackberry transcriptome will accelerate genetic analysis and breeding of this crop and facilitate attempts to improve fruit quality based on secondary metabolite accumulation, and improved field performance within more sustainable production.

we have demonstrated the suitability of short-read sequencing for de novo assembly and annotation of genes without prior genome information, as well as its reliability and complementarity by alignment with sequence from a close, but distinct, species. our results will facilitate the discovery of new functional genes in rubus sp. based on this background, the aim of this study was founded on i) the importance of the transcriptome to improvement of fruit quality dependent on secondary metabolite content, which will be useful for breeders and biotechnologists, and ii) comparison of bioinformatic approaches to study a new transcriptome, with little or no pre-existing information of its genome.

RESULTS
sample preparation and illumina sequencing
rna-seq was performed on ripe fruit of rubus sp var lochness to gather information about genes expressed at the time and place most important to breeders of blackberry. traits such as colour , sweetness  and healthfulness  are determined by metabolic pathways active in ripe fruit. total rna of two independent samples, ripe fruit <dig>  and ripe fruit <dig>  were isolated from ripe fruits to characterize the rubus sp. transcriptome and enhance sequence coverage. after cleaning and quality checks, two independent rounds of illumina sequencing  generated  <dig> , <dig> and  <dig> , <dig> clean reads in total, encompassing  <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig>  total nucleotides  respectively . these data sets are available in the ebi database .table  <dig> 
summary of de novo assembly of transcriptome sequence reads without reference genome



samples
total raw reads
total clean reads
total clean nucleotides 
q <dig> percentage
gc percentage
type of gene detected
total number
total length 
mean length 
n50
first column shows the total raw reads, the next columns shows the clean reads and nucleotids. q <dig> percentage column shows the proportion of nucleotides with quality value larger than  <dig>  gc percentage is proportion of guanidine and cytosine nucleotides among total nucleotides. the total number column shows the total sequences obtained, that represents the all raw sequences and consensus sequences, respectively. next columns show the total nucleotides length and their mean length. the last column shows the n <dig> value .



the two independent samples,  were collected and, after dnase treatment, rna integrity was confirmed using a triple check, nanodrop™, experion™ automated electrophoresis system, and gel electrophoresis.

de novo assembly of sequence reads without a reference genome
reads were assembled using trinity  <cit>  and then, sequences were clustered using the tigr gene indices clustering tools . tgicl  <cit>  was used to join further sequences and remove any redundant sequences.

so, the result of clustering was that from  <dig>  and  <dig>  raw sequence reads were generated; after clustering  <dig>  and  <dig>  total consensus sequences were generated respectively .

gene family clustering was performed such that the consensus sequences were divided into two classes. one class comprised clusters, for which the prefix cl followed by the cluster id and the number of contigs in each cluster was given . in any one cluster, there were several consensus sequences for which similarity between the consensus sequences was more than 70%. the other class comprised singletons, for which the prefix unigene was given.

altogether, considering both repetitions,  <dig>  different consensus sequences were detected. among them  <dig>  were singletons, and  <dig>  others were grouped into  <dig>  different clusters.

the diagram in additional file  <dig> shows the distribution of raw sequences and of the consensus sequence lengths ranging from 200 bp to more than  <dig>  bp in both samples. the most abundant raw sequences were 200 bp  and the least abundant were 3000 bp ; sequences over 3000 bp were grouped together. for the consensus sequences, the most abundant were 200 bp , and the least abundant were 300 bp . the number of sequences decreased as the length increased .

consensus sequences were aligned with blastdb using blastx   <cit> . sequence orientations were determined according to the best hit in the database. the orientation and cds of sequences that had no hit in blast were predicted using estscan  <cit> .

annotation and classification of rubus sp. consensus sequences
for annotation, the consensus sequences were first searched using blastx against the ncbi ‘non-redundant’ database   <cit>  using a cut-off e-value of  <dig> .

to search for the maximum number of similar genes, after using the nr database, the ncbi’s nt database  <cit> , swiss institute of bioinformatics databases   <cit> , kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes   <cit> , clusters of orthologous groups of proteins   <cit> , gene ontology   <cit>  databases were used. first, several databases were used to annotate each gene. in each database, two criteria were used, the score and the evalue. the evalue was set to discard alignments with statistical significance . each gene was analyzed independently, and the annotation was made according to these criteria; these data are shown in additional file  <dig>  the kegg pathway database records networks of molecular interactions in cells, and variants of them, specific to particular organisms. pathway-based analysis helped to understand further the biological functions of genes. pathway information for all annotated sequences was obtained from kegg pathway annotations.

cog is a database where orthologous gene products are classified. every protein in cog is assumed to have evolved from an ancestral protein, and the whole database is built on genes encoding proteins from species with complete genome sequences as well as the evolutionary relationships between bacteria, algae and eukaryotes. all consensus sequences were aligned to the cog database to predict and classify possible functions. it was possible to get gene ontology  functional annotation from the nr annotation. go offers three ontologies: molecular function, cellular component and biological process. the basic unit of go is the go-term. every go-term belongs to a type of ontology. based on the nr annotation, the blast2go program was used  <cit>  to get the go annotation of all consensus sequences. wego software  <cit>  was then used for go functional classification and to understand the distribution of gene functions of the species at a macro level.

for functional annotation,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  consensus sequences were annotated using the nr, nt, swiss-prot, kegg, cog, go databases, respectively; in total  <dig>  annotated sequences were identified. for protein prediction analysis, the number of cds that mapped to the protein database was  <dig> .

among the annotated sequences, the species with the highest number of best hits were wild strawberry   and peach   . these results are consistent since strawberry and peach are the species closest to rubus sp. with sequenced genomes, all belonging to the family rosaceae.table  <dig> 
summary of annotations of assembled rubus sp. consensus sequences



species
number of genes
percentage

fragaria vesca subsp. vesca

prunus persica

vitis vinifera

ricimus communis

glycine max

populus balsamifera subsp. trichocarpa

medicago truncatula

lycopersicon esculentum

rosa rugosa

arabidopsis thaliana
the first column shows the species with the highest number of similar genes in descending order, the second column indicates de number of these annotated genes, and the last column show the percentage of genes with respect to the total annotated genes sequences.



based on sequence homology,  <dig>  rubus sp. sequences were categorized into  <dig> functional groups, belonging to three main go ontologies: molecular function, cellular component and biological process. results showed a high proportion of genes from the categories of; “cellular process”, “metabolic process”, “cell” “organelle”, “catalytic” and “binding” with only a few genes related to “biological adhesion”, “immune system processes”, “growth”, “rhythmic process”, “nucleoid”, “antioxidant activity”, “nutrient reservoir activity”. no genes were clustered as “extracellular”, “virion”, “channel regulator activity”, “protein tag” or “translation regulator activity” .figure  <dig> 
histogram of go classifications of
rubus
sp. consensus sequences ripe fruit. results are summarized for the three main go categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. the left axis indicate the percent of sequences of each category, and right axis shows the total number of genes in each category.



to identify active biological pathways in ripe fruit of rubus sp., the sequences were mapped to the reference canonical pathways in the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes.

. in total,  <dig>  sequences were assigned to  <dig> kegg pathways. the pathways with most representation were “metabolic pathways” , “biosynthesis of secondary metabolites” , “plant-pathogen interaction”  and “rna transport”  . the  <dig>  genes in the “biosynthesis of secondary metabolites” category expressed in blackberry fruits will be useful for defining metabolic pathways for synthesis and turnover of compounds potentially beneficial to human health, and modifiable by plant breeding in blackberry.

to further differentiate the ncbi nucleotide sequences and assembled sequences at the protein level, cog classification was undertaken to analyse the ncbi sequences.

the  <dig>  assembled sequences were divided into  <dig> clusters according to ncbi cog classification . the groups with the highest representation were found in the clusters r “general function prediction only”, k “transcription” and l “replication, recombination and repair” .

to determine differential expression, once all reads were assembled and annotated, each gene expression level was normalized to its length for each replicate . the gene expression level was calculated by using rpkm method  <cit>  , with the following formula: rpkm = 106c/ which defines the expression of gene a , where c is the number of reads that are uniquely aligned to gene a , n is the total number of reads that are uniquely aligned to all genes, and l is the number of bases in gene a. the rpkm method is able to eliminate the influence of different gene lengths and sequencing discrepancies in the calculation of gene expression. therefore, the calculated gene expression can be used directly for comparing the difference of gene expression among samples. normalized data from c <dig> was plotted against data from c2; low dispersion in the plot indicated high repetitivity in expression between samples. gene expression levels showed high similarity between biological replicates, rf <dig> and rf <dig> . most genes showed no significant differences between the samples, suggesting the results were reliable. therefore, the calculated fpkm gene expression values can be directly compared between genes and, for any given gene, between samples.

finally, ssrs were detected using misa software  <cit> , using the sequences as a reference . predominant ssrs were dinucleotides , followed by trinucleotides , mononucleotides , hexanucleotides  and similar amounts of tetra and pentanucleotides . despite the importance of these sequences to predict variability in different organisms  <cit>  no further analysis has been undertaken with these data in the present study, but the sequences are available in ebi databases , to use as markers for improvement of blackberry quality. such ssrs will be useful as molecular markers for assaying the functional diversity in natural populations or germplasm collections, evolutionary studies and for breeding projects.

de novo assembly of sequence reads using the reference genome from strawberry
since the species distribution of nr annotation showed that  <dig>  genes  had the highest similarity with fragaria vesca subspecies vesca, a reanalysis was carried out, aligning the blackberry reads to this reference genome to obtain a more accurate analysis of the ripe blackberry transcriptome.

primary sequencing data produced by illumina hiseq tm  <dig>  , was subjected to quality control , to determine whether a resequencing step was needed. raw reads were filtered into clean reads and aligned to the reference sequences with soapaligner/soap <dig>  <cit> . then, the distribution of reads on reference genes and coverage analysis was done. the quality control was positive for both samples , and therefore further analysis was undertaken.

the genome map rate and gene map rate were very low  because, even though strawberry and blackberry belong to the family rosaceae, they are quite distinct species and the alignment using the soap software was very strict  . the alignment parameters were strict because we wanted to detect only the most similar genes, to compare this analysis with that undertaken with the first strategy. although the number of genes was not as high as expected, , a sufficient number were detected to allow comparative analyses. ontology  enrichment analysis and pathway enrichment analysis were undertaken, but, the results were not as representative nor complete as in the first analysis.table  <dig> 
summary of
de novo
assembly of transcriptome sequence reads with reference genome



sample
clean reads
genome map rate
gene map rate
expressed gene
alternative splicing
snp
clean reads, genome map rate , gene map rate , number of expressed genes, the number of alternative splicing events and the number of single-nucleotide polymorphism  are shown in each column for blackberry ripe fruit samples .



the expression levels of sequences were similar in both replicates rf <dig> and rf <dig> ; only  <dig> genes had significantly different values , suggesting highly reproducible results.figure  <dig> 
figure of distribution of differentially expressed genes. x-axis  and y-axis  shows the logarithm value of normalized expression of each gene in fpkm , for the two blackberry ripe fruit samples  using fragaria as reference genome. red  and green  dots indicate significantly different expression , and blue dots indicates no significant differences.



single-nucleotide polymorphism  analysis was done with soapaligner/soap <dig>  <cit> . in samples rf <dig> and rf <dig>   <dig>  snps and  <dig>  snps were detected, respectively .

comparison of strategies used to analyse the blackberry transcriptome de novo
our initial analysis strategy  produced a large number of annotated genes:  <dig>  from a total of  <dig>  assembled genes . this provides a significant database for berry breeders. all the classifications  provide new tools and resources for research on fruit development and bioactives. however, functional assignment of genes based on similarity to genes in other plant species should be undertaken with caution, especially if the comparator species are taxonomically distant from blackberry, such as populus balsamifera subsp. trichocarpa, medicago truncatula, lycopersicon esculentum, which all showed some genes with high similarity to those of blackberry .

the second analysis  resulted in a lower number of expressed genes,  <dig> . since very high stringency was set for this alignment with strawberry , it is very likely that matched sequences have equivalent functions in the two species.

the combination of the two strategies for assembly and analysis of rna-seq data adds value to the dataset for diverse applications.

study of putative chimeras
rubus sp. var lochness is a tetraploid hybrid  <cit> , and consequently there is a risk of chimeric contigs from assembling the ngs data. however, trinity is reliable in assembling genes from different chromosomes and avoiding chimeras, especially when the hybrid has been derived from different species  <cit> .

to test for putative chimeras, the cds of one gene encoding chalcone synthase  was selected as a representative example for its role in biosynthesis of flavonols and anthocyanins, that are greatly accumulated in blackberries. the cds was cloned from fresh tissue by designing primers  for both ends of the known sequence; the cds were cloned in pgemt and several clones were sequenced.

all the sequences from the clones aligned with high scores  with the two chs contigs from the rnaseq data; however  <dig> nucleotides were different   between the cloned sequences and the chs contigs. these differences could be due to snps or to errors introduced during amplification by pcr or during the sequencing the genes. these sequence differences were clustered around  <dig> nucleotides from each end of the cds.

despite the high reliability of the software used to align the sequences to distinguish homologs of different chromosomes  <cit>  and our results, that suggest that chs is not chimeric, this represents a single test case, and a deeper analysis on more genes should be carried out, to rule out the occurrance of chimeric genes resulting from mistakes in alignment of transcripts in this tetraploid variety.

expression of the contigs estimated by qrt-pcr
rna-seq analysis showed that more than  <dig>  genes of the blackberry transcriptome are clustered in different contigs. this could be problematic for primer design for rt-qpcr analysis, since design of primers that amplify only one of the contigs encoding a specific protein, instead of all the copies of that gene, could give misleading expression data. to check if this is a real problem, three pairs of primers were designed for the chs gene. the first two pairs were designed using the zone with high snp frequency between the two contigs encoding chs in blackberry . consequently, these primers should monitor the transcript levels of each contig encoding chs but not the combined expression of both genes . the third pair of primers was designed within the sequence conserved between the two genes; accordingly this third pair should report the total expression of the chs genes.

rt-qpcr showed that the expression reported by this third primer pair  was equal to the sum of the rt-qpcr products of the two primer pairs which amplified contig <dig> and contig <dig> separately, during three stages of ripening of blackberry fruit  . these data illustrate how gene expression analysis is best undertaken for tetraploid varieties such as blackberry var lochness.figure  <dig> 
expression levels of
chs
relative to actin for the two
chs
contigs of blackberry, amplified independently and combined using different primer pairs. y-axe indicates the expression level compared to actin. slant line background bars indicate the expression level using the primers of the common fraction of both contigs. vertical line and dots background bars indicate the expression level using the primers of the differential fraction of both contigs.



although these studies represent assays of a single gene for chimeras, the degree of polymorphism between the two chs contigs was such  that data on this gene likely represent the top end of the problem, where single nucleotide differences would impact the proteins encoded, since on average 5snps were found per contig. consequently chimeras existing in other contig pairs are less likely to impact the sequence of the encoded protein than for chs.

CONCLUSIONS
the blackberry transcriptome data provide a resource that will enhance comparative studies between different berry crops which are of increasing economic and social importance due to their healthy properties. consequently these transcriptome data and analyses provide an important new resource for biological research. the genes we have identified provide candidates for resistance genes against rna viruses, fungal or bacterial pathogens as well as many genes encoding enzymes of flavonoid metabolism which are key to the health-promoting effects of many berries. the ssrs and snps identified here will constitute an important resource for mapping and marker-assisted breeding of ripe fruit quality traits in rubus sp. and closely related crop species.

two different strategies have been used to analyse sequence, assemble and annotate a new transcriptome de novo without a reference genome or transcriptome. we have demonstrated that the techniques are both robust and complementary and should be used in accordance with the research objectives. we show that the transcriptome of a non-model polyploid species, in this case, a tetraploid, can be sequenced, assembled and annotated avoiding high levels of artificial chimeras. the analysis of expression of several contigs of the same gene can inform expression analyses of both individual genes and all the genes encoding proteins of particular interest.

