BACKGROUND
bioelectrogenesis  has evolved several times independently in aquatic vertebrates  <cit> . in fact, it can be observed in the marine electric rays  and skates , in the african freshwater mormyridae and gymnarchidae , in the south american knifefishes , in several catfish species , and in few marine stargazers . in all the above-mentioned groups, electric organs originate from myogenic tissue; the only exception are members of the family apteronotidae , where the electric organs are formed by modified spinal motor neurons  <cit> . the amount of excitable cells within each electric organ determines the electric potential of an eod, which can range from few millivolts to several hundreds of volts   <cit> .

african weakly-electric fishes of the family mormyridae constitute a group of teleost fishes, formed by approximately  <dig> species  <cit> , all endemic to african riverine and, partially, lacustrine systems. as their name suggests, they are able to produce only weak electric fields, in the order of millivolts to few volts, which are not used for predation or defence. the cells forming their electric organ are compressed disk-like cells commonly called electrocytes. in many species they are longitudinally stacked behind each other in order to form columns of cells embedded within tubes of isolating connective tissue. the synchronous activity of each electrocyte defines the output of the electric organ, known as electric organ discharge   <cit> . such weak pulses are mainly employed for the localization and discrimination of objects in water   <cit> , for the recognition of conspecific individuals  <cit> , and in social and reproductive behaviour  <cit> .

besides these functional roles, the eods of mormyrids display remarkable levels of differentiation in terms of shape and length across different species  <cit> . such differences, which can be dramatic even among closely related species, are considered to have acted as effective prezygotic isolation mechanisms, promoting thus the adaptive radiation observed in this family, facilitated by either ecological speciation  or speciation driven by sexual selection  <cit> .

in all mormyrids, the adult electric organ is located in the caudal peduncle and is formed by four columns of electrocytes, two dorsal and two ventral ones. each electrocyte is innervated by electromotoneurons originating in the spinal cord  <cit> . electric organs arise in juvenile fishes from several myomeres of the deep lateral muscle; their myogenic origin is confirmed by the presence of disorganized myofibrils within the electrocytes  <cit> .

during the last decade, several studies have investigated the genetic basis of eod function and evolution . some of them have stressed the importance of duplication in a class of sodium channel genes for the origin of eod production and diversification in weakly-electric fishes, by revealing the presence of important functional substitutions across paralogs and by discovering their differential patterns of expression between electric organ  and skeletal muscle   <cit> . more recent studies however  <cit> , based on high throughput genomic technologies  have identified many differentially expressed genes, belonging to multiple functional classes , between skeletal muscle and electric organ in several weakly-electric species . all studies conducted so far have been focusing on gene expression differences between two tissues –i.e., skeletal muscle and electric organ- within a species , overlooking possible differences in the same tissue across different species . however, tissue-specific gene expression differences across several species might underlie important phenotypic differences  <cit>  which, in the case of the electric organ of mormyrid fishes, could explain the species-specific variability of eods.

the aim of the present work is twofold; first we aim at exploring the differential patterns of gene expression between skeletal muscle and electric organ  in adult specimens belonging to the mormyrid genus campylomormyrus . we focus then, on the identification of the differentially expressed genes, that are in common between the two species, and that might be responsible for the functional differences between the two tissues, and compare them to the results obtained by previous studies. the second task is to find differences in gene expression among three mormyrid species  for the skeletal muscle and electric organ separately , and identify genes potentially related to phenotypic differences in eod shape and duration.fig.  <dig> analyzed species. the three species analysed in this study, with their relative eods. from bottom to top: g. petersii, c. compressirostris, c. tshokwe




RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing and assembly
sequencing of the twelve cdna libraries produced a total amount of  <dig> ,357raw read pairs, resulting in  <dig> , <dig> quality-filtered read pairs ; see additional file  <dig> for per library sequencing statistics. trinity assembly resulted in  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs for c. compressirostris and c.tshokwe cross-tissue transcriptomes respectively ;  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs were obtained for the sm and eo cross-species assemblies respectively . contigs were then compared to the danio rerio proteome, retrieving  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique proteins for c. compressirostris and c.tshokwe respectively; of these retrieved matches,  <dig>  and  <dig>  hits corresponded to full or nearly full-length coding sequences . for the cross-species assemblies,  <dig>  and  <dig>  contigs, for the sm and eo respectively, matched unique proteins in the d. rerio proteome, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  hits corresponding to full or nearly full-length coding sequences .table  <dig> assembly statistics for the cross-tissue comparison

c. compressirostris
c. tshokwe
for each of the shared differentially expressed gene are reported: the gene and protein names obtained from the top hit blast results against the proteome of d. rerio; whether it is up- or down- regulated in the eo; its function or pathway ; the phenotypic effect on d. rerio of its mis-expression 

fig.  <dig> distribution of length coverage between campylomormyrus trinity transcripts and corresponding top-blast hits . histogram showing the distribution of the percent in length of the sequences in the d. rerio proteome that aligns to the assembled trinity contigs. numbers on the x-axis indicate the upper limit of the binned interval . a cross-tissue comparison. b cross-species comparison



differential expression  analysis
cross-tissue comparison
after transcript quantification with rsem and de-analysis with edger,  <dig> transcripts resulted to be differentially expressed between eo and sm in c. compressirostris  and  <dig> in c. tshokwe . of all differentially expressed transcripts,  <dig> resulted to be shared between the two species  .fig.  <dig> number of differentially expressed genes . venn diagram showing the amount of differentially expressed genes within each campylomormyrus species’ transcriptome  and the amount of differentially expressed genes shared between the two campylomormyrus species . the amount of genes that are up - or down -regulated in the electric organ are reported for each dataset



cross-species comparison
in order to obtain an initial overview of transcriptome-wide gene expression patterns, we performed a principal component analysis on the expression levels of all assessed transcripts with non-zero levels in both assemblies . the results clearly separate the data according to tissue rather than species . a distance matrix was then obtained from the same dataset and a neighbour-joining gene expression tree was built  in order to analyse global evolutionary trends in more detail. the obtained tree  shows a clustering pattern for the eo data where species characterized by similar eods  are grouped together, whereas the species with a rather different eod  forms an isolated cluster. sm data, on the other hand, do not seem to form any particular clustering scheme.fig.  <dig> principal component analysis of expression levels. gnapet = g. petersii; comp = c. compressirostris; tsho = c. tshokwe; eo = electric organ; mu = skeletal muscle

fig.  <dig> neighbour-joining analysis of expression levels. neighbour-joining tree based on pairwise distance matrix  for eo and sm expression values. bootstrap replicates =  <dig> . circles at nodes indicate bootstrap support. gnapet = g. petersii; comp = c. compressirostris; tsho = c. tshokwe; eo = electric organ; mu = skeletal muscle; rep = replicate



after de analysis,  <dig> and  <dig> genes resulted to be differentially expressed across the three analysed species for sm and eo, respectively. within the skeletal muscle  <dig> genes are up-regulated in g. petersii,  <dig> in c. compressirostris,  <dig> in c. tshokwe, and  <dig> in c. compressirostris and c. tshokwe together . as far as the electric organ is concerned,  <dig> genes are up-regulated in g. petersii,  <dig> in c. compressirostris, and  <dig> in c. tshokwe .fig.  <dig> cross-species analysis . a results of the de analysis. left: heatmap showing the differentially expressed genes clustered by expression levels. expression sub-clusters obtained from k-mean clustering. each cluster groups together genes characterized by similar expression levels. b network showing significantly enriched terms and their relative genes for each sub-cluster

fig.  <dig> cross-species analysis . a results of the de analysis. left: heatmap showing the differentially expressed genes clustered by expression levels. expression sub-clusters obtained from k-mean clustering. each cluster groups together genes characterized by similar expression levels. b networks showing significantly enriched terms and their relative genes for each sub-cluster



functional annotation
cross-tissue comparison
in order to identify over-represented functional categories and pathways within the c. compressirostris and c. tshokwe transcriptomes, the sets of up- and down-regulated genes in the electric organ were subject to an enrichment analysis involving gene ontology categories, as well as reactome and kegg biological pathways . the number of retrieved categories/pathways is proportional to the amount of differentially expressed genes present in each analysed set; with fewer categories for the eo up-regulated genes compared to the eo down-regulated genes in c. compressirostris, and a similar number of categories identified between the two sets in c. tshokwe. for both species the most represented categories within the eo up-regulated genes are related to ion channel transport , multicellular organismal development, development and patterning of nerves . the genes found to be down-regulated in the eo regard mainly functional classes like: metabolic pathways specific to muscle tissue , and muscle specific categories .fig.  <dig> functional annotation results . pie charts showing the composition in terms of enriched functional categories  and pathways  for each cluster of differentially expressed genes. eo = up-regulated in the electric organ; eo  = down-regulated in the electric organ



given the information provided by the category-based functional annotation, and to better understand the functional differences in terms of gene expression between eo and sm, independently from the species analysed, a literature search was performed on the shared set of differentially expressed genes between c. compressirostris and c. tshokwe. for each gene, phenotypic information consequent to its mis-expression  in d. rerio was retrieved from the “zebrafish model organism database” . all shared genes were divided into five “general” functional classes, which synthesize the categories reported in fig.  <dig>  the chosen categories are: “electrical activity” , “muscular activity” , “metabolism” , “transcription factors”  and “signal transduction”  . many of the genes present in the category “electrical activity” are up-regulated in the eo , they include genes coding for na+/k+ pumps , voltage-gated sodium  and potassium channels  and cholinergic receptors . however, other voltage-gated ion channels result to be down-regulated in the eo . there are then two members of the subfamily j of inwardly-rectifying potassium channels that show distinct patterns of expression, with one member  up-regulated in eo and the other  down-regulated. all the genes included in the class “muscular activity” are down-regulated in the eo . as far as the “metabolism” genes are concerned , most of the eo up-regulated transcripts are involved in the metabolism of fatty acids, glycerol, and phospholipids , whereas the down-regulated transcripts are more involved in muscle-specific, energy production processes, like glycolysis  and gluconeogenesis . among transcription factors , two of the four known myogenic factors , are down-regulated in the eo , while the other two  do not show significant differences in expression between the two tissues. two basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factors  and one co-factor  are up-regulated in the electric organ. two myocyte enhancer factors  show high levels of expression in the eo, whereas two regulators of sm cell proliferation  are lowly expressed in the eo. most of the eo up-regulated genes involved in signal transduction  belong to the g-protein coupled receptor  signalling pathway  and to the fibroblast growth-factor receptor  signalling pathway table  <dig> muscular activity

for each of the shared differentially expressed gene are reported: the gene and protein names obtained from the top hit blast results against the proteome of d. rerio; whether it is up- or down- regulated in the eo; its function or pathway ; the phenotypic effect on d. rerio of its mis-expression 

for each of the shared differentially expressed gene are reported: the gene and protein names obtained from the top hit blast results against the proteome of d. rerio; whether it is up- or down- regulated in the eo; its function or pathway ; the phenotypic effect on d. rerio of its mis-expression 

for each of the shared differentially expressed gene are reported: the gene and protein names obtained from the top hit blast results against the proteome of d. rerio; whether it is up- or down- regulated in the eo; its function or pathway ; the phenotypic effect on d. rerio of its mis-expression 



cross-species comparison
the two sets of differentially expressed genes identified for sm and eo across the three analysed species were each partitioned into four sub-clusters with related expression patterns ; each sub-cluster was then subjected to an enrichment analysis like the one described in the previous paragraph and in the methods section. of the analysed sub-clusters for the sm dataset, one out of four showed significantly enriched terms, all related to nucleotides metabolic processes . conversely, three out of four sub-clusters were significantly enriched in functional categories for the eo dataset . the most representative enriched functional categories are: glutamate receptor activity ; tca cycle and fatty acid metabolism ; ion transport, neuronal system, and striated muscle contraction .

for each of the analysed sub-clusters genes with known phenotypic effect in d. rerio or h. sapiens are reported in table  <dig> table  <dig> cross-species differentially expressed genes with known phenotypic effect

list of cross-species differentially expressed genes belonging to the terms obtained from the enrichment analysis. for each gene, we report: the analysed tissue; the relative sub-cluster as reported in figs.  <dig> or 7; and the phenotypic effect of gene function disruption on d. rerio  or homo sapiens 



discussion
cross-tissue comparison
functional annotation of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes that are shared between c. compressirostris and c. tshokwe has revealed marked differences within several functional categories, which are probably critical in determining the observed phenotypic differences between the electric organ and the skeletal muscle. below, the functional implications of the differentially expressed genes, in the light of what is known from other fish models, are discussed.

electrical activity
the up-regulation of the atp1a2a gene is explained by the fact that its product, the na+/k+ atp-ase, is fundamental for keeping the electrochemical gradient across the plasma membrane. over-expression of this gene was already observed in the mormyrid fish brienomyrus brachyistius  <cit> , as well as in several species of south-american weakly-electric fishes   <cit> . voltage-gated ion channels, on the other hand, are important for dissipating the electric potential generated by the atp-ases and therefore for producing an eod in response to an action potential. in the electric organ of the analyzed species, one gene coding for a voltage-gated sodium channel  is highly expressed in the electric organ; differential expression of this gene and of its paralog  between eo and sm was demonstrated by zakon et al.  <cit>  for mormyrid and gymnotiform fishes, and suggest the role of gene duplication followed by neo-functionalization as a main driver for the evolution of electric communication  <cit> . other over-expressed genes that increase cell excitability are the potassium channels kcnq5a and kcnj <dig>  the latter belongs to the family of inwardly rectifying potassium channels, a class of ion channels that favour the influx of k+ ions in the cell; up-regulation of members of this family was observed in the eo of the electric eel   <cit> .

repression of muscular phenotype in the eo
many of the differentially expressed transcription factors retrieved in this study are fundamental for the regulation of myogenic development. in particular, we have found that two bhlh transcription factors: hey <dig> and hes <dig>  in co-operation with her <dig>  are up-regulated in the eo; these factors are known to negatively regulate the expression of myogenic factors in several model organisms  <cit> , including electric fish  <cit> . two of the four known myogenic regulatory factors  are down-regulated in the eo, both genes are fundamental for muscle development and differentiation  <cit> ; in particular, knock-down experiments on myf <dig> have shown the degradation of posterior somites in d. rerio  <cit> , the region where the adult eo originates  <cit> . another gene important for muscle development is the myocyte enhancer factor mef2aa. unlike mrfs, this gene is up-regulated in the electric organ of the two species analysed here, as well as in other electric fish species  <cit> , and it is also important for the correct development of posterior somites in d. rerio  <cit> . the concerted activity of transcriptional repressors and co-repressors of the myogenic program results in the down-regulation of genes coding for muscle specific proteins , which finally determine the non-muscle characteristics of the eo like: i) the presence of few, non-contractile, myofibrils  <cit>  ; ii) loss of calcium compartmentalization activity ; and iii) decoupling of the excitation-contraction process .

metabolic activity
the observed differences in terms of gene expression between eo and sm suggest that the metabolic machinery of the electric organ could be mainly devoted to the production and turn-over of membrane structures. indeed, many of the metabolism-related genes up-regulated in the eo are involved in the metabolism of fatty acids , glycerophospholipids , and cholesterol . on the other hand, most of the sm up-regulated genes are involved in typical processes of muscle metabolism like: glycolysis ; gluconeogenesis ; and aminoacids metabolism .

cross-species comparison
the grouping pattern emerging from the principal component analysis, where expression levels tend to group in an “organ-wise” rather than a “species-wise” fashion, is putatively due to the fact that expression levels are conserved for the same organ across different species for functional reasons. a similar pattern was already observed for more tissues across broader phylogenetic distances  <cit> .

the clustering scheme obtained from the neighbour-joining analysis for the eo data might be indicative of the observed differences in terms of eod among the three species, which may be reflected in the expression levels of a conspicuous part of the eo transcriptome. previous studies  <cit>  have revealed that, for most tissues, gene expression levels tend to accumulate over evolutionary time, such that more closely related species have more similar expression levels. however, for tissues characterized by increased levels of adaptation , expression trees tend to group according to phenotypic similarity  <cit> .

the results of the enrichment analysis conducted on the expression clusters for the eo have revealed interesting results. in particular, sub-cluster  <dig> and sub-cluster  <dig>  are enriched in terms which might underlie the observed eod differences across the three species; both sub-clusters are characterized by genes which are mainly up-regulated in the eo of c. tshokwe. the terms relative to sub-cluster  <dig> are all related to metabolic pathways, the metabolism of fatty acids in particular. many of the observed genes are involved in the production and turnover of cell membranes . sub-cluster  <dig> is mainly characterized by genes involved in ion transport and neuronal function; of particular importance here are sodium/potassium atpases , as their over-expression in the eo of c. tshokwe might explain the higher amplitude observed in its eod  <cit> . other genes which may potentially influence eod features are potassium channels .

CONCLUSIONS
the cross-tissue analysis of differentially expressed genes between skeletal muscle and electric organ in two species of african weakly-fishes suggests that: i) the loss of contractile activity and the decoupling of the excitation-contraction processes are reflected by the down-regulation of the corresponding genes in the electric organ; ii) the metabolic activity of the eo might be specialized towards the production and turn-over of membrane structures; iii) several ion channels are highly expressed in the eo in order to increase excitability; iv) several myogenic factors might be down-regulated by transcription repressors in the eo.

the cross-species analysis has revealed that the eo transcriptome is more variable in terms of gene expression levels across species than the sm transcriptome. the functional annotation indicates that the most diverging functional classes across species in the eo include “metabolism of fatty acids” and “ion transport”.

in order to better understand the role played by the differentially expressed gene identified in this study, the onset of transgenic experiments  will be necessary either in fully established model organisms , or in emerging models for electric fish .

