BACKGROUND
one of the key aspects of species biology is locomotion, which determines many important behavioural activities such as foraging, hunting, escaping from predators, or migrating  <cit> . therefore, the study of locomotor adaptations in living and extinct species is crucial to understanding their role in present and past ecosystems  <cit> .

natural selection has led to morphological adaptations in the postcranial skeleton, which have been largely treated in the literature as “ecomorphological indicators” of locomotion modes in living species. thus, several studies on locomotor evolution in mammals have used limb indicators of ecological adaptations to determine paleobiological aspects in extinct species  <cit> . however, natural selection is not always the only factor in shaping morphological traits  <cit> . it is important to investigate the effects of different potential sources of variation prior to identifying possible ecomorphological correlates, such as phylogenetic inheritance  <cit>  or allometry  <cit> .

this study investigated the influence of phylogeny, allometry, and locomotor behaviour in shaping the morphology of the hind limb bones  in mammalian carnivores . we used mammalian fissiped carnivorans  as a model system for the following reasons:  their mode of locomotion is remarkably diverse, including arboreal, terrestrial, and semiaquatic modes  <cit> ;  they have a different hunting styles, including pursuing, pouncing, ambushing, or hunting  <cit> ; and  their phylogenetic relationships are well characterised  <cit> .

this article forms part of a wider study on the ecomorphology and evolution of the appendicular skeleton in the order carnivora with a particular focus on the influence of various factors in shaping the fore- and hind limb bones. we complement the analysis of the forelimb  <cit>  by studying the evolution of the hind limb. this study will therefore lead to a complete picture of the morphological evolution of all major limb bones of the carnivoran appendicular skeleton as a whole.

our predictive hypothesis was that there would be many similarities between the evolution of the bone shape of the fore- and hind limbs. however, as these limbs have several functional differences and anatomical peculiarities, we also predicted that there would be some differences in their patterns of evolution. for example, it has been demonstrated that the forelimbs of domestic dogs support a greater proportion of body weight than the hind limbs  <cit>  and this could be the case for all fissiped carnivorans. if this supposition were correct, it would be reasonable to assume that allometry has less effect on the hind limb bones than on the forelimb bones. furthermore, hind limbs are thought to be more important in providing impulse during acceleration and running than the forelimbs  <cit>  and therefore locomotor behaviour could have a stronger influence on shaping the hind limb than the forelimb. on the other hand, many carnivoran species use their forelimbs for activities other than the ones involved in locomotion, such as grasping, climbing, or manipulating prey  <cit>  and this could also be a potential source of morphological differences between the fore- and hind limbs.

we used 3d geometric morphometrics to characterize the morphology of the hind limb bones  in order to answer the following questions: i) is there an allometric effect in shaping the morphology of the hind limb bones;  is there a phylogenetic signal in all hind limb bones?  is there an association between locomotor behaviour and the shape of these bones?  what are the evolutionary pathways followed by the hind limb long bones?  is the evolutionary pattern of the hind limb similar to that of the forelimb?  does the appendicular skeleton – fore- and hind limbs – reflect functional and ecological convergences similar to the way the craniodental skeleton reflects them?

RESULTS
phylogeny and size
the permutation tests performed to investigate the presence of a phylogenetic structure in shape  and size  showed statistically significant results for all the bones . the multivariate regressions of shape on size were statistically significant in all cases and indicate the presence of interspecific allometry . the shape changes explained by interspecific allometry are shown in figure 1b, 1d, and 1f .the multivariate regressions between the phylogenetic independent contrasts for shape on the contrasts for size also yielded significant results and suggest that allometry is not merely due to a phylogenetic effect . the shape changes explained by evolutionary allometry are shown in figure 2b, 2d, and 2f.

numbers indicate the tree lengths obtained with each permutation test. the respective p-values are given between brackets.

phenotypic spaces and their histories of occupation
principal component analyses  were performed to investigate the morphological variability of each bone and their respective phylomorphospaces . the pca performed on the shape of the pelvis  provided two principal components , which accounted for more than 52% of the original variance. the first pc  differentiated the pelvis of hyaenids and ursids with positive scores from the shape of the pelvis of felids with negative scores. the second pc  mainly differentiated musteloids  with positive scores from canids and hyaenids with negative scores. the corresponding shapes at the extremes of both eigenvectors are shown in figure 3b and additional file 2a.a visual inspection of this phylomorphospace shows that the terminal branches are relatively short and the internal branches are relatively long . this pattern suggests that the pelvis shapes of closely related species are similar. this result was confirmed by the reconstruction of the pelvis shapes for the basal nodes of each family  and shows that each family has a well-defined characteristic morphology.

the pca performed on the shape of the femur yielded two significant pcs, which together explained around 52% of the original variance. the first pc  mainly differentiated the extinct creodont patriofelis, the ursids ailuropoda melanoleuca and ursus spelaeus, and the “false saber-tooth” barbourofelis with negative scores from most canine canids. the maned wolf  had extreme positive scores. in contrast, the second pc  differentiated the species into a gradient that starts at the femur of eira barbara , felids, and procyonids with positive scores and ends at the femur of lontra canadensis with extreme negative scores. the corresponding shapes at the extremes of these eigenvectors are shown in figure 3d and additional file 2b.

the pca performed on the shape of the tibia gave two significant pcs, which jointly accounted for approximately 74% of the total shape variation. pc i  differentiated the tibia of most canines and acinonyx jubatus  with positive scores from the tibia of barbourofelis, hoplophoneus, ursus spelaeus, and ailuropoda melanoleuca with extreme negative scores according to a set of morphological traits . however, pc ii  differentiated the species into a gradient that starts at the tibia of barbourofelis and hoplophoneus and ends at the tibia of most ursids according to the shape changes shown in figure 3f and additional file 2c.the phylomorphospaces of the femur and tibia are clearly different from that of the pelvis  because the phylomorphospaces of the long bones have long terminal branches and short internal ones. this suggests that some families overlap with each other, creating a “messy” pattern. in fact, the reconstruction of the basal nodes of each family for both long bones suggests that shape divergence mainly occurred within each family .

locomotor behaviour
a between-group pca was performed for each bone to investigate the effect of locomotor behaviour on hind limb bone shapes .

the first two pcs obtained for the pelvis explained around 54% of the total variance . the first component mainly differentiated the canadian river otter  with positive scores from cursorial carnivores with negative scores  according to a set of morphological traits . however, the second component differentiated the semifossorial european badger  and the terrestrial giant panda  with positive scores from other species . these pcs do not appear to clearly differentiate any of the other ecological groups.

the first two pcs obtained for the femur accounted for more than 80% of the total variance . the first component differentiated semiaquatic lontra canadensis with negative scores from other species with positive scores . in contrast, the second component mainly differentiated cursorial species and some terrestrial species with positive scores from scansorial species, arboreal species, and some terrestrial species with negative scores . the morphological changes associated with these eigenvectors are shown in figure 5d and additional file 4b.

the between-group pca performed on the tibia provided the first two pcs that accounted for around 88% of the total variance . the first axis differentiated some cursorial species and some terrestrial species with positive scores from the remaining taxa . the second pc mainly differentiated the semifossorial european badger plus some cursorial and terrestrial species with positive scores from other taxa . the morphological changes associated with these eigenvectors are shown in figure 5f and additional file 4c.

discussion
phylogeny and allometry are significant sources of bone variation
the permutation test showed that phylogeny influences the shape and size of the hind limb bones . these results are in line with those obtained for the forelimb bones  <cit> . it appears that the shape and size of the carnivoran appendicular skeleton were acquired early during the evolution of each family and were maintained with little variation during their subsequent evolution.

the shape of the hindlimb is strongly influenced by size differences  and this association is not merely due to a phylogenetic correlation . given the similarity between these results and previous findings for the forelimb bones  <cit> , we suggest that the shape of the entire appendicular skeleton of fissiped carnivorans is strongly influenced by size differences. these results are in line with previous research on limb-bone scaling in mammals  <cit> .

with the sole exception of the tibia, the allometric changes were related to bone robustness  and probably indicate the need of larger animals to manage increasing stresses due to their large body size  <cit> . however, increased bone robustness is not the only way to reduce peak stresses in large-sized animals; the adoption of a more upright posture also reduces bending stresses and increases the effective mechanical advantage of muscles  <cit> . the size-related shape changes shown for the tibia involve an increase of shaft curvature and a change in the condyles in the proximal epiphysis to a more horizontal position . these shape changes could be related to large-sized species needing to adopt a more upright posture because these changes enhance resistance to axial stresses at the expense of bending stresses  <cit> .

the allometric changes in the hind limb bones described above are generally equivalent to those obtained for the forelimb bones shape described in martín-serra et al. <cit> .

morphological variability and phylomorphospaces
the difference in phylogenetic conservatism between the pca obtained for the pelvis and the pcas obtained for the long bones are equivalent to findings obtained for the forelimb  <cit> . we found that the scapula was a more conservative bone than the humerus or the radius-ulna complex. this implies that the tight connection of the pelvis to the axial skeleton is not a potential cause of its phylogenetic conservatism. this is because the scapula is not directly connected to the axial skeleton and is also a highly conservative bone. similarly, the fact that the scapula is composed mainly by a single element  could indicate that the more complex structure of the pelvis  is not a feasible explanation for its phylogenetic conservatism. in contrast, the differences between the proximal and distal elements of the limbs could be explained by their different developmental origin  <cit> .

the first pc of the size-free shapes of the femur and tibia shows that the main axis of shape variation is a gradient of slenderness-robustness . however, there are numerous morphological similarities among distantly related taxa with different ecologies. on the one hand, having slender bones is common to most canine canids, hyenids, the extinct “dog-like” bear hemicyon, the cheetah, the bobcat, and the serval. however, having slender bones is a morphological solution, which could be favoured by natural selection for different purposes such as the active pursuit of prey , long-distance pursuit , or long-distance foraging . in any case, slender hind limb bones indicate cursorial adaptations, i.e., an increased capacity to run faster and/or to run for longer distances with more energetic efficiency  <cit> . on the other hand, distantly related taxa with different ecologies also share extremely robust hind limb bones. for example, the european badger, the extinct cave bear, and some procyonids share robust femora and tibiae. this is also the case for the extinct patriofelis , the false saber-toothed cats barbourofelis and hoplophoneus, and the saber-tooth smilodon. in mammalian carnivores, having robust limb bones is thought to be an adaptation in order to resist axial and bending stresses  <cit>  related to multiple activities such as moving excavated soil during digging  or withstanding body weight loads generated during hunting in large cats  <cit> .

in summary, several distantly related taxa adapted to different ecological habits and functional necessities share bone morphologies that involve having slender or robust limbs. we found little differentiation between the behavioural categories, which could be due to the fact that many ecological contexts could favour one solution or another.

locomotor behaviour is only partially reflected by the shape of the hind limb bones
the six ecological groups were not clearly differentiated by the between-group pcas performed to investigate the effects of ecology on bone shape variation. species are differentiated according to their phylogenetic relationships. for example, bone morphology does not differentiate terrestrial canids from cursorial canids and terrestrial felids are not differentiated from scansorial felids. a visual inspection of the phylomorphospaces shows a clear phylogenetic effect in the distribution of taxa because internal branches are larger than more terminal branches . these results were expected, as other authors have found that phylogeny strongly influences bone morphology and locomotor behaviour  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this article has demonstrated that the shape of the hind limb bones is strongly influenced by size differences. in addition, allometric shape changes show that large-sized species have pelvises with larger areas for the attachment of proximal limb muscles. they also have more robust femora. the shape of their tibiae suggests that they have a more upright posture compared to smaller species. these allometric shape changes are not merely due to a phylogenetic pattern. nevertheless, phylogeny and size have a strong influence on limb bone shape. furthermore, the phenotypic spaces indicated that, once size effects are discarded, the main axis of shape variation is still a gradient of slenderness-robustness. we hypothesized that this axis reflects an adaptive trade-off between maintaining energetic efficiency during locomotion – acquired by having slender bones – and resisting high peak stresses – acquired by having robust bones. however, both morphological extremes can be adaptive in multiple ecological scenarios and behavioural contexts leading to a lack of a one-to-one correspondence between morphology and function. thus, several species with very different ecologies have similar hind limb bone shapes, which is probably due to the presence of strong biomechanical and phylogenetic constraints that mask the association between locomotor behaviour and bone shape. in fact, we found that the ecological influence on limb bone shape was very weak when we analysed specific morphological differences between several ecological groups.

the pattern of hind limb shape evolution described in this article is equivalent to the pattern of forelimb shape evolution  <cit> . this tight correspondence between the fore- and hind limb in shape evolution means that future studies can investigate the patterns of morphological integration between both limbs from structural and functional perspectives. thus, we suggest that the entire appendicular skeleton of mammalian carnivores represents a conspicuous example of a “one-to-many” pattern of evolution between phenotype and function. strikingly, this pattern of evolution is in complete contrast to the “many-to-one” pattern for the evolution of the craniodental skeleton in which similar morphological solutions evolved multiple times in different lineages to accomplish similar functions such as feeding  <cit> . this suggests that the appendicular skeleton could be more constrained than the crania, probably because of the strong biomechanical constraints imposed by active locomotion.

