BACKGROUND
biology is currently undergoing a genomics revolution  <cit> . with the increasing ubiquity of next-generation sequencing technology, it is now possible to rapidly generate millions of base pairs of dna sequence data for a fraction of the per-base cost required for chain-termination sanger sequencing. the result is an exponential increase in the abundance of genomic resources available for studying non-model organisms  <cit> . single nucleotide polymorphisms  have emerged as a marker of choice for population-level studies in the genomics era  <cit> . due to their broad genomic distribution, direct association with functional significance, and ease of genotyping, snps represent an improvement over conventional markers such as amplified length polymorphisms  and expressed sequence tag -linked microsatellites. the efficiency of snp discovery and validation may be further increased through targeting of the transcriptome  or restriction-site associated dna tags .

the emerging field of population genomics has evolved in tandem with these novel technologies, incorporating genome-wide sequence data into the study of systems that historically would have been limited to a small number of neutral markers  <cit> . central to a population genomic approach is the identification of statistical outlier loci that exhibit locus-specific patterns that are highly divergent from the rest of the genome, representing candidate regions under selection  <cit> . the combined signal from high density neutral and putatively adaptive snps throughout the genome offers great potential for investigating evolutionary and ecological questions in natural populations. for example, several recent studies have found that the use of outlier loci can reveal fine-scale population structure beyond what was previously inferred from conventional neutral markers . moreover, population genomic approaches that incorporate statistical outlier loci offer great potential for delineating conservation units  <cit>  and informing fisheries management  <cit> .

kokanee salmon are recently diverged land-locked populations of sockeye salmon  that exist in lakes throughout western north america and northeast asia. two reproductive ecotypes of kokanee have been described based on spawning behaviour and location. stream-spawning kokanee migrate into tributaries in early autumn, display pronounced secondary sex characteristics, site defence, and redd formation. conversely, shore-spawning populations  breed much later in the autumn, lack secondary sex characteristics and site defence, and mate directly on the shoreline rather than migrating into tributaries  <cit> . in many lakes, the two ecotypes occur in sympatry. although kokanee ecotypes display different reproductive traits and experience varying incubation environments, outside of the spawning season the ecotypes are panmictic within lakes and morphologically indistinguishable.

throughout their range, kokanee constitute a heavily managed recreational fishery of great socioeconomic and ecological importance  <cit> . the ability to distinguish stream- and shore-spawning kokanee is an important goal for fisheries managers, as ecotypes may be differentially impacted by alternative conservation and management regimes with regard to water use, the protection of spawning habitat, and recreational harvest regulations. for example, conservation strategies for kokanee have focused primarily on the preservation of stream-spawning habitat by the formation of spawning channels. however, management efforts for shore-spawning populations are in their infancy and are hindered by a lack of data on the size of shore-spawning populations within lakes. while visual surveys of kokanee during the spawning season are quite accurate in streams, it is considerably more difficult to obtain visual measurement of shore-spawner abundance, especially in lakes where shore populations spawn at greater depth or at night. kokanee management would be significantly enhanced by the identification of molecular markers capable of assigning individuals to the correct ecotype, however the identification of sufficiently fine-scale markers has been hindered by the recent divergence and correspondingly weak genetic structure of the two ecotypes  <cit> .

previous studies using neutral loci have found evidence for low levels of genetic differentiation based on mitochondrial dna haplotype and microsatellite loci, yet individual assignment probabilities to ecotype were generally low  <cit> . more recently, work using a panel of est-linked microsatellite loci has identified a set of markers with a high association of genetic diversity with reproductive ecotype, suggesting that there may indeed be a genetic basis for the evolution of kokanee ecotypes  <cit> . however these markers suffer from poor coverage across the genome and provide little information on the specific genes involved in the divergence of the two ecotypes.

here, we evaluated an rnaseq approach for preferentially identifying snps of putatively adaptive significance within and among kokanee ecotypes. we used the roche  <dig> gs flx titanium platform to generate transcriptome-wide sequence data for pooled cdna libraries of shore- and stream-spawning kokanee. these data were used for snp discovery and subsequent validation in natural populations, enabling explicit investigations of ecotype-specific patterns of genetic variation.

RESULTS
sequencing and assembly
we generated ~ <dig> million base pairs of sequence data corresponding to  <dig>  ×  <dig> and  <dig>  ×  <dig> reads for the shore and stream-spawning cdna libraries, respectively, with an average length of  <dig> bases per read . a de novo assembly was carried out with the trimmed reads from both ecotype libraries in order to generate contigs to use as reference sequences; this assembly incorporated 87% of the transcriptome reads to produce  <dig>  contigs . we then mapped the raw reads back to these reference contigs separately for each ecotype and generated a refined data set consisting only of contigs that had a minimum average coverage of 5× for each ecotype and a minimum length of  <dig> bases. the resulting data set  was retained for downstream analyses .

 <dig> in the high coverage data set each contig has a minimum length of  <dig> bases and a minimum of 5× coverage for each ecotype. in addition, this data set has duplicate contigs and contigs that map to pathogen dna sequences removed.

 <dig> contigs composed of reads from a single ecotype. minimum length =  <dig> bases; minimum coverage = 5×. contigs that map to pathogen dna sequences have been removed.

transcriptome analyses and annotation
a genome duplication event in the early evolution of salmonids and subsequent diploidization has resulted in a genome in which isoloci and paralogous gene copies are common  <cit> . the presence of paralogous sequence variants  among contigs would impede our ability to identify sequence variants between the two ecotypes. to address this problem, we used conservatively high similarity parameters during the de novo assembly in order to minimize the incorporation of psvs within each contig  <cit> . in doing so, two separate but highly similar contigs may be created: one corresponding to functional coding sequence, the other to a psv. to test for these redundancies in the data, a de novo assembly with a slightly reduced sequence-similarity value  was carried out on the high coverage contigs in order to identify any contig sequences that either partially or totally overlapped. of the  <dig>  contigs initially retained in the high coverage data set,  <dig>   aligned with one other contig, and  <dig>  aligned with two or more other contigs. these contigs were discarded from the high coverage data set. the remaining  <dig>  contigs  were unique and did not show similarity with any other contig.

the strict similarity value used to create the reference contigs may also explain the relatively short size of the contigs retained in the high coverage data set . while the short contig size may limit some down-stream analyses, the minimization of psvs in the data was of higher priority when optimizing the assembly parameters.

a blast search of all contigs in the high coverage data set  produced  <dig>  positive matches to sequences in the ncbi database . of those contigs with positive blast hits, 60% matched published salmonid sequences . in addition, eleven contigs were a positive match to the infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus , a lethal virus that is enzootic in western north america and can have detrimental impacts on salmonid aquaculture  <cit> . these  <dig> contigs were subsequently removed from the high coverage data set for all further analyses. of the high coverage contigs that had positive matches from the blastx search,  <dig>  were subsequently annotated with one or more gene ontology  terms .

mitochondrial genome
there was coverage across all genes in the sockeye salmon mitochondrial genome , representing  <dig> % of the trimmed transcriptome reads .

snp detection
within the high coverage data set,  <dig>  contigs contained snps that fell within our detection parameters . from these contigs, we identified  <dig>  putative snps that may be used for population genetic analyses of kokanee . although there has been much focus on marker development in anadromous sockeye salmon  <cit> , to our knowledge, this is the first study that has identified snps specifically for reproductive ecotypes of kokanee.

given that low levels of molecular divergence among ecotypes of okanagan lake kokanee have been observed in previous studies, we expected the majority of loci to display similar allele frequencies in both ecotypes. of the putative snps identified in this study,  <dig>  were polymorphic in both ecotypes,  <dig>  were polymorphic in the stream ecotype but fixed in shore, and  <dig>  were polymorphic in the shore ecotype but fixed in stream. there were no snps within our detection parameters that were fixed for alternate alleles in the two ecotypes.

in this study, the high frequency of loci that appear to be fixed in one ecotype may be artificially inflated as a result of the small sample size  in the pooled transcriptome libraries and/or due to the snp detection parameters, which required a minimum of eight reads at a given site and at least two reads for each allele. if one ecotype had coverage below these cut-off values, then it would erroneously appear to be fixed at that site, even if there was some variation present. this could result if one ecotype under-expressed a given gene, preventing it from being detected at sufficiently high levels in the transcriptome data. these potential biases reflect the trade-off between avoiding false snps resulting from sequence error, while attempting to account for all possible variation in the data.

the difference in the frequency of the major allele between ecotypes ranged from <1-88% . ninety-five percent of all snps were contained within a divergence value of 44% or less, suggesting that the overall level of nucleotide divergence is low. the remaining 5% of loci  represented the most divergent snps, with values between 45–88%. these highly divergent snps may represent promising targets for ecotype discrimination, potentially associated with genes underlying ecological diversification.

snp validation
primer pairs were designed for  <dig> loci such that they amplified a 60– <dig> base pair fragment containing a single snp . of these loci,  <dig> exhibited successful pcr amplification, were free of introns, and produced sufficiently clear high resolution melt  signal to attempt the subsequent genotyping validation. these loci were then used to genotype  <dig> stream-spawners,  <dig> shore-spawners, and  <dig> anadromous sockeye salmon using hrm analysis. from the panel of  <dig> snps for which broad-scale hrm genotyping and sanger validation was attempted, nine loci produced consistently scorable hrm clusters and were retained for downstream analyses.

sanger sequence data for the remaining loci confirmed that the expected snp site was indeed polymorphic, however the resulting hrm clusters were not sufficiently discrete to enable accurate genotype assignment. for these loci, sanger sequencing identified either multiple melt curves with the same genotype or multiple genotypes within the same melt curve. some of the inconsistencies with the hrm data may be explained by the reduced accuracy of hrm compared with other conventional genotyping methods such as taqman® assays  <cit> . martino et al.  <cit>  found that rare genotypes and low minor allele frequencies decreased the accuracy of hrm analysis. both of these factors are likely present in our data given that we preferentially chose divergent loci that were fixed for a single allele in one population. the presence of additional polymorphic sites within the amplicon  <cit>  and the use of loci containing class  <dig>  or class  <dig>  snps  <cit>  may also have been factors resulting in weakly differentiated clusters. given that sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of the expected polymorphism, we conclude that the failed assays were not due to errors with the initial snp detection but rather reflect the limitations of the hrm assays at those loci.

there was no evidence of linkage disequilibrium among any of the nine loci for which genotypic data were obtained. one locus  showed a significant deviation from hardy-weinberg equilibrium  in all three populations tested . this may indicate the presence of a psv at this locus  <cit> . one additional locus showed a significant deviation from hwe among the shore-spawning samples only . among the anadromous sockeye salmon samples used in this study, all snps showed similar patterns of allele frequencies to kokanee. these results indicate that snp loci developed from the kokanee transcriptome data could also be useful for genotyping populations of anadromous sockeye salmon.

*denotes significant deviation from hwe following sequential bonferroni correction.

 <dig> the identity of the major allele is defined as the allele with the highest frequency in the transcriptome data.

+the contig from which this locus was created had some overlap with one other contig . both contigs were subsequently removed from the high coverage data set. as the overlap did not impact the snp site, this locus has been retained.

the frequency data obtained from hrm genotyping suggests that while the transcriptome data set provides a valuable tool for identifying novel snps, it is limited in its ability to infer population allele frequencies . small sample size in the pooled transcriptome libraries likely contributed to the observed inconsistencies between hrm genotypes and the allele frequencies predicted from the transcriptome data. we initially hypothesized that the most divergent snps in the transcriptome sample could indicate high-confidence targets for genetically discriminating ecotypes. based on these results, however, we feel that the relative frequency of alleles present in the pooled transcriptome reads is not an appropriate surrogate for large-scale snp genotyping followed by statistical outlier tests. the use of greater sample sizes within the pooled cdna libraries may improve this outcome. likewise, emerging protocols that utilize combinatorial labelling methods and rad tags may provide more efficient and cost-effective alternatives for simultaneously discovering snps in non-model organisms and genotyping population-level samplings  <cit> .

ecotype-unique data
we also generated additional data sets with contigs that contained only reads from a single ecotype . the presence/absence of ecotype-specific contigs may represent candidates for differences in gene expression  between ecotypes. interestingly, we observed twice as many ecotype-unique contigs from the stream-spawning dna library, which may indicate a number of genes that are not expressed by the shore ecotype during spawning. however, this discrepancy in ecotype-specific contigs could partially be accounted for by genes with very low levels of expression that were observed in one library by chance alone. a study specifically designed to examine differences in levels of gene expression may be useful at identifying divergence between the two ecotypes.

blast searches  of the ecotype-unique contigs produced  <dig> positive matches in the shore-unique data set  and  <dig> positive hits for contigs that are unique to the stream ecotype . interestingly,  <dig> stream-unique contigs  were a match to saprolegnia ferax , a pathogenic water mould that is associated with pre-spawning mortality in salmonids  <cit> . contigs matching this pathogen were absent among the shore-unique contigs. similarly,  <dig> stream-unique contigs  were a match to flavobacterium psychrophilum , which is a bacterial infection associated with high levels of salmonid mortality  <cit> . again, there were no matches to this pathogen among the shore-unique contigs. a similar pattern was also observed for contigs matching gyrodactylus salmonis , a pathogenic flatworm  <cit> .

to test the possibility that there were reads matching these pathogens that had not been assembled into contigs, we mapped the raw transcriptome reads from each library to the ncbi reference sequence from each of these pathogens. this assembly supported the prevalence of pathogen sequences among the stream ecotype transcriptome data . the exception was ihnv, which had been identified in the high coverage data set and was expected to be present in both ecotypes.

 <dig> ihnv was identified in the high coverage data set containing reads from both ecotypes and was not expected to show ecotype specificity.

each of these pathogens is associated with reduced fitness in salmonids, not only by killing adults before they are able to spawn  <cit> , but also by persisting in the spawning location and infecting emerging juveniles in the next season  <cit> . a reduction in pathogen sequences present among kokanee collected in shore-spawning habitats suggests the possibility that shore-spawning behaviour may have evolved, in part, as a way to reduce the pathogen load. while highly speculative, this hypothesis is consistent with other studies , which detected outlier loci associated with immune response in kokanee. further, the fact that only internal organs and subcutaneous muscle tissue were sampled increases the probability that the observed pathogen sequences were indeed present within the fish tissue, rather then being environmental contaminants that could occur if external fin-clips or operculum punches had been collected. while the present study was not explicitly designed to address this question and may be influenced by stochastic factors, our preliminary results warrant future research to quantitatively compare the pathogen load among kokanee within each of the two spawning habitats.

all contigs that matched pathogen sequences where removed from the ecotype-unique data sets prior to down-stream analyses. blast2go was then used to assign go annotations to blastx matches  among the remaining contigs that were unique to each ecotype. this analysis found sequence similarity matches for  <dig> and  <dig> contigs from the stream and shore data sets, respectively. from these contigs with positive blast matches,  <dig> stream contigs and  <dig> shore contigs were subsequently annotated with at least one go term .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we harnessed next-generation sequencing technology in order to compare transcriptome-wide patterns of sequence variation among divergent ecotypes of kokanee salmon. we identified  <dig>  putative snps that could be used for population genetic and genomic studies of both kokanee and anadromous sockeye salmon. we further detected contigs that were unique to each ecotype, which may be indicative of differential gene expression, as well as preliminary evidence for variable pathogen load associated with spawning location.

