BACKGROUND
many cellular functions are mediated by protein-protein interactions  <cit> . an aim of modern genomics is to identify and characterize these interactions. with hundreds of genomes completely sequenced, computational methods that exploit sequence data are an attractive goal. methods have been proposed to identify, classify, and validate putative interactions  <cit> . for example, amino acids that participate in a stable protein-protein interface tend to undergo correlated mutations during evolution, providing an interaction signature  <cit> ; proteins that interact, physically or functionally, have an increased chance of being encoded by genes that are physically nearby, so that analyses of genome structure can also provide information on protein interactions  <cit> .

structure-based computational methods provide additional information, and are especially useful to characterize direct, physical interactions between proteins  <cit> . docking algorithms are increasingly powerful and can provide a detailed description of the interaction  <cit> ; however, they are too costly for routine large scale studies. a more attractive possibility is to perform homology modelling, and exploit the ever-growing structural databases  <cit>  to model putative protein-protein complexes  <cit> . homology modeling of a protein-protein complex requires that a structural similarity principle should hold: similar proteins should interact in a similar way. previous studies show that this is true in many cases  <cit> . however, exceptions have also been found, where two homologous pairs of proteins interact in two very different ways  <cit> . in particular, a recent, systematic study by aloy & russell  <cit>  found only a moderate correlation between sequence and structural similarity for protein-protein complexes.

here, we examine the possibilities and limitations of a simple homology modelling procedure for protein-protein complexes. the method is closely related to earlier methods  <cit> , but differs in many significant details. ultimately, the method should allow us to predict whether a pair of proteins interact, given that a homologous pair forms a complex of known structure. we focus on the simplest type of protein-protein interactions: stable interactions between pairs of monodomain proteins. domains are tightly-packed, globular structures. their interactions can be considered as fairly representative of the interactions that take place between larger proteins  <cit> . protein domains are usually thought to be structures that have been conserved in the course of evolution. the scop database  <cit> , for example, provides a hierarchical classification of domains of known 3d structure according to their probable evolutionary relationships. thus, domains are the logical starting point to attempt homology modelling.

as a first step, we examine the structural and sequence similarity among known domain-domain complexes. this question has been examined at length in the past  <cit> . here, we use a slightly simpler dataset , a simpler method to align and superimpose pairs of complexes, and an additional energy criterion. a simple structural homology principle holds for most cases. excluding complexes with weak association energies , most complexes in the dataset that share over 35% sequence identity always share similar interaction modes and structures. note that we are referring here to the sequence identity averaged over the whole complex, not just the interface region. this result is more clearcut than the earlier studies.

as a second step, we examine the performance of a simple homology modelling approach, which could be used for large-scale studies. it combines structure-based alignments with a very simple threading procedure and an empirical energy function. for a given domain-domain complex, several possible templates are considered, made up of homologous complexes. we compare the association energy of experimental complex to the energies of the modelled complexes. this test represents the most basic requirement for a successful energy function. with the simple, dfireβ energy function  <cit> , discrimination is good but not perfect for this relatively easy test.

finally, we perform a more realistic test, comparing near-native structures to distinctly non-native models. most near-native structures are ranked above most non-native models. typically, however, a single alternate, non-native binding mode is found with a native-like energy. in some cases, this could correspond to a genuine binding mode; in other cases, such modes artefacts that would have to be filtered out using more sophisticated models.

overall, it appears that our simple homology modelling, despite its limitations, can help identify and characterize protein-protein complexes, at least in a preliminary way. the method is computationally inexpensive and could be applied on a large scale. it can also be used in combination with other, purely sequence-based methods. in the following, we describe the results. the next section is a discussion. computational methods are described last.

RESULTS
datasets of protein-protein complexes
three datasets of protein-protein complexes are used. importantly, all the complexes are formed from pairs of single-domain proteins. two of the datasets are from previous publications  <cit> . the first, "keskin" dataset  <cit>  includes  <dig> pairs of domains, divided into  <dig> groups of complexes with similar interaction modes. it will be used to judge the accuracy of our structural alignments. indeed, the domains in this set were carefully aligned and grouped into clusters by keskin et al  <cit> ; therefore, they provide a benchmark to check that our own alignment procedure is reasonable. the second, much smaller, "aloy" dataset  <cit>  includes  <dig> complexes, divided into nine functional groups. this dataset was used by aloy and russell to test their own, earlier modelling procedure  <cit> . by applying our procedure to this dataset, we can directly compare our performance to theirs, and judge the accuracy of our procedure.

finally, a third set of complexes was constructed here, larger than the aloy set, based on the scop classification, and comprising only single domain protein complexes . most members of this dataset are also found in the keskin set. this set was constructed as follows. the starting point was the astral compendium of scop domains  <cit> , which is based on version  <dig>  of scop and contains  <dig> domains. from the protein data bank  <cit> , we collected all structures that included more than one chain. cross-checking with the astral compendium  <cit> , we discarded structures that contained more than two scop domains or were absent from astral. we also required that the two domains be continuous and carried by different polypeptide chains, thus excluding complexes between two domains within the same protein. we were left with  <dig> structures. to exclude complexes that are obviously non-biological, such as crystal contacts, we discarded structures that had fewer than ten contacts between their two domains. an interface contact was said to occur when one domain of the complex had a nonhydrogen atom less than  <dig> Å from a nonhydrogen atom of the other domain  <cit> . this left just  <dig> complexes. each one was checked with the program pqs  <cit> ; only those for which pqs returned a dimeric status were retained. the  <dig> remaining complexes were partitioned into groups based on proximity in the scop classification. specifically, two complexes a:b and a':b' were put in the same group if a and a' are part of the same scop superfamily  and b and b' are part of the same scop superfamily . groups containing three or fewer complexes were discarded, since they allow just a few threading models to be built  and just a few discrimination tests to be done. at the end of this selection process, we were left with  <dig> domain-domain complexes, partitioned into  <dig> groups, with between  <dig> and  <dig> complexes per group.  <dig> complexes are homodimers;  <dig> are heterodimers. each group will be labelled by its pair of scop superfamily identifiers. we will refer to each of the  <dig> groups as an "interacting superfamily group", or isg.

testing our alignments by classifying interaction modes
we first evaluate the accuracy of our structural alignments by comparing to the earlier, benchmark study by keskin et al.  <cit> . the keskin dataset contains  <dig> complexes, clustered  <cit>  according to the structural similarity of their binding modes  <cit> .  <dig> of the keskin complexes are also part of our dataset. we performed a similar geometrical analysis of our own dataset, to identify the binding modes present in each interacting superfamily group, or isg . all the complexes within each isg  were compared to each other , for a total of  <dig> pairwise comparisons. the structural deviation is measured by an "interaction rmsd", or irmsd, which corresponds to the rms cα coordinate deviation between the smaller partners after superimposition of the larger partners; see methods. the irmsd was computed for each pair of complexes. a hierachical, average-linkage clustering was then performed, using the irmsd as the distance metric. a maximum distance of  <dig> Å was allowed between any member of a cluster. with this procedure, each isg yields a certain number of clusters, corresponding to distinct interaction modes between the two domains.

with this procedure, our clusters are in good agreement with the keskin set . this shows that our alignment method is reasonable. in particular, the use of a sequence alignment of regions that flank the matras structural alignment  does not cause difficulties. most isgs contain several interaction modes, most of which were also identified by keskin et al. there are very few complexes from different isgs that are clustered in the same interaction mode by keskin et al. only four clusters out of the  <dig> identified by keskin et al.  contain complexes from different isgs .

ain parentheses, the number of complexes that are part of the keskin dataset  <cit> . bmodes found in our study but not in the keskin study. cwhen a complex is not found in the keskin set, and it is the only representative of its interaction mode, the mode is not considered an overcount. in the c. <dig> /c. <dig>  case, for example, we find  <dig> modes, but  <dig> are represented by a single complex each, not found in the keskin dataset: there are no overcounts. din a few cases , our dataset misses some of the keskin modes.

compared to the keskin interaction modes, our analysis returned nine additional modes . most of these modes should probably be considered false positives, or "overcounts" of our mode counting. they correspond to structural similarities between interaction modes that were underestimated by our comparison method. note that a few are genuine, since our dataset includes some additional complexes that were not part of the keskin study.

both our own and the keskin analyses frequently identify very diverse modes of interaction within the same scop superfamily. in fact, this diversity is misleading. we will see below that the different interaction modes are almost always associated either with sets of complexes having a low mutual sequence identity, or with small, weakly-stable interfaces that are probably non-biological, induced by a given crystal environment.

relation between sequence and structure similarity
homology modelling of protein-protein complexes is only viable if similar sequences lead to similar structures. to understand more clearly the relation between sequence and structural homology, we consider our  <dig> complexes, grouped into  <dig> isgs. we begin by identifying complexes whose interfaces are sufficiently large and energetically stable. specifically, we identify complexes that have a buried surface of at least  <dig> Å <dig> and a dfireβ interaction energy of - <dig> kcal/mol or better. following earlier analyses of protein-protein complexes  <cit> , we assume that complexes with such large and stable interfaces are likely to be biologically meaningful complexes, whereas the other complexes are much more likely to be artefacts of the crystal environment. the energy cutoff is a small but partly arbitrary value; see below. of the  <dig> complexes,  <dig> are eliminated by their small surface areas. another  <dig> are eliminated by the energy cutoff. we are left with  <dig> "large and stable" complexes.

from each pairwise comparison, we obtain a sequence identity and a structural similarity score, as described in methods. the sequence identity is given by the optimal alignment . the structural similarity is measured by the pairwise irmsd . the irmsd values are plotted vs. the corresponding sequence identities in fig.  <dig> for the whole dataset . in fig.  <dig>  each large dot corresponds to a comparison between two of the "large and stable" complexes. each small dot corresponds to a comparison where one or  both of the complexes being compared have small and/or less stable interfaces. large, gray dots correspond to comparisons where the structural alignment with matras provided fewer than 80% of the equivalent residues used for the irmsd calculation; the rest of the equivalent residues are provided by a sequence alignment . all the gray points lie in the lefthand part of the plot, below a 35% sequence identity. thus, our use of a flanking sequence alignment for some complexes does not affect the qualitative results. we can now comment on our choice of energy cutoff: - <dig> kcal/mol is in fact the largest  value that gives a clean separation between the large and small dots in figure  <dig> 

in a previous study, aloy and russell extensively studied the relationship between the sequence and structural similarities of numerous protein complexes; see fig.  <dig> in reference  <cit> . in contrast with their approach, which used a simplified geometric representation to measure structural deviations , we compute the irmsd between pairs of complexes using an atomic level of detail. we also apply an energy cutoff that yields additional insights, and we use a simpler, more homogeneous dataset .

with these modifications, the sequence/structure homology principle is more clearcut. indeed, considering only the large dots , we see that when two complexes share at least 35% sequence identity between their subunits, they almost always have a similar mode of interaction. note that the sequence identity is averaged here over the whole complex, not just the interface region. at this level of sequence identity, almost all of the measured irmsd's are below  <dig> Å . thus, in the vast majority of cases, sequence homology implies structural homology. this is a basic requirement to allow homology modelling of protein-protein complexes. below 35% of sequence identity, the interaction modes often differ.

in contrast, the small dots are widely distributed throughout fig.  <dig>  one group of points, for example, forms a band at around 100% sequence identity, extending up to irmsd values of  <dig> Å. these points presumably arise from different packing modes in different crystal forms. a detailed analysis of crystal packing effects is beyond the scope of this paper; see  <cit> .

in some cases, two "large and stable" complexes have subunits that share more than 35% sequence identity and yet they do present strongly dissimilar interaction modes . in fig.  <dig>  such complexes form nine groups, identified by the letters a-g. group a involves two structures of the endonuclease ecorv, which is a homodimer, either bound to dna  or unbound . although the whole enzyme is considered to form a single domain by scop , the structure is actually made of two distinct, globular regions. upon binding to the dna, there is a relative motion of these two regions, which leads to a fairly high irmsd between the two structures , despite their nearly identical sequences . group b corresponds to another two endonucleases, with the same structural change upon dna binding. group c is similar. one complex has a large overall irmsd value with respect to two others; if only the regions close to the interface are compared, the structural deviations are very small . the large irmsd values are thus produced by a compact, globular region far from the interface which could be considered as a separate domain  <cit> . all these cases can be considered artefacts of the scop domain definitions.

group d involves the complex 1a <dig>  a member of the immunoglobulin-like isg. the subunits of this complex are are artificially engineered mutants of the variable antibody domains. the mutants were specifically selected to produce different interaction modes  <cit> . group e corresponds to ribonuclease a structures. these homodimeric structures are known to provide remarkable examples of domain swapping  <cit> . this leads to geometrically different interfaces, despite identical or very similar sequences. such phenomena are relatively rare among protein dimers. group f corresponds to a dimeric snake toxin protein  <cit> , compared to a complex of a homologous toxin with an inhibitor. the inhibitor is expressed in the snake to modulate the activity of the toxin  <cit> . remarkably, the inhibitor is strongly homologous to the toxin , and modulates its action by forming a heterodimer with one of the toxin subunits. the mode of interaction between the toxin and the inhibitor differs from the toxin homodimerization mode. this is an unusual case where a new biological interface has evolved that violates the homology principle .

another region of interest is the one between  <dig> and 37% sequence identity. here, there are three small groups with large irmsd values: g <dig>  g <dig>  g <dig>  group g <dig> is another case where structural deviations arise from a domain swapping event . group g <dig> arises from three complexes , two of which  are very similar . comparing 1dek and the other two, the interaction modes are very different, despite a 35% sequence identity. however, the interfaces are not very large  and the dfireβ association energies are about - <dig> kcal/mol, barely below our - <dig> kcal/mol threshold. finally, group g <dig> contains two complexes  with different interaction modes despite a 35% sequence identity, large buried surfaces, and large association energies . thus, the region between  <dig> and 37% sequence identity is a limiting region, where the structural homology principle begins to be violated. notice that the precise location of this threshold region  is a result of our precise method of sequence and structural comparison, and the precise energy cutoff employed; slightly different methods would lead to a slightly different threshold.

overall, structural homology holds in the vast majority of cases when the sequence identity is above 35% and the association energy is sufficiently large.

recognition of native interfaces: comparing the experimental structure to threading models
the structural homology principle observed above  is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for homology modelling of protein-protein complexes. we turn now to the problem of the energy function. we first perform a very simple test, both with dfireβ and with a simpler, residue-based energy function  <cit> . their discrimination power was evaluated by their ability to assign a lower association energy eint to the experimental, xray structure, compared to alternate structures obtained by threading the sequence onto other, homologous dimers. this discrimination, again, is a basic, necessary condition for a successful modelling procedure.  <dig> groups of homologous dimers were used, for a total of  <dig> complexes. eight of these groups, containing  <dig> complexes, came from our own, isg dataset. nine groups, containing  <dig> complexes, came from the work of aloy and russell  <cit> , who performed the same discrimination test.

the dfireβ function has a 92% success rate in the discrimination tests . the number of successful and failed tests are given in table  <dig> for each superfamily group. each sequence within a group is threaded onto every other structure in the group . success means that a positive sthread score is obtained when an experimental structure is compared to a threaded model . the residue-based energy function has a respectable, but poorer discrimination rate of 66%. among the structures used by aloy and russell, those from the peptidase and squash trypsin groups were the hardest to discriminate. this is in fair agreement with the results they reported  <cit> , using a different energy function and a different measure of structural similarity.

athe number of tests giving a positive sthread score. both the 6-class, residue-based and the dfireβ, atom-based were used for scoring.

 <dig> complexes out of the  <dig> were not fully discriminated: their sequences had a better energy for at least one of the models than for their xray structure . for most of these, either the model was very similar to the xray structure , or the xray structure had a weak association energy . we consider each case in detail.

in the b. <dig>  group , there are four complexes not fully discriminated. for two, the xray complex has a structure very similar to the model complex that leads, after threading, to a better association score , so that these are very mild failures. the other two complexes both have weak dfireβ association energies . in the c. <dig>  group, four complexes are not discriminated. in each case, the xray complex has a structure very similar to the model complex that outscores it . the same is true for the d. <dig>  group . in the d. <dig>  group, three complexes are not discriminated. one  is a domain-swapped dimer . the other two  are enzyme homodimers where the monomer is functional and there is no indication in the literature of a functional dimer. in the e. <dig>  group, there are three real failures, two of which correspond to complexes with weak association energies. in the c. <dig>  group, there are  <dig> complexes . only  <dig> were used in the discrimination tests , as several redundant complexes were excluded . five of the  <dig> complexes are not discriminated. four of them are very similar to each other  so that, in fact, there are only two real failures in this group. for the two cases, the sequence identity between the xray complex and the relevant model complex is around 25%.

finally, in the a. <dig>  group, there are  <dig> complexes not fully discriminated. for one , the model that outscores it  is very similar to the xray complex . of the other nine, eight have weak association energies, with dfireβ scores between - <dig> and - <dig> kcal/mol. all eight prefer the same model, 1jlt. the 1jlt template provides the threaded sequences with a large interface of  <dig> Å <dig> and numerous interface contacts . we speculate that the eight xray complexes could be artefacts of the crystal environment. for these complexes, 1jlt could represent a true biological interaction mode. the other failure  corresponds to a large, stable interface; the sequence identity with the preferred model  is about 50%.

overall, if we include near successes, exclude very weak complexes, and take into account mutually similar, redundant structures, this first, basic, discrimination test has just  <dig> real failures.

recognition of native interfaces: comparing near-native and distinctly non-native models
in a practical modelling situation, one does not know the experimental structure; rather, one must distinguish between models that are close to the real structure  and others that deviate significantly from the true structure . it is therefore of interest to examine the variation of the association energy as a function of the deviation irmsd from the native structure. ideally, a smooth increase should be observed. to illustrate the possibilities and limitations of the present modelling procedure, we focus on two isgs in particular: c. <dig>  and a. <dig> . these groups are fairly representative of the full set of discrimination tests . fig.  <dig> shows the complete set of threading events for each group , relating each sthread score to the structural similarity  between the xray structure and the corresponding model. the dataset includes both "non-native" and "near-native" tests; a "near-native" model occurs when the native sequence is threaded onto another complex that happens to be structurally homologous. the energy "surfaces" thus constructed appear complex, with no simple relation between sthread and irmsd. we do not observe a smooth increase with irmsd. a more detailed analysis shows, however, that the model does display a distinct, albeit imperfect correlation between energy and structure.

indeed, fig.  <dig> gives a more detailed view of the c. <dig>  data. several distinct binding modes were identified above . using a somewhat finer clustering here, we distinguish  <dig> modes . these are shown in the upper part of fig.  <dig>  complexes are colored according to their binding mode; eleven colors can be seen. for simplicity, only  <dig> complexes are shown in the figure . in the lower part of fig.  <dig>  each panel corresponds to one xray complex and one binding mode; the xray complex is compared to all possible threading models. only eight of the eleven binding modes are shown. with this detailed representation, the few, very mild discrimination failures within this group can be seen individually . except for a few points, sthread does tend to increase with irmsd. this indicates a correlated energy surface. in the 1id <dig> panel, for example, sthread increases rapidly then remains roughly constant for  <dig> ≤ irmsd <  <dig> Å. in the 1jax and 1ek <dig> panels, the situation is similar, except for one brown point. in all panels, any points with low energies but large irmsds are associated with one or all of the red, blue, and especially brown binding modes. these binding modes are mutually similar; see tree in upper panel of fig.  <dig>  clearly, this group of binding modes represents a strong competitor for several other, experimental modes. it may be that this group represents a genuine, alternate mode that could be observed under the right experimental conditions; it may also be that some of the other, experimental modes are artefacts of the crystal environment. even if the low energy assigned to this group of modes is a pure artefact of the model, we note that our procedure has allowed most other modes to be correctly positioned in the high energy region. the few, low energy, competing structures  all correspond to a single, competing binding mode that could possibly be discriminated by further, more sophisticated energy calculations such as all-atom models.

fig.  <dig> shows the a. <dig>  data. the situation is somewhat less favorable, since there are several discrimination failures in this group. the largest failures are circled in each panel; they all correspond to sequences threaded onto the same model structures: 1jlt, 1aok, and 1pp <dig>  thus, all the discrimination failures are produced by purple or grey points. 1pp <dig> also has a negative sthread when it is threaded onto the 1jlt model. excluding these points, the variation of sthread is rather smooth in the 1fx <dig>  1pp <dig>  and 1jlt panels. in the other panels, the variation of sthread is less regular, although large irmsd values do correspond to large or intermediate energies. all these other panels correspond to weak complexes . thus, some or all of the corresponding, experimental binding modes could be artefacts of the crystal environment; this would explain the observed violations of the energy/structure correlation. for this isg, we compared the sequence identity at the interface to the overall sequence identity for several pairs of complexes that share the same interaction mode. in  <dig> cases out of  <dig>  the overall sequence identity was higher than the interface sequence identity.

overall, the procedure is much more successful than suggested by the simplistic analysis shown in fig.  <dig>  the energy/structure correlation is mainly violated by a few models, corresponding to one or a small group of very similar binding modes. in both isgs analyzed, some or all of these violations may be due to experimental binding modes induced artificially by the crystal environment. even if the violations are pure artefacts of our modelling procedure, their number is small enough so that a more sophisticated modelling procedure could be used for their further analysis. indeed, a larger number of high-irmsd models are clearly eliminated by our energy values. a clustering of binding modes and their detailed energy analysis was needed to reveal this more promising picture. such an analysis had not been performed in the past.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
for individual proteins, structure-based homology modelling is by far the most important prediction method. most of the difficulties that exist for individual protein modelling can also affect complex modelling. however, complexes include an additional structural level, namely quaternary structure. therefore additional difficulties occur, especially for large, multi-domain, multi-protein complexes. here, we limited ourselves to the simplest class of complexes: binary complexes between single domain proteins. these already present several specific difficulties, at least four of which were illustrated in this work. first, in the pdb, there are far fewer structures of complexes than of individual proteins. second, it is often hard to distinguish biologically-meaningful complexes from those induced by the crystal environment. third, two proteins with similar structures may have very different modes of interaction with a third protein, simply because a few surface residues differ. fourth, domains within the same protein may shift with respect to each other in different environments.

to overcome these difficulties, we took two main steps. we limited ourselves to binary complexes between single-domain proteins, and we identified complexes that have a weak association free energy . when comparing two complexes, we also paid care to the definition of equivalent residues , so that a simple and intuitive measure of structural distances could be used , and to the treatment of gaps in the threading procedure.

we obtained two main results. first, complexes that share over 35% sequence identity usually share similar structures and interaction modes. the same qualitative result was obtained in earlier studies  <cit> . here, however, our dataset is simpler, our analysis somewhat more detailed, and the overall result is more clearcut. note that the reverse situation has also been observed: complexes with weak sequence homology can occasionally have similar binding modes. the literature provides just a few known cases, such as cytochome c' and its homolog, the erv2p thiol oxydase  <cit> . the precise value of the sequence identity threshold obtained here, 35%, obviously depends on the details of our data set and our alignment method. exceptions to the similarity principle were either weakly-stable complexes or a few unusual cases . below 35% identity it is common to find different interaction modes for homologous complexes.

our second main result is the imperfect but still respectable success rate obtained when comparing near-native and non-native models . the energy/structure correlation is mainly violated by a few models, corresponding to one or a small group of similar binding modes. in both isgs analyzed above, some of the failures correspond to weakly-stable complexes. these failures and possibly others may be due to experimental binding modes induced artificially by the crystal environment. in general, we expect poor discrimination for highly-transient and weakly-stable complexes, which were shown above to depart from the simple similarity principle. we expect that the small number of other failures could be resolved using a more sophisticated, all-atom energy function. such an energy function will require a detailed model for the protein sidechains ; this could introduce additional errors. note that the performance of dfireβ is already comparable to several all-atom energy functions  <cit> .

overall, our results suggest that the simple modelling procedure applied here could help identify and characterize, at least in a preliminary way, protein-protein complexes. the next step is to apply it on a genomic scale  <cit> .

