BACKGROUND
periodontitis is a complex process affecting tooth-supporting tissues  <cit> . the pathogenesis of periodontal diseases is largely attributed to localized inflammation, which results from interaction between host and microbial factors  <cit> . the most common etiological agent of chronic periodontitis is porphyromonas gingivalis, a gram-negative anaerobic black-pigmented bacterium  <cit> . on tooth surfaces, p. gingivalis is a constituent of the complex multispecies biofilm known as dental plaque, which has properties of other biofilms found in the human body and in the environment. p. gingivalis can also colonize the tissues and cells of the gingival epithelium  <cit> . the bacterium can not only invade, but also accumulate inside gingival epithelial cells  <cit> . recent evidence demonstrates that the effect of periodontitis might have systemic consequences since the bacterium can spread systemically and locate to other tissues  <cit> .

bacteria living in a biofilm have a physiology different from that of planktonic cells and they generally live under nutrient limitation, including that of iron and heme. the uptake of heme as iron and protoporphyrin ix is an important mechanism by which p. gingivalis and other pathogenic bacteria obtain these compounds for their survival and their ability to establish an infection  <cit> . gram-negative bacteria utilize outer-membrane receptors to acquire heme from host hemoproteins directly or through a hemophore or lipoprotein and then transport the captured heme into the cell. in the case of p. gingivalis, one of the systems of heme acquisition consists of hmur and hmuy proteins  <cit> . hmur is an outer-membrane tonb-dependent receptor involved in heme transport through the outer membrane  <cit> , whereas hmuy is a heme-binding lipoprotein associated with the outer membrane of the bacterial cell  <cit> . a detailed characterization of the hmuy-heme complex demonstrated that heme, with a midpoint potential of  <dig> mv, is in a low-spin fe hexa-coordinate environment  <cit> . in that report we also identified histidines  <dig> and  <dig> as potential heme ligands. recent crystallographic analysis of the hmuy-heme complex confirmed these data and showed that the protein exhibits a unique structure composed of an all-β fold  <cit> . our studies also showed that hmuy may be functional in the form of dimers/tetramers  <cit> . it seems that dimeric hmuy takes up heme and this leads to tetramerization under occlusion of the heme binding sites. tetrameric hmuy would protect heme from host scavengers and delivered it to hmur. on the basis of our mutational analysis of hmuy heme ligands  <cit> , an initial step in heme transfer could involve disruption of only one of the two axial histidine ligands, as found for serratia marcescens hemophore hasa  <cit> . once bound by hmur, heme is translocated across the outer membrane into the periplasm with the assistance of tonb and further heme transport requires the presence of binding proteins to escort it across the periplasm to the cytoplasm. this step might be performed by other hmu operon proteins, so far not characterized  <cit> . hmuy, especially in the form associated with the outer membrane, may also store heme and protect the bacterial cell from damage induced by free hemin.

it is likely that hmuy lipoprotein may play a role not only in heme acquisition, but also in the host pathogen response. therefore the aim of this study was to analyze the surface exposure and expression of hmuy protein in p. gingivalis. in addition, in this report we examined the participation of hmuy protein in biofilm formation.

RESULTS
hmuy is a unique p. gingivalis protein
preliminary studies demonstrated that hmuy shows high identity to proteins identified in several p. gingivalis strains  <cit> . here we compared the amino-acid sequences of putative hmuy homologues deposited in databases. interestingly, we found that hmuy is similar to proteins encoded in several different species belonging to the bacteroidetes phylum, which consists of three classes: bacteroidetes, flavobacteria, and sphingobacteria  <cit> . the bacteroidetes class consists of anaerobes which are often found in high numbers in the intestinal tracts of animals and which may infect different human tissues, including periodontal tissues . members of the other two classes are mainly aerobic and abundant in many freshwater and marine systems . bacteria encoding putative hmuy homologues have also been identified in several human pathogens, including those infecting the oral cavity   <cit> . a characteristic feature of all the hmuy homologues identified in this study is biofilm formation. however, although we found several putative hmuy homologues in a broad range of bacteria, the similarity of the amino-acid sequences of hmuy from porphyromonas and other species was low  . only between hmuy proteins encoded within porphyromonas species was the similarity higher  . in addition, only p. gingivalis strains possess both histidines engaged in heme coordination  <cit> . here we also demonstrated that antibodies against purified hmuy raised in rabbits were highly specific and recognized only this antigen in p. gingivalis a <dig> and w <dig> whole-cell lysates compared with a p. gingivalis hmuy deletion mutant strain  , e. coli, or bacteroides fragilis whole-cell lysates .

hmuy is exposed on the surface of p. gingivalis cells
the n terminus of hmuy shares characteristic features of classical lipoproteins, possessing a signal peptide sequence cleaved off by the signal peptidase ii  <cit> . after removal of the signal peptide, the α-amino group of the n-terminal cysteine is acylated, yielding a mature lipoprotein. although hmuy association with the outer membrane of the p. gingivalis cell was previously demonstrated  <cit> , the orientation of the protein in the outer membrane was not examined. bacterial lipoproteins may be located at the cell surface or directed into the periplasmic space. we hypothesized previously that hmuy functions as an external protein  <cit> . to determine whether hmuy is surface exposed, the proteinase k accessibility assay was employed using the p. gingivalis a <dig> and w <dig> wild-type strains. upon incubation with proteinase k of intact cells grown under low-iron/heme conditions, most of the hmuy was not degraded . a similar effect was observed when p. gingivalis cells grown under high-iron/heme conditions and e. coli cells over-expressing membrane-associated hmuy were examined . it is likely that hmuy may be partially protected by the cell wall, similar to other lipoproteins  <cit> , or resistant to proteinase k digestion. the latter is highly possible since we previously demonstrated that hmuy is resistant to the proteolytic action of trypsin and gingipains  <cit> . indeed, experiments performed with purified hmuy showed limited degradation of the protein . therefore we further employed an immunological analysis. considering the surface-exposed location of hmuy, the protein attached to the p. gingivalis cell should be able to react with antibodies. dot-blotting analysis showed that rabbit anti-hmuy antibodies, either those present in whole immune serum or a purified igg fraction, recognized surface-exposed hmuy with high affinity compared with pre-immune serum or pre-immune iggs . we did not detect reactivity with anti-hmuy serum or iggs in the hmuy deletion to <dig> mutant cells. a whole-cell elisa assay highly corroborated that hmuy is associated with the outer membrane and exposed on the extracellular surface of the cell . since these two experiments were performed using adsorbed cells, facs analysis was employed to examine free cells in solution. the results shown in figure 2c confirmed the surface exposure of hmuy protein. moreover, all these analyses showed that hmuy is expressed in bacteria grown under low-iron/heme conditions at higher levels than in bacteria grown under high-iron/heme conditions.

hmuy is one of the dominant proteins produced under low-iron/heme conditions by p. gingivalis
previous studies showed that mrna encoding hmuy was produced at low levels when bacteria were cultured under high-iron/heme conditions , but its production was significantly increased when the bacteria were starved in bm without hemin and supplemented with an iron chelator  <cit> . to analyze hmuy protein expression in the cell and its release into the culture medium during bacterial growth, western blotting analysis was employed. we did not detect p. gingivalis fur protein in the culture medium, thus confirming bacterial integrity . similar to mrna expression, hmuy protein expression was higher in bacteria grown under low-iron/heme conditions  than in bacteria grown under high-iron/heme conditions . during bacterial growth, hmuy was constitutively expressed in the cells of the a <dig> strain, reaching similar levels in the cells at the indicated time points . instead of being degraded by active p. gingivalis proteases, constitutively produced hmuy was accumulated in the culture medium because during bacterial growth, increasing amounts of the protein were detected in both the outer-membrane vesicle-associated and the soluble form . our data confirm that the changes observed in gene and protein expression in p. gingivalis grown under iron/heme limitation reflect the importance of the environmental levels of these compounds to this bacterium and support the regulation of hmuy expression by iron and heme  <cit> . the response of p. gingivalis to environmental heme availability was previously mapped on a global scale by transcriptomic analysis using dna microarrays and by proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry  <cit> . the authors found that mrna levels of hmur and hmuy in the cell significantly increased under heme limitation. in contrast to higher levels of hmur protein produced under heme limitation in the cell, no significant increase in protein levels of hmuy was observed under low-heme conditions. the data presented in this study  and earlier  <cit>  demonstrated that hmuy is constitutively expressed and released into the external milieu not only in the form of outer-membrane vesicles, but also in a soluble form, which precluded the protein from being identified as up-regulated in the proteomic analysis.

in contrast, others have shown that p. gingivalis enhanced hmuy mrna expression in response to low cell density rather than to low iron concentration  <cit> . the authors found that the expressions of the hmuy and hmur genes were highest in p. gingivalis grown in the early log phase, when the cell density is low, but expression levels were significantly decreased in the late log phase, when cell density is much higher. they also suggested that the expression of hmuy mrna in p. gingivalis cells grown in the same cell densities was similar regardless of the presence of heme. these results are different from those demonstrating higher hmuy mrna expression levels in p. gingivalis cells grown under low-heme conditions and in biofilm, the latter resembling high-cell-density conditions  <cit> . our results presented in this study corroborate the latter findings and demonstrate that hmuy protein is constitutively produced in the cell at low levels when bacteria are grown under high-iron/heme conditions; however, significantly higher protein levels are found in cells grown under low-iron/heme conditions, maintained in vitro by the addition of an iron chelator or human serum to the heme-free medium . these experiments were performed using p. gingivalis cultures grown in the first passage of starvation, thus allowing achieving similar cell densities, especially in the early growth phase .

hmuy participates in homotypic biofilm accumulation
to cope with a changing environment and with continuous attacks of the host antimicrobial defense systems, bacteria produce a biofilm, which plays an important role in chronic infections due to its ability to challenge the host immune system and resist antimicrobial treatment  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that p. gingivalis actively participates in biofilm formation  <cit> , which facilitates the long-term survival of the bacterium and induces an inflammatory reaction that is responsible for the destruction of the hard and soft tooth-supporting tissues. the transition from planktonic bacteria to biofilm-associated cells involves changes in gene expression and is mediated at least in part by intercellular communication. a recent study demonstrated that hmuy is produced predominantly in p. gingivalis cells grown in biofilm compared with the cells growing in a planktonic form  <cit> . biofilm formation begins with the production of an extracellular matrix, a structure that creates a shared space within the cellular community. in prokaryotes, the extracellular matrix is typically composed of carbohydrate polymers and proteins, and many of these proteins possess lipoprotein secretion signals. to determine if hmuy could be engaged in biofilm accumulation, we examined in vitro the homotypic biofilm-forming capabilities of wild-type  strains and a hmuy deletion mutant constructed in the a <dig> strain . as shown in figure  <dig>  bacteria grown under low-iron/heme conditions exhibited significantly greater biofilm accumulation than cells grown under high-iron/heme conditions. in addition, our data demonstrated that hmuy is involved in biofilm formation since p. gingivalis cells not producing this protein showed a significantly lower ability to form biofilm . in contrast, all p. gingivalis cells grown in a planktonic form exhibited similar growth rates, suggesting that the mutation did not influence bacterial growth . all these data suggest that hmuy may play a significant role in biofilm accumulation on abiotic surfaces and support the importance of hmuy for p. gingivalis survival during starvation, conditions similar to those found in plaque.

to facilitate adaptation to life within the oral cavity, p. gingivalis must be capable of sensing and responding to the prevailing environmental conditions, including nutrient availability, cell density, and the presence of other bacteria. it has been recently shown that p. gingivalis possesses the luxs gene and produces a functional ai- <dig> autoinducer  <cit> . in p. gingivalis, among the many different bacterial features that are regulated by quorum sensing using luxs protein is the expression of genes involved in iron and heme acquisition, including the heme receptor hmur  <cit> . although the authors analyzed hmur gene expression only, it is highly possible that the expressions of other components of hmu operon, such as hmuy, may also be regulated by luxs signaling. it has been shown that luxs is also required in p. gingivalis for the development of biofilm under low-heme conditions  <cit> , which additionally supports an involvement of hmuy in both heme uptake and biofilm accumulation.

anti-hmuy antibodies inhibit p. gingivalis growth and biofilm accumulation
we further tested whether anti-hmuy antibodies had inhibitory activity against p. gingivalis, which was first determined by measuring the od at  <dig> nm for planktonic bacteria after incubation of bacterial suspensions with pre-immune or immune anti-hmuy iggs . as shown in figure  <dig>  incubation of p. gingivalis wild-type strains with immune anti-hmuy iggs slightly decreased subsequent bacterial growth, especially in the early growth phase. the growth curves resemble those obtained for the hmuy-deficient strain. the lack of inhibition of bacterial growth in the late growth phase may be caused by the expression of other iron/heme uptake systems important for p. gingivalis at this growth stage. in contrast, anti-hmuy antibodies demonstrated a greater ability to reduce biofilm formation since p. gingivalis cells pre-incubated with iggs isolated from immune anti-hmuy serum exhibited a lower ability of biofilm accumulation than the cells without added iggs or pre-immune iggs . these data confirm that hmuy protein may be among the proteins important for biofilm accumulation by p. gingivalis.

CONCLUSIONS
as the prevalence of antibiotic-resistant strains of bacteria increases, novel ways of treating infections need to be developed. this is particularly important with respect to periodontal diseases, which are the most common chronic bacterial infections of man. first of all, hmuy may be important for a better understanding of the pathology caused by p. gingivalis. the surface exposure, high abundance, and immunogenicity of p. gingivalis hmuy protein suggest that its detailed examination may yield novel diagnostic methods. knowledge of the molecular bases of the host immune response against p. gingivalis hmuy may be further essential for developing approaches to control and treat chronic periodontitis. to confirm these hypotheses, studies of anti-hmuy antibodies produced in patients with various forms of periodontal diseases and the influence of hmuy and anti-hmuy antibodies on the experimental periodontitis in a mouse model are now underway.

