BACKGROUND
chlamydia trachomatis is a gram-negative obligate intracellular bacterium that is a leading cause of preventable blindness and sexually transmitted diseases worldwide  <cit> . much of the biology of infection and disease remains unclear in this system, owing largely to the lack of a routine genetic system for these organisms. while many aspects of these challenges have recently been overcome  <cit> , the use of genetic transformation in this system is just beginning to be exploited. one aspect of chlamydial biology that is poorly understood involves the mechanism of lateral gene transfer among chlamydial strains both in the laboratory and, most likely, in patients. coinfection of host cells in vitro with chlamydial isolates encoding different drug resistance markers lead to generation of dual resistant recombinant progeny  <cit> . these results lend support to pre- and post-genomic analyses demonstrating that chlamydiae recombine in infected hosts  <cit> , likely following infection of a patient by multiple strains  <cit> . chlamydia spp. encode no recognizable bacterial gene transfer systems, thus the mechanisms underlying chlamydial recombination remain unknown.

c. trachomatis and many other chlamydiae are differentiated into distinct serovars based on antibody specificity to the major outer membrane protein , encoded by ompa. serovars and subserovars of c. trachomatis fall into three groups those associated with trachoma , those associated with non-invasive sexually transmitted infections of the urogenital tract , and those associated with invasive lymphogranuloma   <cit> . this historical classification system has recently been modified to a genotypic characterization of strains, both by sequencing of ompa and the inclusion of a variety of other markers in the analysis  <cit> . nevertheless, many of the biological differences among chlamydiae still can be grouped by the serovar-based classification scheme. clinically relevant differences among the chlamydiae include host tropism, variation in disease outcome, and in vitro biology. with some exceptions , such as tryptophan utilization  <cit>  and fusogenicity of inclusions  <cit> , the relationship between genotype and phenotype is not clear in vitro and certainly not with regards to how the phenotypes observed in cell culture relate to the disease potential of a particular strain. two such phenotypes that are different among c. trachomatis strains include the historical difference among serovars regarding attachment and invasion in the presence or absence of centrifugation during the infectious process  <cit> , and secondary inclusion formation by different chlamydial strains  <cit> . deciphering the genetic basis of these and other phenotypes is complicated by the relatively primitive molecular genetic techniques that have been available for studying chlamydial biology, although this situation is changing.

in the present study, genetically mosaic recombinant strains from parents with differing cell culture phenotypes were generated in vitro, cloned by limiting dilution, and subjected to complete genome sequence analysis. these strains, the parentals used in the crosses, and selected clinical isolates were used to investigate the process of chlamydial genetic exchange, and to develop and test a system for a primary examination of attachment and invasion as well as secondary inclusion formation phenotypes in c. trachomatis.

RESULTS
generation of recombinant strains
a collection of recombinant strains was generated using parent strains within serovars j, f, and l <dig> . these included inca-positive strains j/ <dig> and l2- <dig>  and the inca negative strain f/ <dig>  in some cases, crosses involved two parents ; while in other cases three-way crosses were attempted . each of these crosses yielded expected inclusion fusion patterns, leading to cells infected with both inca-positive strains forming fused inclusions, while cells infected with either inca-positive strain and the f/ <dig> inca-negative strain having multiple inclusions per cell. mixtures of all three of these strains led to cells having mixed inclusions containing the two inca-positive strains, and a set of isolated inclusions containing the inca-negative f/ <dig> strain . while progeny with each possible combination of two antibiotic resistance markers were routinely identified in the three-way crosses, no triply resistant strain was recovered in any experiment. additionally, no single progeny strain had sequence at any informative position from each of the three parents in a three-way cross. recombinant progeny were generated in crosses of both inca-positive and inca-negative parents, with no apparent difference in the rate of recovery of recombinants relative to the inca status of the parent .

plasmid phenotype tests for presence and genotype of plasmid.

progeny strains used in subsequent recombinant crosses are shown in bold face.

genome sequence analysis of recombinant strains
the genomes of the twelve recombinant strains were sequenced using illumina paired-end technology . in all recombinant strains, the sequences surrounding the individual resistance markers were derived from the appropriate parent, supporting the conclusion that these were recombinant strains and not spontaneous mutants that emerged during the selection process. there was evidence of a single random mutation in one recombinant, strain rc-l2/ <dig>  this mutation was a g  to a  substitution at position  <dig>  , resulting in an alanine to valine amino acid change in the protein product of ct <dig>  this same mutation was identified in the rc-j/ <dig> genome, a progeny of a cross in which rc-l2/ <dig> was a parent. there was no other evidence of random base change in any other sequenced recombinant genome.

with one exception, the exchange of dna in each recombination event yielded products consistent with classical gene conversion or homologous recombination. the exception involves a recombination/deletion event involving the ribosomal operons which occurred in the cross between parental strains rc-l2/ <dig> and rc-j/6276tet yielding recombinant strain rc-j/ <dig> . this cross led to a deletion of one of the three ribosomal operons found in most of the in vitro-generated tetrc. trachomatis strains , returning the progeny strain to the number of ribosomal operons found in wild-type c. trachomatis and other closely related species . this event also led to the deletion of the c. trachomatis orfs ct740- <dig>  resulting in a progeny strain that contains only the c. suis homologs of ct <dig> through ct <dig>  the results demonstrate that these c. suis sequences can complement any required function of the deleted c. trachomatis genes for growth in vitro.

nucleotide sequence analysis of the recombinant genomes showed that some of these isolates lacked the chlamydial plasmid . we originally hypothesized that loss of the plasmid was associated in some way with the recombination process. to explore this possibility, pcr analyses were performed on all recombinants, as well as the parents used in this study. both the j/6276rif and the f/70rif parents were negative for the plasmid, whereas the l2-434ofl parent was plasmid-positive . because plasmid was absent in both the j/6276rif and the f/70rif parents used in the crosses, plasmid loss in the resulting progeny was likely a function of stress associated with antibiotic-based selection of strains prior to generating recombinants as opposed to a stress induced by the recombination process.

the sequenced recombinant genomes allowed a comparative survey of recombination events in progeny strains. the largest fragment that was laterally transferred during recombination was  <dig>  base pairs, found in rc-j/ <dig>  while the smallest documented double crossover event was a  <dig> base pair fragment in the rc-l2/ <dig> strain.

a total of  <dig> independent crossover regions were detected in the  <dig> recombinant strains. the distribution of these recombination sites was examined by mapping each crossover position from each of the  <dig> sequenced genomes to a single arbitrarily chosen f/ <dig> parental genome . there was generally a higher concentration of crossovers surrounding the rpob locus , and there were large regions of the chromosome that lacked evidence of recombination, such as the region surrounding ct <dig> 

a recent report  <cit>  indicated a strong preference for recombination at specific positions within trpb or gyra in several recombinant progeny originally generated by demars and weinfurter  <cit> . we used two approaches to examine selected sets of candidate hotspots identified by these authors. first, we examined our original  <dig> recombinant genomes for recombination events at common sites. while analysis of these fully sequenced recombinant strains identified four examples of recombination events that occurred within the same genetic region in independent progeny strains , and none were found in more than  <dig> recombinant progeny. second, we conducted pcr-based sequence analysis of a different set of completely independent recombinant crosses, using parental combinations  that were nearly identical to those analyzed by srinivasan and colleagues  <cit> . independence of these crosses was assured because each of the  <dig> examined progeny was the product of a fully independent cross of parental strains. in no examined case was there evidence for recombination at either of the loci identified by these authors, in any of the  <dig> progeny strains generated from these crosses .

individual recombinant progeny from independent crosses were subjected to pcr-based dna sequencing and assessed for recombination at positions identified as hotspots by srinivasan and colleagues  <cit> . for each sequenced product, the identified genotype at that region is indicated . there were no examples of recombination in any of these sequenced pcr products.

chi sites have previously been described as sites for homologous recombination in bacteria  <cit> , and it is possible that a canonical chi site, or other sequence pattern, might be found at or near chlamydial recombination sites. the program meme  <cit>  was used to determine if any identified crossover sites were linked to a common sequence motif. these analyses support the hypothesis that recombination in vitro does not require specific target sequences and occurs at random sites across the genome.

genotypes associated with attachment efficiency
attachment efficiency in the presence or absence of centrifugation is a differentiating phenotype among c. trachomatis strains  <cit> . strains of serovar l <dig> have a high rate of attachment in static culture, while the non-lgv serovars have a reduced ability to infect in the absence of centrifugation . we used a pcr-based analysis of attached ebs to examine the efficiency of attachment in our recombinant strains, relative to the parents of the crosses. parental strains performed as predicted in these assays, with our serovar l <dig> strain having little dependence on centrifugation for attachment, while centrifugation enhanced attachment by both the serovar f and serovar j parental strains . however, the different recombinant progeny strains showed variability in attachment efficiency relative to ompa genotype, with individual progeny strains reflecting the attachment efficiency of either the serovar l <dig> or serovar f/j parental strain.

a genome-wide association analysis was then used to determine if regions in the chlamydial genome could be associated with the observed attachment efficiency phenotype. briefly, the sequenced recombinant genomes are aligned , and every informative site  is analyzed using the fisher’s exact test to determine if that genotype is associated with observed phenotype. five genomic regions were identified that had the highest possible inverse log p-value based on sample size and each observation group size . these include regions containing orfs ct <dig> – ct <dig>  ct <dig> – ct <dig>  ct <dig> – ct <dig>  ct <dig> – ct <dig>  and ct <dig> – ct <dig>  the predicted proteins encoded within these regions of the  <dig> parents and  <dig> recombinants were then compared using the muscle sequence alignment software, and a total of  <dig> proteins had at least one non-synonymous amino acid change that was associated with the attachment phenotype . the chlamydial membrane proteins pmpe , pmpf , pmpg , and pmph  were among the proteins with the highest number of non-synonymous amino acid changes. other relevant genes that were associated with high attachment efficiency were orfs ct <dig>  and ct <dig> -  <dig>  orfs encoding proteins involved in the type iii secretion process  <cit> . differences in the sequences of proteins demonstrated by others to function in primary attachment  or proposed to be associated with very early events following contact  were not associated with differential attachment efficiency, as measured by our assay .

variation in secondary inclusion formation between recombinant strains
formation of secondary inclusions in infected cells is another trait that varies among strains and serovars. for example, strains of serovars g and f commonly form secondary inclusions at a higher rate than strains of serovar j and l <dig>  <cit> . we explored the secondary inclusion phenotype of inca-positive recombinant strains; this analysis was not possible in strains that are inca-negative, because our readout of secondary inclusions is dependent on antibodies to inca. of the eight inca-positive recombinant strains tested, recombinants rc-j/ <dig> and rc-l2/ <dig> showed extensive secondary inclusion production . these results are surprising because both parental strains  used to create rc-j/ <dig> and rc-l2/ <dig> are low secondary inclusion formers  <cit> . recombinant progeny with high secondary inclusion phenotypes where both parents exhibit low secondary inclusion formation suggest a possible interaction between at least two chlamydial proteins, or at least two independent genetic markers, in the manifestation of the secondary inclusion phenotype.

quantitative analysis of possible loci associated with the secondary inclusion phenotype was inconclusive. this was a function of both the low number of recombinants available for analysis, and the fact the apparently multiple alleles are involved.

discussion
genetic manipulation of chlamydiae has been a historical barrier to research in this system, but some of these barriers have recently been removed. one such area of progress is the use and understanding of chlamydial recombination. there is considerable evidence for in vitro and in vivo recombination by chlamydiae, and the methods for generating chlamydial recombinants are becoming routine  <cit> . however, there remains a general lack of understanding regarding the cellular and molecular mechanisms associated with the process. the present study was initiated to address these challenges. we hypothesized that an investigation of both the process of genetic recombination in chlamydiae and the correlation of specific chlamydial genotypes with phenotypes can be addressed using a combination of contemporary genome sequencing technologies with our ability to create genetic recombinants among chlamydiae. this approach has also been used by nguyen and colleagues  <cit>  as part of a forward genetic strategy in these organisms, and the results of such experiments can be integrated with the recently developed chlamydial transformation system  <cit>  to develop and validate correlations between gene structure and protein function.

evidence for recombination in chlamydiae was first provided by nucleotide sequencing of genes or genomes taken from a variety of chlamydial strains. there are data in the literature suggesting that recombination hotspots might be present within or around ompa <cit> , and also at other locations in the genome  <cit> . our genome sequencing has added some support for this premise, as the d/ <dig> genome discussed by jeffrey et al.  <cit>  has a hybrid d/e ompa sequence, and apparent recombination sites within this strain are at or very near sites seen in other, independently isolated, clinical strains  <cit> . other investigators have proposed and debated the concept of chlamydial recombination hotspots using analysis of chlamydial genome sequences from laboratory-generated or clinical strains  <cit> . in the present study, we used two strategies to investigate the possible clustering of recombination events in vitro. first, we analyzed apparent crossover sites by genome sequencing of  <dig> recombinant genomes, which led to the identification of a total of  <dig> primary recombination sites. the largest integrated fragment identified in these experiments was over  <dig>  base pairs, which constitutes approximately 40% of the chlamydial genome. the long recombined region observed in these progeny strains are consistent with the original observations of demars and weinfurter  <cit> , who discuss very large exchanges in their recombinants. sequence data from clinical isolates do not provide evidence for such large exchanged fragments, but there is clear evidence of recombined regions of greater than  <dig>  base pairs  <cit> . chlamydial genomes are remarkably homogenous and syntenous, and we hypothesize that many recombination events that may have occurred, both in clinical strains and in laboratory-generated progeny, have been missed because of the low level of overall genomic variability.

our data provided no evidence for increased frequency of particular recombination at specific sites surrounding markers used for selection . certain areas of the genome were apparently devoid of recombination events, but these areas also were not physically linked to any of the selectable markers used for these studies. our data provide no basis for these chromosomal sections being refractory to recombination. a total of four genomic locations were identified as possible recombination targets in more than one independent progeny clone. none of these four positions is identified as a recombination hotspot in other studies  <cit> . no candidate hotspot regions within or immediately around ompa were identified in any of our in vitro recombinants, and none of the positions are directly flanking the markers used for selection.

a second approach to investigate chlamydial recombination hotspots was in response to work of srinivasan et al.  <cit>  who examined sequence data generated by demars and weinfurter  <cit> , and identified candidate recombination hotspots at several loci. we attempted to replicate these results by making completely independent recombinant clones using strains very similar to those used by these investigators, and examining predicted loci for evidence of recombination. these clones were determined to be fully independent, because each was derived from a completely independent primary mixture of parental strains. we found no evidence of the use of recombination sites identified by srinivasan and colleagues in any of the clones. our inability to identify any hotspots surrounding previously identified recombination sites leads us to propose that most previously identified recombination hotspots were identified as such because: 1) there was significant in vivo selection pressure for change at a locus , or 2) the position being analyzed is identified because there simply was more sequence heterogeneity in that region of the chromosome, or 3) the in vitro progeny identified as containing recombination hotspots were siblings in a single recombination event prior to being cloned out of a population.

each recombination event identified appeared to be a product of homologous recombination or gene conversion between highly related sequences. there was a single deletion event in one progeny strain, in which two virtually identical rrna sequences were precisely deleted to yield a single rrna operon, with  <dig> kb of intervening sequences  removed in the process . this was the only example of a deletion in any progeny strain, and there were no cases of a duplication event. these results are consistent with the general sequence similarity and synteny found in the naturally mosaic c. trachomatis genomes, with occasional phenotype-associated deletions in specific regions of the chromosome  <cit> .

the three-way crosses were designed to examine the possibility that multiple parents could be involved in generation of a single recombinant progeny. we saw no evidence of a three-way cross in any of our selection experiments or in any genome sequence analysis, even though multiple independent two-way crosses were recovered from those experiments. if the probability of a three-way event is a function of the probability of two independent recombination events, it is likely that not enough individual recombinants were screened to identify an extremely rare progeny clone. there is, however, one issue that is addressed by the absence of any evidence for contribution of three parents in a cross. in many of the recombinants identified by our group and in studies by demars and colleagues  <cit> , multiple fragments from each parental genome are found in a recombinant progeny, often in regions of the chromosome that were not selected for with the tested antibiotics . it is possible that these differently recombined fragments involve sequential and independent recombination events occurring during the mixed infections used in this procedure. if involvement of multiple chlamydiae was a common occurrence in the generation of a cross, we hypothesized that some progeny from the three-way crosses should carry fragments of each parent. as no single progeny strain was identified with fragments of each of the parents in the three-way cross, our results do not support this hypothesis. therefore our current model is that the generation of recombinant progeny is the result of a single exchange event between two parents, and that these exchanges can involve very large fragments of the chromosomal dna. this latter result is consistent with analyses by other laboratories  <cit> . subsequent recombination events will then lead to differential integration of fragments of the exchanged dna, leading to the mosaicism seen in many of the recombinants.

the attachment efficiency in the absence of centrifugation measured for the different recombinants revealed groups having either a high attachment efficiency, as exhibited by lgv strains, or a low attachment efficiency, as exhibited by non-lgv urogenital strains . genome wide association analysis of this phenotype revealed a number of loci that were quantitatively associated with the attachment efficiency phenotype seen in cell culture. while the list of candidate alleles that might be associated with this phenotype includes a wide variety of genes , we focus this discussion on proteins known or hypothesized to be on the surface of the chlamydial elementary body. one collection of proteins that is highly associated with attachment efficiency were six of the pmp proteins , a group of chlamydia-specific autotransporters, some of which are known to be surface exposed and are logical mediators of attachment to cells  <cit> . a bioinformatic analysis of pmp sequence and structure demonstrates that four of these encoded pmps  vary consistently in relationship to the described phenotype, and these changes include alterations of the net negative charge of the pmp protein . it is, however, preliminary to assess any property of a single protein or small set of proteins with the attachment efficiency distinction among strains. the recently developed genetic transformation system will be a critical technology in directly assessing such relationships in this species  <cit> .

the second phenotype investigated in our study was the formation of secondary inclusions within infected cells. this property of c. trachomatis strains varies not only between c. trachomatis serovars, but also between strains within serovars  <cit> . an intriguing result was the identification of high secondary inclusion formers in crosses between parents that exhibited very low secondary inclusion formation phenotypes . while interpretations of this result are preliminary, it appears that the phenotype is associated with two or more regions of the genome, and that a specific combination of genotypes at these positions is required for the high secondary inclusion formation phenotype to be manifested.

continued examination of novel recombinants, including backcrosses to integrate more parental genome into recombinant strains will add clarity to the phenotypes we have discussed. we also continue to use the recombinants as tools to understand the basic processes associated with genetic exchange in the chlamydiae.

CONCLUSIONS
the described experiments characterize in detail the products of genetic exchange by c. trachomatis in vitro. sequences representing over 1/ <dig> of the chlamydial chromosome can be incorporated during these crosses. selected phenotypes can be segregated in these crosses. this approach can be combined with the novel dna transformation technologies being developed in these bacteria, leading to novel approaches for determining the relationship between genetic makeup and chlamydial phenotype, both in vitro and in vivo.

