BACKGROUND
the perception of bacteria and archaea as autonomous single-celled organisms is steadily shifting as the capacity to live within structured communities known as biofilms is discovered in species spanning broad taxonomic groups . biofilms are composed of many microbial cells, often of multiple species, held within an extracellular matrix   <cit> . because biofilms bring cells together in close physical proximity, the process of biofilm formation is coupled with additional social systems and mechanisms fundamental to microbiology, including quorum sensing , horizontal gene transfer  and the secretion of enzymes that degrade complex material, causing the ecm to act like a kind of shared external digestive system  <cit> . the end result is a community lifestyle whereby cells may benefit from the advantages of enhanced protection from natural eukaryotic predators  <cit> , other antagonistic microbial species, chemicals, antibiotics or immune responses  <cit> . biofilms may aid in nutrient acquisition and storage  <cit> , facilitate accelerated rates of recombination  <cit>  and allow for coordinated multicellular behaviors . direct analyses of aquatic ecosystems have led to the realization that a majority of microbial species in nature exist in biofilms .

general features of bacterial biofilms have been revealed through the study of several key model species, including pseudomonas aeruginosa, staphylococcus aureus and bacillus subtilis. chemical signals and other external factors often regulate the biofilm lifecycle in bacteria, a sequential process typified by initial attachment of planktonic cells, microcolony formation, maturation into larger structures innervated by aqueous pores or channels, and eventual breakdown or dispersal  <cit> . rather than being simple aggregates of many cells, biofilms contain microenvironments with physical and chemical gradients that establish spatial and temporal genetic patterns sometimes leading to differentiation into multiple cell types . many genes involved in the production and maintenance of matrix materials or extracellular polymeric substances  have also been identified . the principal components of bacterial matrices are polysaccharides, extracellular dna  and amyloid protein  <cit> . the exact composition, physical and chemical properties, and amounts of these components varies in different species and environmental conditions  <cit> .

while biofilm formation is best characterized for bacterial species  <cit> , it has been demonstrated in a number of archaeal groups within the phyla crenarchaeota and euryarchaeota, such as sulfolobus spp. , methanogens  <cit> , acidophilic thermoplasmatales  <cit> , the cold-living sm <dig> strain found in sulfuric springs  <cit>  and halophilic archaea  <cit> . a recent survey of biofilm formation in haloarchaea  conducted by fröls and coworkers showed that a majority of tested strains were able to adhere to glass and form biofilms  <cit> . species were categorized according to adhesion strength and overall biofilm structure. haloferax volcanii fell within the highest adherence group, and formed large surface associated aggregates, relative to other species, including halobacterium salinarum, which formed smaller micro- and macrocolonies in carpet-like layers  <cit> .

we conducted a physiological analysis of biofilm formation by h. volcanii ds <dig> due to several advantages of using this species as a model for archaeal biofilm formation. the wild-type h. volcanii ds <dig> strain was cultivated from sediment from the dead sea in  <dig>  <cit> : it is a relatively fast-growing non-fastidious mesophile, requiring no special equipment to grow in the laboratory  <cit>  and was the first archaeon to be artificially transformed  <cit> . h. volcanii ds <dig> has an available genome sequence  <cit>  and an expanding genetic and proteomic toolbox . haloarchaea also undergo promiscuous gene transfer in the environment  and are excellent species for studying evolutionary processes due to island-like distribution . we hypothesize that a cell-to-cell contact-dependent gene transfer mechanism in h. volcanii  may be active when cells are contained within biofilm communities. the available genetic system allowed us to engineer a h. volcanii strain expressing gfp for three-dimensional biofilm imaging by confocal laser scanning microscopy . here we characterize key aspects of h. volcanii biofilm structural development, composition, dynamics and recombination frequency.

RESULTS
haloferax volcanii cells develop into structured colony biofilms and static liquid biofilms
planktonic h. volcanii ds <dig> cells grown in shaking culture  readily formed biofilms in typical rich media types hv-ypc and hv-ca within several experimental systems that provided a solid plastic or glass substratum. colony biofilms  <cit>  developed on the surface of polycarbonate filters placed on solid media  and were cryo-processed and cross-sectioned, exposing a surface structure containing crevices bounded by globular structures . the greatest level of structural complexity was observed when biofilms were grown in static liquid . cultivating sl-biofilms within chamber slides and on the surface of borosilicate glass coupons placed in six-well plates permitted direct staining and optimized imaging of delicate biofilm structure that was visible macroscopically .figure  <dig> 
growth and development of
haloferax volcanii
static liquid biofilms.  cells within typical shaken culture of h. volcanii ds <dig> under transmitted light. scale bar equals 10 μm.  cross section of cryo-processed h. volcanii colony biofilm grown on ca medium for 5 days and stained with cellmask orange . scale bar equals 30 μm.  photographs of sl-biofilms routinely grown and analyzed within chamber slides  and on glass coupons within six-well plates . a macroscopic photograph of biofilm growth on a  <dig> -mm glass coupon is shown in the center  with an area magnified on the right .  clsm of biofilms grown on glass coupons . biofilms stained with fm 1- <dig> were imaged directly in bulk hv-starve medium using a 63× water-immersion objective after 2 days , 5 days  and 7 days .  biofilm development shown through orthogonal views of sl-biofilms on glass coupons stained with cmo. clsm, confocal laser scanning microscopy; cmo, cellmask orange; sl-biofilm, static liquid biofilm.



we began by examining the development of wild-type h. volcanii ds <dig> biofilms in static liquid using clsm and the cellular membrane dyes fm 1- <dig> and cellmask orange . circular microcolonies formed within 48 h , which led to well-defined clusters/aggregates after 5 days . sl-biofilms reached maturation after 7 days of incubation at 42°c having developed into multi-layer towers with flake-like morphology . large towers were surrounded by a dense layer of smaller clusters or microcolonies and were separated by areas with little or no cell density . overall structural integrity was maintained as large clusters surrounded by smaller microcolonies for several weeks, although a comparison of orthogonal views of cmo-stained sl-biofilms showed that after 2 weeks the height of most structures was diminished and less of the total surface area was covered with microcolonies . large clusters/towers, like the example shown in figure 1f,g,h, varied in height and width, with a maximum measured height of 148 μm.

microcolonies within biofilms formed by a gfp-expressing haloferax volcanii strain bind stains targeting polysaccharide, dna and amyloid protein
several h. volcanii strains were engineered to express gfp to study ecm composition with the goal of reinforcing and expanding staining experiments conducted by fröls and coworkers  <cit> . confirmation of gfp expression was first accessed within colonies formed by two gfp-expression strains produced in this study. colonies formed by the parental h. volcanii h <dig> strain  did not autofluoresce with blue excitation , while those formed by the h. volcanii h <dig> strain based on the previously developed plasmid pjam <dig>   <cit>  showed uniform and high levels of gfp fluorescence . an additional gfp-expressing strain h. volcanii h <dig>  containing the same red-shifted gfp gene as in pjam <dig> but cloned into the plasmid pta <dig>  produced colonies with gfp signals that differed in both intensity and spatial distribution, resulting in an assortment of patterns of gfp signal within developed colonies . the h <dig> strain was therefore selected for biofilm compositional studies to ensure stable gfp expression throughout the cellular population.figure  <dig> 
visualizing the extracellular matrix of
haloferax volcanii
biofilms.  development of a gfp-expressing strain for use in biofilm visualization: colonies formed by the parental strain h. volcanii h <dig> under transmitted light , under blue excitation , and by the strain h. volcanii h <dig> under blue excitation . scale bar equals 250 μm.  seven-day h. volcanii h <dig> sl-biofilm stained with concanavalin a-texas red collected with blue excitation , green excitation , and shown as an overlay . scale bar equals 20 μm.  top-down projections of a z-stack for a h. volcanii h <dig> sl-biofilm stained with dapi.  gfp signal under blue excitation.  dapi-stained material with violet excitation.  overlay of  and . orthogonal views from clsm analysis are shown below each panel and the plane of the orthoslice is shown in . scale bars equal 20 μm.  seven-day h. volcanii h <dig> sl-biofilm stained with congo red with blue excitation , and green excitation for cr fluorescence , with an overlay of  and  shown in . scale bar equals 20 μm.  bright-field view of 7-day cr-stained sl-biofilm within a chamber slide. scale bar equals 1 mm. area outlined by black box is shown in .  ten-day sl-biofilm within petri dish grown at 25°c in medium containing cr with cr-stained string or web-like structures magnified in . scale bar equals 1 cm.  seven-day h <dig> sl-biofilms grown in hv-ypc medium stained with thioflavin t under blue excitation . clsm, confocal laser scanning microscopy; cr, congo red; dapi, 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole; gfp, green fluorescent protein; sl-biofilm, static liquid biofilm.



cellular clusters visible in gfp-expressing biofilms were colocalized with the signal from a texas red conjugate of the lectin concanavalin a  and with the dna binding dye 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole . cona is known to bind a-manopyranosyl and a-glucopyranosyl residues within glyconjugates of haloarchaeal biofilms  <cit> . dapi was selected as an extracellular dna stain for our clsm study because it is known to stain edna preferentially in haloarchaeal biofilms  <cit> . fröls and coworkers  <cit>  used three nucleic acid dyes to distinguish between extracellular and intracellular dna in biofilms formed by h. volcanii and additional haloarchaeal strains, and showed that:  only acridine orange stained individual live cells, appearing similar our use of the cell permeable nucleic acid dye syto  <dig> ,  the signal from dapi appeared nebulous and granular and was colocalized with microcolonies,  simultaneous staining with 7-hydroxy-9h-1-3-dichloro- <dig> -dimenthylacridin-2-one , a nucleic acid dye considered completely impermeable to cells, led to an essentially identical pattern of fluorescence signals, and  very few non-viable cells are present within h. volcanii biofilms , suggesting that the observed dapi signal was not from dead cells. our clsm analysis also showed colocalization of dapi-stained material with microcolonies and a lack of signal from individual cells. further three-dimensional reconstruction of dapi-stained gfp-expressing biofilms revealed that dna was concentrated in the basal layer of the biofilm and dispersed as plume-like structures at the top of larger towers .

larger structures observed in mature biofilms with transmitted light and through gfp fluorescence were also colocalized with the signal from congo red  and thioflavin t . these stains are routinely used as characteristic tests for the presence of a wide variety of amyloid proteins, including for diagnosis and study of disease-causing plaques formed by amyloidosis , and in many investigations of microbial adhesion and biofilm formation .

congo red fluorescence  was used as it has been proposed as the most sensitive and reliable method for amyloid detection when staining with cr  <cit>  and has been applied to biofilm compositional studies  <cit> . crf was sharply defined and granular in appearance and was colocalized with the large biofilm cellular clusters and towers shown in figure 2f,g,h. overlays where single gfp-producing cells are visible and images of crf at 600× magnification  indicated that cr did not stain individual cells. cr-stained biofilm aggregates were also orange-red under transmitted light and were visible macroscopically . further, green fluorescence signal was detected within tht-stained mature biofilms formed by a non-gfp strain with blue excitation .

haloferax volcanii undergoes morphological differentiation during biofilm growth
the implementation of gfp for biofilm visualization led to the unexpected observation of increased variability in length of cellular structures within biofilms compared to planktonic cells . h. volcanii ds <dig> cells are known to be pleomorphic, appearing spherical, disk-like or as short rods  <dig> to 3 ×  <dig> to 3 μm in size in liquid culture  <cit>  . however, during examination of gfp-expressing h. volcanii h <dig> biofilm cells, we observed large cellular structures composed of long rods in chains sometimes approaching 30 μm in length . these structures were attached to the surface and were found within developing h <dig> biofilms at all observed time points , in several independently transformed h <dig> strains, as well as in biofilms formed by h. volcanii strains that do not have the gfp expression plasmid .figure  <dig> 
cellular morphology within developing
haloferax volcanii
h <dig> static liquid biofilms.  planktonic h. volcanii h <dig> cells from exponential phase shaking hv-ypc culture.  cells within a developing h <dig> sl-biofilm grown in a chamber slide  after 12 h , 2 days  and 5 days .  table listing the number of cells binning into  <dig> -μm categories and summarized statistics for  <dig>  cells measured for planktonic and biofilm cell populations  and histogram showing distribution of length at  <dig> -μm binning intervals for planktonic  and biofilm  cells . cell length was measured with fiji particle analysis using images collected from three independent exponential phase shaking cultures and three 12 h biofilms grown in chamber slides. mean length of populations was statistically different with p <  <dig> . scale bars equal 20 μm. sd, standard deviation; sl-biofilm, static liquid biofilm.



further experimentation verified the relationship between the chained long rod morphotype and biofilm formation in the h <dig> strain. a culture of planktonic cells with an average length of  <dig>  μm underwent a morphological shift during the first 12 h of biofilm formation in replicate chamber slide wells . the difference in length between populations of  <dig>  planktonic and  <dig>  biofilm cells was statistically significant . cellular structures within biofilms were on average greater than twice as long, were more variable in size  and reached a maximum length ten times greater than that measured within the planktonic culture from which the biofilm was derived .

haloferax volcanii exhibits social motility following disruption of static liquid biofilms
an investigation of biofilm dynamics in static liquid began by disrupting mature 7-day biofilms through mechanical homogenization followed by time-lapse photography over a reformation period. to our surprise, this led to the discovery of rapid cellular re-aggregation and sustained coordinated social motility . structured cellular aggregates were visible 3 h following homogenization, after which cell density was incrementally concentrated within a central developing sl-biofilm, with the surrounding medium becoming visibly transparent after 48 h . samples were collected from the homogenized biofilm at time zero, and from the central biofilm and surrounding medium at 48 h. the homogenized biofilm was composed of single cells and cellular aggregates; after 48 h, the surrounding medium contained few planktonic cells and the sl-biofilm contained a high density of cells in large aggregates. images collected during reformation at intervals of 3 h , 10 min  and 1 min  captured the coordination of large filaments of cells into dynamic web-like branches. rippling or wave-like streaming was observed during extension and retraction of these structures, particularly evident at low frame rates .figure  <dig> 
time-lapse macroscopic photography of static liquid biofilm reformation. an established 7-day sl-biofilm grown in a plastic petri dish in rich medium  was mechanically homogenized and left to incubate at 42°c while photographs were taken at regular time intervals.  biofilm reformation over a 2-day period, with images shown at 3 h intervals. inlay: cellular vitality controls shown as still images from time-lapse series  of a sl-biofilm treated with heat  and with 4% formaldehyde .  sl-biofilm imaged at 10-min intervals over a 50-min period . scale bar equals 1 cm. sl-biofilm, static liquid biofilm.



social motility was also triggered by physical agitation or partial disruption of previously undisturbed developing sl-biofilms . ring-shaped sl-biofilms, which developed 3 days after an exponential phase culture was left to incubate in replicate petri dishes under static conditions, formed extensions and migrated towards the perimeter of the dish through a network of apparent cellular streams for over  <dig>  h after the culture vessel was gently moved . additional sl-biofilms from the same replicate set retained this sensitivity through day  <dig> of incubation. as sl-biofilms became denser and reached a stationary phase of growth after 10 days of incubation, identical applications of physical agitation or partial disruption no longer induced social motility. coordinated motility as shown in figure  <dig> and in movies  <dig> to  <dig>  has been observed in many independent experiments and is absent in identically prepared heat-treated sl-biofilms  and sl-biofilms chemically fixed with formaldehyde .

genetic transfer occurs at high frequency within haloferax volcanii biofilms
a screen for gene transfer within h. volcanii biofilms through the known mating mechanism was conducted by cultivating biofilms composed of two strains, each with a unique auxotrophic marker. gene transfer frequency of the auxotrophic markers was calculated as the number of colonies forming on selective medium , divided by the number of total viable cells recovered for each culture condition, as described previously  <cit> . a comparison of transfer frequency was conducted for mixed shaking cultures, colony biofilms and sl-biofilms in chamber slides.

transfer frequencies indicated that the mating mechanism was active within colony biofilms and sl-biofilms . for chamber slide sl-biofilms, an average transfer frequency of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> was measured and is within the range reported in mevarech and werczberger’s  <dig> study in which mating was first discovered through co-filtering cells on nitrocellulose filters  <cit> . the transfer frequency for a shaking culture control was low as expected, and mating was not quantifiable in uni-culture biofilms of either h <dig> or h <dig> cells .figure  <dig> 
recombination within
haloferax volcanii
biofilms. two double auxotrophic strains  were mixed at equal cell densities and grown together in hv-ypc + thymidine medium for 7 days under shaking conditions , or as colony biofilms  and chamber slide sl-biofilms . cultures and biofilms were then harvested, washed and plated on defined medium with uracil alone, to select for recombinants, which are either h <dig> cells that have regained tryptophan prototrophy through a transfer event with a h <dig> cell or h <dig> cells that have gained thymidine prototrophy from a h <dig> cell. average frequency of transfer is shown for three replicates per condition. the transfer frequency range reported in the study in which this hgt mechanism was discovered, traditionally conducted using nitrocellulose filters and known as mating, is shown as a grey box  <cit> . vertical bars equal one standard deviation. hgt, horizontal gene transfer.



planktonic  and sl-biofilm cells were visualized through microscopy in parallel prior to plating to determine whether the cellular morphology was consistent with known models for mating, i.e., that it requires cell-to-cell contact and involves the formation of cytosolic bridges and/or cellular fusion events  <cit> . cells from a shaken culture were small and disk-shaped while those in chamber slide biofilms had formed a densely packed basal layer of morphologically diverse cellular structures in close physical association . natural transformation has not been reported in h. volcanii. in fact, an increase in transfer frequency was reported after adding dnase during mating experiments on filters, indicating that gene transfer in h. volcanii biofilms does not occur through transformation  <cit> .

discussion
structural development of haloferax volcanii biofilms and biopolymers of the extracellular matrix
the present study and that of fröls and coworkers  <cit>  demonstrate a propensity of haloarchaeal species to form biofilms and indicate this may be a predominant natural mode of growth for this group of organisms. while haloarchaea are considered extremophiles, the ability of any microbial group to form biofilms is consistent with the emerging view that biofilm formation is an adaptation common to most if not all species . in this particular case, the benefits associated with a community lifestyle match the environmental conditions that challenge microbial life in hypersaline environments. for example, encapsulation within a hydrated nutrient-dense ecm and a biofilm structure with areas that surround developed microcolonies , which likely act as channels to facilitate waste and nutrient exchange, may help explain the persistence of haloarchaeal populations through prolonged periods of starvation  <cit> . overall, the delicate and motile nature of multicellular structures imaged in static liquid  may reflect low levels of natural circulation and water activity within hypersaline environments and a selective advantage associated with movement towards favorable conditions.

our staining experiments with h. volcanii h <dig> allowed for accurate discrimination between cellular structures emitting endogenous gfp signal and ecm and support previous evidence showing that polysaccharide and edna are major biofilm components   <cit> . species of the genus haloferax have long been known to produce exopolysaccharide  <cit>  and recent studies of h. mediterranei  have identified genes essential for exopolysaccharide synthesis and export  <cit> . homologs of genes within an h. mediterranei operon shown to be required for exopolysaccharide production  <cit>  are present in the h. volcanii genome. several putative eps operons have been identified: hvo_2056-hvo_ <dig> on the main chromosome, and hvo_a0216-a <dig> and hvo_a0594- <dig> on the mini-chromosome phv <dig>  while the function of extracellular dna within h. volcanii ecm is not yet clear, in bacterial biofilms, edna is known to be involved in attachment to surfaces, microcolony formation, overall structural integrity and even spatial self-organization . in several crenarchaeal species, edna is present within biofilms but is not a structural component  <cit> . similar attempts at dnase treatment of edna in haloarchaeal biofilms were unsuccessful and may have been complicated by high salt concentrations within the growth medium  <cit> . interestingly, ecm is also known to be a mechanism for nutrient storage  <cit> , and we have previously demonstrated that h. volcanii is capable of utilizing edna as a nutrient  <cit> , suggesting that edna may contribute towards the growth of cells within the biofilm.

bacterial appendages involved in attachment and biofilm formation are often composed of amyloid proteins  <cit> . previous studies have surveyed the presence of amyloid in natural biofilms using the dyes cr and tht and found that it is an abundant and widely distributed ecm component  <cit> . those same studies reported that amyloid production by archaea could not be determined due to low recovery of archaeal cells from sample sites  <cit> . on the basis of visible staining with cr, crf and tht fluorescence, we have identified putative amyloid protein that was colocalized with h. volcanii microcolonies . although it is most commonly used to stain amyloid fibrils, it is important to note that cr may stain other biopolymers such as polysaccharide  <cit> . however, because it was colocalized with microcolonies and larger biofilm structures , cr likely stained a major ecm component and not an internally stored polymer. the gene hvo_ <dig> is homologous to a known amyloidogenic factor in sulfolobus solfataricus  <cit>  and is a potential genetic determinant of amyloid protein within h. volcanii biofilms.

social motility of static liquid biofilms formed by haloferax volcanii as a multicellular or collective behavior
macroscopic time-lapse images collected following disruption of sl-biofilms  demonstrate a propensity for h. volcanii cells to re-aggregate within hours, rather than remaining suspended in liquid culture or evenly precipitating. during and after reformation, multicellular filaments or extensions formed, appearing to self-organize and explore the surface area along the bottom of the culture plate . this activity was not seen in identically prepared sl-biofilms that had been heat-treated or treated with formaldehyde , indicating it is an active biological process, and suggesting the existence of an archaeal system evocative of the elaborate swarming behavior characterized in the soil bacterium myxococcus xanthus  <cit>  and in pseudomonas aeruginosa  <cit> . although swarming is strictly defined as migration across a solid surface  <cit>  and is typically imaged in these species at a solid–air interface, early studies of rippling and wave-formation in m. xanthus swarms were also conducted in submerged liquid culture  <cit> .

the existence of a system for social motility in h. volcanii is supported by the known production of type iv pili-like structures responsible for surface adhesion  <cit> , the prior observation of a hypermotile phenotype  <cit>  and the presence of a complete set of chemotaxis genes  positioned adjacent and interspersed with archaeal flagella gene clusters   <cit> . a predicted operon including four genes on the main chromosome  is of particular interest as hvo_ <dig>  hvo_ <dig> and hvo_ <dig> proteins are homologs of bacterial frizzy aggregation /defective in fruiting  proteins frzf, frze/dife and frzg, respectively, factors that are essential determinants of social motility and ecm production in m. xanthus  <cit> . the ecological role of social motility in h. volcanii is undetermined at this point. it is plausible that multicellular groups might migrate towards a nutrient influx during known bloom events  <cit> , or that social motility is associated with an additional activity, such as cooperative feeding.

haloferax volcanii biofilms are hotspots for gene transfer
while h. volcanii is often noted for its unique gene transfer system  <cit> , the mechanism and genes underpinning this phenomenon remain largely uncharacterized  <cit> . here we report that mating occurs within biofilms at the same frequency as in earlier reports , consistent with the known cell-contact-dependent nature of the mechanism. mating was discovered and has been routinely observed in the laboratory by several groups by co-precipitating cells or co-filtering them on nitrocellulose filters . these experimental methods for bringing cells together in close proximity can be thought of as proxies for naturally formed biofilms.

we show that h. volcanii biofilms contain a biologically formed layer of pleomorphic adherent cells at high density and in close association . the observed spatial arrangement and diversity of cellular structure is consistent with the model of cytoplasmic bridge formation and membrane fusion during mating  <cit> , previous electron micrographs showing elongated cells with intercellular structures  <cit> , and/or the involvement of additional contact-dependent cargo-transfer mechanisms not described in h. volcanii, such as lipoprotein transfer  <cit> , vesicular trafficking  <cit>  and cell-to-cell secretion systems  <cit> . based on these observations, we suggest biofilms are the microenvironments where mating likely occurs in nature, and propose this mode of growth as an excellent way for studying and visualizing hgt mechanisms in live cells and in real time.

cellular morphogenesis as phenotypic reflection of differentiation into distinct genetic cell types
in bacillus subtilis, a distinct chained-rod morphology is associated with a population of cells known to produce ecm and to remain attached to the surface, while short unchained rods express flagellar components and are motile  <cit> . here, we identified a population of surface-attached cellular structures appearing during biofilm formation and present within developing biofilms but never in planktonic culture . long rod structures were confirmed as live cells, as the only source of fluorescent signal in figure 3b,c,d was endogenous gfp. this morphotype is unlikely to be the result of a spontaneous mutation in the h <dig> strain; it was observed in several independent strains and haloferax species are known to have a low spontaneous mutation rate  <cit> .

our observations are consistent with reports of “irregular” morphological characteristics  when h. volcanii ds <dig> is grown on agar medium, as noted in the original  <dig> characterization  <cit> . archaeosortase  overexpression strains also showed an elongated rod morphology. the arta protein has many downstream targets effecting cell shape and surface decoration, indicating that it could be a regulatory component of biofilm formation and/or related systems  <cit> . previous observations of irregular cell morphologies can now be understood as being coupled with biofilm formation.

additional cellular functions may also be associated with a chained-rod or adherent cell phenotype. larsen and mullakhanbhai  <cit>  found narrow constrictions with an apparently contiguous s-layer connecting cells together like beads on a string. in light of the later discovery of the mating hgt mechanism and electron micrographs of mating cells, the constrictions and associations between gfp-expressing cells observed in biofilms in this study  may be viewed as cytoplasmic bridges, which have been proposed as a prerequisite step towards cellular fusion and chromosomal mixing and/or recombination . further genetic analyses will shed light on the possible specialized function  of this cellular phenotype.

CONCLUSIONS
the archaeon h. volcanii forms biofilms in several experimental systems that can be visualized in the laboratory using standard protocols developed for bacterial species. h. volcanii cells develop into biofilm structures that exhibit complexity in both cellular morphology and ecm composition. we have reported several key features of h. volcanii biofilms: structural development through microcolony formation and maturation phases, visualization of ecm, including the identification of putative amyloid fibrils, an archaeal form of social motility, as well as a chained-long rod morphotype and gene transfer. with the implementation of fluorescent proteins for biofilm visualization and the available genetic system, it is clear that the study of biofilm formation in h. volcanii is not only a means for understanding haloarchaeal ecology and physiology, but also acts as an excellent model for the molecular biology of archaeal biofilms and multicellular behaviors. future studies may focus on the genetic identification of many possible differentiated cell types and the visualization of their positions in time and space using fluorescent protein reporters. the likely many genetic determinants of ecm components, social motility and the enigmatic mating mechanism for gene transfer in h. volcanii all remain to be discovered.

