BACKGROUND
microbial endophytes live non-pathogenically inside their host plants and can provide a number of beneficial functions for their hosts, including aiding with nutrient acquisition, producing stimulatory plant hormones and antagonizing pathogens  <cit> . endophytes benefit from living inside plants by gaining access to nutrients and protection from outside competition and predation  <cit> . as described below, there are conflicting reports concerning the immediate sources of endophytes, and the extent to which they are taken up from the surrounding environment  or inherited   <cit> . a critical stage for soil microbes to gain access to plants would be during germination and early development, to become founders of the endophytic microbiome of adult plants.

soil is considered to be the major environmental source of plant associated bacteria  <cit> , and it is thus not surprising that roots are reported to be the most heavily colonized plant organ  <cit> . textbook examples of soil derived microbes inhabiting plants include vesicular arbuscular mycorrhizae  <cit>  and nodule-forming, nitrogen-fixing rhizobia  <cit> . because they are not inherited through seed, rhizobia must re-infect legume roots every generation  <cit> . as such, when the legume soybean was introduced into the americas, far away from its native asian soil  <cit> , its yields were low due to a lack of compatible soil rhizobia in the new world. to fix this problem, crude soil field transplants, and later inoculation with strains of pure soil inoculants of rhizobia, were used  <cit> . it remains to be established whether non-legume crops such as maize can benefit from soil microbes  that are located at their ancient sites of domestication.

contrary to an environmental origin, there is evidence that in some plant species, bacterial endophytes can be inherited from one generation to the next through seed  <cit> . this behaviour would obviously be most advantageous for microbes that are the first to colonize a seedling, ensuring effective colonization of the new niche.

understanding whether endophytes in young plants are primarily inherited or selected from a local soil has relevance to modern agriculture. today, crop genotypes are shifted around the world and grown on new soils to facilitate breeding or ex situ conservation in seed banks where the seeds are re-grown periodically on foreign soil to maintain viability. soil is considered to be the most microbially diverse habitat on earth  <cit> ; in fact, geographically distant soils within the americas share only 4% similarity at the operational taxonomic unit  level  <cit> . if crops use soils as a passive “marketplace” for endophytes  <cit> , then their associated bacterial communities are being significantly altered from soil to soil with unknown impacts.

zea mays spp. mays  is one of the world’s three most important food crops. it is an example of a cultigen in which wild, exotic and modern genotypes are shifted around the world to facilitate breeding programs and ex situ conservation  <cit> . maize is believed to have been domesticated in southern mexico about  <dig>  years ago in the state of oaxaca from a wild grass ancestor whose closest living relative today is the wild teosinte, zea mays spp. parviglumis   <cit> . the only significant natural population of parviglumis that remains today is in the balsas river valley of mexico  <cit> . following domestication, pre-columbian farmers selected maize landraces to suit local environments and needs  <cit> . christopher columbus noted arriving in the americas to see maize landraces being grown in massive fields 30 km long  <cit> . one of the most ancient surviving landraces, a giant plant called mixteco , is still grown by mexican farmers on acidic, nutrient poor soils and may represent a “missing link” between wild teosinte and modern maize  <cit> . in contrast to geographically adapted landraces, modern maize hybrids are the result of commercial breeding programs where the goal is to have stable yields across a diversity of soil types and environments  <cit> . most of this breeding is now performed by companies, under high input conditions , rather than by local farmers, with as much as 94% of breeding in the united states conducted by the private sector  <cit> . pioneer  <dig>  is an example of a modern maize hybrid that is grown on diverse temperate soils around the world including canada, the united states and europe. pioneer  <dig>  grown on an agricultural soil in wisconsin , has been shown to contain at least  <dig> different phylotypes of bacteria within its roots  <cit> .

as the center of origin, mexico boasts the greatest genetic diversity of the above ancestral, exotic and modern maize  <cit> . these seeds are housed in a vault at the international maize and wheat improvement center  in mexico. from here, seeds are shipped to many other nations to facilitate breeding, but the impact of this seed movement on maize endophyte community composition has not been well characterized. some evidence suggests that maize can take up endophytes from the soils it is adapted to grow on, and hence would be affected by migration: for example, an endophytic strain of nitrogen-fixing burkholderia could only be isolated from a mexican maize landrace when it was inoculated with its native agricultural soil  <cit> . in contrast, a previous study conducted by us showed that the relative bacterial endophyte composition of seeds from diverse zea genotypes, imported into canada from other nations, including mexico, remained largely conserved when the plants were subsequently re-grown and seed harvested on canadian soil  <cit> . this result suggested that z. mays plants used vertical transmission of microbes to buffer their endophytic communities against geographic migration.

several hypotheses might be expected to predict the effects of geographic migration on the endophyte populations of zea mays. like a sponge, z. mays plants might passively acquire the majority of their bacterial endophytes from soil, resulting in dramatic shifts to endophyte populations when plants are grown on geographically distinct soils. it is also possible that z. mays plants are able to discriminate between soil microbes, allowing only selective entry. it is tempting to speculate that pre-domesticated and other wild relatives of maize are genetically programmed to selectively uptake specific microbes that are only present in the soils on which these plants evolved  <cit> . in parallel, perhaps recent crop breeding for improved yield stability across diverse geographic locations has caused modern z. mays to restrict entry or survival of microbes from diverse soils. another possibility is that z. mays inherits most of its microbiome through seeds rather than from the soil, buffering the plant’s endophytic communities against the effects of geographic migration.

the objective of this study was to characterize the effects of migration on the founder bacterial endophyte communities of z. mays under controlled conditions. we acquired seed of the three genetically diverse z. mays genotypes described above and grew them side-by-side on three soils: a mexican, non-agricultural soil in which were found growing wild, pre-domesticated parviglumis; an agricultural soil from a field growing modern hybrid corn in canada; and sand that had been heat-sterilized to kill potential endophyte colonists . bacterial endophyte communities were sampled from roots and shoots by dna extraction with terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism  fingerprinting and by culturing on nutrient agar. the consequences of soil swaps on the endophyte community profiles of these z. mays genotypes were compared using multivariate statistics. the microbial profiles of sibling seeds, in combination with the plants grown on sterile sand, were used to understand the contributions to the microbial community from inheritance , while the microbial profiles of the associated soils from mexico and canada were used to clarify the microbial contributions of these soils.figure  <dig> 
seeds, plants, and substrates used in this study.  the three juvenile plant genotypes at the five leaf stage growing in canadian soil are shown : ancestral parviglumis teosinte , traditional mexican landrace mixteco , and the modern temperate hybrid pioneer  <dig> .  examples of seed are shown : parviglumis, mixteco and pioneer  <dig>   pot substrates are shown : sterilized sand, canadian agricultural soil, and mexican soil from a parviglumis field. the scale bars on the left equal 10 mm. for a physical and chemical comparison of canadian and mexican soil, see additional file 1: table s <dig> 



RESULTS
physical-chemical soil analysis
canadian soil  was excavated from around the roots of  <dig> zea mays ssp mays  plants in a long-term maize trial field, while mexican soil  was sampled from around the roots of wild parviglumis plants  in an uncultivated field in mexico . soil analysis showed that the canadian sample was a silt loam soil while the mexican sample was a clay loam soil, both with a similar ph ; the control substrate was sand with a ph of  <dig> . the wild mexican soil had nearly two-fold more organic matter content than the agricultural canadian soil  and likewise contained higher levels of arsenic, aluminum, cadmium, calcium, iron, lead, molybdenum, vanadium and zinc. the only mineral that was more abundant in the canadian soil than mexican soil was extractable phosphorus .

bacterial 16s trflp profiles of juvenile plants are very different from those of the soil in which they were grown but are somewhat similar to those of seeds
the three diverse zea mays genotypes  were grown in a growth chamber side-by-side in pots containing either non-sterile mexican or canadian soil or heat sterilized sand . at 20 days after germination, roots and shoots were harvested and weighed . bacterial dna fingerprinting of soil and surface-sterilized roots, shoots and seeds was conducted by trflp . trflp data was further matched to sequenced 16s rdna amplicons from cultured bacteria to assist in assigning taxonomic identities . a total of  <dig> of these sequences  were submitted to genbank . principal component analysis  of covariance was performed on trflp profiles to attempt to explain the causes of any shifts in the bacterial communities .figure  <dig> 
16s rdna trflp profiles of the bacterial endophytic communities inhabiting young
zea
plants based on a culture-independent approach. shown are fluorescently labelled  799f fragments of bacterial dna from:  shoot tissues and  root tissues growing in different soils. each peak is the fluorescence intensity average of six trflp amplifications from three pools of five plants, a semi-quantitative indicator of microbial titre. mixteco plants grown in sand are the average of four trflp amplifications from two pools of  <dig> plants. 16s rdna amplicons were generated using primers 799f/1492rh and then were restricted using ddei. small fragments and those corresponding to 16s chloroplast rdna or 18s rdna were removed from the display. max <dig> labelled fragments are not shown.



there were obvious differences in the raw trflp fragment profiles observed in roots  and shoots  when compared to trflp signals from soils and seeds. soil profiles were dominated by small sized fragments of between  <dig> to 100 bp in size. as it has been previously shown that soil that is directly attached to plant roots  can be enriched in plant-associated bacterial populations distinct from more distant bulk soil, it is regretful that we did not include this sample type in our study. seeds had a few large peaks sized from  <dig> to 500 bp; root profiles were defined by peaks of between  <dig> to 300 bp in size ; while some of the more striking peaks in shoots were between  <dig> to 200 bp in size .

multivariate principal component analysis  of the 16s rdna trflp peaks showed that detectable bacteria resident in shoots, roots, and to a lesser extent, seeds, clustered together, quite far removed from bacteria residing in the canadian and mexican soil samples . although some trflp peaks were shared between plant and soil microbial profiles , soil and plant vectors were angled very far away  from each other  suggesting that bacterial communities in soil were very different from communities in roots or shoots or seeds. contrary to the selective endophyte uptake theory, trflp profiles of parviglumis plants grown in their native mexican soil did not appear to be very similar to the trflp profile of the mexican soil itself. similarly, trflp profiles from the temperate hybrid pioneer  <dig> did not more closely resemble profiles from the canadian soil compared to the mexican soil . these data showed that the bacterial communities of the soils versus plant tissues were dramatically distinct.figure  <dig> 
clustering relationships between endophytic microbial communities based on principal component analysis  of bacterial dna fingerprints . shown are endophytic community groupings including:  soil, seed, shoot and root data;  only shoot and root data. parviglumis root samples are underlined in brown, mixteco roots in green, and pioneer roots in blue. results are displayed as biplots of the first and second principal components, with vectors representing the different samples; vector length represents the amount of variation in that sample, and angles between vectors represent the degree of variance between samples. abbreviations: pi, parviglumis; mi, mixteco; pa, pioneer 3751; can, canadian soil; mex, mexican soil; sand, sterilized sand.



pca of bacterial 16s trflp profiles distinguishes root versus shoot tissues
the pca analysis was repeated without soil or seed data, which increased the variation explained by pca from 52% to 62% . pca of only root and shoot trflp data showed separate clustering of root microbial communities away from shoot communities . consistent with this result, β diversity analysis of trflp data using sørensen’s similarity index  showed that 16s trflp peaks were significantly more similar between the same tissue across different host genotypes  than between the different tissues belonging to the same host genotype  .

the composition of bacterial 16s trflp profiles observed in plant tissues is more influenced by plant genotype than by pot substrate
within tissue-specific groupings, root 16s trflp profiles were more clustered into host genotype subgroups, and not the pot substrate subgroups as originally expected , contrary to the hypothesis that the majority of root endophytes are derived from soil. consistent with this result, trflp peaks from roots grown on sterilized sand  clustered with those from plants that were grown on soils but only when those plants belonged to the same genotype . however, soil could be seen to have an effect in the pca, as parviglumis and mixteco roots grown on canadian and mexican soil were positioned closer to each other, than they were to the roots of the same genotype grown in autoclaved sand. pioneer roots grown in all three substrates appeared to be spaced equally far apart from each other. no clustering pattern was observed in the pca of shoot tissues, which appeared to be more randomly organized .

to quantify the above observations, when the trflp peaks  were compared between plants grown on mexican soil versus canadian soil, the sørensen’s qs value was  <dig>  for parviglumis,  <dig>  for mixteco, and  <dig>  for pioneer, even when combining root and shoot data . even assuming that multiple microbial species can share the same trflp peak size, this high degree of sharing of trflp peaks between plants grown on different soils was found to be statistically non-random and highly robust across z. mays genotypes .figure  <dig> 
relatedness and categorization of trflp fragments present in young
zea
plants grown on different substrates. shown is data from plants grown on mexican soil versus canadian soil for:  parviglumis,  mixteco and  pioneer  <dig>  based on sørensen’s similarity index of bacterial dna fingerprints .  co-occurrence of 6fam and max <dig> labelled trflp peaks in different samples: seed: trflp peaks in soil-grown plants that are shared with peaks present in seed; plant on sand: trflp peaks in soil-grown plants that are shared with peaks present in sand grown plants but not found in seeds; soil or plant on soil: peaks present in soil grown plants, that are shared with the opposite soil and plants grown on the opposite soil, but not in seeds or in plants grown on sand; same soil match only: peaks present in soil grown plants, that are shared with the same soil the plant was grown on, but not in seeds, nor in plants grown on sand nor in plants grown on the opposite soil nor the opposite soil itself; no match: peaks present in soil grown plants but not found in seeds, sand grown plants, opposite soil grown plants, or either soil. pie charts d-f show fragment co-occurrence percentages for plants grown on canadian soil and g-i on mexican soil.



when examining root microbial communities separately, parviglumis roots grown in different soils had a qs value of  <dig> , whereas parviglumis roots versus mixteco roots grown on the same soil  had a qs value of  <dig> , while parviglumis roots versus pioneer roots grown on mexican soil had a qs value of only  <dig>  . at the genus level, the cultured endophyte communities were also fairly similar when whole plants of the same genotype were grown on canadian versus mexican soil  . these numbers support the patterns observed in the pca, which suggest that host genotype is more important in shaping endophyte communities in young plants than is soil type.

there appears to be significant vertical transmission of bacteria in both traditional and modern z. mays genotypes
given the strong effect observed of the host genotype on candidate endophyte populations, the extent of possible endophyte vertical transmission was investigated by analyzing how many trflp peaks from soil-grown plants were also present in sand-grown plants and/or in sibling seeds of the original planting materials. an average of 28% of trflp peaks present in young plants were shared with their surface sterilized parental seeds  . sørensen’s similarity index using combined trflp data  from both roots and shoots suggested that the plant endophyte communities were on average ~46% similar between sand and soil grown plants . sørensen’s similarity index also suggested that the cultured bacterial community was on average 47% similar between sand and soil grown plants . in total, 51-67% of trflp peaks present in soil grown plants were present in parental seeds and/or sand-grown plants , suggesting that the largest fraction of bacterial endophytes found in young zea plants were vertically transmitted and not soil derived. with respect to each genotype, the results were similar: a total of 62% and 66% of trflp peaks present in soil-grown parviglumis plants had evidence of vertical transmission, compared to 51% and 52% in mixteco, and 64% and 67% in pioneer . the sharing of trflp peaks between soil grown plants, and sand grown plants and/or sibling seeds, was found to be statistically non-random, even assuming that different microbial species could result in a common trflp peak size .

zea mays plants appear to be able to uptake bacteria with the same 16s rdna trflp peak sizes from geographically distant soils
within each genotype, there was an additional class of trflp peaks that were shared between plants grown on both mexican and canadian soils, which we hypothesized represented the ability of plants to select and uptake taxonomically similar microbes from diverse soils. to characterize this class, trflp peaks from soil-grown plants were first filtered out if they were also present in seed or in sand-grown plants . the remaining trflp signals were kept if they co-occurred in plants grown on the opposite soil . based on this classification scheme, for plants grown on canadian soil, 22% of parviglumis peaks, 22% of mixteco peaks, and 8% of pioneer peaks, were classified as originating from soil and also being shared across geographic locations . for plants grown on mexican soil, the shared numbers of trflp peaks were: 25% for parviglumis, 26% for mixteco, and 18% for the pioneer hybrid .

ancestral, pre-domesticated parviglumis does not possess more unique bacterial trflp peaks when grown on its native mexican soil than on canadian soil
our original hypothesis was that parviglumis teosinte, the wild ancestor of maize, might prefer to uptake microbes from its native mexican soil than distant unfamiliar soils, due to co-evolutionary selection. opposite to this expectation, multivariate analysis showed that parviglumis, when grown on its native soil, possessed microbial trflp profiles that clustered with the profiles of sibling plants grown on canadian soil . to examine this question more robustly, we individually scored the number of trflp peaks in plants that were uniquely associated with growth on its native soil ; surprisingly, only 2% of trflp peaks fell into this class, compared to 3% of unique trflp peaks when canadian soil was substituted . however, amongst the trflp peaks observed in soil grown parviglumis plants, there were additional peaks that could not be explained as either inherited or soil derived . as these may have represented rare soil microbes that were only enriched once they colonized the plant, it was possible they were specific to the soil that the plants were grown on. even including this potential “error” in the calculation, the results suggested that no more than 9% of candidate endophyte trflp peaks observed in parviglumis were taken up uniquely from its native soil when grown on that soil, compared to 16% when the plants were grown on canadian soil . by comparison, the percentage of soil-derived microbes that might have been unique to a soil ranged from 23-26% for mixteco  to 18-24% for pioneer  <dig> . combined, these data do not support the hypothesis that wild, pre-domesticated parviglumis preferentially takes up microbes from its native mexican soil.

a modern maize hybrid does not appear to block entry to soil-derived endophytes
we had hypothesized that modern maize hybrids may have been inadvertently bred to take up fewer microbes from the soil, in order to maintain yield stability across environments. opposite to this expectation, the trflp profiles of the modern pioneer hybrid were not more clustered across diverse soil environments than the ancestral plant genotypes . to understand this observation, we systematically counted the number of trflp peaks in pioneer  <dig> plants that appeared to originate from soil . pioneer  <dig> plants contained only a slightly smaller fraction of putative soil-derived trflp fragments on canadian soil  and mexican soil  compared to either the traditional mixteco landrace or pre-domesticated parviglumis plants  . given the number of peaks of ambiguous origin , we have not found evidence to conclude that a modern maize hybrid substantially rejects more microbes from soil as sources of endophytes than ancestral plant genotypes.

culturing predicts the taxonomies of vertically transmitted or soil derived bacteria
an attempt was made to culture microbes from z. mays samples, in combination with 16s rdna sequencing, in part to pinpoint the genus-level taxonomies of soil-derived and vertically transmitted microbes. we cultured  <dig> bacteria from  <dig> different genera . the data was not as consistent as trflp profiling, but some observations could be made. a subset of microbial genera  appeared to be somewhat conserved across the various host genotype and pot treatment combinations, including plants grown on sterilized sand, suggesting that these microbial genera were inherited rather than soil derived . some microbial genera were more associated with a specific genotype: four of the  <dig> genera  cultured on sand-grown parviglumis  were also only cultured from parviglumis seed, suggesting these to be vertically transmitted . other genera appeared to be soil derived: for example, from pioneer roots and shoots, agrobacterium species were cultured when the plants had been grown on soil but not sand .figure  <dig> 
summary of bacteria cultured from surface sterilized roots and shoots of
zea
plants grown in sand, canadian soil or mexican soil.
top panel: examples of r2a plate cultures of extracts from roots and shoots of parviglumis when grown on different substrates. botton panel: taxonomic identification of cultured microbes based on sequencing of 16s rdna from each colony. a black box indicates successful culturing of that genus. to enable comparisons to trflp results, the 16s rdna sequences were virtually digested and the peak sizes are shown in the right column . the white scale bar on the left equals 10 mm. more details on bacterial isolates are found in additional file 3: table s <dig> 



the in vitro activities of z. mays endophytic communities can be supplied by microbes predicted to be inherited
plants might not select for endophytic taxa per se, but rather the functions of these microbes. thus, we asked whether the functional traits exhibited by the cultured z. mays endophytic communities, in vitro, were affected by the pot treatments. microbes were characterized for  <dig> functional traits that could potentially influence host growth and/or health, including: mineral nutrition factors ; synthesis of indole-containing compounds which includes the root growth stimulating hormone, auxin  <cit> ; synthesis of acc deaminase   <cit> ; and production of acetoin/butanediol   <cit> . the ability of z. mays endophytes to promote growth of potato explants that were previously cured of all cultivatable microbes  <cit>  was tested by measuring potato biomass after inoculation with different isolates . this potato based bioassay was employed since a comparable gnotobiotic tissue culture system had not yet been developed for maize. tests were also conducted to detect antagonism against potential pathogenic viruses  and the maize pathogenic fungi, fusarium graminearum and aspergillus flavus. finally, pectinase and cellulase activities were tested, since endophytes live in a niche consisting of pectin and cellulose.figure  <dig> 
analysis of
in vitro
functional traits of bacterial endophytes cultured from
z. mays
plants. shown are  select examples of trait assays and  the complete summary of observed traits organized by host genotype and substrate treatment. examples of assays are:  the ability of microbes to solubilise tricalcium phosphate ;  acetoin and butanediol production ;  growth promotion of tissue cultured potato one month after inoculation with  klebsiella pneumoniae, sterile buffer or methylobacterium oryzae. for panel , isolates were scored as either having activity  or not  and hence the numbers indicate the number of isolates from that cultured community that express the trait noted. light yellow shading indicates that <25% of isolates exhibited the trait, deep yellow indicates 25-50%, orange indicates 50-75%, and red indicates 75-100%. the scale bars on the top equal 10 mm.



the overall results showed that endophytes cultured from soil-grown plants versus sand-grown plant displayed a similar diversity of in vitro activities, regardless of whether the host genotype was ancient or the result of modern breeding . this observation suggests that microbial-derived traits of potential benefit to young zea plants are not dependent on soils as microbial donors but rather can be supplied by vertical transmission. with respect to evidence for co-evolution of z. mays plants with their native soils, there was no obvious difference in the diversity or frequency  of the in vitro traits exhibited by the candidate endophyte communities of young parviglumis plants that were grown on their native mexican soil compared to sibling parviglumis plants grown on temperate canadian soil or sterilized sand .

to determine whether host genotype or soil was able to select for different endophytic traits, pca analysis was also undertaken, similar to the 16s trflp analysis. to enable the pca, the bacterial isolates were assigned binary scores for each trait  . the influence of host tissue type was ignored and shoot/root data were pooled, since very few bacteria were cultured from shoots. the pca of endophytic activities showed that host genotype had more influence on the types of traits exhibited by members of an endophyte community than soil type . for example,  <dig> out of  <dig> potato shoot growth promoting endophytes were isolated from mixteco plants, compared to only one endophyte each from parviglumis and pioneer  <dig>  . isolates from mixteco grown on sand  or mexican soil  showed plant growth promotion  . as mixteco is a giant plant adapted to grow on low nutrient soils  <cit> , growth promoting bacterial endophytes may play a role in its life strategy.

discussion
in an earlier study which examined the endophytes of diverse genotypes of the genus zea, including wild central american/mexican teosintes, traditional north american landraces and modern hybrids, we demonstrated that the endophytic communities of seeds remained surprisingly stable after re-growth of plants on a common canadian field  <cit> . this result suggested that z. mays can substantially buffer its seed endophytic communities against migration to new soils. in this study, we directly tested this hypothesis by performing soil swap experiments in a controlled greenhouse. we used non-sterile seeds to mimic the activities of plants in the real world. our most important result, based on multivariate analysis of bacterial 16s rdna peaks, is that plant genotype rather than pot substrate  plays the most important role in shaping endophyte populations. to understand this result, detailed analysis of trflp peak sharing was conducted, which suggested that the proximate sources of candidate founder endophytic bacteria in wild/pre-domesticated plants , a traditional landrace  and a modern hybrid  were a combination of passive soil uptake, selective soil uptake and vertical transmission. the latter two mechanisms may contribute to the importance of host genotype in shaping endophytic communities, and as a consequence may partially buffer the bacterial endophytic communities of this crop from geographic migration. we did not find evidence to support the hypothesis that wild parviglumis teosinte preferably takes up microbes from the native soil on which it co-evolved. parviglumis seeds possess a tough extra layer  which we speculate may serve to house and inoculate emerging seedlings with seed-transmitted endophytes  <cit>  that compete against soil-derived microbes. we also did not find evidence to support the hypothesis that the endophytic community of the modern pioneer hybrid is more buffered than its ancient counterparts against the effects of geographic movement in order to promote yield stability across environments.

passive versus selective uptake of endophytes from soils
the mexican versus canadian soil swaps had only a modest effect on endophytic communities , and our trflp peak sharing analysis suggested that no more than 9-26% of bacterial trflp peaks detected in roots and shoots originated from passive uptake of microbes from these soils . by contrast, a surprising conclusion of this study is that young z. mays plants were apparently colonized by similar populations of microbes  from the two geographically distant soils in a host-genotype dependent manner; 8-26% of the detected 16s trflp signals in these plants appeared to derive from both canadian and mexican soils . this promiscuity, at the level of trflp, may partially explain why the mexican versus canadian soil swaps had only a modest effect on the endophytic communities of these plants .

soils have been shown to determine bacterial community composition in the rhizosphere  <cit> , and traditional thought has assumed that soil would similarly be the major source of endophytes  <cit> . indeed, plants have been described as microbial “traps”, able to entice endophytes out from the soils they are growing in  <cit> . in support of this view, maize landraces grown in soils infected with rhizobium etli from intercropped beans were shown to take up these microbes  <cit> . in fact, maize root diazotrophs have been shown to be more related to nearby soil communities than to those in shoots of the same plants  <cit> . cracks at lateral root branch junctions are the suggested route for systemic endophyte colonization from soil  <cit>  including for the endophytes herbaspirillum seropedicae  <cit> , klebsiella pneumoniae  <dig>  <cit>  and burkholderia phytofirmans  <cit> . environmental entry of microbes has been observed in other plants, including tomato  <cit> .

our results, however, are more consistent with a recent comprehensive study performed using arabidopsis  <cit> , which supports the view that the largest fraction of bacterial endophytes is not caused by passive invasion of microbes from soil. in this study,  <dig> sequencing of 16s rdna fragments was used to sample endophytes inhabiting  <dig> arabidopsis genotypes grown from sterilized seed on two types of soil. the results showed that ~60% of the most diagnostic otus in the root microbiome were taken up equally from both of the two distinct soils and only the remaining 40% were soil specific; the paper also noted that host genotype played an important role in determining root endophyte communities  <cit> . this paper supports the idea that there are widespread or promiscuous bacterial endophytes living in soils, but also that there are specialized soil-inhabiting endophytes which different plants are able to selectively take up. it is worth noting that, unlike our current study, the arabidopsis plants were grown from  seeds which were thoroughly sterilized by treatment with 70% ethanol and bleach before planting  <cit> , which may have biased the study against seed-transmitted microbes.

the observation that geographically different soils can contribute taxonomically similar sources of bacterial endophytes is somewhat surprising given that only 4% of bacteria have been found to be common to geographically distant soils across the americas  <cit> . it seems reasonable to speculate that while most bacteria from bulk soil do not have the potential to exist endophytically inside zea plants, soil-derived endophytes originate from a more select subset of microbes which can be found enriched in rhizospheres  <cit> . such common endophytes likely include proteobacteria which account for up to 37% of all maize root endophytes in previous studies  <cit> , and which are commonly observed in diverse soils. it would be interesting to repeat our experiment with soil that has never been associated with zea plants , or soils with diverse acidities, to determine if promiscuous endophytes can still be found.

vertical transmission of endophytes
as already noted above, only part of the explanation for why endophytic trflp peaks in z. mays plants clustered primarily by plant genotype, and not pot substrate , lay in promiscuous uptake of microbes from soils in a genotype-dependent manner. the major reason for the clustering result appears to be the high fraction of vertically transmitted microbes associated with a specific host genotype: trflp peak size sharing analysis suggested that 51-67% of bacterial trflp signals observed in young zea plants could be explained by inheritance through seed . consistent with this result,  <dig> microbial-derived traits of potential benefit to young z. mays plants were observed from microbes isolated from plants grown on sterilized sand, and hence plants could potentially obtain these traits without depending on soils as donors .

for microbes to be transmitted vertically, they must inhabit seeds, an association which we have recently shown to be strongly influenced by genotype in maize  <cit> . similarly, in rice grown on radiation sterilized soil, seed-associated endophytes have been shown to become the dominant endophytic microbes in mature plants, with up to 45% becoming established in the next generation of seed  <cit> . interestingly, by using dgge analysis, this same study showed that soil ph had a major effect on root and shoot endophyte populations. though soil ph strongly impacts the abundance and diversity of soil bacteria  <cit> , it may have also altered the physiology of potential host plants , leading to the selection of different members of the seed derived microbiota. it is noteworthy that both soil types in the rice study were sterile and thus not a major source of observed microbes  <cit> .

benefits of vertically transmitted endophytic microbes have been observed in seeds of giant cardon cactus, where seed bacteria colonize both the developing seedling and spermosphere where they solubilise rock nutrients crucial for plant growth  <cit> . in tobacco seeds, microbes were shown to alleviate heavy metal stress in maturing plants  <cit> . as already noted, to mimic nature, zea seeds in this study were not surface sterilized before being planted, allowing for bacteria living on and underneath the surface of the seed to persist and potentially colonize the germinating seedling prior to soil inhabiting microbes. early bacterial colonists of eukaryotic hosts have been shown to exert a “barrier effect” against invading microbes  <cit>  which may help explain why soil was not as important a source of endophytes as originally assumed. indeed, ancient versus modern wheat varieties grown on the same soils were shown to have distinct bacterial communities  <cit> . while founding communities of microbes may help displace late colonizers of the endosphere, the plant itself must also presumably regulate which microbes infect its tissues, or otherwise be overwhelmed by parasites and pathogens.

the importance of enterobacter and pantoea spp. to the endophytic microbiome of z. mays
of  <dig> different, reproducible trflp fragments  observed at the whole plant level,  <dig> were conserved across all  <dig> host genotype and pot treatment combinations, including growth on sterilized sand  suggesting that these peaks represent seed transmitted bacteria. to predict the identities of these microbes, they were compared to the cultured microbe collection where the 16s rdna gene was sequenced . the only cultured isolates which matched conserved 16s trflp fragments belonged to the genera enterobacter and pantoea, with predicted fragment sizes of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and 259 bp; these strains were also cultured from all root genotypes sampled. consistent with these results, in a previous study of zea seeds, 98% of the cloned sequences with these fragment lengths also belonged to pantoea and enterobacter  <cit> . given these independent pieces of data, it is reasonable to hypothesize that these microbial genera are tightly associated with z. mays across diverse environments.

study limitations and future experiments
a number of caveats about the methodology used in this study must be noted. first, though we used sequencing of 16s rdna amplicons to predict the taxonomic identities of microbes cultured in this study, these results did not coincide with all of the trflp signals observed, nor can one assume that a trflp signal represents a single microbial species, because different bacteria can produce the same 16s rdna restriction polymorphism. however, as each of our tissue samples typically gave only 35– <dig> trflp peaks from an empirically determined pool size of  <dig> peaks, the sharing of so many 16s restriction polymorphisms from different tissue samples could not have occurred by random chance, which we demonstrated statistically . indeed, sharing by different microbial species of a single trflp peak size does not increase the probability that trflp peaks will co-occur in different tissue samples by random chance, since such contributions also linearly increase the size of the detectable microbiome. trflp analysis of microbial communities, in combination with multivariate statistical methods, has been shown to be a robust tool for visualizing microbial differences between samples  <cit>  and has been used successfully in a number of microbial ecology studies  <cit> . we used trflp here as an inexpensive method to analyze the many treatments and replicates required for this study. nevertheless, it is reasonable to expect that shared trflp peaks in plants grown on geographically distant soils might represent, minimally, different strains of the same microbial species or related species. to be cautious, we have tried to refer to our results as “trflp peaks” or “16s signals”, and placed predicted species identifiers in brackets. it is important for the reader to understand the conclusions from our study only in the context of the taxonomic methodology employed. ideally, our study should be replicated using deep sequencing methods along with analysis of dna polymorphisms at multiple genes.

there were other technical limitations to this study. first, dna extraction can be variably effective with respect to different bacterial groups, and primer bias in pcr can further skew the view of the community, with studies suggesting that at best, any particular primer pair might only amplify up to 50% of the bacterial diversity in a given sample  <cit> . furthermore, it is estimated that any particular microbial strain must be present at ≥1% of the population for molecular fingerprinting to detect it  <cit> , which is why we were careful to note that the study focus was only on detectable endophytes. to encourage amplification of all bacterial groups, here nested pcr was performed twice, totaling 70 cycles, each on three biological replicates , and the results were pooled to add weight to 16s signals that were reproducibly higher than background noise; fragments that were observed only once were discarded. to increase fingerprint robustness by including rare groups that were poorly amplified by pcr, we analyzed fragment fluorescence intensity information with a low signal threshold and converted results into binary data to weigh each group equally as recommended elsewhere  <cit> .

another caveat of this study, as with many endophyte studies, is that we cannot exclude the possibility that we also sampled phyllosphere or rhizosphere microbes. prior to dna isolation or culturing, plant tissues were washed and surface sterilized, and the effectiveness of the protocol was verified by culturing the last surface wash on r2a agar plates; no microbes were cultured from plant surfaces. we did not test whether this protocol was effective at destroying bacterial dna which might have remained on the plant surface; however our protocol  exceeded the minimum concentrations and times found to be sufficient for decontaminating bone surfaces of dna  <cit>  and for cleaning dna extraction tools  <cit> . furthermore, our major result which showed that the mexican-canadian soil swap had only a minor effect on the endophytic communities , suggests that our samples had low levels of environmental contamination.

another technical limitation of this study was that the culture-based analysis of z. mays endophytes may have suffered from under-representation of specific taxonomic groups of microbes. it is well established that many microbes are non-culturable using conventional methods  <cit> . however, culture based analysis of endophytes was important to include in this study, as it appeared to target a different subset of microbes than dna based analysis, with only  <dig> of  <dig> of the 6fam labelled trflp peaks matching  <dig> of the  <dig> genera of cultured microbes . also important, bacterial culturing allowed assessment of functional traits from endophyte communities .

the final major limitation of this study is that we analyzed endophyte communities in relatively young plants  and only in the first generation after swapping soils. it is possible that the endophyte communities of young plants are more influenced by founder microbes that are inherited, whereas the titers of soil-derived microbes may increase over time  <cit>  until they are perhaps ultimately able to infect future generations through seed. in an earlier study, however, we demonstrated that the bacterial endophyte composition of seeds from nine zea genotypes, imported into canada from other nations, remained relatively stable when the plants were re-grown on canadian soil for a full generation  <cit> . nevertheless, it would be interesting to characterize how endophyte community composition changes over time when plants are grown on different soil types.

CONCLUSIONS
by germinating pre-domesticated, traditional and modern genotypes of z. mays on geographically distinct soils and sterile sand, we have obtained data that the bacterial endophyte communities of these plants are partially buffered against the effects of geographic migration. within the limits of 16s-trflp profiling, this study suggests that young z. mays plants are not primarily empty receptacles waiting to be colonized by soil microbes, but rather they appear to transmit a majority of their bacterial endophytes from generation to generation through their seed, and further regulate the entry and/or establishment of select and widespread soil bacteria.

