BACKGROUND
the quantity and quality of offspring at egg hatching are two major components of parent and offspring fitness in oviparous species. because these two components are traditionally thought to trade-off, females are expected to make optimal allocation decisions to maximize their reproductive success  <cit> . for instance, favoring the production of large clutch sizes  may increase the likelihood of getting a larger number of descendants. alternatively, favoring the production of large  eggs may give rise to large offspring, which are better competitors and yield higher reproductive success than small ones  <cit> . finally, spending a substantial amount of energy in egg care may enhance egg development and hatching success and may thus favor the production of numerous and / or better quality offspring  <cit> .

associations among egg number, egg size and egg care are generally expected to result from limited resources and life-history constraints  <cit> . for instance, limited resources have been shown to impose a trade-off between egg quantity and quality, with some females investing in large clutches of light eggs and others in small clutches of heavy eggs  <cit> . the detection of such trade-offs, however, assumes that all females within a population allocate the same quantity of resources to reproduction, which is not necessarily the case when females differ in quality  or resource acquisition  <cit> . conversely, life-history constraints have been suggested to select for a positive association between egg size and maternal egg care  <cit> . one hypothesis to explain such an association is that it would allow the parents to increase the time spent with their offspring in the safest developmental stage . an alternative hypothesis is that egg mortality increases with egg weight, e.g. due to oxygen limitation in aquatic environments  <cit> , so that these eggs require pre-hatching forms of care to develop properly  <cit> . to date, the ultimate reasons for the evolution of a positive association between egg size and maternal egg care are controversial, with recent comparative analyses revealing that its strength is taxon specific  <cit>  and when it does occur, that its underlying evolutionary drivers are unclear .

although the associations between egg quantity, quality, and parental care were studied in many species  <cit> , it remains unclear if and how these three parameters simultaneously shape maternal and offspring fitness at egg hatching. in general, disentangling pre- and post-laying effects on fitness returns is important for our understanding of the evolution of reproductive strategies and life-history traits  <cit> , as these effects might reflect the outcome of independent selection pressures or of co-adaption processes. for instance, investment into pre-hatching forms of care may either reflect predetermined strategies of females, or serve to compensate for limited investment in the quality or quantity of eggs  <cit> . here, we addressed this issue in the european earwig, forficula auricularia, an insect species where females tend their clutch of eggs over winter and provide multiple forms of care, such as egg guarding, grooming and clutch displacement  <cit> . whereas maternal attendance is required to ensure egg hatching, the frequency and duration of egg care  are extremely variable among females  <cit> . because earwig mothers stop feeding between egg laying and hatching  <cit> , any change in female weight during this period can be used as a proxy to estimate its expenditure on pre-hatching forms of care. in particular, relatively high weight loss in females can be used to define high levels of maternal expenditure on egg care, whereas relatively low female weight loss  can be used to reflect low maternal expenditure on egg care. interestingly, maternal care is not only shown towards the eggs, but also towards the young offspring  after hatching. in particular, mothers stay with their nymphs for several weeks during which they provide multiple forms of care, such as protection against predators and food provisioning  <cit> . although post-hatching care is known to come with substantial costs for the mothers - for example by delaying their 2nd clutch production  <cit>  - the potential costs of pre-hatching care remain unknown in this species. finally, the size of earwig offspring at hatching is particularly important, as it generally enhances nymph survival and limits the risks of cannibalism after brood mixing, a common phenomenon during which nymphs join unrelated clutches  <cit> . once the period of family life has ended, mothers disperse and some produce a second and final clutch  <cit> .

we investigated the associations between egg number, egg mass and maternal expenditure on egg care, as well as their simultaneous influence on maternal and offspring fitness at egg hatching. we first surveyed a total of  <dig> clutches to  determine the occurrence of trade-offs among these three parameters,  test whether variation in female condition  possibly masks these trade-offs and more generally  investigate whether clutch size, egg size and maternal expenditure on egg care additively or interactively combine to determine offspring number and weight at egg hatching. in the case of interactions, we predict that egg number only determines nymph number and weight when mothers also express high investment into egg care . we then set up a mother-removal experiment using  <dig> clutches to test whether  low maternal expenditure on egg care can be beneficial to the female, e.g. in terms of 2nd clutch production, and whether  these benefits remain significant after females interact with their hatched nymphs  <cit> .

RESULTS
the 1st clutches produced by the  <dig> females contained between  <dig> and  <dig> eggs, which weighed between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg on average and hatched between  <dig> and 28 days after they had been laid . the relative weight change of females during the period of egg care was highly variable, ranging from a  <dig> % loss to a  <dig> % gain of the initial weight. note that maternal weight gain likely reflects egg consumption, as females had no access to food during the period of egg care. most females  lost weight during the period of egg care , so that weight loss was used as a reference for weight change in the rest of the study . in the mother-removal experiment,  <dig> out of the  <dig> isolated and  <dig> out of the  <dig> non-isolated females produced a 2nd clutch , which contained between  <dig> and  <dig> eggs, weighing between  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg on average . these 2nd clutches were overall smaller  and lighter  than the 1st ones.

overall, there was no association between egg number, mean egg mass and the relative weight loss by mothers during the period of egg care . however, when correcting for variation in female weight at egg laying, the residuals of egg number were negatively correlated with both the residuals of mean egg mass  and the relative weight loss during egg care . although heavy or large eggs are known to need more time to develop across species  <cit> , we found that egg developmental time was independent of mean egg mass, of the number of eggs or of female expenditure on egg care .

maternal expenditure on egg care was estimated through the relative weight loss by mothers between egg laying and egg hatching. this correlation matrix was conducted using  uncorrected values or  the residuals of egg number and mean egg mass . the matrices above diagonal reports the correlation coefficient and the ones below diagonal the corresponding p-values, both obtained from spearman rank correlation tests. the correlations significant after false discovery rate  corrections are in bold .

a series of pairwise interactions among egg number, mean egg mass and female weight loss determined the number of hatched nymphs , a result supporting the entangled effects of maternal expenditure on egg care and egg production on nymph production. in particular, decreases in mean egg mass or in relative weight loss by mothers during egg care cancelled the otherwise positive association between egg and nymph numbers . conversely, decreases in the weight loss by mothers entailed a negative association between mean egg mass and nymph number . independently from the interactive effects on nymph number presented above, the mean weight of nymphs at hatching was positively associated with the mean egg mass , but independent of egg number, mother weight loss or any interaction among the three tested factors . overall, nymph number was independent of the mean weight of nymphs at hatching .

2
2
maternal expenditure on egg care was estimated through the relative weight loss by mothers between egg laying and egg hatching. significant p-values are in bold.

the relative weight loss of mothers during egg care affected their investment into future reproduction, but this effect depended on the occurrence of post-hatching family life  χ <dig> =  <dig> , d.f. =  <dig>  p =  <dig> ). in particular, mother weight loss was negatively correlated with the number of 2nd clutch eggs when mothers were isolated from their 1st clutch nymphs at egg hatching  but not when they were kept with their nymphs after hatching . in contrast, the mean egg mass of the 2nd clutch was independent of the three components of reproductive success measured on the 1st clutch and the occurrence of family life .

discussion
although egg number, egg mass and egg care are the three most common components of reproductive success in oviparous females, the reciprocal influences among them and the consequences of their joint action on maternal and offspring fitness remain under debate. here we showed that in the european earwig f. auricularia  egg number, egg mass, expenditure on pre-hatching forms of care and egg developmental time are independent of each other. however,  when correcting egg mass and egg number for natural variation in female weight at egg laying, our data revealed a trade-off between these two parameters, as well as a trade-off between egg number and pre-hatching care. we also demonstrated that  the number of hatching nymphs does not only depend on egg number, but also on the mean egg mass and on the level of maternal investment into egg care. in particular, low maternal expenditure on egg care led to a negative association between mean egg mass and nymph number, as well as weakened positive association between egg and nymph numbers. moreover, clutches of light eggs were less likely to hatch than clutches of heavy ones. independent of these effects on nymph number, our data showed that  the mean weight of nymphs at hatching was positively associated with the mean egg mass, but independent from egg number and investment into pre-hatching care. finally, our results revealed that  maternal expenditure on the care of 1st clutch eggs reduced the production of 2nd clutch eggs, but only in absence of post-hatching family interactions.

variation in the amount of resources available to each individual is traditionally expected to mask potential investment trade-offs between mutually exclusive functions  <cit> . our findings support this prediction in f. auricularia. here, we show that correcting egg number and mean egg mass by female weight at egg laying allowed the detection of negative associations between egg quantity and quality and between egg quantity and egg care. the negative association between egg number and mean egg mass reflects a traditional trade-off found across a wide range of species  <cit> , which shows females’ needs to distribute resources among two traits simultaneously expressed at egg laying. conversely, the negative association between egg number and egg care involves two temporally separated traits, which demonstrates that maternal expenditure on egg care is not a fixed strategy before egg production, but instead determined by females’ clutch size. we propose four hypotheses to explain the reported level of maternal expenditure on pre-hatching forms of care. first, this level may simply be a by-product of the resources left to females directly after egg production, so that females are energetically constrained in their level of care  <cit> . the importance of resource availability on the level of  care, however, received mixed support across species . second, it may reflect an adaptive strategy of the females which favors investment into either egg number or pre-hatching care  <cit> . for instance, low risks of egg predation and thus low benefits of egg guarding could favor females allocating more resources into egg number than egg care  <cit> . a third hypothesis is that the level of maternal expenditure on pre-hatching care might not be directly affected by egg production, but by the impact of egg production on egg quality. in other words, clutches where the number of eggs was higher than predicted by female weight could have required  the expression of higher levels of care. disentangling between these first three hypotheses would require cross-fostering of eggs and females  <cit> , as well manipulation of clutch size to then investigate whether the level of maternal expenditure on egg care is determined by the number of eggs produced or tended by the female, as well as by the origin of the tended eggs.

the fourth hypothesis to explain the negative association between egg number and maternal expenditure in egg care is that larger egg production entailed larger egg consumption by females. maternal expenditure on egg care was estimated by measuring mother weight loss between egg laying and hatching, a period in which females had no access to food. although this measurement may at least partly reflect energy expenditure  <cit> , the fact that  <dig>  females gained weight during this period of time implicates that at least some mothers consumed a few of their eggs. filial egg consumption has never been reported in the european earwig , but cannibalism frequently occurs in this species, either of eggs by newly hatched nymphs, between siblings during family life or even between adults during group living  <cit> . more generally, filial egg consumption is a behavior found in many species exhibiting parental care  <cit> . this behavior may reflects either  a stress-induced behavior with limited evolutionary relevance or  an adaptive strategy of females, which may serve to recycle resources from current eggs for future reproduction or into higher quality of care for the current clutch, as well as to limit the level of sibling competition after hatching  <cit> . in f. auricularia, the occurrence of filial egg consumption is unlikely to reflect a stress-induced behavior as all females were maintained under standard laboratory conditions that are typically associated with very high hatching success . conversely, the benefits of low expenditure into pre-hatching care  in terms of 2nd clutch production are in line with filial egg cannibalism as an adaptive strategy of earwig females. further studies should investigate whether filial egg cannibalism results from the targeted consumption of non-viable  or viable eggs, and determine whether such behavior was selected to help females re-allocating resources toward future reproduction and/or limiting the level of future sibling competition.

our data reveals both isolated and interactive effects of maternal expenditure on egg care, clutch size and egg weight on offspring weight and offspring number at egg hatching. on one hand, nymph weight was positively associated only with egg mass, a finding in line with those in other oviparous species  <cit> . on the other hand, nymph number was neither shaped by single nor additive effects among the three parameters, but by pairwise interactions. in particular, nymph number was positively associated with egg number only in clutches with heavy eggs or where mothers lost more weight during egg care, but also negatively associated with mean egg mass in clutches where mothers gained weight during egg care. if change in female weight at least partly reflects egg consumption, this negative association suggests that f. auricularia mothers preferentially fed on clutches of large eggs. moreover, the overall negative association between mother weight gain and nymph number supports that female weight change during egg care is a good proxy to estimate the efficiency of maternal pre-hatching care  on hatching success. finally, the trade-off between egg mass and nymph number together with the positive association between egg mass and nymph weight reveals fitness costs and benefits of producing heavy eggs, but also shows that these costs can be limited when mothers subsequently invest into pre-hatching care . hence, maximizing fitness returns for earwig mothers and nymphs requires the simultaneous investments in heavy eggs and egg care. on the intra-species level, this finding is in line with comparative studies reporting the positive association between egg size and parental care across species and taxa  <cit> . more generally, it also supports that the sensitivity of heavy eggs to pre-hatching care could be a key driver in the emergence of such an association  <cit> .

lower weight loss  by mothers during the care of 1st clutch eggs translated into a higher number of eggs in the 2nd clutch, which revealed that low expenditure on egg-care  provided benefits to females in terms of future reproduction. however, this association was only detectable when mothers were isolated from their hatchlings, suggesting that family life cancelled the maternal benefits of low expenditure on egg care and/or provided benefits to females with high expenditure on egg care, both in terms of 2nd clutch egg number. whereas the second hypothesis requires forms of cooperation from nymphs to mothers, which to our knowledge have never been reported in species with family life, the first one could reflect a trade-off between pre- and post-hatching care, with females expressing low expenditure on egg care  subsequently showing high levels of offspring care, and vice-versa. because we did not measure the level of post-hatching care in this experiment, our data does not allow directly testing the occurrence of such a trade-off, or the ultimate reasons for its evolution . however, this trade-off would be in line with the high variation in the levels of post-hatching care already described in f. auricularia females, e.g. in terms of food provisioning, aggressive protection against predators, clutch displacement and allogrooming  <cit> . more generally, this result raises the question of the importance of pre-hatching parameters and post-hatching family life on offspring fitness. for example, post-hatching maternal care has been shown to mask the otherwise positive effects of egg size on larval body mass at dispersal in the burying beetle nicrophorus vespilloides <cit> . notice however that in the burying beetle females do not provide pre-hatching forms of care, which might have entailed different selection pressures on the respective importance of egg number and size, as well as pre- and post-hatching care between the two species.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have shown phenotypic reproductive trade-offs between egg number, egg mass and pre-hatching care, as well as demonstrated their interactive effects on maternal reproductive success. we also demonstrated that studying natural variation in female body weight at egg laying is of key importance to better understand female investment trade-offs, as this variation masked the trade-off between the quantity and quality of eggs  and the one between egg quantity and maternal egg care. moreover, our data suggests that pre-hatching care is costly for mothers in terms of future reproduction, but that these costs could be compensated by lower investment in post-hatching care. overall, these results emphasize that studying fitness returns of oviparous mothers and offspring requires considering reciprocal influences among the multiple types of maternal investments at egg production, and more generally support the very recent claim to incorporate reciprocal causation in evolutionary theory  <cit> .

