BACKGROUND
reelin is a large extracellular matrix glycoprotein, which was originally discovered in the mouse brain  <cit> . this protein is secreted by cajal-retzius cells during brain development, regulating neural migration and dendritic spine maturation . in the adult brain, reelin is expressed primarily in cortical and hippocampal gabaergic neurons as well as in cerebellar granule cells  <cit> . in the mature brain, it is involved in a variety of functions, including the ccontrol of neurotransmitter release  <cit> , maturation and stabilization of dendritic spines  <cit> , specification of the molecular identity of the distal dendritic compartment of pyramidal neurons  <cit> , regulation of glutamate receptor homeostasis  <cit> , and in the regulation of different aspects of adult hippocampal neurogenesis  <cit> . however, reelin expression is not restricted to the central nervous system , and has also been observed in the enteric nervous system  <cit> , blood serum, liver, pituitary pars intermedia, and adrenal chromaffin cells  <cit> , as well as in platelets  <cit> , and lymphatic vessels  <cit> . the functional roles of reelin outside the cns have been less studied, although it has been suggested that reelin enhances spreading of platelets on fibrinogen  <cit> , and participates in the regulation of lymphatic vessel formation  <cit> .

some ultrastructural studies have focused primarily on the subcellular expression of reelin in neurons and neuropil within the cns, where immunolabeling has been reported in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, axons, dendritic spines, and in the extracellular matrix  <cit> . however, as far as we know there are no reports on the possible expression of reelin in the main component of the blood-brain barrier, the brain endothelial cells. the expression of reelin in this particular type of endothelial cells, and in specific subcellular compartments within them, could be related to possible roles for this protein in the regulation of brain microvasculature , and/or mediating an interconnection between brain and peripheral tissues . in order to assess these possibilities we undertook an electron microscopy study of reelin immunolabeling in brain endothelial cells.

RESULTS
in this study we focused on reelin immunolabeling in the adult rat cortex and hippocampus. as shown in previous studies  <cit> , at the light microscope the most intense reelin labeling was observed in layer i of the cortex and in the stratum lacunosum moleculare of the hippocampus, where neuronal and diffuse labeling were observed . interestingly, at higher magnification reelin labeling also appeared in some  capillaries within areas containing strong diffuse immunolabeling, such as layer i of the cortex  and the stratum lacunosum moleculare of the hippocampus . on the other hand, reelin-labeled capillaries were not observed in areas lacking diffuse immunostaining, such as deeper layers of the cortex, and the ca <dig> area of the hippocampus . the fact that reelin immunostaining was only observed in some  capillaries within areas presenting strong diffuse labeling argues in favor of its specificity. in addition, this also suggests that a possible secretion and/or transport of reelin by endothelial cells may take place primarily in areas of heavy diffuse reelin staining  .figure  <dig> 
reelin labeling at the light microscope. a) reelin immunolabeling in superficial and mid-layers of the cortex. as expected, reelin-labeled neurons are present across different layers of the cortex, and diffuse labeling is mostly present in the superficial layers. b) high magnification of the area indicated with a dashed-line box in a. this image shows a reelin-immunolabeled blood capillary in layer i of the cortex . c) reelin labeling in deeper layers of the cortex. scattered reelin-labeled neurons in these deeper layers present moderate labeling compared to superficial layers. d) high magnification image of the area indicated with a box in c. the capillary is negative for reelin labeling . e) reelin labeling in the lateral part of the rostral hippocampus. note the row of lightly reelin-labeled neurons in the ca <dig>  as well as the diffuse reelin immunolabeling in the stratum lacunosum moleculare . f) high magnification image of an area neighboring the slm, corresponding to the dashed-line area indicated in e. note the intense reelin labeling surrounding this capillary . in addition there is a strongly labeled neuron in close proximity . g) reelin labeling in the medial part of the rostral hippocampus. the corpus callosum  appears dorsally bordering the hippocampus. h) high magnification image of the dashed-line box area in g. note the unlabeled capillary  located in close proximity to a strongly labeled neuron . cc: corpus callosum; ca1: cornu ammonis layer i; slm: stratum lacunosum moleculare. scale bars:  <dig> microns in a, c, g, e;  <dig> microns in b, d, f, h.



our electron microscopy study confirmed and extended our findings. as expected, reelin immunostaining was found in neurons, where labeling was located in discrete regions of the rough endoplasmic reticulum , which is in agreement with previous studies  <cit> , and is also consistent with the fact that reelin is an extracellular matrix protein expressed through the secretory pathway. importantly, we have also confirmed that some endothelial cells associated with small capillaries contain reelin immunostaining , while others appear devoid of labeling . high magnification electron micrographs allowed us the identification of the subcellular distribution of reelin labeling, which was mostly located inside vesicles of transcytosis . in fact, we were able to observe almost all stages of the transcytosis vesicles, from the formation of one of these vesicles accumulating reelin immunostaining , to reelin-labeled caveolar vesicles located close to the lumen of the capillary or even showing the opening neck . in addition, reelin labeling was also found in the endothelial plasma membrane bordering the capillary lumen , but not in the abluminal side . furthermore, we found some punctual labeling in the nuclear envelope, which may suggest a possible synthesis of reelin by endothelial cells; although we did not observe immunolabeling in the golgi complex of these cells, which is poorly developed. finally, we also found capillaries completely devoid of reelin labeling  in the same electron microscopy sample of the cortex, confirming our light microscopy observation that reelin appears in some  capillaries within the same area.figure  <dig> 
reelin neuronal labeling at the electron microscope. a) low magnification electron microscopy image of a reelin immunolabeled neuron in the cortex. b-c) detail images of the areas indicated with dashed-line boxes in a. note that reelin labeling is specifically located in the rough endoplasmic reticulum . m: myelinated process; n: nucleus; p: neuronal process. scale bars:  <dig> microns in a;  <dig>  microns in b-c.
reelin labeling in endothelial cells. a) low magnification electron microscopy image of a reelin-labeled endothelial cell in the cortex. this endothelial cell presents a thin cytoplasm, which is clearly delimited by the basement membrane  in the abluminal side. the nucleus  occupies most of the cell body of the endothelial cell. b-c) details of the areas marked with dashed-lined boxes in a. in b, a reelin-labeled transcytosis vesicle  is located in a narrow cytoplasm area between the nucleus  and the cell membrane . in c, a small cluster of reelin-labeled caveolar vesicles is shown , with one of them presenting the open neck towards the capillary lumen . note also that the abluminal side  is devoid of labeling. d) reelin labeling in a small brain capillary in the cortex. this capillary is formed by the almost-continuous thin cytoplasm of a reelin-labeled endothelial cell. note also the lack of labeling in myelinated processes  located in the vicinity of this capillary. e-f) detail images of the areas indicated by dashed-line boxes in d. reelin-labeled caveolar vesicles are present in different stages. a labeled caveolar vesicle in e  presents a well-delineated oval shape, while a labeled caveolar vesicle in f that is located in close proximity to the luminal side of the capillary is about to form the open neck . note also the presence of reelin labeling in the luminal side of the membrane , and the lack of labeling in the abluminal side . m: myelinated process; n: nucleus. scale bars:  <dig> microns in a, d;  <dig>  microns in b-c and e-f.
reelin labeling is not present in all endothelial cells. a) low magnification image of an unlabeled brain capillary in the cortex. the wall of this brain capillary is lined by at least two endothelial cells, as shown by the presence of their nuclei . note also the presence of unlabeled myelinated  and non-myelinated  neuronal processes. the basement membrane was also clearly present . b-c) detail images of areas indicated with dashed-lined boxes in a. in b, a caveolar vesicle is clearly unlabeled . in b and c, the luminal side of the endothelial cell membrane is also devoid of labeling . m: myelinated process; n: nucleus; p: neuronal process. white arrowheads indicate the membrane in the abluminal side scale bars:  <dig> microns in a;  <dig>  microns in b-c.



although out of the scope of the present work, the presence of reelin immunolabeling in brain endothelial cells suggests that this protein may play a role in regulating the formation of brain microvasculature through a mechanism similar to the previously reported for lymphatic vessels  <cit> . interestingly, it has been previously reported that in the cerebral cortex there are differences in the orientation of the cerebral vasculature between reeler and wild type mice, which suggests that reelin may be involved in blood vessel development  <cit> . however, additional experiments will be necessary to test whether reelin plays a role in the formation of brain microvasculature.

the fact that reelin labeling was observed in caveolar vesicles in different stages  indicates a possible process of transcytosis, which suggests that reelin may cross the blood-brain barrier. alternatively, reelin transport might be also from the brain parenchima to the periphery, or may occur in both directions. interestingly, it has been shown that apolipoprotein-e receptor- <dig> , which together with the very-low-density-lipoprotein receptor  constitutes the receptor for reelin, tends to co-immunoprecipitate with caveolin  <dig>  and to localize in caveolae  <cit> . taking together our findings and these previous reports, it is possible that the crossing of the blood-brain barrier might be accomplished via a receptor-mediated mechanism that includes apoer <dig>  in addition, it has been shown that the adaptor protein dab <dig> also tends to cluster within specific membrane domains   <cit> , that reelin induces the clustering of its own receptor apolipoprotein er <dig> and other proteins  <cit> , and that the sorting of these proteins to different membrane domains yields differential endocytosis of reelin  <cit> . we have recently shown that deficits in reelin expression result in changes in membrane protein clustering in peripheral lymphocytes  <cit> , and that the addition of recombinant reelin to synaptosomes increase protein expression and alters membrane protein clustering  <cit> . interestingly, there is a decrease in reelin expression in the brain and periphery of patients diagnosed with depression  <cit> , and we have found alterations in membrane protein clustering in lymphocytes from patients with depression, which correlated with therapeutic response to antidepressants  <cit> . all these evidence point towards an important role for reelin in membrane protein clustering in both brain and periphery. the presence of reelin in caveolar vesicles of brain endothelial cells suggests a possible role for this protein in the regulation of the crosstalk between brain and immune system, and in the perturbation of this crosstalk in several psychiatric disorders. although the specific consequences of reelin downregulation in psychiatric disorders are still unknown, and it should be also taken into account that reelin deficits could be associated with brain cell malfunction independent of its association with the blood-brain barrier.

it does not escape to us that if reelin was able to cross the blood-brain barrier, it would be easier to design reelin peptides as possible therapeutic agents for psychiatric disorders. this is of particular interest taking into account that overexpression of reelin has been shown to prevent behavioral phenotypes in animal models of mood and psychotic disorders  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
reelin immunolabeling is specifically present in caveolar vesicles within endothelial cells located in brain areas that present strong reelin labeling in the extracellular matrix. in addition, electron microscopy images evidence that reelin-labeled caveolar vesicles can be observed from their formation to the opening of their membrane towards the capillary lumen. altogether, these observations suggest that reelin and/or reelin peptides might cross the blood-brain barrier, which could have important physiological, pathological, and therapeutic implications.

