BACKGROUND
the alkaline phosphatases  are a family of enzymes with a number of isozymes and isoforms that differ from each other in various degrees of amino acid sequences and the extent and nature of glycosylation. in humans, three of the four ap isozymes aretissue specific, i.e., the intestinal ap , placental ap , and germ cell ap , while the fourth ap gene is the tissue-nonspecificap  found expressed in bone, liver, and kidney  <cit> . there is 50% identity between tnap and plap and 86% identity between intestinal and placental isozyme at the level of protein sequence  <cit> . in this study, tnap is represented by bone isozyme . the postulated functions of the isozymes are many  <cit> . while the ubiquitous expression of ap family across the phyla and also within the human body points to a broad conservation of important functions, the diversity of the isozymes and isoforms also indicates a certain degree of differentiation and specificity regarding their functions.

our laboratory has been working on the generation of recombinant antibodies to plap for possible use in tumor targeting  <cit> . plap is expressed on the cell surface in several types of malignancies  <cit> , including choriocarcinomas, seminomas, and tumors of ovary, uterus, cervix, breast, lung, stomach and bladder. even though the percentage expression in a particular tumor type is variable, the total numbers of tumors expressing the antigen are quite high, and encompass a range of solid tumors. most of the current management strategies for solid tumors have a poor outcome. certain characteristics of plap, like cell surface localization  <cit> , clathrin mediated endocytosis  <cit>  and low shedding into circulation makes it an ideal target for immunolocalization and immunotherapy  <cit> . antibodies specific to plap would be useful for localizing therapeutic modalities like conjugated toxins, drugs and liposomes carrying cytotoxic compounds as well as for tumor imaging. in our earlier work  <cit> , we had attempted to select phage clones exhibiting isozyme specific binding from a phage-displayed human scfv library  <cit> . as is usually done, we had selected anti-plap scfv by allowing the phage library to bind to immobilized plap and eluted with high ph. though we could select clones that bound the selecting antigen, we failed to isolate plap-specific clones. this highlighted the need for adopting alternative strategies for isolating phage antibodies that bind to defined structural regions in an isozyme specific manner.

it would be a rational strategy to use small molecules that bind to defined regions of the selecting antigen to elute out bound phage from specific antigenic conformations. for enzymes in general, the detailed studies on substrates and inhibitors available in literature suggest ways for carrying out such selections. there are several aspects of the catalysis by ap family that offer clues to conformations that could be exploited for the selective targeting of the isozymes. while all of the isozymes can catalyse several small molecular artificial substrates , even within the isozymes expressed in human tissues there are several uncompetitive inhibitors that have varying degrees of isozyme specificity. l-phe-gly-gly and l-leu are plap-specific, while l-phe inhibits both plap and iap  <cit> . l-homoarginine specifically inhibits tnap  <cit> . the binding patterns of these inhibitors perhaps reflect homologies or unique structures in these molecules  <cit> . an uncompetitive inhibitor is effective only in the presence of substrate  <cit> . uncompetitive inhibitors bind to the enzyme-substrate complex and their binding site would therefore be at/close to the active site of the enzyme  <cit> . it was expected that l-phe-gly-gly  would; therefore, elute phage bound to the definite structures on plap that were unique to the isozyme. such a strategy would also provide a way for the directed selection of isozyme specific phage antibodies. x-ray crystallography has revealed that the active site of plap is a large shallow depression  <cit> . therefore, it would be possible for such scfvs to interact directly with the active site and also modulate plap function.

in this study, we have incubated the phage-displayed scfv library with plap and eluted the phage clones bound to the immobilized plap by l-phe-gly-gly in the presence of pnpp. these clones have been studied with regard to their isozyme specificity, biochemical modulation of binding and the effect of their binding on the enzyme activity. this strategy has enabled us to isolate a high proportion of scfv antibodies that are isozyme specific and bind to the active site, as evidenced by the modulation of enzyme activity. the binding characteristics of these phage antibodies provide useful information regarding the conformational relatedness of the ap isozymes and thus could also serve as structural probes.

RESULTS
selection of plap binding clones and determination of antigen binding
the ph of  <dig> , which is optimal for plap activity, would probably denature the scfv displayed on the phage and also disrupt plap-scfv interaction. hence, after standardization, a ph of  <dig>  was chosen for elution with  <dig>  m l-phe-gly-gly. at this ph, plap activity was retained and the enzyme activity was inhibited by l-phe-gly-gly but not by the control peptide l-gly-gly-gly. phage eluted by l-phe-gly-gly + pnpp , were amplified after each round of selection and the binding of phage to plap was assessed by magnetic bead phage elisa . the fourth round phage showed significant binding to plap . hence, individual phage clones from the fourth round were assessed for their ability to bind plap.

enrichment in transforming units  of plap binding phage after each round of selection
the transforming units  of input and output phage after each round of selection are shown in table  <dig>  there was an initial fall in the tus of the eluted phage in comparison to the input phage. also, we observed a decrease in the tus of the phage eluted after the second round of selection indicating the decrease in phage binding non-specifically to beads. there was an increase in phage tus in subsequent rounds of selection indicating enrichment of selected anti-plap phage.

antigen binding characteristics of monoclonal anti-plap scfvs
 <dig> phage clones from the fourth round of selection were assessed for plap binding by mbphe. this was performed like the polyclonal mbphe.  <dig> plap binding clones were detected . out of these,  <dig> clones were selected on the basis of extent of binding and were further characterized.

magnetic bead phage elisa  in the presence of inhibitors
this was done for the  <dig> clones that gave significant binding to plap. binding was studied in the presence of the inhibitor l-phe-gly-gly or the control peptide l-gly-gly-gly along with the substrate pnpp. based on the inhibition of antigen binding by substrate and l-phe-gly-gly/l-gly-gly-gly, these clones were of three types. type i  comprised of the clones whose binding was inhibited by l-phe-gly-gly but not by l-gly-gly-gly . this indicated that the bound clones were displaced from plap on the formation of the enzyme-substrate-inhibitor complex. type ii phage antibodies  comprised of  <dig> clones whose binding was inhibited by substrate alone . the inhibitor, l-phe-gly-gly or the control peptide l-gly-gly-gly did not affect the binding. this suggested that while the clone was displaced on the binding of the substrate plap, the inhibitor did not influence the binding. type iii phage antibodies  comprised of  <dig> clones whose binding was not inhibited by either l-phe-gly-gly or l-gly-gly-gly . the binding of these clones was not inhibited by either substrate or inhibitor and suggested that their elution was presumably physico-chemical.

relative binding to the various isozymes of alkaline phosphatase
the binding of scfvs to biotinylated-plap was competed with the increasing molar concentrations of unbiotinylated plap, iap or bap. the binding of the studied clones to biotinylated-plap was affected in the presence of unbiotinylated soluble isozymes  to a different extent, depending on the clone. the binding of two clones  to biotinylated-plap was inhibited only by unbiotinylated plap and not the other two isozymes of alkaline phosphatase . the binding of two clones was inhibited by unbiotinylated plap at much lower molar concentrations than by the other two isozymes. this indicated that selection strategy led to the preferential isolation of plap-specific scfvs. for  <dig> clones  binding to biotinylated-plap was inhibited in the presence of two isozymes  but not the third . however, seven clones  exhibited inhibition of binding to biotinylated-plap in the presence of all the three isozymes of alkaline phosphatase .

influence of antibody binding on plap/iap/bap enzyme activity
three scfv antibodies, gle <dig>  gld <dig> and gl2d, had an accessible his6-tag and were purified on metal affinity columns. there is also a possibility that the his-tag was not detectable in the other clones because of their poor expression levels, but this has not been explored further. the ability of the three selected clones to modulate the activity of the three isozymes, plap, iap and bap was studied in detail. clones gle <dig> and gl2d specifically inhibited the activity of plap but not of the other isozymes . clone gld <dig>  that binds to both plap and bap, inhibited the activity of these two isozymes but not of iap. the nature of inhibition of plap activity by these scfv antibodies was studied using varying substrate concentrations. lineweaver-burk  plots were made for gle <dig>  gl2d and gld <dig> . all the mentioned scfv clones inhibited enzyme activity. the plots in the presence of the scfvs suggested a competitive type of inhibition as the inhibition was completely relieved by higher concentrations of the substrate, indicating competition by the antibody and substrate for a site on the plap molecule. for the clone gle <dig>  km of the enzyme was  <dig>  mm; enzyme with scfv: k'm:  <dig>  mm and ki ~ <dig> m- <dig>  for the clone gld <dig>  km of the enzyme was  <dig>  mm; enzyme with scfv: k'm:  <dig> mm and ki ~ <dig> m- <dig>  for the clone gl2d, km of the enzyme was  <dig>  mm; enzyme with scfv: k'm:  <dig> mm and ki ~ <dig> m- <dig> 

binding of the purified scfvs to plap expressed on tumor cell lines
the two scfv clones, e <dig> and gl2d, showed binding to the purified plap in an isozyme specific manner. the binding of these scfvs was then studied on hela cell line that is known to express plap. cell elisa could detect binding of these two clones in a plap-specific manner. both the clones showed binding to plap expressed on hela cells .

sequence analysis
identity analysis of the scfv sequences was performed at ncbi blast server. the sequences showed identity to immunoglobulin heavy and light chain variable fragments. the sequences of the selected clones have been submitted to embl and their accession numbers are as follows: clone gle4-aj <dig>  clone gl2d- aj <dig> and clonegld6-aj <dig>  the germline origin of all the sequences were determined using dnaplot at the vbase database and the data is shown in table  <dig>  all the sequences were numbered as per kabat convention. no domain deletion or frame shifts were observed in these sequences.

discussion
various selection strategies for phage-displayed antibodies have been described, especially for large combinatorial libraries with high degrees of diversity. the selection strategy is very important in determining the binding characteristics of the phage  <cit> . the implementation of specific biochemical methods of selection, wherever possible, would give the selected phage a certain degree of pre-determined epitope specificity. in the case of human alkaline phosphatases a unique panel of uncompetitive inhibitors permits the distinction between the various isozymes, in spite of their having a high degree of sequence identity. in this work, phage antibodies were eluted with a plap-specific uncompetitive inhibitor, l-phe-gly-gly, in the presence of substrate, to select clones that are likely to be isozyme specific. by definition, an uncompetitive inhibitor binds to the enzyme-substrate complex and hence would be likely to bind close to the active site of the enzyme.

our selection strategy entailed the use of optimal ph for phage viability and enzyme inhibition. we have used alternating surfaces of magnetic beads and plastic immunotubes to avoid selection of phage binding to the solid support. the fourth round polyclonal phage showed significant binding to plap. next, the binding of monoclonal scfvs was studied in the presence of l-phe-gly-gly or l-gly-gly-gly . for most of the clones , binding was inhibited by l-phe-gly-gly + substrate, indicating that they bound to a region of plap from where they were displaced by the specific inhibitor. of the three clone studied in detail , two  were of type i. they bound only to plap. however, for two clones , the substrate  alone was sufficient to displace the bound scfv, indicating their binding to the active site of the enzyme. since the synthetic substrate is common to all the three isozymes, the conformation of the binding site for such clones is likely to be a shared one. one such clone  has been studied in detail. this was cross-reactive with bap but not with iap. this is interesting because plap has a greater overall similarity with iap than with bap. it is probable that the displaced scfv made contact with those conformations of plap that were shared with bap but not iap.

the modulation of enzyme activity by the purified scfvs reflected that the selection strategy was targeted towards the active site of plap. all the three clones inhibited the activity of the bound isozyme. in all the cases, the inhibition was completely relieved by excess substrate indicating competition for the same binding site. the alkaline phosphatase structure reveals five crucial regions, namely theactive site and its vicinity, the active site valley, the homodimerinterface, the crown domain, and the metal-binding site  <cit> . the active site is a shallow groove, suggesting that phospho-proteins could be natural substrates for alkaline phosphatase in vivo. the modulation of enzyme activity by the scfv would support the notion of an active site accessible to large molecules. the soluble scfv, when it bound to the enzyme, presumably denies the substrate access to the active site. the asymmetry of the molecular weights of pnpp and scfv is also worth noting. the scfv, being a large molecule, cannot form a bridge between the enzyme-substrate complex and the crown and acts as a competitive inhibitor possibly by extruding the substrate from the active site.

the crown domain and the metal-binding domain are mammalian-specific andwere observed for the first time in the plap structure. the domain is said to be involved in the properties of the enzyme that distinguish one isozyme form the other  <cit> . the binding of uncompetitive inhibitors like l-phe and l-leu have been studied and modeled extensively in earlier studies  <cit> . both inhibit plap and iap. the inhibitor acts by functionally interacting with arg  <dig> and zn2+ ion through its carboxy and amino groups respectively, and the conformation of the unique surface loop located in the vicinity of the active site influences both the positioning of the inhibitor and its accessibility to the active site  <cit> . mutations of plap at residue  <dig> with ala and phe, as well as the corresponding double mutants containing gly  <dig> have been shown to result in a 2-fold decrease in kcat, a significant decrease in heat stability, and disruption of inhibition by the uncompetitive inhibitors l-phe and l-leu  <cit> . because the crystal structure has only been elucidated for the binding of l-phe to plap, such antibody probes would be useful for further exploring the binding of these inhibitors. while the binding of l-phe-gly-gly has not been so extensively studied, the site is probably overlapping but not identical to that of l-leu. the binding sites of l-leu and l-phe-gly-gly are probably located close to each other but may not be identical  <cit> .

the present study demonstrates that isozyme specific inhibitors can be used to select phage antibodies that in many cases, bind to the active site and show isozyme specificity. such molecules can distinguish similar conformations and therefore, possibly act as structural probes. in addition, antibodies that inhibit enzyme activity and bind to the cell surface expressed plap, could be employed to study the physiological and pathological significance of plap, and for targeting tumour cells. in a more general way, the study highlights how the specificity of small molecules can be utilized to select binding entities directed to the specific molecular regions from large and highly diverse combinatorial libraries.

CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that a small molecule inhibitor can be used to select phage antibodies directed to the active site of plap. the binding of most of the scfvs selected by this process was reduced in the presence of the inhibitor. a significant number of clones had various degrees of isozyme specificity. the three clones studied showed inhibition of enzyme activity, suggesting that they bound to the active site and denied the access to the substrate. this indicated the success of the selection strategy. the specific clones showed binding to hela cells . these scfvs could thus be used as probes for the active site of plap and to modulate enzyme activity. this strategy also has a general application in selecting specific antibodies from combinatorial libraries to closely related molecules and conformations.

