BACKGROUND
the ability to identify the sex of a dna sample is an important tool in molecular ecology and conservation genetics. the optimal marker would work on small amounts of non-invasive samples that are likely to include highly degraded dna and be applicable in many species.

molecular sex identification normally works by pcr amplification of sex specific regions that differ in length. the pcr products can then be visualized using standard electrophoresis, revealing females as homozygotes  and males as heterozygotes . generally, in order to detect the male sex, a y chromosomal fragment must be amplified. this can be done by  amplification of a homolog region on x and y with a length difference,  a triple primer pcr with a common primer x/y and a y specific primer  and x specific primer  or  a multiplex pcr with a y region and an positive control .

several loci have been used for sex identification in humans and closely related species, e.g. the amelogenin system  <cit>  the zinc-finger protein  <cit> , the sry locus  <cit>  or a combination  <cit> . detection of sex-specific restriction patterns  <cit>  requires some pre-analysis development  and enzyme restriction of pcr products, which is time consuming. the sry locus requires co-amplification of external control regions  <cit> , which may be unreliable for non-invasive dna samples with dna of low quality.

the widely used amelogenin system  <cit>  has recently been found to provide ambiguous results in humans such as null-alleles, primer mutations or amplification failure, resulting in erroneous gender determination  <cit> . it works in closely related apes  <cit> , but not orang-utans  <cit> , baboons or more distantly related species  <cit> . also, the sullivan amelogenin system amplifies a very small x-y size difference , which does not consistently resolve well on agarose gels. therefore this system needs more time-consuming and expensive acrylamide gel- or capillary electrophoresis. recently, a new general multiplexing method was published, using the amelogenin locus, the sry locus and group specific primers and suitable for non-invasive samples  <cit> . non-identification of males may result from non-amplification of the y fragment and it has been argued  <cit>  that all "females"  should be verified with a second independent sex test. this calls for the development of multiple independent tests that can be carried out in parallel.

we have previously developed a new primer pair for a different region of the amelogenin gene suitable for sexing lemurs and humans and therefore possibly most primate species  <cit> . however, like the zing-finger protein system  <cit> , the resulting fragments are too long  for non-invasive samples, which often contain highly degraded dna. alternatively, we then designed primers for a small region of the dead-box gene, which are able to sex apes and monkeys, but these primers do not work in prosimians – probably due to primer region mutations  <cit> .

at present, genomic sequence information is only available for a few primates  and rodents  or even more distantly related species. so far, we find that it is impossible to identify suitable homolog xy regions with the desired degree of conservation for a standard two-primer pcr design that will work in all primates.

the objective of this study was to identify a suitable region for a triple primer pcr design with a shared xy primer in combination with an x- and y-specific primer. the primers should amplify a short region and be widely conserved through primate evolution, such that the method would work on non-invasive samples from all primate species.

RESULTS
a region of uty is highly conserved between human and mouse
the comparison of the repeat masked human, chimpanzee and mouse y chromosome yielded surprisingly few results. the best hit was  <dig> bp with  <dig> % identity between mouse and human. this region is a part of the y-chromosomal isoform of the ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat protein gene . hence, uty and the x-chromosomal homolog  were selected for further analysis.

the utx/uty region is suitable for triple primer design
a small region in the alignment of  <dig> primate utx/uty sequences  showed three distinct patterns, useful for primer design : the utx/uty primer is located in a region with high conservation between primate x and y homologs . the uty primer is located in a region conserved between y homologs but with conserved differences between the x and y homologs  and the utx primer is located in a region conserved between x homologs but with conserved differences between the x and y homologs . the resulting primers  were chosen to be able to bind to all sequences in the alignment and to yield both short fragment sizes as well as fragments with differing lengths. the two fragments  are easily separated on agarose gels .

successful sexing of all primate species tested
the primers work in all species tested yielding amplifications of both x and y fragments . amplifications were successful regardless of template dna concentration, hence the method is suitable for analysing non-invasive samples.

since the primers were designed in well conserved regions, no species-specific optimization was necessary and a shared pcr protocol and identical annealing temperature was used .

discussion
in this study we have established a simple, accurate and widely applicable method for determining the sex of primate dna samples by using triple primer pcr of a small region of the utx/uty gene. the ubiquitously transcribed tetratricopeptide repeat protein gene  is located on the x and y chromosomes and our analysis identified a region in the human uty having the highest identity to the mouse y chromosome. due to the high conservation of this region the triple primer pcr setup works in all primate species tested. furthermore, the method contains an internal positive control , but should always be tested in samples of known sex before actual analysis is carried out. also, it may be necessary to perform species specific optimization of annealing temperature and/or primer concentrations prior to analysis.

since the nature of the y chromosome allows deletion of many regions, it can be expected that with an increased number of individuals tested deletion of uty might be found in low frequency . furthermore, primer region mutations may result in non-identification of males due to pcr failure, which are known in the amelogenin system  <cit> . generally, non-identification of males may result from non-amplification of the y fragment and it has been argued  <cit>  that all "females"  should be analysed with at least two independent sex tests. it is now possible to combine the analysis of amelogenin, sry and utx/uty in parallel for most primate species, thereby obtaining reliable sex determination  using independent pcr runs. given the low amount of dna usually obtained from non-invasive sampling, the optimal approach for molecular sexing would be to run a single multiplex pcr analysis, but such a protocol has not been developed yet.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings show that the pcr assay based on the utx/uty gene is reliable for sex identification in primates. the advantage of this assay is the extreme primer conservation and wide applicability and ease of use. in combination with other single locus markers, it is now possible to reliably sex individuals of most  primate species.

