BACKGROUND
gene flow in plants determines many key aspects of plant ecology including colonization and range expansion, and influences the potential responses to environmental changes. effective long-distance seed dispersal,  can preserve genetic diversity at the local scale, which may in turn affect the efficiency of selection and local adaptation  <cit> . quantifying effective long-distance dispersal  is therefore crucial to understand whether or not populations are functionally connected, in particular for isolated populations in fragmented habitats. despite the potential of molecular markers as highly effective tools to study ldd, empirical data on ldd distances in plants are scarce, largely due to the inherent difficulty to identify and sample all the fragments in a given landscape  <cit> . species that naturally occur at low densities are particularly suitable for this purpose, as it becomes feasible to map and sample all populations in a landscape.

most orchid species are typically characterized by small, disjunct populations and are assumed to have a considerable dispersal potential because they produce a huge amount of dust-like, wind-dispersed seeds  <cit> . until now, only a handful studies has focused on the spatial aspects of seed dispersal in orchid populations. evidence from parentage analysis and fine-scale spatial genetic analysis shows that orchid seeds frequently land within metres of the parent plant e.g.  <cit> . however, these studies have focused on short distance dispersal and were not designed to detect the rare long-distance dispersal events that may contribute to colonization and gene flow among populations.

the family orchidaceae is well known for its exceptional diversity, with approximately  <dig>  species. a combination of strong genetic drift and natural selection has been proposed as the key to this immense species diversification  <cit> . a critical requirement of the ‘drift-selection model’ is that effective gene flow is restricted between spatially isolated populations  <cit> . however, in a meta-analysis of  <dig> orchid population genetic studies, of which  <dig> used allozymes, phillips et al.  <cit>  found that orchids are typically characterized by exceptionally low levels of population genetic differentiation  compared to most other plant families. furthermore, isolation-by-distance was most frequently detected when the scale of the sampling exceeded 250 km, suggesting that below this scale, there is extensive seed dispersal. phillips et al.  <cit>  discussed that drift-mediated speciation is therefore unlikely to be an important mechanism explaining the high diversity of orchids. they argued that ldd combined with local adaptation is likely a possible mechanism underlying the species diversity, but this has not been studied experimentally. yet, empirical data about effective long distance gene flow and about the proportion of the genome contributing to adaptation and affected by divergent selection is largely lacking.

here, we chose the fen orchid  rich.) to study effective long distance gene flow and adaptive divergence. fen orchid is a rare species declining throughout its distribution range that covers temperate parts of north-america and europe. it occurs in early successional vegetation of coastal wet dune slacks and alkaline fens in plains and mountains  <cit> . as such, it is a typical pioneer plant for which regional metapopulation persistence depends on extinction-colonization dynamics. within the species, two varieties are sometimes distinguished: a narrow-leaved variety occurring in fens, and a shorter, broader-leaved variety  occurring in dune slacks  <cit> . genetic differentiation may hence exist between the two habitats to the extent that hybrid offspring suffers from marked outbreeding depression  due to a break-up of co-adapted gene complexes . however, empirical evidence for iba in plants is scarce  and completely lacking for orchids. furthermore, understanding the spatial scale of evolutionary processes is required in order to set targets for conservation but little is known about the geographical scale at which local adaptation takes place.the aim of this study was to investigate effective long-distance dispersal by seed as well as adaptive divergence at different spatial scales in the fen orchid. we used aflp-based assignment tests to quantify long-distance seed dispersal events and their effect on the spatial structuring of genetic diversity across northwest europe . by using a genome scan, we looked for loci under divergent selection  related to habitat type to test the hypothesis that iba contributes to ecotypic divergence. to assess the spatial scale of adaptation, we performed the outlier-analysis at different spatial scales: the continental scale , the landscape scale  and the smaller regional scale . particularly, we looked for replicated outlier behaviour that would provide evidence of independent and parallel divergent selection.
liparis loeselii 
sampling locations and scales used in the outlier analysis.

RESULTS
aflp pattern and genetic diversity
using four primer combinations we scored  <dig> polymorphic loci. after excluding samples with low profiles, the remaining total sample consisted of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations. information on the sample locations is given in additional file  <dig> and in figure  <dig>  the mean typing error following bonin et al.  <cit>  was  <dig> % per locus . we observed consistent aflp-banding patterns and no grouping in the principal coordinate analysis  according to the extraction method , suggesting no confounding effects of the dna extraction on the aflp patterns. a significant negative correlation between fragment sizes and frequencies was found for one primer combination  , which may indicate a potential presence of size homoplasy or suboptimal concentrations in the pcr mix. the exclusion of fragments smaller than 200 bp for this primer combination  resulted in a non-significant correlation . to further reduce potential biases associated with the estimation of population parameters, we further reduced the number of fragments for this primer combination  from  <dig> to  <dig> by excluding all fragments smaller than 350 bp. this resulted in a data subset of  <dig> polymorphic loci for the four primer combinations. this subset was used to analyse patterns of genetic diversity and genetic structure.

the aflp band frequency distribution for the  <dig> polymorphic loci was asymmetric with relatively high occurrences at the low and high frequency ends of the distribution . pairwise logistic regressions between the  <dig> loci were significant for only  <dig> % of all comparisons , suggesting that less than 3% of all pairwise loci comparisons were not independent. this was further reduced to only  <dig> % of significant pairwise loci comparisons  when repeating the logistic regressions on the subset of  <dig> loci.

no ramets of the same genet were found among the samples. the estimated selfing rate   calculated over all k subpopulations  was 91% . this corresponds with a mean inbreeding coefficient of  <dig> . the proportion polymorphic loci  at the 5% level, nei’s gene diversity  and the rarity index  are given per population in additional file  <dig>  the ppl ranged from  <dig> to 82% with a mean of 59%. hj ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with a mean of  <dig> . patterns in the unbiased shannon diversity index are presented in figure  <dig>  by visual inspection, we detected no clear geographical trend in shannon diversity.

genetic structure
there was a moderate genetic differentiation between the populations at the continental scale. the fst-value  calculated for the estimated mean self-fertilisation rate of 91% was  <dig>  . the mean estimated value of Φpt was  <dig>   =  <dig> ). clustering at the population level is presented in the neighbour-joining  tree and in the pcoa in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  respectively. in general, the nj-tree showed low bootstrap support and no consistent genetic structure, neither according to geographical location nor to habitat type . instruct indicated the lowest dic for the model with  <dig> clusters. confirmed by the nj- tree and the pcoa, the bayesian approach did not group geographically nearby populations consistently within the same genetic cluster and showed a high level of admixture in each population . based on the mean population genetic distances, the pcoa segregated almost completely the populations located in dune-habitats from these located in fen-habitats . however, a pcoa based on pairwise genetic distances between individuals resulted in one large cluster with no segregation of the individuals according to habitat type . extensive gene flow and admixture was also suggested by the absence of a significant isolation-by-distance effect ).
liparis loeselii 
populations based on  <dig> polymorphic aflp markers.

long distance seed dispersal
the simulations for the assignment procedure resulted in a fairly small increase in proportion of failures at increasing assignment stringency levels. increasing the latter from a minimum log-likelihood difference  of  <dig>  to mld =  <dig>  increased the average rate of failures  with  <dig> % and  <dig> % for the simulated data of belgium & the netherlands and northwest france, respectively. consequently, our aflp-dataset proved to be adequately powerful. the average estimated rates of allocation success, of non-allocation and of allocations to the wrong population for different values of mld and based on the simulated datasets  are given in additional file  <dig>  the re-allocation results and the effect of the number of putative source populations and of the number of loci on these results are given in additional file  <dig> 

for northwest france, two clusters of two redundant loci each were found and reduced to a single locus. the re-allocation tests on this reduced dataset identified  <dig> putative migration events within northwest france representing  <dig> different source – destination combinations . another two individuals  were allocated to a source population that was not sampled. this resulted in an estimate of the ldd rate between  <dig> % and  <dig> % for the sampled populations in northwest france. the simulation analysis for the populations of northwest france resulted in  <dig> % correct allocations. this increased to a success rate of  <dig> %  when excluding locations with low sample size . dispersal distances ranged from  <dig>  to 152 km with a median geographical distance between the different combinations of source- destination populations of  <dig>  km. when excluding locations with a low sample size , we obtained an estimate of the ldd rate between  <dig>  and  <dig> % and a mean dispersal distance of  <dig>  km . the main directions of ldd were northwest and northeast, each representing 33%  of all the different source – destination combinations. re-allocation tests suggested seed dispersal between populations occupying different habitats .

for the populations of belgium and the netherlands, no clusters of redundant loci were detected. within this region,  <dig> putative migrants were identified, representing  <dig>  different source – destination combinations. no putative immigrants from outside the sampled region were detected. this resulted in an estimate of ldd for the populations of belgium and the netherlands ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> %. simulation tests estimated an allocation success rate of  <dig> % . ldd distances ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  km with a median geographical distance between the different combinations of source – destination population of 20 km. the main direction of ldd was southwest which represented 43%  of the different source – destination combinations. also at this regional scale, assignment tests suggested seed dispersal between populations occupying different habitats .

for the re-allocation procedure of the samples from belgium and the netherlands, including the populations from northwest france as putative source populations changed the assignment for four out of  <dig>  putative immigrants from a population from belgium/the netherlands to a population located in northwest france. including the four sampled populations on the dutch wadden islands as putative source populations within the re-allocation tests resulted in a different assignment for three putative migrants . for the re-allocation procedure of the samples from northwest france, a higher number of putative source populations changed the assignment for seven out of  <dig> allocated individuals  from a neighbouring french population to a population located in belgium/the netherlands. removing loci that have a high probability of being homoplasious  from the dataset increased the number of individuals that could not be allocated  and changed the assignment of five  and two  allocated individuals for the regions of belgium/the netherlands and northwest france, respectively.

putative adaptive loci
one locus ) was identified as an outlier associated with habitat-type by both bayescan and mcheza at the continental scale  . however, this locus was not retained as a significant outlier as it emerged as such in one pairwise  fen-fen population comparison ). no outlier loci were detected by both bayescan and mcheza in the overall between-habitat comparisons at the landscape and at the regional scale.
liparis loeselii


 <dig> 
2
populations sharing the same habitat-type were pooled on different geographical scales. b: belgium; nl: the netherlands; nw-f: northwest france.

1locus detected as significant outlier locus using a threshold of posterior odds  > <dig> or p >  <dig> ; 'strong evidence' for selection.

2the fst cut-off value for significant outlier detection was set to  <dig> .

six loci  were identified as outliers in at least one pairwise fen-dune comparison and not in the control fen-fen and dune-dune comparisons . these loci , id  <dig> , id  <dig> , id  <dig> , id  <dig>  and id  <dig> ) were identified as outliers with ‘strong evidence’ ) in bayescan. of these, only one locus   was a replicated outlier in three multiple pairwise population comparisons of which two were statistically independent, that is, comparisons that did not share a population. these comparisons included two different fen populations from the netherlands  and three different dune-populations .

discussion
high levels of effective long-distance dispersal
this study suggests remarkably high levels of inter-population seed dispersal in fen orchids in northwest europe. given its autogamous pollination system, gene flow by pollen is likely to be negligible  <cit> , as also shown by our estimate of the selfing rate , and thus the species primarily disperses its genes by seed. at least 15% of the assigned individuals likely originated from among-population seed dispersal events with dispersal distances up to 220 km. only  <dig> % of all sampled individuals were assigned based on genotype to the population from which they were sampled and 11% remained unassigned. after relaxing the criteria of assignment, all of these unassigned individuals seemed to originate from the populations within which they were sampled. insufficient genetic resolution between the source population and one or more unsampled source populations may be the reason for these unassigned individuals  <cit> . in many cases, the dispersal events observed did not occur between adjacent populations. for the region of belgium and the netherlands, the main dispersal direction followed the second predominant wind direction, after dominant overseas western winds, with 43% of the different putative source – destination dispersal events coming from the southwest. for the region of northwest france where overseas west to southwest winds are predominant, the main source – destination dispersal directions were northeast , and northwest. assignment success was high for the samples from belgium and the netherlands  but lower for the samples of northwest france  likely because of the low sample sizes  for three locations. excluding these latter locations from the assignment analysis increased the probability of correct assignment, calculated based on the simulations, to  <dig> % and decreased the lower bound of the ldd-estimate for northwest france from 15% to 9%. enlarging the geographical scale by including more putative source populations had more influence on the allocation of putative migrants from northwest france ) compared to the allocation of putative migrants from belgium and the netherlands ), which is in accordance with the estimated probability of correct assignment.

orchids produce thousands to millions of extremely small  seeds per capsule  <cit> . their seeds have large internal air spaces that make them balloon-like and facilitate ldd  <cit> . these seed characteristics combined with the high fecundity likely explain the ldd events observed in this study. the maximum distance of seed dispersal of 220 km could only have been detected by studying an area of this size, illustrating the limited value of estimates of average dispersal distances derived from spatially restricted studies. given the frequent strong coastal winds, it is likely that the maximum distance of seed dispersal is even much higher than the distances observed here. indirect methods based on dispersal models indicate dispersal capabilities of orchid seeds by wind of up to 2000 km  <cit> . high levels of ldd will likely reduce the probability that seeds will reach a suitable habitat, as many seeds are ‘lost’ in the unsuitable matrix between the habitat patches  <cit> . however, ldd is needed to transport seeds from local, high-competition patches to remote, low-competition patches, and thus enhance seedling survival  <cit> . the results of extensive seed dispersal are consistent with the observed absence of a significant relationship between genetic and geographic distance and a moderate genetic differentiation among populations . the fst-values observed in this study confirm the rather low fst in orchids compared to other herbaceous families . the absence of a structure in the genetic data according to the geographic location was also reported by pillon et al. <cit>  in a study on the fen orchid in northwest france and the united kingdom. being a pioneer and predominantly selfing species, the fen orchid generally colonizes an open habitat with one or a few individuals, and subsequent population expansion mainly results from the establishment of progeny of the original founders. seeds that act as founders in unoccupied patches, have a subdividing effect which results in an increase of fst  <cit> . in contrast, long-distance dispersed seeds arriving at already occupied patches have a homogenizing effect on the genetic structure of the metapopulation, thereby decreasing fst  <cit> . the moderate value for fst and the observed large rates of long-distance seed dispersal among established populations suggest that the homogenising effect of gene flow is stronger than the subdividing effect of founder events for fen orchid in northwest europe. this post-colonization gene flow has also been shown to be important as a ‘rescue effect’ at the metapopulation level  <cit> . under low extinction probabilities, the homogenizing effect prevails whereas the subdividing effect dominates at intermediate to high extinction probabilities, especially in expanding populations  <cit> . at intermediate levels of local extinction, ldd clearly raises metapopulation survival as compared to short distance dispersal  <cit> . local populations of the fen orchid are generally assumed to have high extinction probabilities but empirical data on local population lifetimes are largely lacking. the homogenising effect of gene flow indicates that at least some populations may not be particularly young. indeed, the presence of the fen orchid population at the belgian location meergoor is documented since  <dig> and this population appears to persist on this location for over 45 years  <cit> . yearly observations of fen orchid individuals on the same location over a time span of seven and eight years were reported for the french fen population le marais de pagny-sur-meuse  <cit>   and the belgian population hazop , respectively, indicating population lifetimes of at least seven years. whether the fen orchid forms a seed bank is not known but terrestrial orchid seeds are generally short-lived   <cit> . it is therefore unlikely that some of the fen orchids assigned to a distant population may have actually originated from a local, long-lived seed bank.

the results of this study also indicate high admixture between populations of fen and dune slack habitats. remarkable for a predominantly selfing species, we observed substantial genetic diversity within populations . a high level of aflp polymorphism, the absence of identical genotypes, a similar asymmetric aflp band frequency distribution and a relatively low level of linkage disequilibrium were also found for arabidopsis thaliana, which, as the fen orchid, reproduces almost exclusively through selfing  <cit> . miyashita et al.  explain this nucleotide polymorphism by recombination events and random mutations. comparable to this study, relative high population genetic diversity values  for the adult stage were also found in the predominantly autogamous food-deceptive orchid neotinea maculata using aflp loci  <cit> .

previous studies have shown that aflps were efficient in assigning each individual to its population, especially at intermediate spatial scales and when population differentiation is weak  <cit> . the power of aflp-based assignments increases with the number and quality of the aflp-loci with low-informative loci  strongly contributing to the assignment power  <cit> . in this study we used a large number of loci and many were low-informative, indicating a broad genome coverage and a good assignment success. however, for some populations the number of plants analysed was small. assignment tests assume that allele frequency estimates are accurate. although fen orchid is known to be subject to strong founder effects, selfing populations may show variable genetic diversity depending on the number of selfing-lineages. it is therefore possible that we have missed selfing-lineages because of small sample sizes. this may have affected the accuracy of the allele frequency estimates. furthermore, for old populations some dispersal events may be several generations old and may have originated from a population that currently has become extinct. such events may have resulted in an overestimation of the seed dispersal distances. this may be the case for some populations located in relative stable fen habitats. yet, many dune-populations studied here are known to be relatively young, resulting from colonisation events that have occurred in the last few decades when fen orchid was already rare in the study area  <cit> . still, the above estimates of effective long-distance seed dispersal should be treated cautiously. though this study suggests extensive gene flow in fen orchid, the actual connectivity of populations may be lower than the estimated dispersal distances reported here suggest.

signals of adaptive divergence
to date, few studies exist on the spatial scale of local adaptation at the genetic level [but see  <cit> . here, we tested for significant differentiation associated with habitat type at different geographical scales. when pooling populations sharing the same habitat at different geographical scales one locus  was identified as a common outlier at the continental scale including all the sampled populations, by both bayescan and mcheza. this locus was however also identified as an outlier in one pairwise comparison of two fen populations. therefore, we did not consider id  <dig> to be associated with divergence between habitat types. similar to the continental scale, no reliable outliers were detected when pooling populations at the landscape and the regional scale. however, at the level of individual populations, we observed six outlier loci in at least one pairwise population comparison potentially reflecting a signature of adaptive divergence associated with habitat type. these loci were identified as outliers in pairwise among-habitat comparisons and not in control comparisons. of these loci, id  <dig> was an outlier in two statistically independent pairwise population comparisons, suggesting replicated divergence. the latter is unlikely to arise via non-selective factors such as type i error, genetic drift or mutation rate variation and is therefore a powerful application of the genome scan  <cit> . this may demonstrate the repeated and parallel fixation of the same adaptive allele and suggests that some fen orchid populations may have locally adapted to habitat type. adapted populations may have evolved preferences for their native habitat, which could have decreased effective dispersal and mating between-habitats and lowered the viability of immigrants . hence, these findings may suggest that local adaptation to habitat type in the fen orchid is more likely to occur at the level of individual populations rather than at larger geographical scales. this is consistent with metapopulation genetic theory which predicts, under the island model, that founder effects associated with patch colonization play the primary role in creating genetic divergence among local populations  <cit> . divergent adaptation may proceed via different mutations in different localities such that particular outliers are not highly consistently observed across population comparisons  <cit> . ldd may enhance speciation at moderate colonization-extinction rates. if local extinction is absent or too frequent, the genetic homogenizing effect of ldd will prevent speciation  <cit> . it is also possible, however, that the outliers identified are related to any other kind of selection and not necessarily to divergent selection associated with habitat type  <cit> . the importance and function of the detected outlier loci and their neighbouring genes for adaptation remain to be clarified in future experiments. although we detected a few outliers that potentially reflect adaptive divergence, we did not find strong signals of iba. other studies examining genomic divergence in plants, report  <dig>  to  <dig> % outliers . but, as nosil et al.  <cit>  pointed out, comparisons across studies are difficult because of the variety of analytical approaches and of the range of significance cut-offs used by different researchers.

there are several possible explanations for the lack of strong signals for adaptive divergence associated with habitat type in the fen orchid. one possible explanation is that the levels of genetic adaptive divergence across the genome are too low to be detected by a genome scan. if divergent adaptation occurs through moderate changes in allele frequencies at multiple sites, it is likely that none of these sites will exhibit substantial divergence between populations  <cit> . besides this limitation of genome scans, gene flow combined with the selection strength and the timescale may explain the lack of strong signals of iba. adaptive divergence between populations will only occur if reproductive barriers are strong enough to restrict gene flow at ecologically relevant loci  <cit> . the findings of this study indicate high levels of effective gene flow in the fen orchid over long distances, also between populations occupying different habitat types. it is thus plausible that the homogenizing effect of effective gene flow overwhelms the signals of divergent selection and thereby mostly erases the signal of iba  <cit> . in addition to high levels of gene flow and selection strength, the short life span of individuals and the high turn-over rate of populations result in a short timescale for diversifying selection to act on allele frequencies in favour of one or the other habitat type, which may also explain the observed low signals of iba in fen orchids.

CONCLUSIONS
founding effects from long-distance seed dispersal combined with local adaptation to regional variation, rather than drift-mediated selection, have been proposed by phillips et al.  <cit>  as key factors in the diversification of the orchidaceae. the results of this study support this hypothesis but also suggest that high levels of effective gene flow may strongly act against speciation by erasing differences developing between populations. however, founder effect speciation by reproductive isolation may evolve over several hundred generations. it is possible that we detect no strong signals of iba because the fen orchid may currently be in an early stage of the process of population differentiation and speciation. to further investigate ecologically important functional variation, genomic data should be combined with fitness characteristics and morphological data from reciprocal transplant experiments with individuals originating from different habitats.

