BACKGROUND
wnts are key mediators of developmental processes throughout the metazoan kingdom  <cit> . molecules of the wnt family are characterized by a conserved pattern of  <dig> to  <dig> cysteines and a post-translational lipid modification at their n-terminal half  <cit> . upon transport through a specialized secretory route, they act as morphogens in a variety of tissues by forming concentration gradients in the extracellular space  <cit> . wnt secretion is dependent on the activity of wntless/evi, a conserved transmembrane protein, which functions as a cargo receptor for wnt proteins in diverse phyla  <cit> . secreted wnts activate canonical or non-canonical signaling pathways in responder cells by binding to seven-pass transmembrane receptors of the frizzled  family and respective co-receptors lrp5/ <dig> and ror. the n-terminal cysteine-rich domain  of fz receptors serves as the binding domain for wnt ligands and is shared by the alternative ror <dig> receptor and secreted frizzled-related proteins   <cit> . the post-translational addition of palmitate or palmitoic acid to wnts renders them highly hydrophobic and is believed to control their secretion and membrane localization  <cit> . it is unknown, however, how wnt proteins are recruited from the membrane to signaling complexes and how binding to fz-crd-related proteins regulates their signaling range in the extracellular space.

recently, janda et al.  <cit>  presented the crystal structure of the xenopus wnt <dig> in complex with mouse fz8-crd. wnt <dig> was shown to have a two-domain structure in which the alpha-helical n-terminal domain  formed a contact with fz via the palmitoic acid lipid group  whereas the conserved region in the c-terminal domain  formed a strong hydrophobic contact with a groove in the fz8-crd . interestingly, it was shown that a mini-wnt comprising only the ctd is able to bind to the fz8-crd autonomously  <cit> . janda et al. have in addition reported a third contact site in the crystal structure designated as pseudo site  <dig>  which was speculated to mediate asymmetric wnt/fz dimerization and thus self-assembly to polymers. nevertheless, whether and how site  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> residues impact on biological wnt function under relevant physiological conditions remained unknown.

here, we present a mutational analysis of the mouse wnt3a-fz8-crd interaction on the basis of the xenopus wnt8-fz8-crd crystal structure . our analysis defined the highly conserved hydrophobic trp <dig> within site  <dig> to be critical for fz binding while it required several adjacent residues to induce full signaling. in particular, we identified val <dig> as a residue essential for signaling activity without contributing to receptor binding. mutations in pseudo site  <dig> either abolished or enhanced wnt3a signaling, suggesting a dual role in signal modulation. likewise, soluble fz8-crd protein modulated wnt signaling in a biphasic manner, probably through influencing the stoichiometry of membrane-detached ligand-receptor complexes. in summary, our study presents a systematic dissection of the wnt3a-fz8-crd complex and identifies sites competent for binding and for signaling in vitro as well as in vivo, providing a model for the modulation of wnt activity by crd-related proteins.

RESULTS
mutational analysis of in vitro wnt3a activity
to predict critical sites in mouse wnt3a required for fz binding, we generated a structural model of the mouse wnt3a-fz8-crd complex adopting the recently published x-ray structure . as demonstrated by janda et al., the wnt molecule contacts the fz-crd at two distinct binding sites within the ntd and ctd designated as sites  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . interaction at site  <dig> is dominated by the lipid group attached to ser <dig> in wnt3a , while site  <dig> is located within a conserved hydrophobic loop  in the ctd of wnt3a   <cit> . the third site, designated as pseudo site  <dig>  constitutes a large interface between wnt3a and a second crd . to test experimentally for the relevance of each of the sites that we predicted to be involved in crd binding, we mutated each of them to alanine. glycine, valine or alanine residues were substituted by arginine. each wnt3a mutant was first tested for its biological activity using a wnt reporter assay . to exclude the possibility that the observed activity loss resulted from impaired secretion of the mutant wnt3a proteins, we analyzed protein levels in the cell supernatants and lysates of transfected human embryonic kidney  293t cells by western blotting. as shown in figure 2b,d, the secretion levels of most mutant wnt3a proteins were comparable to that of the wild-type protein levels, indicating that the mutations introduced did not significantly alter protein secretion. site  <dig> mutants, s209a and g210r, are an exception, as here secretion is most probably impaired by the lack of lipid modification . moreover, w218a also showed reduced secretion, which might be due to partial misfolding caused by the substitution of the tryptophan residue. a quantitative analysis of the observed secretion levels revealed about 60% diminution for w218a and more than 90% for s209a and g210r .we observed that wnt3a mutations introduced into site  <dig> reduced signaling activity only moderately, with the exception of s209a and g210r, which caused a dramatic loss in signaling activity . when we combined mutations k204a and l208a, which had only a mild effect as individual mutants, the loss of signaling activity of the double mutant was more pronounced, although residual signaling was still detectable . mutations in site  <dig> generally showed a more pronounced effect on signaling activity. in particular, c335a and v337r mutations resulted in a complete loss of the reporter gene activation . while f331a and w333a single mutations still showed some residual activity, the signaling level of the double mutant  was comparable to the control  .

we then asked whether the predicted interaction residues in site  <dig> were also involved in wnt3a signaling. as demonstrated in figure 2e, site-directed mutations at three positions, v60r, e68a and f169a, significantly decreased signaling activity in the wnt reporter assay. the e68a/f169a double mutant did not show any residual activity . however, in contrast to site  <dig> and site  <dig> mutations, a majority of the mutations introduced into site  <dig> augmented wnt signaling compared to wild-type levels, with a96r showing the most pronounced effect. as with site  <dig> and  <dig> mutations, we further confirmed that all site  <dig> mutant proteins were detectable at comparable levels in the cell supernatants . altogether, these data led us to conclude that site  <dig> has a physiological relevance in canonical wnt signaling.

impact of wnt3a mutations on direct binding to frizzled
to analyze whether the introduced wnt3a mutations affected wnt-fz binding efficiency, we performed pull-down assays using a recombinant fz8-crd-fc fusion protein. as a negative control, the fc protein alone was applied. interestingly, binding of site  <dig> mutant w333a to the fz8-crd-fc was nearly abolished compared to wild-type wnt3a, while the c335a mutation still had some residual binding activity . more surprisingly, the f331a and v337r mutations, although lacking signaling activity, did not show significantly reduced fz8-crd binding. the double mutant f331/w333a was comparable to the w333a single mutant in the pull-down assay . site  <dig> mutants, s209a and g210r, showed a complete loss of binding while the binding of site  <dig> double mutant k204a/l208a was not significantly reduced. site  <dig> mutants, v60r and e68a, showed only minimal binding to fz-crd. f169a as well as the double mutant e68a/f169a completely failed to bind in the pull-down assay. site  <dig> mutants that showed increased signaling activity showed full binding as demonstrated for a96r . a similar result was obtained for s92a and r173a . in summary, our binding data indicate that site  <dig> residues, f <dig> and v <dig>  are crucial for signaling without contributing essentially to fz-crd binding. to evaluate whether the loss of binding and signaling activity observed for s209a and g210r mutants  might be due to a lack of hydrophobicity , we precipitated equal amounts of wild-type wnt3a and the respective mutant proteins with blue sepharose . while most of the wild-type wnt3a was bound by the sepharose, both mutant wnt3a proteins were poorly retained in the blue sepharose precipitate, indicating that g210r could be similarly impaired in acylation as s209a.

individual wnt3a protein domains do not show independent signaling activity
it was shown previously that a mini-wnt comprising the xenopus wnt <dig> ctd shows autonomous binding to fz  <cit> . in addition, the inhibitory effects of wnt ntds have been reported in various studies  <cit> . to examine whether the mouse wnt3a subdomains have an independent signaling property, we designed constructs expressing either wnt3a ctd or ntd fragments  and tested their activities in vitro and in vivo. we found that constructs expressing wnt3a subdomains did not activate the wnt reporter in cultured cells, neither alone nor in combination . when these single domain constructs were co-transfected with full-length wnt3a, they both showed a moderate inhibition of the wnt reporter activity. this is likely a result of competition for receptor binding, with the ctd having a stronger inhibitory effect than the ntd. combining both wnt3a domains in a triple co-transfection experiment with full-length wnt3a resulted only in a minor additive effect . to exclude the possibility that the loss of wnt3a signaling activity resulted from abnormal cellular synthesis or secretion of the wnt domain fragments, the wnt3a ntd and wnt3a ctd were expressed as his-tagged fusion proteins in hek293t cells. we found that both wnt3a domains could be detected in the supernatants of transfected cells, indicating there is sufficient structural integrity of the wnt3a domains for passing the cellular protein folding control of the secretory pathway .

to test our findings in vivo, we injected capped mrnas encoding for either mouse wnt3a ntd or wnt3a ctd into xenopus embryos. in comparison to the uninjected controls , mouse wnt3a very effectively induced secondary axes upon injection of  <dig> pg mrna , while the separate wnt3a domains did not show a comparable effect, even at a tenfold or 100-fold excess . consistently, a combined injection of equimolar mrnas encoding for the two wnt3a domains also did not induce in vivo activity , indicating that the individual wnt3a domains are not able to activate fz receptor signaling effectively in an independent manner.

physiological relevance of wnt3a point mutations
to determine whether the above described wnt3a point mutations have any effect on the wnt3a function in vivo, we evaluated the activity of wnt3a mutants that were found to be critical in vitro by their expression in the zebrafish embryo. ectopic expression of wnt antagonists can promote head formation, whereas ectopic activation of wnt signaling during gastrulation blocks head formation  <cit> . furthermore, it was previously shown that overexpression of zebrafish wnt <dig> can activate the canonical wnt pathway within the zebrafish embryo  <cit> .

our in vivo studies revealed that injection of  <dig> pg mouse wnt3a capped mrna per embryo causes a very specific and robust effect on specifying the balance of anterior-posterior cell fates along the neural axis in the zebrafish, resulting in severe posteriorization of the anterior nervous system . using optical sectioning, we found that  <dig> pg of wnt3a mrna per embryo leads to loss of the eye field, forebrain and partially also midbrain structures . these abnormalities were specific to the cranial part of the embryos, whereas the posterior part of the embryos showed no gross abnormalities. injection of higher amounts of wnt3a mrna led to severe abnormalities during gastrulation , which were specific to high wnt3a expression levels only.

if our point mutations in mouse wnt3a were deleterious for their activity in vitro, then similar levels of the wnt3a mutants would be expected to have no effect on anterior-posterior neural axis establishment. we injected a set of wnt3a mutant capped mrnas at  <dig> pg per embryo and quantified the effects on embryo development at  <dig>  days post fertilization . as with the wild-type mouse wnt3a, the mutants f331a, w333a, c335a, v60r, e68a, a96r and f169a  led to severe defects in the anterior-most neural system. they were characterized by the lack of a telencephalon and eye field structures and occasionally also led to diminished mesencephalic structures, compared to the non-injected or the ef1α control embryos . interestingly, for the a96r mutant, the effects were most severe among all expressed constructs: very frequently the complete cranial part of the embryonic axis was missing. in  <dig> % of g210r-expressing embryos, the eyes were either not present or were significantly smaller. we were very intrigued by the finding that when the v337r mutant was expressed,  <dig> % of the injected embryos were normal and not distinguishable from the controls. interestingly, of all injected constructs carrying a single mutation in wnt3a, only for embryos injected with s209a isoform mrna  was there no effect, either on the formation of the forebrain/midbrain or on the eye field, suggesting the s209a mutation is deleterious for the in vivo function of wnt3a. double mutants, e68a/f169a  and f331a/w333a , did not show any reversal of the phenotype and their effects were not significantly different from the single mutants at the gross morphological level. to ensure that the tested mutants were expressed at similar levels in the embryos, we designed in parallel his-tagged versions and monitored wnt3a protein levels in embryo lysates after mrna injection by western blot analysis using an anti-his antibody. as shown in additional file 4: figure s3c, the wnt3a mutants were all well expressed and the protein levels were comparable among the wnt3a mutants, with the exception of s <dig>  which showed a reduced expression level of about 30% .

altogether, these results reveal that the mutations in the f <dig>  w <dig>  c <dig>  v <dig>  e <dig>  a <dig> and f <dig> residues  do not significantly impair wnt3a in vivo signaling in this context. as for the tests with cultured hek293t cells, the s209a mutant completely lost activity during zebrafish embryogenesis.

interestingly, in this analysis we identified the v337r mutation at site  <dig> as the most essential residue required for signaling. we, therefore, analyzed this site in more detail by performing a series of point mutations, in which different amino acid side chains were tested for their influence on signaling at this position. as shown in figure  <dig>  an alanine substitution did not attenuate signaling activity both in vitro and in vivo, whereas the slightly more spacious isoleucine residue diminished activity quite significantly in the zebrafish embryo . residues with more bulky side chains, such as tyrosine and tryptophan, completely blocked wnt3a biological activity in both assays. aspartic acid had a more dramatic effect in the reporter assay than in the zebrafish embryo, indicating a partial tolerance for this substitution in vivo. a possible explanation for the spatial restrictions of this sensitive wnt3a binding site is provided by our model of the v337w substitution in figure 6b. in summary, the v337r substitution stands out by abolishing signaling without changing binding activity and thus could serve as a new experimental tool that would enable manipulations of reduced signaling by competing for receptor engagement.

soluble fz8-crd protein influences wnt3a signaling in a biphasic manner
as our results of the site  <dig> mutations strongly suggested an independent fz binding site in the wnt3a ctd, we hypothesized that receptor engagement of the membrane-associated wnt is a two-step process, in which the initial interaction with the wnt3a ctd facilitates membrane detachment of the lipid-modified ntd. soluble crd proteins might, therefore, be able to augment wnt signaling by increasing the local concentration of membrane-detached wnt ligands. we tested this hypothesis by performing a wnt reporter assay with wild-type wnt3a in the presence of the fz8-crd-fc protein at increasing concentrations . moreover, soluble fz8-crd protein applied at micromolar concentrations inhibited wnt signaling. in contrast, crd concentrations that were in the range or slightly above the wnt3a concentration in the cell supernatant  increased luciferase activity threefold compared to wnt3a alone. to exclude cross-linking effects by the fz-crd dimer in the applied fc fusion construct, we performed a control experiment using a monomeric fz8-crd-his protein, which showed a similar biphasic effect on wnt3a activity . autocrine signaling assays, such as the one applied in this experiment, do not distinguish between secreted and cell-surface-attached wnt ligands. to confirm that the observed effect was due to a higher amount of soluble wnt3a ligands, we incubated transfected hek293t cells with different amounts of fz8-crd-fc protein and monitored wnt3a protein levels in the cell supernatants by western blotting . the amount of soluble wnt3a protein was, to a large extent, correlated with the applied fz8-crd concentration, while the supernatant levels of the non-binding wnt3a mutant w333a were not altered by the addition of fz8-crd .to provide further evidence that the observed increase in wnt signaling activity by the fz8-crd protein was due to a higher mobility of the wnt ligand, we performed a double luciferase chamber assay, in which the wnt3a transfected cells were separated from the responder cells by a porous membrane . the fz8-crd-fc protein was applied at increasing concentrations to the wnt3a-producing cells. as shown in figure 7c, we found that the luciferase activity of the responder cells was modulated by the soluble crd protein in a comparable manner as in figure 7a, suggesting that the increase of signaling activity at nearly equimolar concentrations of mouse wnt3a and fz8-crd is independent of the direct cell–cell contacts and autocrine signaling.

in conclusion, wnt3a signaling activity was modulated by the presence of soluble crd protein, positively with increased solubility at low crd concentrations and negatively at high crd concentrations.

discussion
here, we present an in vitro and in vivo characterization of the wnt3a-fz <dig> binding interface. we systematically introduced a set of mutations in the wnt3a sequence, which were directed by a model of the mouse wnt3a-fz8-crd complex structure on the basis of the recently published x-ray structure  <cit>  . table  <dig> summarizes the results obtained from the wnt3a mutants designed in this study.

effect of wnt3a mutants tested in tcf/wnt-reporter, fz8-crd binding and zebrafish embryo assays. for the wnt reporter assay, + +, + + +, -, - - and - - - represent, high , higher than wild type, lower than wild type, very low and no signaling activity. for fz8-crd binding, + +, + and - - represent full, low and no binding. for the zebrafish embryo assay, wt wnt3a showed an abnormally dorsalized phenotype, including defects in the formation of the anterior-most neural system.

nd, not determined; wt wild type.

when we mutated residues in mouse wnt3a responsible for the site  <dig> interaction , the ser <dig> mutation abolished signaling activity in the wnt reporter assay completely, due to its function as a lipid attachment site. the importance of the lipid modification for wnt signaling has been repeatedly reported  <cit> . interestingly, the ser <dig> mutation also led to a complete loss of binding to soluble fz8-crd . in concert with this, we found ser <dig> to be crucial for wnt3a activity in injected zebrafish embryos in vivo. based on these data and on our analysis of isolated wnt3a domains, we conclude that the presence of both sites,  <dig> and  <dig>  is essential for full binding and activity of wnt3a. also, lrp binding sites in the linker between sites  <dig> and  <dig> might be sensitive to lacking conformational restrictions imposed on this region by the simultaneous binding of both sites to the fz receptor  <cit> . alternatively, the lack of lipid modification could induce protein aggregate formation, precluding site  <dig> accessibility. our finding that the g210r mutation also leads to a complete loss of both binding and signaling activity, although still partially active in the embryos, suggests that it might be essential for the lipid attachment as well. a potentially impaired binding to porcupine might explain such an effect. this hypothesis is further supported by our finding that both g210r and s209a show reduced binding to blue sepharose . alternatively, a distortion of the thumb loop interaction with fz through the introduction of a more spacious side chain could also lead to a largely dysfunctional ligand through impaired site  <dig> interaction. likewise, a g210a mutation behaved like wild-type wnt3a in the wnt reporter assay . the g <dig> position is conserved in all wnt ligands with the exception of medaka and zebrafish wnt8-like, where it is substituted for glutamic acid  <cit> . considering our findings, this substitution is assumed to result in a wnt ligand with attenuated activity, which may have a distinct developmental function. other conserved site  <dig> residues that were reported to contribute secondarily to fz interaction  in xenopus wnt <dig>  <cit>  showed a moderate reduction in signaling activity for mouse wnt3a, both as single mutants and in combination  .

as predicted by the structural data, site  <dig> mutations had a more significant effect on signaling in the wnt reporter assay . in particular, mutations in residues f <dig>  w <dig>  c <dig> and v <dig> that engage in van der waals interactions at the tip of the wnt index finger in the complex structure showed a significant loss of ligand activity when mutated to alanine. c <dig>  which showed the strongest effect, forms a disulfide bond with the adjacent cys <dig>  inducing a tight turn of the protein backbone. we therefore presume that its mutation has an additional impact on the overall structure of the binding loop. when tested in the physiological context of zebrafish embryogenesis, f331a, w333a and c335a mutations in wnt3a showed only mild deviations from the wild-type wnt3a, retaining most of their signaling capacity, which might be due to compensatory effects by a different receptor context and responsiveness of the tissue. this is also supported by the fact that the wnt3a e <dig> position, for which an alanine mutation in the wnt reporter assay resulted in impaired signaling, is occupied by valine in the xenopus sequence. small affinity differences between wild-type wnt3a and its mutants that seem to be relevant in the cell culture luciferase assay were not detectable in the binding assay or the embryo. the fact that the w333a mutant, which shows both impaired signaling in a cell culture and significant loss of binding, still retains full activity in the zebrafish embryo, might also point to different expression levels of wnt signaling components in the two systems. in particular, signal amplifiers, such as the lrp6-axin complex  <cit> , might contribute to the differences between the in vitro and in vivo results that we observed. in addition, previous reports have shown that in the absence of direct wnt-crd binding, the wnt signal can still be transduced  <cit> . thus, wnt ligands could maintain residual activity without crd interaction, which might be sufficient for a physiological response in vivo, although below the detection threshold of an in vitro wnt reporter assay.

the v337r substitution, which had the most severe effect on signaling in both settings, most probably induces a structural distortion of the binding loop due to sterical hindrance. this is evidenced by the fact that an alanine substitution did not alter signaling activity while an isoleucine substitution showed a significant impairment in vivo . interestingly, the v337r mutation did not significantly inhibit binding to fz-crd in solution . this site can therefore be considered as primarily important for signaling without contributing to binding. despite a very recent report on a naturally occurring wnt <dig> mutation of valine to phenylalanine at position v <dig> , causing osteogenesis imperfecta through impaired wnt signaling  <cit> , the identification of the residue v <dig> as being essential for wnt3a activity during zebrafish embryogenesis is novel. we conclude that the insertion of w <dig> into the hydrophobic pocket of the fz receptor, as a critical binding event in the wnt ctd, might well be independent of the signaling competence of the ligand-receptor complex. the v <dig> position is highly conserved in canonical and non-canonical wnts throughout the metazoan kingdom, underscoring its essential role in receptor interaction and signaling.

among site  <dig> mutants that abolished signaling, f169a showed the most pronounced loss of binding. interestingly, position f <dig> in wnt ligands is highly conserved, and the interacting site in fz crds and sfrps is either phenylalanine or tyrosine, thus suggesting stacking interactions of the aromatic residues. as f-y and f-t pairs exhibit different binding energies  <cit> , this interaction might be relevant for ligand-receptor specificity.

the lipid modification of wnts  <cit>  most probably acts as a membrane anchor, bringing the ctd into a membrane-distal position. we propose that the first contact with the fz-crd and other crd related proteins might be realized via site  <dig>  which in the second step facilitates membrane detachment and a switch of the lipid chain into the site  <dig> binding pocket . soluble crd-related proteins should therefore effectively increase the amount of cell-detached wnt ligands. furthermore, this results in an increased spatial signaling range of wnts by sfrps in vivo <cit> . our data on the modulatory activity of the fz8-crd-fc protein on wnt signaling clearly support such a mechanism. in particular, by using a wnt reporter assay with separated chambers for wnt-producing and -responding cells, we were able to demonstrate that soluble crd proteins are able to promote wnt signaling by facilitating increased ligand mobility .

the biphasic modulation of wnt signaling that we observed has also been described for sfrp- <dig> and is thought to be caused by two separate binding sites for wnt with different affinities  <cit> . our unexpected results obtained for the majority of site  <dig> mutants  might suggest an alternative explanation. as this site was reported to be possibly involved in higher-order wnt-crd complexes, the increase in wnt activity in wnt3a mutant proteins might indicate that oligomerization leads to a depletion of active wnt ligands. as wnt-crd complexes at high concentration are more inclined to form aggregates, the observed biphasic activity of the soluble crd protein might be caused by a shift in complex stoichiometry . this is also in line with the recent observations for a secreted splice variant of the xenopus frizzled- <dig> receptor  <cit> . mutants that inhibit this process would accordingly increase the concentration of active wnt-crd complexes, which facilitate efficient receptor engagement. the severe effect of the a96r mutation in the zebrafish embryo, together with its pronounced activity in the wnt reporter assay in cultured cells, both support such a model. moreover, this study identifies the a96r wnt mutant isoform as a possible new tool, relevant for the wider field and representing a hyperactive wnt ligand.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our analysis provides novel important insights into structure function relationships of the wnt-fz interaction and its modulation by soluble crd-related proteins. the dissection of wnt3a residues into sites essential for binding and for signaling will clearly suggest new approaches for tackling the problem of ligand-receptor specificity in the wnt field. in particular, our analysis of site  <dig> residues, which likely induce crd homo- or heterodimers, contributes to a general understanding of different signaling strategies in the context of different receptors and soluble crd-related factors.

