BACKGROUND
large-scale protein interaction network  data have now been collected in a number of prokaryotic and eukaryotic species. it has been suggested that these networks provide an integrative perspective on cellular processes and considerable effort has been invested into their functional and evolutionary analysis <cit> . at the moment molecular network data sets are still plagued by noise  <cit>  – this is especially true for protein interaction networks – and incompleteness  <cit> , but nevertheless considerable progress is being made in the analysis of complex cellular phenotypes in light of such networks. below we will introduce an novel method for the construction of confidence intervals for network quantities. this new approach is able to fuse different lines of biological information and generate conditional confidence intervals; these can be applied as an alternative we can employ it in addition to demonstrate it in an analysis of the saccaromyces cerevisiae pin.

a number of studies have investigated  whether characteristics of interacting proteins are more similar than those of proteins for which no interaction has been reported  <cit> , and  how the network structure affects properties – such as the evolutionary rate  <cit>  – of interacting genes or proteins. other studies have looked at structural properties, such as network motifs  <cit> . because of the dependence introduced by the network it is, however, not possible to use the conventional confidence measures, e.g. for the correlation coefficient of some property of pairs of interacting proteins. rather, a network-aware null model has to be used which compares the actual network with some suitably randomized version of it. in order to incorporate network aspects these studies have used either  straightforward bootstrapping of nodes in order to create random pairs of nodes   <cit> ,  bootstrapped nodes based on their degree  <cit> , or  randomly rewired the network while keeping the degree of each node fixed  <cit>  . the first approach has been shown to underestimate the size of the confidence intervals   <cit> , while the second and third yield statistically similar results ) for measures of pair-wise similarity of the properties of interacting nodes. in order to assess the cis for motifs, however, an explicit incorporation of the network is generally necessary and only the third approach can be used.

all of these three approaches above rely, however, implicitly on the assumption that the network is uniform and not structured in any particular way. such procedures also ignore any other information that is increasingly becoming available for many species  <cit> , and which may affect the organization of the network. while bootstrap  or rewiring approaches are parsimonious – and undoubtedly should be preferred for general cases where no other information is available – it opens up the question as to whether such approaches are still satisfactory when additional, potentially co-variate, data is available.

here we provide statistical tools for incorporating such additional information into the statistical analysis. using such information can have considerable effect on the construction of network confidence intervals, and our procedure, gocardshuffle, constructs randomly rewired instances of networks that incorporate the degree sequence exactly, and additional information statistically . thus, for example, if in a given protein interaction dataset, proteins in the mitochondria interact predominantly with other mitochondrial proteins but not at all with proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum, then gocardshuffle will construct only instances of randomly rewired networks which reflect the relative importance of intra-category versus inter-category connections. in addition to go annotations, any other biological annotation  may act as confounding variables, e.g. when expression levels differ between categories.

there is a rich statistical literature on confounding variables and their role in the statistical interpretation of primary effects. scenarios, where the effects of known or unknown confounding variables result in inconsistencies unless properly accounted for, are known as examples of simpson's paradox in statistics. on a much more subtle scale there will undoubtedly be confounding variables in many of the processes studied in systems biology. these, at least in principle, can be accounted for in a framework such as gocardshuffle; if the approach  is used in addition to random rewiring then it may be possible to detect such potentially confounding hidden variables.

RESULTS
here we illustrate the use of gocardshuffle by contrasting statistical confidence intervals obtained under different null models for network rewiring.

correlation of node properties
in both cases, however, we notice that the full annotation as used in gocardshuffle results in distributions of correlation values that cover the observed value of the correlation. thus, once the rewired network instances are conditioned on go annotations the observed correlation appear to be covered by the new, conditioned null model. in figure  <dig> in additional file  <dig> we show that the effects of conditioning on presently available functional information in the context of presently available protein interaction data does result in a shift of the distribution obtained under the null model away from zero to finite positive values. depending on the dataset and correlation measure, however, the gocardshuffle histogram may not overlap the observed value .

quite generally, we expect that conditioning such analyses on additional available data  will result in a shift in the expected null distribution if such data does explain some aspects of the variability in the measures to be correlated. that is, we observe the shift in the null distributions, precisely because some of the variation in evolutionary rate and mrna expression levels are captured by go annotations  <cit> .

network motifs
in order to illustrate the use of gocardshuffle on motif-analysis  <cit>  we counted the numbers of each possible motif of size four present in the original protein interaction network  and in each of the rewired networks. the statistical significance of motifs is assessed by their z scores . for the simple null model, and the gocardshuffle null model using all three annotation categories, these are shown in figure  <dig>  changing the null model against which significance is assessed naturally changes the observed z-scores of the motifs. perhaps the most interesting result is that the relative excess of the fully connected motif in the true network compared to the "random networks" decreases as the annotations are taken into account. another way of looking at this is that incorporating the coarse structure of the pin  cannot account for the local network patterns across the network.

discussion
we have shown that it is possible to condition the rewiring process by which confidence intervals on networks are constructed on biological information such as gene ontology data. integrating such known biological information into the statistical analysis of protein interaction network data may result in changes to the null model if such data is correlated with network organization. we demonstrated the effect of conditioning on go data by analyzing the correlations among interacting proteins: several studies had reported that properties of interacting proteins are significantly more similar than those of non-interacting proteins. applying gocardshuffle to yeast pin data and conditioning on different combinations of go categories suggests that this may at least partially be because the protein interaction networks of real biological organisms are inhomogeneous and show a level of local and functional organization, which has been ignored in previous statistical analyses. in light of the conditional null models, however, the similarity of evolutionary rates and expression levels of interacting proteins in the yeast pin dataset used here, is just as would be expected for a network with the same biological characteristics . since these protein characteristics differ between different categories  <cit>  – even if sometimes only slightly – and since within-category interactions are more frequent than between category interactions, similarity of properties of interacting proteins are readily understood.

presently go annotations have to be treated with some care and caution. there is the danger of circular arguments if in-silico annotations  are used. as we outline in the methods section uncertainties and different levels of support for different annotations are straightforwardly incorporated into the gocardshuffle algorithm.

the source code of the python and r routines of the implementation of gocardshuffle are available from the authors' website  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our novel network resampling approach allows the construction of confidence intervals under a statistical null model of network organization which conditions on available biological information. if used in addition to conventional rewiring procedures then this approach can be used to detect potentially confounding hidden variables or relationships in systems biology data.

gocardshuffle allows the refinement of the statistical null model for network structure based on available biological data: the rewired network instances may now capture probabilistically the modular aspects of these molecular networks . this appears to be the case for go annotations of yeast proteins, and as we have shown, such stratification of the network – where within-category interactions are more frequent than between-category interactions – may lead to correlations among properties of interacting proteins. once this has been accounted for, there is no strong additional evidence for interacting proteins to be more similar than would be expected by chance. the present approach is readily extended to include other information on functional and structural properties of the network. quite generally, gocardshuffle, can be applied in the statistical analysis of coloured graph problems.

