BACKGROUND
chronic bacterial infections are widespread in nature and exhibit a large range of interactions with their host, from mutualism to parasitism. in insects, symbiotic intracellular bacteria  are deeply integrated into host cell biology and development as they are transmitted maternally through hundreds of host generations, and early on in the insect embryogenesis they invade specialized host cells called bacteriocytes that sometimes form a specific organ, the bacteriome  <cit> . physiological and molecular investigations have provided evidence that endosymbionts supply their host's diet with limiting nutrients, thereby improving their invasive power and their ability to settle on nutritionally poor sources and habitats, such as blood , plant sap , and cereal grains   <cit> .

however, while the physiological and the evolutionary aspects of insect endosymbiosis have been thoroughly investigated over the past two decades, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms that permit the establishment, then the maintenance and the regulation of such beneficial interactions. one striking question concerns the interaction between the bacteria and the host innate immune system, an area which has been relatively well investigated in pathogenic relationships compared with mutualistic associations that have been recently approached in only a few systems  <cit> .

to combat infection, insects rely on multiple innate defense reactions. insect immunity includes physical barriers, together with local and systemic immune responses involving both cellular and humoral pathways . activation of the humoral pathway consists of microbe-associated molecular pattern recognition by pattern recognition receptors, such as peptidoglycan recognition proteins , and the activation of intracellular signaling pathways, such as the toll and the immune deficiency  pathways. these pathways activate, in particular, the production and the secretion of a panel of antimicrobial peptides  in response to gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. in addition to amp production, the insect humoral response also involves a proteolytic cascade leading to prophenoloxidase  activation and subsequent melanin synthesis at the site of cuticular injury. this reaction, called melanization, plays a key role in wound healing, encapsulation, sequestration of microbes and production of toxic intermediates  <cit> . while the systemic response is by far the best characterized pathway among immune reactions, the local immune response  was only recently shown to significantly contribute to protection against invading microorganisms in the alimentary tract and tracheae. in the gut, for example, there is an inducible local production of amps. this response is triggered upon natural infection by gram-negative bacteria and is mediated by the imd pathway  <cit> . the gut epithelium also expresses amidase pgrp. it has been shown that these pgrps, which scavenge peptidoglycan released by commensal bacteria, reduce gut immune reactivity and avoid a state of permanent immune activation in this tissue  <cit> .

in a previous work on the mutualistic interaction between the weevil sitophilus zeamais and a γ-proteobacterium called s. zeamais primary endosymbiont  , we discovered the overexpression of a member of the pgrp gene family in the bacteriome tissue of the host  <cit> . we showed that wpgrp is induced after a bacterial challenge and that wpgrp gene expression depends on bacterial growth. moreover, we have shown that the wpgrp gene was induced concomitantly with an endosymbiont release from the bacteriocytes during nymphosis, demonstrating that the pgrp gene family is involved in host-symbiont interaction  <cit> .

this study was dedicated to enlarging the panel of insect immune genes involved in the host-symbiont interaction. we first identified the host immune-relevant genes by suppressive subtractive hybridization , and analyzed in silico their full-length coding sequences completed with race-pcr. we then measured their steady-state levels in aposymbiotic larvae challenged with szpe and in the bacteriocyte cells of naturally infected larvae. we show that experimental infection of larvae with szpe results in a significant induction of amps and that only few immune gene transcripts, including homologs to an antibacterial peptide and immunomodulators, are accumulated in the bacteriome tissue. these data reveal that endosymbionts are perceived as intruders while being present in hemolymph and that there is a local immune gene expression in the bacteriome. this study provides the first indication of how insects may maintain endosymbionts within the bacteriome and prevent their invasion into insect tissues.

RESULTS
identification of immune-relevant genes in sitophilus zeamais
as the sitophilus genome has not been sequenced, we applied ssh technology to cdna from e. coli-infected larvae and cdna from naive larvae to identify the immune genes of interest to this work. to obtain genes expressed at different phases of the immune response, three rna samples were extracted  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hours after escherichia coli infection and mixed prior to cdna synthesis. we sequenced  <dig> expressed sequence tags  from the subtracted library. following quality analysis, trimming and chimeric sequence digestion , we assembled  <dig> sequences into  <dig> putative transcripts, consisting of  <dig> contigs and  <dig> singletons .

a. tgicl parameters: ests with 94% identity over at least  <dig> base pairs and a maximum length of unmatched overhangs of  <dig> nucleotides were clustered together.

b. redundancy = number of ests in contigs/total number of ests.

c. uniprot rel.  <dig>  april  <dig>   <dig>  cut-off e-value was  <dig> 

to gain insight into the function of est products, we compared the  <dig> resulting sequences with the uniprot databases and classified them using the gene ontology  scheme. moreover, we constructed a database where all the ests and a complete list of blastx matches, together with their functional classification, can be found. of these  <dig> sequences, 83% successfully matched against the uniprot database and 63% were functionally classified . concerning the immune genes, around 12% of the ests have similarities with transcripts that are known to encode proteins involved in an immune function. according to sequence identity, some ests showed only a weak similarity to antibacterial peptides, such as diptericin a, cecropin a <dig>  sarcotoxin ii- <dig> and luxuriosin. nevertheless, taking into account their high redundancy , we have included them in this study. in addition, sequence analysis of ests with similarities to diptericin, tenecin and luxuriocin has uncovered various isoforms of these peptides . however, due to the high dna and protein sequence identities  we have analyzed only one isoform of each gene family in this work.

analysis of full-length cdna of immune genes obtained by race-pcr
to improve sequence similarities, we applied the race-pcr technology and have sequenced the full cdna sequences of ests  with similarities to antibacterial peptides, lysozymes, pgrps and tollip . we also analyzed the cdna sequences in silico to identify conserved protein domains and to predict the cellular localization of the peptides and proteins.

antimicrobial peptides
amps typically contain fewer than  <dig> amino acid residues, divided in most cases into three domains: a signal peptide, a propeptide -r motifs), and the mature peptide. the first two domains are proteolytically cleaved to release the mature peptide active against bacteria  <cit> .

a signal peptide and an r-x--r motif have been predicted for all the putative antibacterial peptides of s. zeamais, except for inf- <dig> and inf- <dig>  for which only a signal peptide is reliably predicted . according to protein similarity, we confirmed the identification of two amps  belonging to the coleoptericin family, a defensin with sequence identity of 66%  to tenecin , and a homolog of luxuriosin, an amp characterized by a kunitz domain  <cit> , with a sequence identity of 42% . for ests inf- <dig>  inf- <dig> and inf- <dig>  the full-length transcripts still show weak similarities to amps and no characteristic domain has been identified for the putative peptides, which cannot be considered as antibacterial peptides without further analysis .

lysozymes
lysozymes are widespread enzymes characterized by their ability to cleave bacterial peptidoglycans. among lysozymes, several types have been described according to the genomic structure and phylogenetic data: the c , g , i , phage, bacteria and plant types  <cit> . here, according to sequence homology, we have identified two lysozymes: an i-type , with a destabilase-related domain identified in an i-type lysozyme from the leech  <cit> , and a c-type lysozyme  with a characteristic lysozyme domain. both proteins have a predicted signal peptide.

pgrp
two pgrp transcripts were identified in the subtracted library. one est  corresponds to the wpgrp gene previously identified  <cit>  while the est inf- <dig> is an additional weevil pgrp gene. these two genes will be referenced as wpgrp <dig> and wpgrp <dig>  respectively. race-pcr product analysis has shown that the two wpgrp proteins have 30% identity and have both conserved the residues necessary for amidase activity  <cit> . according to in silico analysis, wpgrp <dig> may be an intracellular amidase while wpgrp <dig> may be secreted in hemolymph.

tollip 
among the ests of the subtracted library, we found a sequence  with homology to tollip, a regulator of the toll-like receptors pathway described in mammals  <cit> . analysis of the race-pcr product has confirmed homology to the mammal genes since the predicted protein of s. zeamais shares 46% identity  with the tollip protein from mus musculus.

gene expression analysis after sterile or septic injury of weevil aposymbiotic larvae
to determine genes induced by wounding  and genes specifically induced by bacterial challenge, using qrt-pcr we have compared the transcript levels in aposymbiotic larvae after sterile and septic injury, and in naive aposymbiotic larvae taken as a control .

ests were analyzed as described in materials and methods and classified according to gene family or function. transcripts were quantitated by qrt-pcr in untreated aposymbiotic larvae , in larvae six hours after a mock-infection  or an e. coli infection . the fold-change of gene expression after sterile or septic injury is expressed relative to the transcript levels in untreated larvae. for each sample, the transcript level is estimated from the mean of three independent measurements after normalization with the expression of the gapdh gene. the transcript amounts of the genes corresponding to the est inf- <dig> and inf- <dig> are too weak to be quantified in the control larvae and in all the samples, respectively. comparisons of transcript levels between the three samples were made using nonparametric tests. a significant increase in transcript level after sterile or septic injury is indicated by an asterisk . a significant difference between sterile and septic injury is indicated by a second asterisk . acc. num., accession number; nd, non-determined. a. proteases can represent either signaling proteins or immune effectors.

according to the kruskal-wallis rank sum test, most of the genes with sequence similarity to amps are highly induced  after e. coli infection, including genes without any significant antibacterial domain . some peptide genes, such as inf- <dig>  inf- <dig> and inf- <dig>  are also slightly induced  after a sterile injury. inf- <dig>  the homolog of luxuriosin, is the only peptide gene induced after sterile injury but not in response to e. coli challenge. finally, both lysozyme genes  are induced after sterile injury, independently of the bacterial infection.

the qrt-pcr data show that both wpgrp genes are upregulated. however, while wpgrp <dig>  is weakly induced by injury  and more strongly induced after e. coli infection , wpgrp <dig>  is induced by sterile injury only .

as regulators we quantified the expression of genes with similarity to proteases and protease inhibitors, in addition to the tollip gene. the tollip gene  and two genes with similarity to proteinases  were shown to be constitutively expressed. all the other genes were induced after sterile injury, except the cysteine-rich venom-like proteinase homolog  that was induced after infection with e. coli. however, no data are available concerning the function of this protein identified in the salivary gland of aedes albopictus.

in addition to humoral immune response genes we quantified two cytoskeleton genes, as the participation of actin cytoskeleton regulation proteins in innate immunity has been established by functional genomic analysis of phagocytosis  <cit> . however, no variation in the transcript levels has been observed, either for the actin gene or for the homolog of profilin, an actin polymerization regulator .

gene expression analysis in aposymbiotic larvae challenged with szpe
to examine immune response to szpe while present in the larval hemolymph, we quantified gene transcript levels in aposymbiotic larvae following an injection of szpe. knowing that szpe fails to divide in vitro, we injected approximately  <dig> ×  <dig> viable or heat-killed szpe , the amount of e. coli required to induce immune response .

no significant difference was shown between water and symbiont injections for wpgrp <dig>  whereas all the genes with sequence similarity to amps were significantly induced by the symbiont. moreover, heat-killed e. coli was shown to induce a weaker immune response than the untreated e. coli , possibly because bacterial growth and division in larvae may result in an increase of bacterial density and then in a stronger immune response  <cit> . unlike e. coli, no difference was found between larvae injected with viable or heat-killed szpe, which is consistent with an absence of symbiont proliferation in the hemocoel.

gene expression analysis in the larval bacteriome
as the bacteriome fails to develop in the absence of endosymbionts, the immune gene expression profile was examined in the bacteriome and compared with the mean transcript levels from whole aposymbiotic larval tissues. as shown in figure  <dig>  most of the genes overexpressed in larvae infected with e. coli  or szpe  were slightly  expressed in the bacteriome, with the exception of two genes: the wpgrp <dig> gene  and one of the two coleoptericin genes . interestingly, this experiment also revealed a high expression level of the tollip gene  in the bacteriome tissue. moreover, cytoskeleton-encoding genes were shown to be significantly underexpressed in the bacteriome. actin transcripts were 800-fold less represented in the bacteriome when compared with whole aposymbiotic larvae. although many cases of host cytoskeleton manipulation by bacteria have been described  <cit> , we cannot exclude the possibility that the difference in the levels of actin transcription between the bacteriome and the larvae is due to the high muscle actin content in the larvae. similarly, the abundance  of certain gene products in major tissues  can create an apparent under  expression in the bacteriome, and for such genes these results should be considered with caution. however, it is noteworthy that comparisons between the bacteriocyte and the whole body expression profiles have provided previously meaningful results  <cit> .

discussion
there is compelling evidence that intracellular bacterial infections can establish chronic non-septic relationships with host cells for many generations. some bacteria  invade and proliferate rapidly in their host, causing diseases, while others  remain latent and may reactivate months or years after initial exposure to cause chronic disease  <cit> . in the insect world, some intracellular bacteria can generate a long-term relationship within the host without causing any disease or invading any host tissues except the germ cells and the bacteriocytes. the overexpression of the wpgrp <dig> gene in the weevil bacteriome suggests a close interaction between the host immune system and the endosymbionts.

to determine how the insect immune system recognizes the bacteria and prevents bacterial invasion of insect tissues, we first identified, by ssh technology, the immune genes induced in insects challenged with e. coli. bioinformatic analysis scored a relatively high proportion of ests with similarities to immune-related genes, including several antibacterial peptides, lysozymes, pgrps and proteins of the ppo pathway , which highlights the efficiency of the subtractive approach. further in silico analysis on full-length coding sequences has confirmed the identification of an i-type and a c-type lysozyme gene  and at least four antibacterial peptide genes: two members of the coleoptericin family , a defensin  and a homolog of luxuriosin , an antimicrobial peptide from acalolepta luxuriosa  <cit> . we also validated a homolog of tollip, a gene so far only studied in mammals that seems to be absent from the drosophila genome, and a pgrp gene  additional to the one previously described . the expression profile of all the putative immune genes was then characterized by larvae challenge experiments combined with rt-pcr transcript quantification . thus we have demonstrated that all the genes studied were inducible, except for homologs of tollip  and hemolymph proteinase  <dig> , which appear to be constitutive.

to elucidate the particular bacteriome immune features, we first examined the systemic host response following aposymbiotic larvae injection with szpe  and we then measured immune gene expression in the bacteriome of naturally infected larvae . experimental infection of the larvae led to a systemic immune response with the up-regulation of all the genes with similarities to amps, providing evidence that szpe is recognized as a microbial intruder while present in the hemolymph. it is noteworthy that in contrast to szpe, spiroplasma does not induce host transcripts encoding amps in drosophila while present in hemolymph. however, the lack of bacterial cell wall structure of spiroplasma is probably the best explanation for the apparent absence of host humoral response to this bacterium  <cit> .

in the weevil symbiotic larvae, in addition to the wpgrp <dig> gene, one antibacterial peptide induced by bacterial challenge  is overexpressed in the bacteriome. these data confirm the existence of an immune response in the bacteriome tissue and provide the first elements to explain how host-endosymbiont association can persist with regard to the host immune system and bacterial proliferation.

since all amp genes are up-regulated following a hemolymph challenge with szpe, the unique overexpression of the coleoptericin gene in the bacteriome suggests a constitutive expression in this tissue rather than an induction by szpe, unless coleoptericin gene regulation involves a separate pathway from those that trigger synthesis of other amps. we can only speculate about this question, as comparison between symbiont-full and symbiont-free bacteriocytes cannot be conducted since no symbiont-free bacteriome has been detected in sitophilus aposymbiotic insects so far. taking into consideration that some amps are expressed constitutively in cells potentially in contact with the environment  <cit> , and that the coleoptericin gene encodes a signal peptide, these data suggest that the coleoptericin gene is expressed constitutively and secreted outside the bacteriocyte. coleoptericin is currently under investigation to determine whether this peptide may prevent host tissue invasion by the endosymbiont, and/or may protect the endosymbiont population against infection with environmental bacteria, as the bacteriome tissue is intimately attached to the insect foregut. moreover, another interesting issue would be to investigate whether coleptericin expression in the bacteriome can protect the host from pathogens. this would represent an additional example of 'symbiont-mediated protection'  <cit> .

although the absence of a host humoral immune response to an intracellular symbiont and a constitutive expression of coleoptericin in the bacteriome are consistent with current knowledge of the insect immune response, the overexpression of gene homologs to pgrp-lb  and tollip is quite intriguing. pgrp-lb gene inhibition in drosophila was indeed shown to result in a significant induction of antibacterial peptides  <cit> , while tollip has been implicated as a negative regulator of the mammalian immune response  <cit> . moreover, these two genes are overexpressed in the gut epithelia and have been proposed to play a role in the control of immune reactivity of the host to the presence of bacteria in the gut. therefore, the overexpression of these two genes in the bacteriome may be consistent with an immune modulation that inhibits the production of amps in this organ, as it was described in the gut epithelia. together with the overexpression of an amp , these results uncover striking similarities between the bacteriome immune profile and the local immune response in gut epithelium that is in permanent contact with commensal and mutualistic bacteria  <cit> . a gene silencing study in weevil is currently under development to validate coleoptericin, wpgrp <dig> and tollip gene function and their contribution to the maintenance of symbiosis.

it is noteworthy that this work was performed on a recently established symbiosis where, contrary to ancient symbiotic associations known for a drastically reduced endosymbiont genome size such as in the aphid/buchnera association  <cit> , szpe exhibits similar features to those of free-living gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . hence, whether and how the host immune response evolves in parallel to symbiont genome reduction constitutes a key aspect in the understanding of host-symbiont interaction in the course of evolution. recently, a transcriptomic study was performed on the aphid bacteriocyte to identify a gene of interest in intracellular symbiosis  <cit> . intriguingly, no homolog to any known immune genes was shown to be expressed in the aphid bacteriocyte except for i-type lysozymes, whose function in bacteriocytes remains unknown. since both the weevil i-type and c-type lysozymes were shown to be weakly expressed in the bacteriocytes, these data suggest that the bacteriocyte immune profile may have evolved with bacterial coevolution with the host, unless the immune response of weevils  has diverged significantly from that of aphids .

whatever the antimicrobial effectors , their permanent expression in bacteriocytes could represent a common mechanism to restrict the localization of mutualistic symbionts, which is probably necessary to optimize the host-symbiont interaction. without this confinement, intracellular symbiotic bacteria may invade the whole organism without inducing any antibacterial peptide synthesis, as has been shown in drosophila infected by wolbachia, a parasitic symbiont widely distributed in host tissues  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this work provides the first immune gene expression profile in the insect bacteriome and reveals the overexpression of at least three homologs to immune genes: a member of the pgrp gene family involved in bacteria recognition, an antibacterial peptide involved in bacterial clearance and a gene involved in immunomodulation in mammals. this immune profile uncovers some striking similarities between the bacteriome and the gut epithelium, which is in constant contact with environmental bacteria. taking into account that the endosymbiont is recognized as an intruder in the host hemolymph, these findings also indicate that the host immune system may prevent endosymbiont invasion into insect tissues in a manner similar to the gut local immune response that helps to confine the microbiota to the gut, avoiding a permanent systemic response to the commensal bacteria.

