BACKGROUND
the impact of bacterial endosymbionts on eukaryote evolution and the earth’s biogeochemical cycles is highlighted by the ubiquitous occurrence of mitochondria and plastids, organelles that evolved as a consequence of endosymbiosis more than a billion years ago  <cit> . in the last two decades it has become apparent that there are more recently established bacterial endosymbionts found across the eukaryotic tree of life  <cit> . these associations engage a broad range of bacterial phyla, represent various levels of integration, and usually provide the host with new physiological capabilities that allow it to colonize and propagate in ecological niches that would otherwise be inaccessible  <cit> .

advances in genome sequencing technologies have been exploited to greatly enhance our understanding of the physiological basis of many endosymbiotic interactions. the genomes of bacterial endosymbionts tend to become reduced, sometimes down to organellar genome sizes, while functions that are beneficial for the host are retained  <cit> . furthermore, the gene repertoire of the host and endosymbiont can become highly complementary, which indicates integration of metabolic processes between the partner organisms . molecular mechanisms that mediate these interactions, however, are only starting to be unveiled. while endosymbionts where initially expected to exchange only metabolites with their host cells, recent evidence has demonstrated that it is not only metabolites, but also host-encoded proteins that can be targeted from the cytoplasm of the host cell to the bacterial symbiont. in the cercozoan amoeba paulinella chromatophora > <dig> genes originally derived from its cyanobacterial endosymbiont  were identified in the host nuclear genome  <cit> . transcripts from three of these genes were shown to be translated on cytoplasmic ribosomes and their protein products targeted to the chromatophore where they assembled with the chromatophore-encoded subunits of photosystem i  <cit> . in certain plants and insects, nuclear-encoded peptides have been shown to be routed into their endosymbionts where they regulate/modulate endosymbiont growth and division .

however, understanding the molecular mechanisms that underlie metabolic complementation and coordination, protein targeting and import, signaling between symbiotic partners, and synchronization of host and endosymbiont cell cycles is limited. this limitation reflects the lack of sophisticated molecular/genetic tools that can be used to probe endosymbiotic associations, the intrinsic complexity of the multicellular systems that are being explored , and the need to invest time and resources for establishing and maintaining genetically-modified organisms  <cit> . therefore, developing a molecular toolbox for querying an endosymbiont-harboring protist that is easily grown and has a short generation time would represent a considerable asset to the field of symbiosis research.

the trypanosomatid angomonas deanei belongs to the kinetoplastea, a class that includes clinically and economically important pathogens such as leishmania spp., trypanosoma brucei, and trypanosoma cruzi. angomonas along with the genera strigomonas and kentomonas form a monophyletic clade within the kinetoplastea, the subfamily strigomonadinae that is characterized by the presence of a single β-proteobacterial endosymbiont in their cytoplasm  <cit> . the endosymbiont is enclosed by two membranes and a reduced peptidoglycan layer  <cit> , divides synchronously with the host cell, and is vertically transmitted to progeny cells  <cit> . whereas most trypanosomatids are nutritionally fastidious and have a strict requirement for heme and several amino acids, members of the strigomonadinae can grow in defined media lacking heme and containing a reduced number of amino acids because many metabolites can be synthesized by the endosymbiont and delivered to the host . besides members of the strigomonadinae, there is a single trypanosomatid species  that is known to have acquired bacterial endosymbionts independently  <cit> .

the full genome of a. deanei and its β-proteobacterial endosymbiont were recently sequenced  <cit> . the  <dig>  mb endosymbiont genome is strongly reduced compared to free-living β-proteobacteria and the complement of encoded proteins suggests tight metabolic cooperation between the endosymbiont and host cell  <cit> . as is typical for trypanosomatids, the nuclear genome of a. deanei is characterized by a lack of introns and transcription of long polycistronic mrnas that mature by cleavage into single open reading frames  concomitant with the addition of a splice leader  at their 5′-end and polyadenylation at their 3’-end. the relatively simple trypanosomatid genome organization, with typically high levels of homologous recombination , has allowed for the development of numerous molecular biological tools to probe trypanosomatid physiology .


a. deanei has a doubling time of ~6 h in standard nutrient broth , making propagation and experimentation both efficient and inexpensive. in addition, the genomic structure and availability of molecular tools for dissecting closely related organisms make a. deanei a promising endosymbiotic model for developing a powerful system for in depth exploration of molecular mechanisms that govern host-endosymbiont interactions. here we describe the stable integration of transgenes into the a. deanei genome, high level expression of those genes, and the generation of null mutants. furthermore, combining proteomic analysis with the newly developed molecular capabilities, we demonstrate that the host endosymbiont-targeted protein  <dig>  is routed to the endosymbiont suggesting the existence of a sorting machinery in a. deanei that delivers proteins to the endosymbiont.

RESULTS
genome and transcriptome assemblies set the foundation for developing genetic tools
since the available draft assembly of the a. deanei nuclear genome is still highly fragmented , information important for building molecular tools for this protist, including sequences of long genomic contigs spanning multiple genes and expression levels of specific genes, is missing. therefore, a new genome assembly was generated for a. deanei atcc pra- <dig>  in total,  <dig> scaffolds totaling  <dig>  mbp of sequence were assembled. these scaffolds comprised  <dig>  contigs of total length  <dig>  mb, and  <dig>  mb of intra-scaffold gaps . half of the assembly is in  <dig> scaffolds longer than  <dig>  kb  and  <dig> contigs are longer than  <dig>  kb . this assembly provides more than 10-fold improvement in linkage relative to the gene-oriented assembly that was already available. this whole genome shotgun project has been deposited at ddbj/ena/genbank under the accession lxwq <dig>  expression levels of many nuclear genes were inferred from rnaseq analyses .

efficient homologous recombination in a. deanei
we hypothesized that, like for other trypanosomatids, a. deanei would be amenable to genetic manipulation using hr and transgene expression would occur by read through without the need for a dedicated promoter  <cit> . the loci for one gene of each, the γ- and δ-subfamily of amastins , were selected for the site at which a cassette containing a drug resistance marker gene would be inserted because  these two amastin genes are highly expressed ,  amastin loci have been previously used to enhance expression of heterologous genes in other trypanosomatids  <cit> , and  a knockdown of δ-amastin does not seem to affect proliferation of insect stages in other trypanosomatid species  <cit> . amastins are surface glycoproteins of unknown function that can be grouped into four subfamilies  and occur in some trypanosomatids as tandemly arrayed multicopy genes  <cit> . several members of each subfamily are encoded on the a. deanei genome  <cit> , but sequences of the various members of the γ- and δ-subfamilies differ at the nucleotide and amino acid levels and their intergenic regions show no homology .

for establishing suitable drug resistance selection markers, first, we determined that 300 μg/ml of either g- <dig> or hygromycin were sufficient to kill wild-type cells following exposure for less than 48 h . next, four plasmids were constructed  carrying a cassette in which the γ- or δ-amastin coding sequences  were replaced by either the neomycin  or hygromycin  resistance genes that each included 1 kb each of 5’- and 3’-flanking regions  from the γ- or δ-amastin gene . after excision of the drug resistance marker gene with the genomic flanking regions , the excised dna was used to transfect a. deanei by electroporation. transfectants were selected in 500 μg/ml g- <dig> or hygromycin for approximately 2 weeks, and clonal cultures were obtained by limiting dilutions . analyses of cells transfected with the padea γ-ama/hyg cassette revealed that hr occurred at high frequency and specifically at the targeted locus, resulting in Δ-γ-amahyg single knock-out  cell lines, as indicated by  the occurrence of an additional pcr product at  <dig>  kb using genomic dna  from transformants  as a template and primers that anneal to gdna just outside of the fr sequences used for targeting the insertion cassette ;  sequence analysis of pcr products containing the inserted cassette ;  the occurrence of a  <dig>  kbp apa1/sgra <dig> gdna band hybridizing to the hygromycin probe in southern blot analysis ; and  reduced hybridization signals of the γ-amastin probe to apa1/sgra <dig> restricted gdna of the Δ-γ-amahyg sko strains relative to wild-type . also for the remaining  <dig> plasmids described in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  strict hr was observed. furthermore, integrations of the resistance cassettes were stable for over 2 months even after removing the selection pressure, as demonstrated by the pcr banding patterns of Δ-δ-amaneo sko cell lines .fig.  <dig> 
a g- <dig> and  hygromycin sensitivity of a. deanei. cultures of wild-type cells grown to mid-log phase were diluted in 10 ml of fresh medium supplemented with the indicated concentration of drug to 1 ×  <dig> cell/ml and incubated at 28 °c without agitation. cells were counted every 12 h and the average and standard deviation from three independent cultures were plotted against time


fig.  <dig> sequence analysis confirms insertion of resistance cassette in the γ-amastin locus. genomic dna extracted from Δ-γ-amahyg sko clone  <dig>  was used as a template for pcr with primers binding to the gdna outside of the cassette and inside the resistance markers. the pcr products obtained were sequenced. the alignment shows: clone1-5′ or 3′ utr, sections of the genomic sequence of the transformant resulting from hr between the gdna and the resistance cassette ; clone1-5′utr/hyg and clone1-hyg/3′utr, sections of the genomic sequence of the transformant surrounding the start and stop codon of the hyg gene, respectively; γ-ama/hyg rscaffold, the expected genomic sequence organization of the recombinant Δ-γ-amahyg locus; γ-ama wt scaffold, wild-type sequence at the γ-amastin locus. the map underneath the alignment indicates primer binding sites  and sizes of resulting pcr products. red arrowheads indicate the position at which the cassette inserted by hr into the genome and black arrowheads denote the start and stop codon of the hyg and γ-amastin orfs. the striped rectangles represent genomic regions upstream and downstream of the insertion sites for the cassettes. light blue rectangles represent the 5′- and 3′-flanking regions  of the γ-amastin gene that are present in the cassette. yellow rectangles represent hyg



fig.  <dig> homologous recombination in a. deanei. genomic dna was restricted with specified enzymes and analyzed by southern blot hybridizations using probes against γ-amastin, δ-amastin, hyg, or neo, as indicated above each blot. the wild type  and three clones  were analyzed for Δ-γ-amahyg sko , Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-γ-amaneo dko , and Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-δ-amaneo pko cell lines .  in the Δ-γ-amahyg sko cell lines, a band shift of 2 kb between the γ-amastin wt locus and the recombinant locus containing hyg could be readily observed in all three clones analyzed, indicating replacement of the first γ-amastin allele by hyg;  a second transfection with a cassette encoding neo targeting the γ-amastin locus completely abolished the γ-amastin wt locus in all three Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-γ-amaneo dko clones analyzed; as a control, gdna from the sko lines Δ-γ-amahyg  and Δ-γ-amaneo  was tested;  transfection of Δ-γ-amahyg sko clone  <dig> with a cassette encoding neo targeting the δ-amastin locus yielded the Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-δ-amaneo pko cell lines.  restriction maps are provided for the various blots. the striped rectangles represent genomic regions up and downstream of the insertion sites for the cassettes, light blue and violet rectangles represent the 5′- and 3′-flanking regions  of the γ- and δ-amastin genes, respectively, that are present in the cassettes; blue and orange rectangles represent the γ- and δ-amastin orfs, respectively; and hyg and neo are represented by yellow and pink rectangles, respectively. the red bar above the inserted marker gene highlights the binding region for the dna probe used for hybridization


fig.  <dig>  stability of genomic insertion in a. deanei and  knock-out of the amastin genes does not affect growth of a. deanei.  ten clones of the Δ-δ-amaneo sko were grown in the absence of g- <dig> for a period of two months. the gdna was then extracted and the presence of neo tested by pcr. a single band at  <dig>  kb corresponding to the δ-amastin gene can be seen in the wild-type cells , while an additional band at  <dig>  kb corresponding to the insertion of neo appears in all  <dig> Δ-δ-amaneo clones examined .  cells from mid-log phase cultures of the Δ-δ-amaneo and Δ-γ-amahyg skos and the Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-γ-amaneo dko cell lines were diluted to 1 ×  <dig> cells/ml in fresh growth medium supplemented with 500 μg/ml of the corresponding drug and cells were counted every day. values represent an average and standard deviation of three independent experiments




since trypanosomatids are asexual diploids, the creation of null mutants requires disruption of both alleles of any specific gene. the double knock-out  Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-γ-amaneo was readily obtained by transfection of the Δ-γ-amahyg sko cell line with the apa1/sac <dig> restriction fragment from padea γ-ama/neo that encodes the neo resistance marker flanked by γ-amastin frs . in this case, restricted gdna from the dko strains showed no signal when the γ-amastin gene was used as a hybridization probe , but bands of expected sizes were observed when both hyg and neo genes were used as probes .

in order to test if both the δ- and γ-amastin loci can be highjacked for simultaneous expression of heterologous genes, a Δ-γ-amahyg/Δ-δ-amaneo parallel knock-out  cell line was generated . insertion of the neo marker gene into one allele of the δ-amastin gene is shown in fig. 3c, panels  <dig> and  <dig>  while insertion of the hyg marker gene into one allele of the γ-amastin locus is shown in fig. 3c, panels  <dig> and  <dig>  there were no apparent phenotypical differences  between wild-type and any of the recombinant cell lines generated, suggesting that a sko or dko of the γ-amastin gene, a sko of δ-amastin, or a pko of the δ-amastin and γ-amastin genes are not detrimental to the cells , at least under the conditions that we used for growth.

construction of a vector for heterologous expression of egfp
to facilitate protein localization studies in a. deanei, we used heterologous expression of the enhanced green fluorescent protein . an expression vector  was constructed in which the 5’-fr of the δ-amastin gene was fused to the 5’-end of the neo marker gene followed by the intergenic region between the a. deanei glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase i and ii genes , a highly conserved trypanosomatid sequence containing all signals necessary for transcript maturation and stability  <cit> , and then egfp followed by the 3’-fr of the δ-amastin gene . a foreign gene  could be integrated into this vector at the 5’ or 3’-end of the egfp sequence, resulting in expression of an egfp n- or c-terminal fusion protein. to achieve targeting of egfp to various subcellular compartments, the paex-egfp vector was modified by the addition of a peroxisomal targeting signal type  <dig>  to egfp, , or a mitochondrial targeting peptide  from the trypanosoma brucei dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase   <cit> . for transfection, the expression cassettes were excised from the plasmids at the ecorv restriction sites shown in fig. 5a.fig.  <dig> heterologous expression and subcellular localization of egfp in a. deanei.  the paex series of plasmids. violet rectangles, δ-amastin 5′- and 3′-flanking regions ; blue rectangle, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase i-ii intergenic region ; magenta arrow, neo; green arrow, enhanced green fluorescence protein ; red highlights, position of the t. brucei dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase mtp  and the peroxisomal targeting sequence type  <dig> .  cells transfected with paex cassettes encoding the egfp, mito-egfp containing an n-terminal mtp, or egfp-skl containing the c-terminal pts <dig> were spread on polylysine-coated glass slides, fixed in 2 % v/v ice-cold solution of paraformaldehyde in pbs, and stained with dapi for 5 min before visualization. scale bar: 2 μm




as assessed by epifluorescence microscopy, cells transfected with the paex-egfp cassette showed the expected cytosolic localization of egfp fluorescence . in contrast, cells transfected with the paex-egfp-skl cassette showed the characteristic punctate pattern of fluorescence in accord with localization of the egfp to trypanosomatid glycosomes  <cit> , while cells transfected with the paex-mito-egfp cassette showed a tubule-like fluorescence pattern that reflects the unique shape of the a. deanei mitochondrion  <cit>  . these results demonstrate that  highjacking of the δ-amastin locus was suitable for in vivo expression and localization of heterologous proteins in a. deanei, and that  using the a. deanei gapdh ir to drive expression of transgenes allows for the synthesis of stable mrnas and the subsequent accumulation of the encoded fusion protein.

etp1: a host-encoded protein specifically targeted to the endosymbiont
to test the hypothesis that host-encoded proteins in a. deanei are targeted to the endosymbiont, endosymbionts were isolated and subjected to proteomic analysis using tandem mass spectrometry. comparative proteomic analysis of whole cell lysates versus purified endosymbionts revealed enrichment of the host-encoded etp <dig>  in the latter fraction . assignment of the sequence to nuclear contig number  <dig>  <cit>  and the presence of a typical sl at the 5’-end of the etp <dig> mrna clearly demonstrated its nuclear origin.table  <dig> the host-encoded etp <dig> is enriched in the purified endosymbiont fraction. 500 ng tryptic digested protein of each sample , was analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry 

etp1c
atp synthase sub. αe
atp synthase sub. βe
nadh-frdf

aprotein identifier corresponding to the uniprot database 


b
subcellular localization found in other trypanosomatid species


cendosymbiont-targeted protein 1


daverage and standard deviations were calculated from three independent experiments


esubunit α and β of the mitochondrial atpase complex


fnadh-dependent fumarate reductase




to confirm specific targeting of etp <dig> to the endosymbiont, we constructed two expression vectors encoding etp <dig> fused to the n- or c-terminus of egfp . a. deanei cells transfected with these expression cassettes were analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization  using a 5′-cy <dig> labeled probe against the bacterial 16s rrna   <cit>  in combination with an immunofluorescence assay using a gfp-specific primary antibody. epifluorescence microscopy showed specific targeting of the n- and c-terminal fusions of etp <dig> to egfp to the bacterial endosymbiont, indicating that the targeting function of the etp <dig> sorting signal  was maintained in both of the fusion proteins . the same fluorescence pattern was observed by direct analysis of the egfp signal , however, this type of analysis cannot be combined with fish.fig.  <dig> host-encoded etp <dig> is specifically targeted to the β-proteobacterial endosymbiont in a. deanei.  paex-egfp-etp <dig> and paex-etp1-egfp plasmids for expression of etp <dig> fused to the c- and n-terminus of egfp, respectively. brown rectangle or arrow, etp <dig>  remaining color code and abbreviations are as in fig.  <dig>   cells expressing the n- or c-terminal etp1-egfp fusion protein were analyzed by fish-ifa using a 5′-cy <dig> labeled probe against the bacterial 16s rrna and an α-gfp igg as described in methods. egfp-etp <dig>  n-terminal fusion of egfp; etp1-egfp, c-terminal fusion of egfp; es, eight-shaped endosymbiont; k, kinetoplast; n, nucleus. scale bar: 2 μm




discussion
despite the prevalence of bacterial endosymbionts across eukaryotic phyla and their ecological and evolutionary relevance, molecular mechanisms mediating host-endosymbiont integration are largely unknown owing to a lack of effective molecular tools that enable functional studies of endosymbiotic systems. in this work, we focused on developing molecular biological tools for the trypanosomatid a. deanei, a promising model system for studying endosymbiosis. the ease of transfection, availability of full genome and transcriptome sequences, high frequencies of hr, and rapid growth have allowed us to generate a toolbox for efficient genetic manipulation of a. deanei. we established electroporation protocols, hygromycin and neomycin resistances as markers for selection of transfectants, and identified the γ- and δ-amastin loci as suitable genome sites for insertion and high level expression of transgenes. in addition, we used these newly developed tools to perform protein localization studies over a short time frame  by heterologous expression of egfp fused to various targeting signals, with the cassette encoding these constructs integrated into the δ-amastin locus.

the ability to obtain sko, dko, and pko cell lines in a. deanei and express fluorescent fusion proteins allows for the knock-out of specific genes, the expression of endogenous proteins with altered amino acid sequences, the establishment of over-expresser lines, the testing of heterologous proteins for activities/functions, and the localization of proteins to specific cellular compartments. these fundamental capabilities will enable, for the first time, the time and cost effective in depth dissection of the molecular mechanisms that shape the interactions between a eukaryotic host and its vertically inherited endosymbiont. furthermore, there is the potential to expand the molecular toolbox for a. deanei. a recent study demonstrates that the rnai machinery is functional in a. deanei and knock down of specific genes can be achieved by transfection of cells with double stranded rnas  <cit> . also the crispr-cas <dig> system, which has recently been established in the closely related t. cruzi  <cit> , can likely be applied to a. deanei with the tools already developed, which would help to efficiently knock out multiple genes simultaneously.

using the newly developed tools, we firmly establish that the host-encoded protein etp <dig> is specifically targeted to the endosymbiont of a. deanei. the absence of etp <dig> orthologues in any other organism makes it difficult to predict a cellular function of this protein. recently, it was shown that specifically inhibiting the a. deanei cell cycle or translation, affects the division of its endosymbiont  <cit> . this raises the speculative possibility that etp <dig> and/or other nuclear-encoded proteins targeted to the endosymbiont might play a role in controlling its cell cycle.

interestingly, in legume plants and insects with bacteriocyte-housed endosymbionts, proteins targeted to the bacterial endosymbionts contain an n-terminal signal peptide  that routes proteins to the secretory pathway . in contrast, a. deanei etp <dig> is specifically targeted to its intracellular β-proteobacterium in the absence of any apparent targeting signal at its n- or c-terminus. a similar situation was reported for nuclear-encoded photosystem i proteins that are targeted to the intracellular cyanobacterium-derived organelle in the amoeba p. chromatophora  <cit> . the presence or absence of sps in symbiont-targeted proteins probably reflects an important difference between the various endosymbiotic systems. while rhizobia in the legumes and bacteriocyte-housed endosymbionts in insects are compartmentalized within ‘symbiosomes’ , the bacterial endosymbionts of a. deanei and p. chromatophora are in the host cytoplasm and not encased in a host-derived membrane. a more rigorous analysis using methods with higher resolution such as immunogold electron microscopy will be necessary to establish subcellular localization of etp <dig> within the endosymbiont.

CONCLUSIONS
the realization that symbiotic associations are ubiquitous in nature and critical to the evolution of eukaryotes makes it imperative to establish systems for elucidating the rules that govern the integration of an endosymbiotic bacterium into a eukaryotic host cell. previous studies revealed targeting of host-encoded proteins to bacterial endosymbionts in plants , insects , and the amoeba p. chromatophora . here we report that also in the trypanosomatid a. deanei , i.e. a member of a fourth eukaryotic superphylum, host-encoded proteins are routed to the bacterial endosymbiont. this finding suggests that the targeting of host proteins might be a general strategy of eukaryotic cells to gain control over and interact with a bacterial endosymbiont. in this work, we established a. deanei as a time and cost efficient reference system for in depth dissection of the molecular mechanisms that underlie host-endosymbiont interaction. using this system to explore the partitioning of cellular functions, the trafficking of proteins and metabolites between the partner organisms and their regulatory integration, will be fundamental for our understanding of the biology of endosymbiosis and might provide insights into general principles that govern endosymbiosis as a biological phenomenon.

