BACKGROUND
xanthomonas is a genus in the gamma division of proteobacteria primarily constituted by pathogens to plants of considerable economic importance. these pathogens affect a wide variety of crops, including citrus spp. , oryza spp. , crucifers  and manihot esculenta , with individual members showing a high degree of host specificity  <cit> . xanthomonas is among the few bacterial genera in which large dna-dna hybridization, rflp and rep-pcr datasets are available  <cit>  and have been employed for the taxonomical resolution of the group  <cit> . in addition, the availability of more than ten genomes within the genus  <cit>  has allowed recent studies of comparative genomics and genome evolution  <cit> .

the genus xanthomonas has been subject to numerous taxonomical and phylogenetic studies, starting with the description of bacterium vesicatorium as the causal agent of bacterial spot on pepper and tomato  <cit>  and its reclassification as xanthomonas campestris  <cit> . xanthomonas was first described as a monotypic genus, and later divided in two groups, a and b  <cit> . a subsequent study  <cit>  classified  <dig> reported strains into  <dig> different species mainly based on dna-dna hybridization data. since then, a general classification has been established based on polyphasic analysis  <cit> , while other analyses helped to clarify the classification in specific clades, mainly using multi locus sequence analysis  and amplified fragment length polymorphism   <cit> . this allowed the development of several typing and characterization tools , which have revealed the diversity and complexity of the genus  <cit> , while showing the limitations of single locus analyses  <cit> . however, during the last decade the taxonomy of this genus has still been subject to considerable debate. genus-wide reclassifications have been proposed  <cit> , and frequent sub-specific reclassifications and proposals for new species have been published  <cit> .

a remarkable example of these conflicts is the classification of x. fuscans aurantifolii  <cit> , also known as x. axonopodis pv. "aurantifolii"  <cit> . this taxon was originally identified as part of the dna hybridization homology group "x. axonopodis"  <cit> , but after its differentiation from other xanthomonads by dna sequence-based molecular techniques, production of water-soluble brown pigment and host range, it was designated as x. fuscans  <cit> . however, when these traits/methods were examined, none of them could individually differentiate x. fuscans from other pathovars within x. axonopodis  <cit> . dna-dna reassociation assays, in turn, have differentiated x. fuscans from x. axonopodis, x. campestris and x. citri  <cit> . additional host-range evidence has also been used to support the designation x. fuscans, separated from x. axonopodis and x. citri. phaseolus vulgaris and citrus spp. are infected by x. fuscans pvs. fuscans and aurantifolii, respectively, but are not infected by either x. axonopodis or x. campestris. citrus spp., on the other hand, is also infected by x. citri  <cit> . however, host range is usually a criterion to separate pathovars and not species. this example underscores the importance of a solid taxonomic classification with a phylogenetic basis.

molecular phylogenetics has played an important role in the classification of the genus. single locus analyses, including the use of 16s-23s rdna spacers, the 16s rrna gene and the dna gyrase gyrb  <cit> , generally agree with standing nomenclature but with low resolution below the species level. mlsa including sequences of protein-coding genes dnak, fyua and rpod  <cit> , has significantly extended previous results. in general, mlsa results suggest that x. citri and x. fuscans are closely related species and should be considered as a single species based on their  <dig> % similarity in the proteins encoded by dnak, fyua, gyrb and rpod  <cit> . recently, a phylogenomic approach was applied to resolve the phylogenetic relationships within the genus  <cit> , although this work did not explore the phylogenetic distances between strains, and did not include sequences from x. axonopodis species. the general structure of the genus agreed with the standing nomenclature.

the use of genomic sequences as the basis for species delimitation has been explored as a new standard in bacteria in replacement of dna-dna hybridization  <cit> , particularly based on metrics such as the ani   <cit> . the correspondence between dna-dna hybridization and sequence similarity has been exploited in xanthomonas for the establishment of clades and species  <cit> , but full genomic sequences have not been used so far for the resolution of the "x. axonopodis" clade . phylogenomic methods extend the analysis of primary sequence data from one or few loci  to hundreds or thousands of loci at the same time, alleviating the problem of incongruence between characters  <cit> . here, we present a phylogeny of the genus based on seventeen complete and draft genomes, including five genomes from the "x. axonopodis" clade. we identified the orthologous genes and performed the phylogenetic inferences using a new library called unus, which is briefly described here.

RESULTS
the automated selection of orthologous genes is consistent with manual selection
in order to compare a typical literature-based selection of genes for phylogenetic reconstruction in bacteria with the unus automated method, using  <dig> genes in the genomes listed in table  <dig>  we evaluated the presence of the housekeeping genes used by amphora  <cit> . we found that several of these genes were absent in the draft genomes xfa <dig>  xfa <dig> and xvm <dig>  in addition, in-paralogs  were detected in the genome of xook for several ribosomal proteins  and were therefore discarded. this is possibly due to errors in the genome sequence, given that these genes are usually present as a single copy. importantly, the absence of rpl genes in the xook genome suggests that ribosomal proteins  were located at mis-assembled regions of the genome sequence. genes employed in the genus-wide analysis and used by amphora include dnag, nusa, pgk, pyrg, rplm, rplp, rpls, rplt, rpma, rpob, rpsb, rpsc, rpse, rpsi, rpsk, rpsm and rpss. also, five out of the seven genes used by pieretti et al.  <cit>   were found in the constructed orthology groups , while other two  seemed to be absent in the draft genome of xfa <dig>  this underscores the importance of a flexible selection criterion of orthologous genes in a determined group of taxa, especially with unfinished genomes. a previous mlsa conducted by young and collaborators  <cit>  employed four protein-coding genes included in the previous lists plus the tonb-dependent receptor fyua, also present in our selection. another mlsa recently performed by bui thi ngoc et al.  <cit>  used the genes atpd, dnak, efp and gyrb, all of which were present in our dataset. these data suggest that the automated selection using bit score ratio  is in agreement with the classical selection of genes for phylogenetic studies. therefore, some of the genes selected in this study can be used for future phylogenetic reconstructions.

the species column contains the accepted name of the bacterium. alternative names may exist. the listed diseases may be known with different names or in additional hosts. the diseases names and hosts stand as designated in the publication of the genome  or in  <cit>  where unpublished. * spontaneous rifampicilin-resistant strain derived from ncppb  <dig> . * type strain of the species, straininfo  <dig>  * smr derivative of the wild-type strain dsm  <dig>  <cit> , straininfo  <dig>  * wild-type isolate by anne alvarez  <cit> . * in this study we show that this name should be considered a later heterotypic synonym of x. citri as previously suggested  <cit> . * ibsf  <dig>  straininfo  <dig>  * cio, ciat-orstrom  xanthomonas collection, biotechnology research unit, cali, colombia  <cit> . * cfbp  <dig> or lmg  <dig>  straininfo  <dig>  * isolated from banana by valentine aritua, not registered in straininfo. * cfbp  <dig>  straininfo  <dig>  * straininfo  <dig>  * 5-azacytidine-resistant derivative of pxo <dig>  collected by mew and collaborators  <cit> . * cfbp  <dig>  straininfo  <dig> 

the cog classification for the employed genes  was compared among sets of genes obtained from automated selections at different taxonomical levels within the genus . cog categories related to central metabolism and ribosomal proteins presented a tendency to increase in representation , as genomes from a wider taxonomical range were included . together, these categories covered 27% of the cog-classified genes and included genes that are frequently used for phylogenetic reconstruction. on the other hand, a reduction in the relative representation when including a wider taxonomical range of genomes was observed for categories related to peripheral metabolism and poorly characterized proteins . these categories covered  <dig> % of the cog-classified genes and included clade-specific genes  as well as genes absent in x. albilineans, which presents a notable genome size reduction  <cit> . pieretti and collaborators identified  <dig> ancestral genes potentially lost by pseudogenization or short deletions in x. albilineans and  <dig> potentially lost by both x. albilineans and xylella fastidiosa  <cit> . most of the cog-classified genes putatively lost in x. albilineans or both x. albilineans and xylella fastidiosa  can be classified within these cog categories. the same tendency to increase in relative representation when increasing the number of taxa was displayed by genes without an assigned cog category . the only category significantly impacted by discarding the in-paralogs was category l . this category covers  <dig> % of the cog-classified genes, and  <dig> % of those discarded by paralogy, suggesting frequent duplications of genes implicated in these processes. putative transposases and inactive derivatives represent 76% of the discarded genes.

phylogeny of the genus xanthomonas
our phylogenetic analysis was based on  <dig> og , which included all markers used in previous xanthomonas phylogenetic analyses. both, the maximum likelihood tree and the bayesian consensus tree reconstructed the same well-supported topology, with bootstrap supports of 100% for all the nodes . the same relationships were also obtained with maximum parsimony .

a total of four clades were obtained in the phylogenomic reconstruction. the first clade includes x. oryzae, the second comprises x. vasicola, the third one groups together x. fuscans, x. euvesicatoria and x. axonopodis, and the fourth clade contains x. campestris . these results agree with previous phylogenies of the genus  <cit> . in order to further advance on the knowledge of the ancestral relationships of the genus xanthomonas, and in particular the species xylella fastidiosa, we performed a new analysis including three additional genomes in the xanthomonadaceae family: xylella fastidiosa str. 9a5c , also a plant pathogen, but strictly transmitted by insect vectors; pseudoxanthomonas suwonensis str. 11- <dig> , a bacterium isolated from environmental samples but more commonly found in contaminated ones; and stenotrophomonas maltophilia str. r551- <dig> , a common soil colonizer which has also been reported as a human opportunistic pathogen. these species are hereafter termed xyf <dig>  pxs <dig> and stmr, respectively. this new analysis was based on a collection of  <dig> genes automatically compiled by the unus library using bit score ration . the resulting phylogeny revealed that the genus xanthomonas is not monophyletic, with xylella fastidiosa as its sister clade. x. albilineans should be placed in an independent genus in order for the taxonomy to match the phylogeny of the group , as previously noted  <cit> . this result differs from that presented by pieretti and collaborators, based on seven housekeeping genes  <cit> , where x. albilineans and x. fastidiosa form a single clade ancestral to all other xanthomonas.

genome evolution: gains and losses
the high number of pseudogenes and lost regions in x. albilineans suggests a reductive genome evolution in this species  <cit> . this information, together with the position of the taxon in previous phylogenies  <cit>  and the reduced size of the close relative xylella fastidiosa  <cit> , could indicate either a reduced genome as the ancestral condition in the xanthomonas genus or independent genome reductions in xylella fastidiosa and x. albilineans. pieretti and collaborators provide strong evidence supporting the latter hypothesis  <cit> . however, the enrichment of phage-related regions in the xylella genomes, as well as the presence of multiple insertion sequences  in xanthomonas reveal very active mobile elements in the xanthomonadales order  <cit> . to determine whether this reductive tendency extends to other genomes of the genus, we employed genoplast  <cit>  for the detection of ancestral genomic gains and losses. the results  revealed that all the tip nodes in the x. oryzae species present net genomic losses compensated by genomic gains in ancestors of the species . interestingly, the three genomes of the species x. vasicola presented large genomic gains  after genomic losses exhibited by the most recent ancestral node of the species . this level of genomic losses is almost twice as large as that exhibited by x. albilineans , suggesting that the x. vasicola genomes are very dynamic, while maintaining a genome size comparable to other species in the genus.

gene clusters and detection of putative gene transfer by orthology groups
in order to identify the distribution of ogs among taxa within xanthomonas, a second set was constructed using orthomcl  <cit> . figure  <dig> depicts the general distribution, clustering by patterns of presence/absence among genomes, regardless of their relatedness. in general, the patterns presented by most of the ogs are monophyletic, as expected . however, a few paraphyletic patterns were unexpectedly enriched. further inspection revealed that most of the ogs in two of the most enriched paraphyletic patterns are clustered in the genomes and preserve synteny. we explored these patterns, and found two clusters of contiguous genes with paraphyletic distributions, suggesting horizontal transference of genetic material.

the first cluster  is present in xci <dig>  xeu <dig>  xcc <dig> and xccb, but absent in other genomes of x. campestris, in x. axonopodis and in x. fuscans. similar genes were also found in pseudomonas aeruginosa, salmonella enterica and other species of the genera pseudomonas, salmonella and acidovorax . this cluster is mainly composed of putative secreted and membrane proteins, with few characterized orthologs. in xanthomonas, only three of those genes have been characterized. the first two code for vird <dig> and virb <dig>  which are proteins implicated in protein secretion by the type iv secretion system in several bacteria, including helicobacter, agrobacterium and bartonella  <cit> . the third codes for radc, a protein involved in dna repair. the gene at the locus xcv2366_ <dig> from xeu <dig> presents homology with the oxidoreductase dbsa, an important protein for oxidative folding of disulphide-bonded proteins in gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . only nine out of the nineteen genes in this cluster present a g+c content at least one standard deviation distant from the average for the coding regions within the xeu <dig> genome . the values of codon adaptation index  for the seventeen genes in the cluster were similar to the values obtained for other regions of the genome. the distribution of this cluster along the genus suggests flow of genetic material between different pathovars of xanthomonas. however, g+c content and cai analyses failed to relate this cluster to lgt. furthermore, lgt regions predicted by alienhunter  <cit>  do not cover more than one gene in this region in any of the analysed genomes . interestingly, in all the genomes, predicted lgt regions surround the cluster at distances from one to eight kbp.

the second cluster  is present in xamc and xfa <dig> but not in xfa <dig>  despite the high genome-wide similarity presented between xfa <dig> and xfa <dig> . the classification of putative homologs of the genes in this cluster  revealed that it is mainly composed of sequences similar to proteins in escherichia coli, siphoviridae, stenotrophomonas sp. ska <dig>  salmonella enterica and pseudomonas aeruginosa . moreover, members of the siphoviridae viral family are known to be pseudomonas and xanthomonas phages, suggesting the presence of virus-mediated lgt. we cannot attribute the pattern to the mixture of chromosomal and plasmidic dna in draft genomes , because none of the sequences presented similarity with genes in xanthomonas plasmids. note that the gene at the locus xauc_17260_ <dig>  was originally annotated as yaph, but its product is a large protein of  <dig> aa in xfa <dig> and  <dig> aa in xamc, putatively xenologous with a component of a phage tail . two genes in the cluster  presented a g+c content more than one standard deviation below the mean of the coding sequences in the xamc genome , and a low cai with respect to the whole predicted coding sequences . the other seven genes in the cluster presented average features, which would have precluded their identification as units potentially under lgt.

discussion
the results of the genome-based phylogenetic reconstruction suggest that certain changes should be considered in the nomenclature of the xanthomonas genus. for instance, x. fuscans was recently proposed as a new species  <cit> , but here we show that it should be considered as a later heterotypic synonym of x. citri, as previously suggested  <cit> . other clades in the standing bacterial nomenclature  <cit>  within the xanthonomonas genus were consistent with the phylogenetic reconstruction. nevertheless, we observed a paralogy in the genus xanthomonas when xylella fastidiosa was included with x. albilineans outside the xanthomonas group. our results suggest that x. albilineans, probably along with other early-branching xanthomonas, should be considered for a new genus designation. however, the relationships between x. albilineans, xylella and the other xanthomonas remain unclear. another shared feature between xylella fastidiosa and x. albilineans is the reduced genome. the reductions in these genomes were previously shown to be due to independent events  <cit> . here we show evidence suggesting that reductive genome evolution could also affect other clades in the genus such as x. vasicola.

the phylogenetic relationship between x. albilineans, xylella fastidiosa and the rest of the taxa in the genus xanthomonas is not clear. the genome of x. albilineans is part of the "early-branching species"  <cit> , a group of species including x. albilineans and x. sacchari previously found to be basal in the phylogeny of the genus  <cit> . the species is also a member of the "hyacinthii" group, a group of species with major differences in the 16s-23s rdna intergenic spacer  with respect to the other members of the genus  <cit> . pieretti and collaborators  <cit>  suggested that xylella and x. albilineans form a monophyletic clade, which is basal to the rest of xanthomonas. this is based on a maximum likelihood analysis with seven housekeeping genes. our analyses with over two hundred genes suggest that x. albilineans is basal to xylella and the rest of taxa in the genus xanthomonas. neither of the analyses obtains a good support value for these nodes. the most straightforward explanation for this is that certain regions of the genome support one topology and certain others support the second one. this could be due to a considerable number of lgt in these genomes. alternatively, it could be due to the large amount of changes accumulated in xylella fastidiosa, as revealed by the length of the corresponding branch .

the phylogenetic tree presented in figure 2a displays identical topology and similar relative branch lengths as inferred by different optimality criteria . the tree supports monophyly in the species x. campestris, x. oryzae and x. vasicola. the clade "x. axonopodis" contains the species x. fuscans, x. citri, x. axonopodis and x. euvesicatoria. however, the lower coverage in terms of sequenced genomes of these species makes it difficult to support any further observation beyond the close relatedness within the clade with respect to other species.

interestingly, the phylogeny displays a close relationship between the species x. fuscans and x. citri. in order to compare their similarity in the same framework of mlsa performed for other species of xanthomonas , we constructed a matrix containing  <dig> loci employed for the phylogenetic inference . according to the resulting matrix, a similarity threshold of 99% can differentiate bacteria recognized as belonging to the different pathovars . all the species with currently accepted names  <cit>  have similarities above 97%. this value  also differentiate species outside the x. axonopodis clade, but fails to differentiate x. fuscans and x. citri, suggesting that the two pathovars conform a single species as previously suggested  <cit> . this is also supported by the likelihood distances between these two taxa . accordingly, we recommended that the species x. fuscans be regarded as a heterotypic synonym of x. citri.

the  <dig> loci employed for phylogenetic inference were used to generate a similarity matrix between genomes. values between 96-99% of similarity are highlighted in light grey. values above 99% similarity are in bold.

several robust methods for the identification of orthology, multiple sequence alignments and phylogenetic inferences have recently been developed . however, a common flexible framework for their joint application in specialized phylogenetic studies and mlsa in general is still required. the bioperl libraries, including the bio::phylo package  <cit> , provide valuable tools for the automation of analyses, but the connections between different steps are often not automated, making them time-consuming. unus allows the execution of complete workflows in phylogenomics within a single interface, and its current functionalities and limitations underscore the need for a fully structured platform in the field, such as those available for other branches of genomics.

we compared the automatically selected ogs for the phylogenetic assessment with several lists of genes manually compiled. these comparisons indicated that, depending on the genome coverage and annotation of the drafts employed, our analyses broadly agree in the selection of ogs with those utilized previously for phylogenetic inference. furthermore, the functional distribution of the automatically selected genes exhibits the expected behaviour at different taxonomical levels. selections on broader taxonomical levels exhibit a larger representation of genes implicated in central-metabolism, while the proportion of clade-specific genes augments in narrower taxonomical levels.

the analysis of the distribution of cog categories shows that central metabolism and ribosomal proteins are favoured when comparing distant genomes, as they are in phylogenetic studies based on one or few loci. genes in these categories are better suited than genes in other cog categories or unclassified genes because of two characteristics that are important for phylogenetic assessment. firstly, genes implicated in central-metabolism and ribosomal genes are usually of single-copy. genes with in-paralogs are normally avoided in phylogenetic inferences given the difficulty in identifying corresponding genes in sets of paralogy  <cit> , despite some efforts to include them in phylogenetic analyses . secondly, these genes are often present even in genomes from loosely related organisms. although phylogenetic reconstructions based on gene content have proven successful , it is hard to achieve high resolution below species and it is not possible with incomplete draft genomes.

additional genes suitable for phylogenetic analyses were detected through automated identification of orthologs, allowing a higher resolution among closely related taxa. these genes are usually not included in mlsa, although they can add important information about relationships within the group. for closely related bacteria , the importance of such additional information resides on the low variability among genomes. therefore, the option to select orthologs without a priori knowledge of the genes that will be included, allows for flexibility in terms of data availability, as well as the obtention of optimized phylogenetic resolution at any taxonomic level under study.

a previous study  <cit>  suggested a reductive evolution in the genome of x. albilineans, revealed by the small genome  and the high putative pseudogenization. we present evidence supporting the hypothesis that the reductive genome evolution occurs along the genus, and is not restricted to the species x. albilineans. in our analyses, the species x. albilineans effectively revealed large genomic reductions, but even larger reductions were presented by the species x. vasicola, with recent genomic gains only detected on tip nodes, suggesting a reductive evolution tendency followed by the acquisition of genomic regions. the genomic gains on tip nodes can be partly explained by the inclusion of non-chromosomal material in the draft genomes of x. vasicola, although this result was not found in other draft genomes in the study that have non-chromosomal material, such as xamc. an alternative explanation is that genomic gains have arisen by recent genetic exchange with other bacteria, as previously suggested for x. vasicola  <cit> . however, the large ancestral losses cannot be explained by means of the incompleteness of the genomes, and may reflect an ancestral genomic reduction in the species. the size of the regions involved in such events, and whether they affect restricted functional categories of genes or random regions, is still to be determined.

we identified two clusters of genes with paraphyletic distribution, suggesting lateral gene transfer. one of the clusters, present in x. campestris and the "x. axonopodis" clade, exhibits interesting functional relationships with the type iv secretion system , while most of the genes are annotated as coding for either putative secreted or membrane proteins. identification of lgt events based only on intrinsic features such as the g+c content and the cai would fail to identify both clusters, showcasing the usefulness the phylogenetic distribution of orthologs as a complement for the prediction of putative lgt events.

CONCLUSIONS
currently, phylogenomic methods are finding a privileged place in phylogenetic inference and evolutionary studies, yet common frameworks for the flexible automation of workflows are not widely available. here we used unus, a package developed to facilitate the execution of phylogenetic workflows, to explore the phylogenetic structure of the genus xanthomonas. we recovered a strongly supported phylogeny in accordance with previous results and high resolution in the closely related genomes of x. oryzae. the results also provide evidence for the reconsideration of the x. fuscans species, clarify relationships between x. citri, x. axonopodis and x. euvesicatoria, and show that the genus xanthomonas is not a monophyletic clade. our results allowed us to identify several interesting features in the evolution of xanthomonas, including two large putative lateral gene transfer events, which would have been hard to detect by means of g+c content deviation or codon adaptation index. we also detected evidence of an evolutionary tendency towards a reduction in genome size in at least two clades of the genus.

