BACKGROUND
s. mutans is considered the major etiological agent of dental caries due to its strong aciduric and acidogenic capacities. during the metabolism of dietary carbohydrates and subsequent formation of acid end-products, acidogenic bacteria can shift the plaque ph to  <dig> or lower within minutes and can retain it at this value for up to one hour, depending on the age of the plaque biofilm  <cit> . demineralisation of the tooth enamel caused by low ph is the beginning of caries development. to withstand these ph fluctuations and to compete with other oral bacteria s. mutans has evolved an effective acid tolerance response . the atr is induced under acidic conditions and has an optimal ph between  <dig> - <dig>  several proteomic studies showed that more than sixty proteins were involved in this response and that many of them appeared within the first  <dig> minutes after acid shock, whereas full induction occurred after 90- <dig> minutes  <cit> .

general determinants are the induction of general stress proteins, the reduction of membrane proton permeability, increased glycolytic activity and a shift to homo-fermentative metabolism, resulting in elevated lactate production. anabolic reactions are in return down-regulated, which results in slower growth and lower cell yield  <cit> . the concomitant surplus of atp is used to drive the h+/atpase, which leads to an increased translocation of protons across the membrane. more specific reactions that contribute to the aciduricity are e.g. the agmatine deiminase system . agmatine is secreted by other bacteria in response to low ph but is internalised and deaminated by s. mutans to ammonia and carbamoylputrescine. the latter is further decarboxylated to putrescine, yielding carbon dioxide and atp, which again can be used for proton extrusion  <cit> .

another mechanism for gaining atp is malolactic fermentation , which is a secondary fermentation that lactic acid bacteria can carry out when l-malate is present in the medium. its biochemical properties have been studied in detail because of the considerable biotechnological interest, since it occurs after the alcohol fermentation during wine making affecting the flavour of the wine. in mlf the dicarboxylic acid l-malate is converted to l-lactate and carbon dioxide by the malolactic enzyme  in a two step reaction without releasing intermediates. since malic acid  is a stronger acid than lactic acid  decarboxylation of l-malate leads to an alkalinization of the cytoplasm. this effect is further enlarged by diffusion of h2co2/co <dig> out of the cell into the gas phase. the concomitant ph gradient drives the electrogenic malate/lactate antiporter and is coupled to atp synthesis, which is used to maintain the intracellular ph more alkaline than the environment by extrusion of protons  <cit> . s. mutans ua <dig> possesses a malolactic fermentation gene cluster, that is oriented in opposite direction to the putative regulator mler  <cit> . a homologue of this regulator was the first lysr-type transcriptional regulator  described in gram positive bacteria and was shown to positively regulate mlf in lactococcus lactis. a seven-fold induction of l-malate decarboxylation activity and a three-fold increase of gene expression determined by a mler-lacz fusion was observed in the presence of l-malate  <cit> . however, in oenococcus oeni malolactic fermentation activity was not enhanced by the presence of mler or l-malate  <cit> . recently sheng and marquis showed that s. mutans possesses mlf activity with a ph optimum of ph  <dig> in planktonic cells  <cit> . significant intracellular atp maintenance and enhanced protection against lethal ph values were observed in the presence of l-malate  <cit> . since this study showed that mlf has a great impact on the aciduric capacities of s. mutans, we were interested if this mechanism is part of the general atr of the cell or if it is specifically induced by mler and the presence of l-malate. deletion of mler and luciferase reporter strains for mler and mles and rt-pcr revealed insights into the expression and regulation of the mle gene cluster and especially the effect of ph. electrophoretic mobility shift assays  indicated several binding sites for the mler protein which were influenced by the presence of l-malate. moreover we investigated the role of mler for the ability of s. mutans to withstand acid stress.

RESULTS
analysis of the mle locus by rt-pcr and emsa
in the genome of s. mutans ua <dig>  <cit> , the lysr type transcriptional regulator mler is orientated opposite to a gene cluster encoding the malolactic enzyme , a malate permease , and a oxalate decarboxylase , respectively. additionally a putative prophage repressor is inserted between mler and mles . this insertion is unique for the oral streptococci  among all sequenced lactobacillales. adjacent to the genes involved in malolactic fermentation is the gene oxdc encoding the oxalate decarboxylase which catalyses the conversion of oxalate to formate and co <dig>  this gene is unique for s. mutans ua <dig> among all sequenced lactobacillales. rt-pcr disclosed that it is co-transcribed with mles and mlep since it was possible to amplify overlapping fragments of all three genes . the putative gluthatione reductase  located downstream of oxdc, which is involved in the removal of reactive oxygen species, could not be assigned to the same operon by the use of rt-pcr.

applying the electrophoretic mobility shift assay   using a dna fragment covering almost the complete intergenic sequence  between mler and smu.136c  resulted in one retarded complex, indicating one binding site for mler in this intergenic region. elongation of the dna fragment  to include the 3' end of smu.136c, produced two retarded bands, suggesting an additional binding site at the 3' end of smu.136c. the presence of  <dig> mm l-malate in both emsa reactions gave the same banding pattern. however, the extent of the shift was slightly reduced.

using the complete coding sequence of smu.136c  resulted in one retarded complex, confirming the presence of one binding site for mler in this gene. addition of l-malate to the binding reaction changed the pattern in this case and produced two retarded fragments. truncation of the 3' end of smu.136c  resulted only in one retarded fragment, independent of l-malate. the data show the presence of at least two binding sites for mler within smu.136c. one site is located within fragment ep 6- <dig>  presumably binding the apo form of mler and another one is located at the 3'end of smu.136c and appears to need the co-inducer bound form of mler. the intergenic sequence upstream of mles  produced one retarded complex in the absence and three complexes in the presence of  <dig> mm l-malate. thus, within this igs also several binding sites for different forms of mler exist. using internal dna fragments of mles or mler  or a sequence within the igs of mler and smu.136c  did not produce complexes with the mler protein under the tested condition, thus confirming the specificity of the dna-protein interaction. incubation of all used dna fragments with bsa instead of mler resulted in no retardation .

involvement of mler in mlf activity
it was previously shown that s. mutans ua <dig> was able to carry out malolactic fermentation  <cit> . to determine if the putative regulator mler is involved in the regulation of the mlf gene cluster a knockout mutant of mler was constructed, by replacing an internal part  of the gene with an erythromycin resistance cassette, amplified from another strain  <cit> . s. mutans wildtype cells showed highest mlf enzyme activity in the presence of  <dig> mm l-malate at the beginning of the stationary phase  <cit> . under these conditions, we observed a significant reduction of mlf activity of the Δmler mutant compared to the parental strain, indicating a positive regulation of the mle genes by mler . after one hour the wild type strain converted or internalised over 40% of the added l-malate. for the mutant lacking the mler regulator only a 1% reduction of the added malate within one hour was observed. furthermore, internalisation and decarboxylation of the stronger malic acid to lactic acid leads to a considerable increase of the external ph . however, after  <dig> hours of incubation a reduction of 78% and 38% of the added l-malate was observed in the wildtype and the Δmler mutant, respectively, indicating a basal level of mlf enzyme activity in the absence of mler.

the capability to carry out malolactic fermentation was determined by measuring the l-malate concentration and the ph of the supernatant of cultures grown to late exponential phase . the values represent the average of two independent experiments. the standard deviation was less than 5%.

transcription of mle genes during growth
to obtain better insights into the transcriptional regulation of the mlf gene cluster and mler itself, firefly luciferase reporter plasmids were constructed. the upstream sequences of mler and mles containing the putative promoter sequences were cloned in front of a promoterless luciferase gene and then integrated into the genome of the wildtype and the Δmler mutant by single homologous recombination, respectively. luciferase activity was monitored during growth in the absence of l-malic acid . the highest activity for both promoters was observed at the transition to the stationary phase, with an external ph between  <dig>  and  <dig> . this was true for the parental strain and the Δmler mutant, indicating that both transcriptional units might be controlled by acid inducible promoters. to rule out that this up-regulation was not due to post-exponential phase phenomena, we investigated the influence of the ph during the exponential growth phase in more detail . however, in the wildtype the mles promoter construct showed higher activity than in the Δmler knockout strain, indicating that mler induces transcription even in the absence of the potential co-inducer l-malate. accordingly, quantitative real time rt-pcr of rna isolated from cells in the late exponential phase in the absence of l-malate showed a 3-fold induction of the genes mles and mlep when comparing the wildtype to the Δmler mutant strain. an induction of mler itself under these conditions was not observed .

regulation of the mle genes by ph and l-malate
during batch cultivation without addition of external l-malate, the highest luciferase activity for the mle promoters was observed during the transition to the stationary phase . addition of l-malate as free acid to the culture , thereby lowering the ph to  <dig> - <dig>  , resulted in an immediate induction of activity . to determine if this effect was caused by the low ph or by l-malate, we further studied the influence of both parameters separately. after inoculation, cells were allowed to adapt for two hours to the medium. after addition of neutralized l-malate  the ph of the cultures was adjusted with hcl to the desired values and samples for luciferase measurements were withdrawn in intervals of  <dig> min for two hours. figure  <dig> summarizes the fold change values of promoter activity after two hours of measurement. lowering the ph, without addition of malate, resulted in an increased activity of both promoters in the wildtype as well as in the Δmler background. these data clearly demonstrate that both promoters are acid inducible and that this behaviour was not caused by post-exponential phenomena. furthermore, it shows that the influence of mler is weak at neutral ph conditions. by contrast, the presence of l-malate at low ph significantly enhanced the activity of both promoters, but only in the presence of a functional copy of mler. this allows four conclusions:  l-malate is the coinducer of mler;  enhanced transcription in the presence of l-malate requires an acidic ph;  mler positively regulates its target genes and furthermore  its own transcription. a positive auto-regulation would be a special feature, since most lttr repress their own transcription. however, exceptions exist e.g. lrha  <cit> . however, no significant induction of mler after two hours exposure to  <dig> mm free malic acid was observed using quantitative real time pcr .

quantitative real time pcr
the transcript levels of the genes smu.135- <dig> were determined using quantitative real time rt-pcr. to this end, an early log phase culture of the wildtype was divided. to one part free malic acid  was added, the other part remained untreated. rna was sampled prior to splitting the culture and after two hours. all tested genes, except mler itself, showed enhanced transcription in the presence of malic acid compared to time zero .

influence of l-malate and mler on growth
since l-malate does not serve as a catabolite facilitating growth of s. mutans we were interested to see how energy gain and ph maintenance due to mlf affect its ability to grow in an acidic environment. to study this, we used bm medium supplemented with 1%  glucose  with or without supplementation of l-malate. in the absence of l-malate, there was no difference in growth of the wildtype and the Δmler mutant strain. both strains entered the stationary phase after 6- <dig> hours at an external ph of about  <dig>  and reached a final od <dig> of about  <dig>  . inoculation of neutral bmg with this culture  resulted in an optical density of ~  <dig>  for both strains, ensuring that the ph and not nutrient limitation were the determinant for entering the stationary phase at acidic conditions. addition of l-malate to the acidified culture medium facilitated ph maintenance and further growth of both cultures . the presence of l-malate resulted in a substantially higher optical density of the wild type compared to the mler knockout strain. both strains were capable of carrying out mlf, as monitored by the l-malate concentration in the supernatant , but the mutant to a much smaller degree than the wildtype. further on significant internalisation/decarboxylation of l-malate started when the external ph dropped below  <dig>  confirming the luciferase reporter data which had shown that the malolactic fermentation system is only activated at low ph.

influence of l-malate and mler on the ability of s. mutans to tolerate acid stress
since mlf has been shown to facilitate ph maintenance  <cit> , we studied the contribution of mlf to acid tolerance in s. mutans . control cells of wildtype and Δmler were grown in neutral thby before being transferred to ph  <dig>  without l-malate. both strains showed no difference in the survival under these conditions . to determine the influence of malate and the mler regulator on the response of s. mutans to a rapid ph shift, both the wildtype and the mler mutant were grown in neutral thby and then subjected to ph  <dig>  in the presence of  <dig> mm malate. in both strains the number of surviving cells after  <dig> minutes was similar to the control . however, after  <dig> minutes the number of viable cells increased significantly compared to the control in the wildtype. thus, the genes for mlf were induced within this time period and the conversion of malate contributed to the aciduricity. without a functional copy of mler, the number of viable cells also increased after  <dig> minutes but to a much lesser extend compared to the wildtype. this again shows that a shift to an acidic ph is satisfactory to induce the mlf genes in the absence of mler. when the mle genes were induced by low ph and l-malate in a preincubation step before transferring the cells to ph  <dig> , an immediately increased viability was already seen  <dig> minutes after acid shock. again, the wildtype exhibited a significantly enhanced survival compared to the mler knockout mutant. the data show that the mlf genes are induced during the acid adaptation response but a functional copy of mler in conjunction with its co-inducer l-malate is needed to achieve maximal expression.

quantitative real time pcr showed an up-regulation of the adjacent gluthatione reductase upon the addition of  <dig> mm free malic acid . therefore, we tested the capability of s. mutans to survive exposure to  <dig>   hydrogen peroxide after incubation of cells in acidified thby and malate to induce this gene. however, no difference between wildtype and Δmler mutant was observed .

discussion
the aciduric capacity of s. mutans is one of the key elements of its virulence. contributing mechanisms are increased activity of the f1f0-atpase, changes in the membrane protein and fatty acid composition, the induction of stress proteins and the production of alkaline metabolites  <cit> . extrusion of protons via the f1f0-atpase consumes energy in the form of atp. hence, the yield of glycolytic activity and atp production is diminished at low ph, s. mutans has to induce other pathways to supply enough energy. the conversion of l-malate to l-lactate and carbon dioxide during malolactic fermentation facilitates the maintenance of the atp pool of the cell and supports the production of more alkaline metabolites. therefore mlf directly contributes to the competitive fitness of s. mutans in the complex, multispecies environment of the dental plaque. recently, sheng and marquis showed that cells of s. mutans ua <dig> possess mlf activity but no information about its regulation was available  <cit> . according to the information of mlf from l. lactis it was likely that the lttr mler adjacent to the mlf genes might be involved in their regulation.

low ph is required for induction of mlf
a knockout of mler significantly decreased mlf activity of s. mutans cells and thus confirmed its participation in the regulation of mlf. applying promoter luciferase reporter constructs we showed that the regulation of the mle genes is much more complex than just being induced in the presence of mler.

the luciferase fusion data and the acid killing profiles showed that the mle genes are activated within  <dig> minutes by acidic ph values, independently of mler and malate. therefore, the transcription of the mle genes is driven from acid inducible promoters and mlf is part of the early acid tolerance response. the emsa experiments showed a clear interaction of mler with malate, even under alkaline conditions. however, under neutral ph conditions no effect of malate on the transcription  was noticeable, suggesting that uptake of malate occurs only under low ph conditions. indeed, poolman et al.  <cit>  showed that in the presence of a ph gradient, membrane vesicles of l. lactis are able to take up l-malate with one proton or the monoanionic form of l-malate . they conclude that a ph gradient stimulates indirectly a malate/lactate antiport, by affecting the l-lactate gradient or promotes directly electrogenic malate uptake, respectively. they showed that with decreasing ph, the ph gradient adjusted to the membrane potential or even exceeded it, which resulted in an increased uptake of added malate. assuming a similar mechanism in s. mutans explains why malate under neutral ph conditions did not cause an induction of the mle genes. since the uptake of malate is reduced in a neutral ph environment, the intracellular amount of malate is not sufficient to stimulate mler and subsequent avoided a positive regulation.

mler fully induces the mlf only at low ph, with malate acting as a coinducer. a similar mechanism was recently disclosed by liu et al. for the agmatine deiminase system  <cit> . they showed that its induction by agur requires both low ph and agmatine. using a linker scanning mutagenesis approach they were able to isolate mutant forms of agur that lost their ability to activate transcription in response to ph, agmatine or both signals, respectively. they suggested that acidic conditions favoured binding of the ligand due to conformational changes of the regulator protein. a similar mechanism may indeed also be true for mler and l-malate.

in s. mutans, mlf is switched on at low ph in the complete absence of malate. this behavior might be adaptive since low ph and the availability of malate are often correlated in natural sources, e.g. fruits. thus, it may be advantageous for s. mutans to induce the whole battery of acid tolerance responses if threatened by low ph in order to be prepared, since chances of encountering malate are usually high.

the mle locus
by rt-pcr we showed that the oxalate decarboxylase gene  is co-transcribed with the mlesp genes. since the reactions catalysed by mles and oxdc are analogous it can be expected that decarboxylation of oxalate to formate also contributes to the aciduricity of s. mutans. however, no evidence for oxalate decarboxylation activity was found in s. mutans under the tested conditions, but extensive investigations were not carried out. examination of the transcript levels of the wildtype in the presence of free malic acid using quantitative real time pcr showed co-transcription of oxdc with the mle genes and confirmed the results obtained with the luciferase reporter strains. the transcript level of mler itself constituted an exception because it was not elevated. however, the result has to be interpreted cautiously since the reporter strains used here do not take into account the mrna stability of mler, which might represent another regulatory mechanism. furthermore qpcr showed an induction of the adjacent gluthatione reductase, confirming that the responses to acidic and oxidative stress are overlapping in s. mutans  <cit> .

mler binding sites
the electrophoretic mobility shift assays shown here revealed the presence of multiple binding sites for mler in the dna region within the translational start site of mler and mles. lysr type transcriptional regulators  are generally regarded to be active as tetramers, therefore they are known to interact with several binding sites at their promoter region. the -regulatory binding site is favoured by the apo-form, whereas the -activation site is occupied once the co-inducer is bound to the protein. however, the presence of the co-inducer affects the affinity to each binding site, influences dna bending and subsequently protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

the addition of l-malate changed the retardation pattern for some of the applied dna fragments. since the transcription of mler and mles was shown to be induced equally by a ph shift and l-malate using the luciferase reporter strains, a similar retardation behaviour in the emsa for both upstream dna fragments would have been expected.

surprisingly, only the igs upstream of mles showed a different pattern in the presence of malate, whereas the igs upstream of mler even showed a weaker retardation. due to the basic pi of the mler protein, we were not able to carry out emsa under physiological ph conditions which might negatively influence the binding affinity of the protein. the presence of at least two binding sites for mler within the coding region of smu.136c suggests a complex regulatory mechanism, which has to be elucidated further by means of dnase footprinting and mutagenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we showed that the mle genes including oxdc are under the control of acid inducible promoters and that they are induced within the first  <dig> minutes upon acid shock. therefore they are part of the early acid tolerance response in s. mutans, which is induced within  <dig> minutes after acidification  <cit> . further enhancement of their transcription can be obtained by mler and l-malate in an acidic environment. the use of gel retardation assays showed the presence of multiple binding sites for mler, even in the coding sequence of another gene, suggesting a complex regulatory mechanism. we clearly showed that the presence of l-malate contributed strongly to the survival of s. mutans under low ph conditions. mlf is one of the strategies aciduric bacteria have evolved to cope with low ph and to compete with other bacteria in dental plaque. s. mutans is able to carry out mlf under more acidic conditions than other streptococci  <cit> , thus emphasizing the dominant role of s. mutans in the oral cavity.

