BACKGROUND
the plastid genome has remained remarkably conserved throughout the evolution of land plants . genomes from diverse land plant lineages—including seed plants, ferns, lycophytes, hornworts, mosses, and liverworts—have a similar repertoire of genes that generally encode for proteins involved in photosynthesis or gene expression. the order of these plastid genes has remained consistent for most species, such that large syntenic tracks can be easily identified between genomes. furthermore, most plastid genomes have a quadripartite structure involving a large single-copy  and a small single-copy  region separated by two copies of an inverted repeat . although these generalities apply to most land plants, exceptions certainly exist, such as the convergent loss of photosynthetic genes from parasitic plants
 <cit>  or ndh genes from several lineages
 <cit> , the highly rearranged genomes of some species
 <cit> , and the independent loss of one copy of the ir in several groups
 <cit> .

because of the conserved structure and content of plastid genomes, its sequences have been favored targets for many plant phylogenetic analyses . through extensive sequencing from phylogenetically diverse species, our understanding of the relationships between the major groups of land plants has greatly improved in recent years
 <cit> . however, there are a few nodes whose position remains elusive, most notably that of the gnetales
 <cit>  and the horsetails
 <cit> . horsetails  are particularly enigmatic because until recently
 <cit>  their morphology had been considered to be ‘primitive’ among vascular plants, and consequently they were grouped with the “fern allies” rather than with the “true” ferns. recent molecular and morphological evidence now unequivocally support the inclusion of horsetails in ferns sensu lato , which also encompasses whisk ferns and ophioglossoid ferns , marattioid ferns , and leptosporangiate ferns 
 <cit> .

despite this progress, the relationships among fern groups, especially horsetails, have been difficult to resolve with confidence. many molecular phylogenetic analyses have suggested that horsetails are sister to marattioid ferns
 <cit> , while other analyses using different data sets and/or optimality criteria have suggested a position either with leptosporangiate ferns, with psilotum, or as the sister group to all living monilophytes
 <cit> . however, these various analyses rarely place equisetum with strong statistical support. this phylogenetic uncertainty stems from at least two main issues. first, equisetopsida is an ancient lineage dating back more than  <dig> million years, but extant  members are limited to equisetum, which diversified only within the last  <dig> million years
 <cit> . second, substitution rates in the plastid  genome appear to be elevated in horsetails compared with other early diverging ferns . consequently, molecular phylogenetic analyses produce a long evolutionary branch leading to equisetum, a problem that can lead to long-branch attraction artifacts .

in cases where molecular phylogenetic results are inconsistent, the use of rare genomic structural changes, such as large-scale inversions and the presence or absence of genes and introns, can provide independent indications of organismal relationships
 <cit> . one notable example used the differential distribution of three mitochondrial introns to infer that liverworts were the earliest diverging land plant lineage
 <cit> . other studies have identified diagnostic inversions in the plastid genomes of euphyllophytes
 <cit>  and monilophytes
 <cit> . unfortunately, complete plastid genomes are currently lacking from several important fern clades, preventing a comprehensive study of the utility of plastid structural changes in resolving fern relationships.

in this study, we sequenced three additional fern plastid genomes: the ophioglossoid fern ophioglossum californicum, the horsetail equisetum hyemale, and the whisk fern psilotum nudum. by sequencing the first ophioglossoid fern and a second horsetail , we expected that this increased sampling would allow us to evaluate diversity in plastid genome structure and content and to resolve fern relationships using sequence and structural characters.

RESULTS
static vs. dynamic plastome structural evolution in monilophytes
the three chloroplast dna  sequences from ophioglossum californicum, psilotum nudum, and equisetum hyemale  have a typical circularly mapping structure containing the lsc and ssc separated by two irs. all three genomes contain the large lsc inversion  found in euphyllophytes as well as the smaller lsc inversion  that is specific to monilophytes .

we compared the general structural features of these three new genomes to other available monilophyte and lycophyte cpdnas . the  <dig>  bp e. hyemale genome is the smallest sequenced to date, closest in size to that from e. arvense . the o. californicum and p. nudum genomes are slightly larger, at  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp, respectively, whereas all other published monilophytes are >150 kb. the reduced genome sizes in equisetum, ophioglossum, and psilotum are due to smaller sscs and irs compared to other species. despite the similar genome sizes between o. californicum and p. nudum, the ir and ssc sizes in o. californicum are more similar to equisetum than to p. nudum. gc content is quite variable among monilophytes, ranging from 33% in e. arvense to 42% in ophioglossum and angiopteris .

a close inspection of the irs among the five major groups of monilophytes  reveals a dichotomous evolutionary history involving boundary shifts and inversions in some lineages and stasis in other lineages . the irs in ophioglossum and in both equisetum plastomes contain the same complement of genes encoding all four plastid rrnas and five trnas. the ir boundaries are also similar among these three species, placing trnn-guu adjacent to either ndhf or chll at the ir/ssc borders and trnv-gac next to either trni-cau or the 3′-half of rps <dig> at the ir/lsc borders. the exact border breakpoints differ slightly in each genome but generally terminate within the ndhf and/or chll genes, creating a second fragmented copy of these genes. interestingly, the gene adjacencies at the ir borders in ophioglossum and equisetum are virtually identical to those found outside the monilophytes, including the lycophyte huperzia lucidula, the mosses physcomitrella patens and syntrichia ruralis, and the liverworts aneura mirabilis, marchantia polymorpha, and ptilidium pulcherrimum . the similar ir borders among diverse vascular and non-vascular plants can be most parsimoniously explained by the plesiomorphic retention of this arrangement inherited from the land plant common ancestor.
 <dig> 

in contrast to the static arrangement discussed above, the irs among psilotum, angiopteris, and polypodiopsida are more variable . the 19 kb ir in p. nudum includes nine additional genes due to expansion into one end of the ssc  and into one end of the lsc . the a. evecta ir exhibits intermediate characteristics: the ir/ssc border has retained the general ancestral position after trnn-guu, but the ir has expanded twice into the lsc, adding rps <dig>  rps <dig>  ndhb, and trnl-caa from one end of the lsc  and trni-cau from the other end . irs among polypodiopsida are more complex in origin, involving at least three major changes relative to the vascular plant ancestor. the unique gene orders within the ir and lsc can be most easily explained by an expansion of the ir to trnl-caa , followed by two overlapping inversions . the first inversion appears to have involved a section from ndhb in the ir to psba in the lsc. the second inversion spanned trnr-acg through the inverted ycf <dig> gene, which also included the previously inverted psba and trnh-gug genes but not the inverted pseudo-trnl-caa or ndhb genes.

limited gene and intron content variation among monilophytes
a comparison of gene and intron content among representative monilophye and lycophyte plastomes indicates a conservative evolutionary history involving no gains and few losses . some of the differences in total gene and intron numbers among species are due to differential duplication of a few genes after ir expansion in several lineages . counting duplicated genes only once, the number of plastid-encoded genes varies from  <dig> to  <dig> due to minor changes in the set of trnas or protein-coding genes, while the number of introns ranges from  <dig> to  <dig> .

a) species: isoetes flaccida , huperzia lucidula , ophioglossum californicum , psilotum nudum , equisetum hyemale , equisetum arvense , angiopteris evecta , alsophila spinulosa , adiantum capillus-veneris  and pteridium aquilinum .

b) caa anticodon of trnl-uaa in adiantum capillus-veneris  is subjected to partial c-to-u rna editing
 <cit>  and is potentially edited in alsophila spinulosa .

c) anticodon of trnr-ccg in isoetes flaccida  is assumed to be subjected to u-to-c rna editing
 <cit> .

d) mutations in anticodon of trnr-ccg created a ucg anticodon in alsophila spinulosa  and pteridium aquilinum  and a uca anticodon in adiantum capillus-veneris .

e) rps12i <dig> intron is trans-spliced .

f) ycf <dig> in angiopteris evecta  may retain functionality as a split gene with two protein products
 <cit> .

for plastid-encoded rnas, all four rrna genes  are duplicated within the ir regions, whereas trna content varies among monilophytes for five genes . the trnt-ugu gene was lost from ophioglossum and all completely sequenced polypodiopsida. the remaining trna variation has occurred within polypodiopsida. this includes the loss of trnk-uuu  after the divergence of osmundales
 <cit> , the loss of trns-cga, the fragmentation of trnl-caa which is still intact in gleichenia , and the fragmentation and subsequent loss of trnv-gac .

the trnr-ccg, while present in all leptosporangiate ferns, has undergone several sequential anticodon changes in this group . the first mutation created a ucg anticodon sequence that is seen in a. spinulosa and p. aquilinum, which might be corrected by trna editing or tolerated by wobble-base pairing. in a. capillus-veneris and cheilanthes lindheimeri, a second mutation changed the anticodon into uca, which would be expected to match uga stop codons. it is possible that this trna is a recent pseudogene
 <cit> , which is also supported by two mis-pairings in the pseudouridine loop. however, because the adiantum gene is still expressed, wolf and colleagues suggested it is a functional trnsec-uca that allows read-through of premature uga stop codons by inserting selenocysteine
 <cit> . alternatively, we suggest this trna still carries arginine as it did ancestrally, only now it recognizes internal uga stop codons. thus, this putative trnr-uca may act as a novel failsafe mechanism to ensure arginine is correctly inserted into the protein at any internal uga codons that were not properly converted by u-to-c rna editing into cga . different mutations have occurred in the anticodon of this trna for several other polypodiales. more work is needed to understand the functional significance of these anticodon shifts.

the set of protein-coding genes in the plastid genome differs for only seven genes among the examined monilophytes . the three chlorophyll biosynthesis genes  were lost from the cpdna of p. nudum. these genes were also lost from angiosperm plastid genomes in parallel
 <cit>  but not from any of the other completely sequenced monilophyte cpdnas. the psam gene was lost from the sequenced polypods, including adiantum, pteridium, and cheilanthes lindheimeri. the ycf <dig> gene in a. evecta contains a frameshift mutation that may render it nonfunctional, or it may retain functionality as a split gene with two protein products
 <cit> . contrary to the conserved presence of most genes, the ycf <dig> gene is highly unstable among monilophytes. this gene is intact and likely functional in a. evecta and the two lycophytes. however, it is a fragmented pseudogene in equisetales and a. spinosa and it was completely lost from ophioglossum, psilotum, adiantum, and pteridium. a more in-depth study showed that botrychium strictum  and several other leptosporangiate ferns have retained an intact gene, indicating that ycf <dig> has been independently lost at least four times in monilophyte evolution
 <cit> . the rpl <dig> gene also shows a sporadic distribution. it is a pseudogene in the lycophyte i. flaccida and completely absent from several fern lineages, including p. nudum, o. californicum, e. hyemale and e. arvense.

the plastome intron content varies for six introns among monilophytes . in this study, we use the dombrovska–qiu intron nomenclature
 <cit> , which names introns based on their nucleotide position within a reference gene . this nomenclature provides a unified framework to facilitate discussion of orthologous introns, especially when intron content is variable among species as seen here in ferns. the trnk-uuui <dig>  rps16i <dig>  and ycf66i <dig> introns were lost from several species due to the loss of the genes that contained them. like rps16i <dig>  the rps12i <dig> intron is also absent from psilotum, ophioglossum, and equisetales, although in this case the trans-spliced rps <dig> gene was retained. this shared loss was verified by comparing rps <dig> sequences covering this intron region from  <dig> representative taxa of every major monilophyte group . the intron was found to be absent from the rps <dig> gene of all species belonging to psilotopsida and equisetopsida, whereas it is still present in all species from marattiopsida and polypodiopsida. finally, both equisetales cpdnas have lost the second clpp intron , while the loss of rpl16i <dig> is specific to the newly sequenced e. hyemale genome.

molecular phylogenetic analyses with additional taxa remain inconclusive regarding monilophyte relationships
phylogenetic analyses were performed using maximum likelihood  with a gtr+g model in raxml and bayesian inference  with a cat-gtr+g model in phylobayes . we used the cat-gtr+g model for bayesian analyses because it was recently shown to be less susceptible to artifacts caused by long-branch attraction and substitutional saturation
 <cit> . at the broadest level, the results were congruent with previous estimates of relationships for the major groups of vascular plants
 <cit> , including the monophyly of angiosperms, gymnosperms, and ferns sensu lato . among ferns, our analyses grouped ophioglossum and psilotum with strong posterior probability  and bootstrap support  to form a monophyletic psilotopsida clade, as previously indicated based on analyses of several genes
 <cit>  and large-scale plastome analyses
 <cit> . in addition, the two equisetum species form a clear monophyletic group , as do the four polypodiopsida species . most importantly, both analyses provide evidence  for a sister relationship between equisetales and psilotopsida  and between marattiales and polypodiopsida , a result that was also recovered in other recent phylogenetic analyses of plastid genes
 <cit> .

to examine the robustness of these findings, we performed additional raxml and phylobayes analyses on four modified data sets: 1) first and second positions only, 2) third positions only, 3) a reduced sampling of  <dig> taxa after removal of several fast-evolving seed plants and lycophytes, and 4) translated amino acid sequences for the reduced data set . several of these additional raxml and phylobayes analyses corroborated a sister relationship between equisetum and psilotopsida, while others instead suggested that equisetum is sister to polypodiopsida, although few results were strongly supported . we also reevaluated all five data sets using mrbayes with a gtr+g nucleotide model or cprev+g amino acid model . the mrbayes results directly parallel the ml results, but with stronger support  for equisetum + psilotopsida using the full nucleotide data set and for equisetum + polypodiopsida using the first and second or aa data sets. in contrast, the phylobayes results with the more advanced cat-gtr+g model do not provide strong support for equisetum with polypodiopsida in any analysis.

in summary, it is clear that the relationship among ferns is highly dependent upon choice of model and data when using plastid sequences. the main incongruence among the molecular phylogenetic analyses presented here and previously centers on the enigmatic placement of equisetum. the difficulty in resolving equisetum’s relationship within ferns is likely due to lineage-specific rate heterogeneity and substitutional saturation resulting from a combination of an accelerated substitution rate and a lack of close relatives to equisetum, factors which can lead to phylogenetic inconsistency due to long-branch attraction artifacts.

genomic structural changes help resolve relationships among major monilophyte groups
given the inconsistent results among molecular phylogenetic analyses, we assessed whether rare genomic structural changes could provide further insight into fern relationships. indeed, the phylogenetic distribution of genomic structural changes in ferns  provides additional support for the ml and bi topologies recovered in figure 
 <dig>  most interestingly, several structural changes provide new support that help define the position of horsetails and marattioid ferns within monilophytes. the rps <dig> gene and the rps12i <dig> intron are present in the plastid genomes of many land plants, including angiopteris and all examined leptosporangiate ferns , indicating that they were probably present in the fern common ancestor. however, rps <dig> and rps12i <dig> are notably absent from all examined ophioglossoid ferns, whisk ferns, and horsetails , which is consistent with a single loss for each sequence if equisetum is sister to psilotopsida . in contrast, at least two independent losses for each sequence would be required if equisetum is more closely related to any other fern group.

supporting the position of marattioid ferns with leptosporangiate ferns is a novel intron in the mitochondrial atp <dig> gene  that is present in both groups but not in any ophioglossoid ferns, whisk ferns, or horsetails . this distribution, which was previously confusing, can now be explained by a single gain in the common ancestor of leptosporangiate ferns and marattioid ferns. the ir expansion that captured the 3′-rps <dig>  rps <dig>  ndhb, and trnl-caa genes may also be a synapomorphy for these two groups, but further sampling from early diverging leptosporangiate ferns will be necessary to tease apart the timing of this expansion and the two inversions within this group. a similar ir expansion is also found in the psilotum plastid genome, although this is almost certainly a homoplasious event given its absence in ophioglossum and the strong phylogenetic support for a close relationship between these two taxa in all other studies.

many of the other changes shown in figure 
 <dig> confirm or even presaged relationships that are well established today, such as two previously reported inversions in the lsc that characterize euphyllophytes and monilophytes
 <cit> . similarly, the multiple inversions and trna losses shared by all completely sequenced polypodiopsida species provide further support for their monophyly, and the loss of clppi <dig> appears synapormorphic for the genus equisetum .

CONCLUSIONS
we sequenced the plastid genomes of three diverse monilophytes: equisetum hyemale , ophioglossum californicum , and psilotum nudum . these new genomes revealed limited change in gene and intron content during monilophyte evolution. the structure of the genome is also extremely conserved in e. hyemale and o. californicum, whose ir boundaries are nearly identical to those in the lycophyte h. lucidula and most non-vascular plants. the stability of the ir boundary strongly suggests the retention of this arrangement from the common ancestor of land plants, vascular plants, and ferns sensu lato. in contrast, the ir boundaries in p. nudum, angiopteris evecta, and leptosporangiate ferns have undergone several expansions to capture genes ancestrally present in the ssc or lsc.

by expanding taxon sampling to include the first ophioglossoid fern and a second representative from equisetum, we hoped to provide more definitive resolution of taxonomic relationships among the major groups of ferns. while the results of the phylogenetic analyses provided generally weak and inconsistent support for the positions of equisetum and angiopteris, their phylogenetic affinities were revealed by mapping rare genomic structural changes in a phylogenetic context: the presence of a unique mitochondrial atp <dig> intron argues strongly for a sister relationship between polypodiopsida and marattiopsida, and the absence of the rps <dig> gene and the rps12i <dig> intron from equisetum, psilotum, and ophioglossum indicates that equisetopsida is sister to psilotopsida.

further plastome sequencing of marattioid ferns and early diverging leptosporangiate ferns will likely be necessary to solidify the sister relationship between these two lineages, but the position of equisetum is unlikely to be resolvable with more plastome data. this is due to unavoidable long-branch artifacts for equisetopsida caused by the increased plastid sequence diversity in this group and by the lack of any close, living relatives of equisetum. expanded sequencing from mitochondrial and nuclear genomes may prove to be more useful, although this remains to be tested.

