BACKGROUND
bark and ambrosia beetles in the weevil subfamily scolytinae are remarkably diverse in their ecological adaptations to a variety of habitats
 <cit> . with more than  <dig>  species currently recognised, they comprise about  <dig> percent of the total weevil diversity, and thus constitute one of the greatest species radiations on earth
 <cit> . scolytine beetles are generally enormously abundant and dominate forest insect communities associated with recently dead wood and other lignified plant material
 <cit> . their ubiquitous presence in nearly all woody material indicates that these beetles are the most important organisms in the early stages of forest decomposition. in these habitats they excavate diverse tunnel systems reflecting different reproductive modes and variable diets in different plant tissues. a large scale phylogeny of scolytinae will therefore illuminate many aspects of key evolutionary traits in this group of beetles.

one of the most successful ecological adaptations in bark and ambrosia beetles is their symbiotic relationship with microbes. this relationship provides nutritional enrichment of dead plant material in exchange for transmission between plant resources. these microbes include bacteria, yeast and mycelial fungi. while the exact role of the first two is not known
 <cit> , the multicellular fungi contribute an important but variable component of a wood boring beetle’s diet
 <cit> . in about  <dig>  species of scolytinae, ophiostomales and microascales fungi are the sole source of food for both larvae and adults and are actively cultivated by the beetle. this extraordinary agricultural system shares many similarities with fungus farming in ants and termites
 <cit> . these are the ambrosia beetles and they include common pest species such as the striped ambrosia beetle trypodendron lineatum and the red bay ambrosia beetle xyleborus glabratus. in addition to scolytine ambrosia beetles, fungus farming also occurs in another weevil subfamily, the platypodinae
 <cit> . fungi are transmitted as spores in specialised cuticular pockets in ambrosia beetles, and are inoculated in the wood during the excavation of a new tunnel system in their host plant. they grow fine mycelia in the wood during egg laying
 <cit> . after hatching, the larvae graze on a dense carpet of conidia which covers the tunnel walls. ambrosia beetles are both functionally  and physiologically  dependent on these fungi. it has been documented that moulting and metamorphosis does not occur in the absence of fungal steroids
 <cit> . it is therefore expected that a reversal to a wood based diet is not very likely once fungus farming has evolved.

the remaining species of scolytinae mainly feed on bark and phloem, occasionally on seeds, and they take most of their nutrients from dead plant tissue excavated during tunnel construction
 <cit> . these beetles are also associated with ophiostomales fungi, which may provide food enrichment. although it is not unusual that bark beetles have mycangia to facilitate transportation of fungal spores
 <cit> , they cannot make fungal gardens and have only a facultative association with fungi; hence, they can complete their life cycle without the addition of fungus to their diets. the fitness of certain bark beetle species  is nevertheless increased by addition of such fungi in their phloem diet
 <cit> . this is a selective advantage for effective transmission. one can therefore readily imagine that a transition from a primarily bark- and phloem-based diet to a nutritional dependence on fungi is not a particularly difficult evolutionary event. fungus farming has evolved multiple times in scolytinae because of this nutritional advantage
 <cit> .

multiple origins of fungus farming enable a meaningful comparison of the underlying ecological circumstances that may have spurred the transition from phloem to fungal feeding. fungus farming beetles are found in wet tropical forests , which is perhaps indicative of the ideal climate for ambrosia beetle species radiations. however, the ecological or climatic conditions under which fungus farming may have evolved and the timing of these feeding transitions have not been explored in detail.

ambrosia beetles are also characterised by a generally gregarious feeding behaviour in the larvae, a behaviour that seems pre-adaptive for close inbreeding by sibling mating
 <cit> . regular inbreeding is the rule in several unrelated scolytine lineages and is characterised by female-biased offspring sex ratios. fungus farming is potentially advantageous to developing sibling mating by congregating brood members in areas of fungal growth, which facilitates efficient mating between siblings. the direction of evolution from gregarious inbreeding to fungus farming or vice versa, or the assessment of whether or not these are completely unlinked phenomena, has not yet been examined in a phylogenetic context but see
 <cit> .

a detailed phylogenetic analysis of scolytinae will enable us to test the sequence of the origin of fungus farming, gregarious feeding modes, and sibling mating. hence, we have reconstructed the most comprehensively sampled phylogeny of scolytinae to date, based on five genes for  <dig> scolytinae species. this represents  <dig> of  <dig> genera in  <dig> of the currently  <dig> recognized tribes, including all known fungus farming lineages. dates of evolutionary origin were estimated by calibrating molecular divergence rates using a significantly updated fossil record that set the minimum age of both scolytinae and curculioninae to more than  <dig> ma
 <cit> .

RESULTS
all phylogenetic analyses revealed limited phylogenetic structure at deeper nodes, with most of the strongly supported nodes occurring at tribal and generic levels. differences between the various bayesian and parsimony analyses were not strongly supported and we have therefore used the bayesian analysis based on seven partitions to illustrate the major topological findings in this report . incongruent signal in the five independent markers was revealed by an overall negative support from ef-1α or cad in the partitioned bremer analyses . however, re-analyses with exclusion of one or more partitions did not improve overall node support. analyses of amino acid translated data from the four protein encoding genes combined resulted in minimal resolution, mainly with the ingroup separate from the outgroups, and with scolytini subtending the most basal node in scolytinae.

phylogenetic patterns
eleven of the  <dig> included tribes  were monophyletic in all or some analyses, including bothrosternini, corthylini, crypturgini, phloeotribini, phrixosomatini, scolytoplatypodini, scolytini, xyleborini and xyloterini . micracidini included cactopinini and these taxa were monophyletic in some analyses . dryocoetini was paraphyletic with respect to xyleborini and ipini was paraphyletic with respect to premnobiini; these two clades formed well supported sister groups. scolytoplatypodini was nested within parts of hexacolini . several well-sampled tribes such as hypoborini and polygraphini were monophyletic with the exclusion of one genus each. the majority of conifer associated hylurgini  formed two main clades – one southern hemisphere clade consisting of araucaria associated species, and one northern clade associated with boreal pinaceae. although only weakly supported, scolytini was monophyletic and subtended the hexacolini genus microborus and all other scolytinae species.

timing and directionality of ambrosia feeding
ten independent origins of fungus cultivation could be traced on the various topologies under accelerated parsimony optimisation , with eleven origins under delayed transformation. two of these origins were the recent origins of single species in the genera hypothenemus and scolytodes. hyorrhynchini was represented only by a single species . the remaining seven groups of fungus farming beetles were monophyletic in all analyses, with the exception of camptocerus that was sometimes paraphyletic with respect to cnemonyx.

minimum  and maximum  age estimates for ambrosia beetle clades are listed in table
 <dig>  for the seven clades where crown age could be assessed, dates ranged from 8- <dig> ma in analysis a , with corthylina as the likely earliest clade of fungus farming species. xyloterini, scolytoplatypodini and camptocerus followed with ages of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> ma. the origins of the bothrosternus + eupagiocerus and xyleborini clades were younger, estimated to  <dig> and  <dig> ma. the two different analyses provided very similar time estimates, with analysis b providing time estimates roughly 1- <dig> myr older .

crown  and stem  ages were estimated from beast analyses of all nucleotides, using  two fossil calibrations with oldest scolytinae set to  <dig> ma, and  three fossil calibrations with oldest scolytinae set to  <dig> ma .

each fungus farming lineage was sister to a bark feeding beetle lineage, with the exception of bothrosternus-eupagiocerus where the sister group cnesinus consisted of pith feeders, and, in part, xyleborini where the sister group coccotrypes contained some seed feeding species .

species numbers are from wood & bright
 <cit> ; the most diverse lineage is indicated in bold.

the relative timing of gregarious feeding and inbreeding
the relative timing of ambrosia fungus cultivation, regular inbreeding and gregarious feeding modes are depicted in figure
 <dig>  the oldest origins of regular inbreeding were estimated to be  <dig>  ma  for hypothenemus + ptilopodius, and  <dig>  ma for the inbreeding dryocoetini  plus xyleborini. in clades where both inbreeding and ambrosia fungus farming occur , inbreedingevolved first twice, fungus farming three times, and simultaneously once. gregarious larval feeding occured in six clades and always occurred before or simultaneously with fungus farming , and inbreeding . independence between fungus farming and gregarious feeding mode, and between fungus farming and regular inbreeding by sibling mating, was not rejected, while independence between gregarious feeding and sibling mating was rejected . transition rates indicated that fungus farming is more likely to evolve in groups with regular inbreeding or gregarious feeding mode, with the highest transition rates to fungus farming found in lineages with regular inbreeding.

based on pagel’s
 <cit>  test of independence between traits . if q <dig> is higher than q <dig>  x is more likely to evolve first, if q <dig> is higher than q <dig> then y is more likely to depend on x, if q <dig> is higher than q <dig>  then x is more likely to depend on y; transition rates >  <dig> marked in bold.

discussion
fungus farming has evolved at least ten times in scolytinae, in contrast to the single origin of fungus farming in attine ants and macrotermitine termites
 <cit> . although limited resolution in tree topology was found in all types of analyses, the fungus farming taxa and sister lineages were well resolved. we found that all origins of fungus farming in scolytinae were derived and a reversal to a non-fungal diet could not be traced on any of the tree topologies examined. it is noteworthy that although these findings are concordant with previous studies
 <cit> , our data are more complete in terms of taxon sampling, inclusive of a higher number of fungus farming taxa per clade. the only possible reversal indicated by some of the bayesian topologies related to camptocerus with respect to cnemonyx. however, a more complete taxon sampling for these two genera showed that camptocerus is indeed monophyletic
 <cit> ; smith and cognato, unpublished molecular data]. our data thus corroborate the hypothesis that fungus farming is indeed a non-reversible evolutionary transition.

the many origins of fungus farming did not correlate strongly with some of the biological factors that benefit from a symbiotic relationship between fungi and beetles. although we did observe a trend in fungus farming evolving more often in lineages with close inbreeding, the reverse transition rate  were negligibly low and the association between specific reproductive modes and fungus farming was not significantly correlated . this is perhaps most clearly illustrated by the complete lack of regular inbreeding in four ambrosia beetle lineages . furthermore is regular inbreeding the norm in true bark beetles such as in some dendroctonus and araptus [see e.g.
 <cit> . fungus farming is therefore a trait that at least sometimes evolves relatively independent of reproductive biology. repeated origins of fungus farming must therefore be explained by additional ecological factors such as the frequent facultative association between bark beetles and fungi that grow in the phloem and bark of the host trees. based on this perspective, it is notable that termites have only evolved fungus farming on one occasion even though fungus is an important food component for many other termite groups
 <cit> .

compared with the timing of the origin of scolytinae, more than  <dig> ma, the development of obligate symbiotic fungus farming occurred relatively late. in all groups where an estimate of crown age was reliable, they revealed origins younger than  <dig> ma, with 95% confidence interval ±  <dig> myr . xyloterini and scolytoplatypodini had stem ages older than the crown age for corthylina, which could potentially indicate a slightly older origin of fungus farming in these groups. however, it is equally likely that close relatives of these taxa were not included in our study which would overestimate the age of these fungus farmers. regardless of these uncertainties, the ophiostomales fungi have certainly existed much longer than the ambrosia beetles as shown by the multiple independent origins of the symbiotic fungi
 <cit> , and thus have likely been nutritionally advantageous to the early lineages of bark beetles that preceded the first ambrosia gardeners. in light of the ubiquitous presence of ambrosia beetles in pantropical forests, and the likely early availability of ambrosia fungi, one may wonder why such a successful adaptation should have taken so long to evolve. there are two particularly relevant factors that may not have been optimal at the earliest stage of bark beetle evolution – tropical forest diversity and climate.

about  <dig> percent of the known ambrosia beetle fauna is tropical or subtropical
 <cit> , which emphasizes that fungal symbiosis is largely dependent on moist conditions in warm climates
 <cit> . thus, the timing of modern moist tropical forests expansion may be relevant to the origin of fungus farming beetles. elements of angiosperm-dominated tropical forests developed during the mid-cretaceous, but did not radiate extensively until the palaeocene or early eocene era
 <cit> . this time period experienced a thermal maximum  of some 5- <dig> degrees warmer climate from  <dig> to  <dig> ma
 <cit> . several groups of animals and plants showed increased diversification associated with the increasing angiosperm dominance
 <cit> , in particular during or just after petm
 <cit>  when tropical elements dominated floras and faunas from the equator to mid-latitudes e.g.
 <cit> . corthylina, xyloterini, scolytoplatypus and camptocerus originated during or immediately after petm and had likely taken advantage of the large tropical angiosperm forests emerging during this time period.

the only group of fungus cultivating insects that may have occurred in the cretaceous period is a related group of weevils in the subfamily platypodinae. recent studies are inconsistent about the phylogenetic position of these beetles, but they are definitely part of the advanced weevil radiation
 <cit> . although the timing of this group seems problematic as a consequence of a generally higher substitution rate at independent genetic loci see
 <cit> , a late cretaceous origin at 100- <dig> ma seems realistic based on molecular data
 <cit>  and a fossil from burmese amber . climate during this time period is less well understood, but was probably quite warm, dominated by magnoliales and the early expanding malphigiales
 <cit> . however, the greatest part of the platypodine radiation took place much later, with more than  <dig> percent of the diversity originating in the eocene and later time periods
 <cit> .

it is interesting that fungus farming in ants and termites have similarly late origins as in most scolytinae beetles. attine ants first originated around  <dig> ma
 <cit> , similar to corthylina beetles. however, the major radiation of these ants occurred later, around  <dig> ma, which corresponds to our estimates for bothrosternus-eupagiocerus and the great xyleborini radiation. during this intermediate ‘antarctic thawing’ period
 <cit> , which lasted some  <dig> million years, tropical climates again dominated near mid-latitudes
 <cit> . this is also the time period when the fungus gardening termites  diversified
 <cit> , after their origin in tropical rainforests of africa
 <cit> .

the late origin of the greatest ambrosia beetle radiation in xyleborini is well supported by our data. stem age was only  <dig> ma  for a clade that is closely related to bark beetles in the genera coccotrypes, dryocoetiops and ozopemon <cit> . the species diversity in xyleborini is therefore unparalleled by any other ambrosia beetle lineage or other scolytine lineage. a recent origin of xyleborini fits well with their absence from dominican amber, a fossil source otherwise rich on older ambrosia beetle groups such as corthylina and platypodinae
 <cit> . the great diversity of xyleborini stands in contrast to a relatively modest diversity in the other clades of scolytine ambrosia beetles, particularly so in perspective of time. the reason for their great diversity is unclear. there are at least nine other scolytine clades of ambrosia beetles and only three of these are marginally more diverse than their sister group . xyleborini are also characterized by regular inbreeding by sibling mating which is generally a great success factor in scolytine evolution, including hypothenemus and related genera in cryphalini. however, among the seven origins of regular inbreeding, only xyleborini and inbreeding cryphalini are more diverse than their sister group, so evidently there is no direct connection between inbreeding and diversification. there is therefore nothing overtly unique with this group of beetles compared with other ambrosia beetle lineages. to conclude, xyleborini is most likely diverse because of chance effects, evolving at the right time  in the most productive parts of the globe, in the tropical regions.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has provided the most accurate time estimate to date for the origin of fungus farming in bark and ambrosia beetles. many origins occurred at different time periods, which resulted in a highly variable diversity for each lineage per time unit. however, they all shared a relatively late origin, which most likely occurred in periods of global warming and expanding wet tropical forests. our taxonomic coverage was generally broad, which resulted in precise estimates for most origins of fungus farming. however, these estimates were less certain in scolytoplatypodini, xyloterini and hyorrhynchini in which sister group relations were more distant. additional research must aim at closing these taxonomic gaps.

the present study has furthermore demonstrated the challenge connected with resolving highly diverse taxon groups. almost  <dig> nucleotides were included from five independent molecular markers, but only the more derived clades were resolved, including all origins of fungus farming. scolytinae is a very interesting group for many other kinds of evolutionary studies and detailed hypotheses may be tested if also deeper phylogenetic nodes obtain better resolution. as it currently stands, more protein encoding genes must be optimised to obtain such goals – a project of high priority in our laboratories.

