BACKGROUND
polygamous mating systems are often defined by social dominance where territorial individuals top the social hierarchy. alternative mating strategies in fish species are commonly associated with a dominance hierarchy including dominant or territorial males and secondary males or so-called sneaker males
 <cit> . being the dominant individual comes at a cost, as the territorial male has to invest in defending the territory, attract the female and guard the nest
 <cit> . in some fish species those dominant individuals even do not feed during the reproductive period of several months
 <cit> . the sneaking individual on the other hand can obtain reproductive success by sneaking into nests or mimicking female behavior and phenotype
 <cit> .

the term ‘social dominance’ suggests that dominance depends on the social setting. the territorial male is often the largest male present in many fish species but there are exceptions
 <cit> . this is especially true for fish species where the change from sneaker to territorial male is not fixed for life, but temporary and therefore plastic. here, the switch to becoming territorial could depend on the presence of plausible nest sites, the number of mature females or even the presence or absence of other males
 <cit> . for instance, in the goby gobius niger <cit>  and the blenny tripterygion delaisi <cit>  a sneaker male can switch into a territorial male after the experimental removal of the previous territorial male.

phenotypic plasticity, the ability of a genotype to respond to external conditions by changing its phenotype, has received considerable attention in evolutionary ecology
 <cit> . the assimilation of an initially plastic response to an altered environment and therefore the maintenance of the phenotype has long been understood as a fundamental component in selection and evolution
 <cit> . more recently, short-term and non-adaptive phenotypic changes have been the focus of several studies
 <cit> . in many species reproduction is a temporal or a short-term event, taking place for example only once a year in the reproductive period. this means that the alterations occurring during this period, being behavioral and/or phenotypic, are plastic and mostly reversible changes
 <cit> . in male alternative mating tactics, the different tactics are linked with differences in behavior often leading to phenotypic dimorphism with secondary sexual traits. social interactions, in these cases, have been shown to trigger the behavioral and phenotypic change
 <cit> .

social influences and behavioral changes lead to alterations in gene expression in the brain
 <cit> . more specifically, social stimuli can lead to short term deviation from the baseline of gene expression in the brain
 <cit> . while it is unclear how these changes are transmitted to the other organs, clearly the brain plays a vital role
 <cit> . the neural basis of social status has been studied in the brain in atlantic salmon  where the plasticity in the development of alternative male phenotypes has been investigated
 <cit> . aubin-horth and coauthors
 <cit>  discovered that 15% of the analyzed genes were differentially expressed between brains of male morphs, but the investigations into alternative mating tactics in the atlantic salmon were carried out on precocious males and lack the analysis of the large mature male. alternative male mating strategies are also studied in cichlid fish species, due to their extreme diversity and the facility to be handled and kept in the laboratory , whereas the non-dominant male is not reproductively active
 <cit> . gene expression patterns related to phenotypic plasticity in different mating strategies have been analyzed either by targeting single genes or via microarray analyses
 <cit> . to our knowledge up to now no attempt to characterize phenotypic plasticity in wild male phenotypes from the same population, both reproductively active, has been carried out using a genome-wide approach.

our study species tripterygion delaisi , also called the black-faced blenny, is a common small rocky shore fish from the mediterranean sea and the east atlantic coast
 <cit> . the black-faced blennies live camouflaged with the rock or algae they inhabit for most of the year. the sneaker males as well as the females exhibit the same camouflaged phenotype throughout the whole year, but in spring throughout the three months reproductive period, some males change their phenotype to a black head and a bright yellow coloring across the rest of the body. these males start protecting a small territory, which is referred to as their nest, against predators and other secondary males
 <cit> . this coloration and behavior is transitory and only observed during the reproductive period. if a territorial male is removed from its nest, in 20% of the cases, a sneaker male takes over and changes its coloration as well as its behavior and becomes territorial
 <cit> . this shows that territoriality is a plastic trait. after being courted by the territorial male, the female lays the eggs directly into the nest and leaves. the territorial male fertilizes the eggs by releasing the sperm directly on them and is left to protect the eggs until the larvae hatch. the sneaker male can dart by and ejaculate its sperm over the nest from a distance
 <cit> . thus, in t. delaisi alternative mating tactics can be observed for two types of reproductively active males with different phenotypes.

in non-model species, it is often difficult to study molecular differentiation of plastic traits especially in absence of a reference genome
 <cit> . here we used rnaseq to detect differentially expressed genes in the brain between males with alternative mating strategies in tripterygion delaisi as well as between males and females. by sequencing and generating a de novo transcriptome assembly it is possible to look at a huge variety of expressed genes and demonstrate key genes which are expressed at a particular moment
 <cit> . by using rnaseq in this study we generate a genome-wide catalogue of genes expressed during the reproductive period of t. delaisi and analyze expression profile and differential expression to identify differences across the brain transcriptome of territorial males, sneaker males and females.

RESULTS
de novo transcriptome assembly and annotation
in the absence of a reference genome for tripterygion delaisi in this study we de novo assembled a transcriptome to use as a reference for read mapping and brain gene expression profiling. the de novo assembly of the reference brain transcriptome was performed with  <dig> , <dig> trimmed reads  of eight pooled individuals of normalized cdna libraries and  <dig> , <dig> trimmed reads of three separately sequenced not-normalized samples at 109 bp . normalizing libraries allowed for the detection of genes also expressed at low levels and therefore a more complete reference transcriptome. with the trinity de novo assembler  <dig>  contigs were produced, including different isoforms per contig, after removing contamination . the n <dig> of the reference transcriptome is 298 bp long, the n <dig> 234 bp and the n <dig> is of 464 bp length. the longest contig has a length of  <dig>  bp. on average 76% of the reads of the individual samples were mapped back onto the reference assembly. this is the first reference transcriptome for a fish belonging to the perciforms suborder blennioidei  and therefore provides a valuable resource and a first step towards a comprehensive understanding of genome-wide gene expression.

the de novo assembly includes differentially spliced isoforms
 <cit> . most contigs in the reference assembly had one isoform, but many contigs combined differentially spliced isoforms, with the number of isoforms increasing with contig length . however, given the lack of a reference genome, we cannot discard that some isoforms might result from paralogous genes or misassemblies. the few published genome-wide expression studies on non-model species primarily focus on differential expression at the gene level and de novo assemblies do not include alternatively spliced transcripts e.g.
 <cit> . however, alternative splicing has fundamental effects in the development and maintenance in eukaryotes with 92-94% of human genes undergoing alternative splicing
 <cit> . the products of alternatively spliced transcripts are shown to be responsible for a number of diseases by changing the biological function with differently spliced isoforms
 <cit> . hence, it is likely that even social behavior or phenotypic expression patterns could be influenced or even dominated by alternative splicing.

similarity with known proteins  was detected for  <dig>  contigs which represent  <dig> % of the de novo reference transcriptome assembly. overall  <dig>  contigs had blast results between 1×10- <dig> to 1×10- <dig> and  <dig> contigs had an e-value of  <dig>  hence, many of the contig sequences could not be matched to a protein and therefore to a functional description in the protein databases. there can be different reasons for the lack of homology with known proteins. these contigs could be orphan proteins, non-coding rna or sequences from utr protein regions, although, we cannot discard the presence of partially or misassembled transcripts. furthermore, lack of sequence conservation across species combined with absence of genomic information for t. delaisi could prevent the annotation of contigs. when blasting  the longer contigs  against the refseq database of oreochromis niloticus  we receive significant hits  for over  <dig> percent. for further descriptive analysis we divided our transcriptome contig set into two subsets: contigs with protein homology  and contigs without protein homology . the ‘with blast’ set had slightly larger contig sizes than the ‘without blast’ set . similarly, median open reading frame  sizes, measured in nucleotide bases, differed slightly between sets, with larger orfs in the ‘with blast’ than in the without blast set . protein coding potential above  <dig>  was estimated with cpat
 <cit>  and the without blast set has lower protein coding potential . higher gc content as well as higher expression levels were encountered for the ‘without blast’ set . the described characteristics of the ‘without blast’ set in tripterygion delaisi have also been reported for the wasp
 <cit>  which is also a species without a reference genome. in general, more genomic resources for t. delaisi or closely related species and more information on protein functions would increase the quality of the transcriptome assembly.

the most expressed genes from the transcriptome  regardless of phenotype were annotated for biological function in blast2go
 <cit>  and enrichment analysis resulted in upregulated expression of  <dig> slimmed go-terms in biological function. the majority of these terms  is involved in processes of translation and transport such as translation elongation and srp - dependent cotranslational protein targeting to membrane . interestingly, one of the twenty-eight enriched upper-hierarchy go-terms is behavior. when looking at the first ten genes with the highest overall expression count across the whole genome, we identified a gene called ependymin  . this gene is predominantly expressed in the cerebrospinal fluid of teleost fish
 <cit>  and with our results we confirm that this gene is highly important in the brain of tripterygion delaisi. ependymin is associated with neuroplasticity and regeneration and might indicate a stress response
 <cit> . a limiting factor in the study of gene expression of wild-caught animals is the introduction of stress which can lead to behavioral alterations.
1: table s <dig> 

differential expression between phenotypes
the rnaseq methodology based on  <dig> individuals allowed a genome wide analysis of the expression patterns that distinguish the three phenotypes of tripterygion delaisi using five territorial males, five sneaker males and five females. on average  <dig> million quality trimmed reads were used for each of the  <dig> individuals . three pairwise comparisons were performed by using a bayesian approach to accurately estimate isoform expression . individual variation was accounted for by only accepting significant differential expression if standard deviation was smaller than the mean expression value within each phenotype. the final set of differentially expressed contigs between phenotypes is represented by hierarchical clustering of the expression patterns . the territorial male differentially upregulated more genes than the other two phenotypes when all three comparisons were considered , possibly indicating that expression of an elevated number of genes are necessary for the maintenance of this phenotype. the comparison between the territorial male and the sneaker male resulted in the highest number of differentially expressed contigs with  <dig> significant contigs after fdr correction and adjustment for individual variation . for these differentially expressed contigs between the two male phenotypes, territorial males and sneaker males are separated into two clusters illustrated by the hierarchical distance tree , representing the genes involved in phenotypic plasticity of different social statuses. in general, more differentially expressed genes were found for the comparison between the two male phenotypes than between males and females. this suggests that phenotypic plasticity, rather than sexual dimorphism, causes greater differences in gene expression patterns between phenotypes during the reproductive period of t. delaisi.

fdr adjusted significance value of  <dig> . > indicates elevated expression in the phenotype on the left. tm = territorial male, sm = sneaker male, f = female.

phenotypic plasticity has received considerable attention in evolutionary ecology, whereas focus has been laid on long term adaptive phenotypic changes
 <cit> . recent studies, based on model species, which test the more rapid time scale of response to environment such as temperature, light, and presence of pathogens or pheromones
 <cit>  have demonstrated an important role for protein phosphorylation. protein kinases, such as those involved in the mitogen-activated protein kinase  signaling pathway, mediate phosphorylation changes in other proteins and have been implicated in the control of synaptic plasticity in the adult brain
 <cit> . genes from the map kinases pathway which are associated with social phenotypic plasticity were identified as differentially expressed in t. delaisi. madd, for instance, was upregulated in the territorial male in two different isoforms against the sneaker male whereas mapkapk <dig> was upregulated for the sneaker male against the territorial male . furthermore, we find regulation of map kinase activity to be enriched in the female . this enrichment may be due to several isoforms of trib <dig>  a gene that interacts and regulates activation of map kinases, being overexpressed towards the sneaker male. thus, these genes might be worthwhile analyzing more profoundly in future studies.

annotation, meaning contigs with information on functional protein characteristics, was highest in sneaker males . for females and territorial males only about one third of the upregulated contigs could be annotated to known proteins . the enriched go-terms for the sneaker male are predominantly involved in differentiation and development . this could suggest that the elevated annotation success for the upregulated genes in sneaker males might be related to the presence of more functional descriptions of these developmental genes in the databases. on the other hand, over 70% of differentially expressed genes are left unannotated to a known protein for the territorial male and the female and especially low annotation success was found for the upregulated genes in territorial males against sneaker males . as stated above, general reasons for non-annotation of contigs could be lack of sequence conservation, non-coding rna and orphan genes. however, here by comparing the annotation rate of the phenotypes directly, the results might indicate that the genes involved in social phenotypic plasticity are poorly studied and therefore lack information of the protein function in the databases.

candidate genes in the context of social behavior
several previous studies have proposed candidate genes for social behavior and dominance in other fish species with alternative mating tactics
 <cit> , for details please see material and methods]. all genes were present in all tripterygion delaisi individuals and the expression levels of these selected genes were compared between phenotypes . the only candidate gene that showed significant differences in expression after correction for individual variation in t. delaisi was the somatostatin receptor type  <dig>  between territorial males and females. somatostatin is a neuropeptide also known as a growth hormone-inhibiting hormone and therefore commonly studied in the context of growth. in the african cichlid  somatostatin and somatostatin receptors have been shown to play a role in social behavior
 <cit> . somatostatin prepropeptide and somatostatin receptor type  <dig>  were elevated in the dominant cichlid males in comparison to the subordinate males. for t. delaisi, differential expression was found for sstr <dig>  which was not measured in cichlids, with significant differential expression between territorial males and females . it is probable that elevation in sstr <dig> levels for t. delaisi males and especially territorial males is correlated with aggression. for cichlids, somatostatin has been shown to have a significant effect on aggressive behavior and aggression levels were correlated with sstr  expression in the gonads
 <cit> . this is the first evidence for the role of sstr <dig> in association with different morph types demonstrating that the effects of somatostatin on the regulation of growth and behavior are complex
 <cit> .

no other previously suggested candidate genes for social dominance were differentially expressed at a significant level in tripterygion delaisi with the exception of the brain aromatase enzyme , which catalyzes the formation of aromatic estrogen. for this gene multiple isoforms were differentially expressed but only before adjustment for individual variation . cyp19a <dig> was found at higher levels in territorial males in comparison to sneaker males in other fish species [e.g.
 <cit> . aromatase is duplicated in fish and one form is expressed in the ovaries and the other one is expressed in the brain. brain aromatase activity was found to be lower in castrated males than in non-castrated males of salmo salar <cit>  and lower in individuals with developing gonads in comparison to individuals with fully developed gonads in atlantic croaker . in peacock blennies aromatase activity was also suppressed in sneaker males and elevated in nesting males
 <cit> . although this shows that brain aromatase clearly is an important enzyme involved in the regulation of social status between males in several fish species, individual variation of the expression of this gene was high in t. delaisi thus we don’t consider this gene differentially expressed . the five sneaker males all expressed the cyp19a <dig> isoforms at an equally low level, whereas two of the five territorial males show very high levels resulting in differential expression between the male types due to these outliers. this result could be attributed to slight differences in the reproductive phase of the territorial males . individual gene expression variation has previously been pointed out to be an important factor for phenotypic plasticity
 <cit>  and outlier expression might bias the outcome
 <cit> . pairing careful behavioral studies with genome wide molecular analyses could therefore strengthen the conclusion, but this especially emphasizes the need of non-pooled biological replicates even in genome wide studies.

a commonly measured neuropeptide in relation to aggression, arginine vasotocin , is differentially expressed between males in several fish species, but not in tripterygion delaisi . in atlantic salmon  vasotocin is one of the key genes that is differentially expressed in the brain with down-regulation for the precocious male
 <cit>  as in the peacock blenny  where avt levels were detected to be higher in territorial nesting male in the forebrain
 <cit> . in the african cichlid  elevated expression of avt was found in the dominant male in the posterior preoptic area and in the anterior preoptic area avt mrna levels were higher in the non-dominant male
 <cit> . such regional expression differences were also observed in three-spined stickleback  in relation to territoriality
 <cit> . the fact that whole brain expression was measured in t. delaisi might mask actual expression differences between different brain regions. nonetheless, santangelo & bass point out that there might be a species and context dependency of avt regulation across teleost species as seen for tetrapods
 <cit> .

the fact that most of the previously mentioned candidate genes were not differentially expressed in tripterygion delaisi could be due to slight differences in reproductive social system. in african cichlids, the subordinate males have undeveloped testes and need to become territorial to reproduce
 <cit> , which is distinct to the sneaker male in t. delaisi. testes in t. delaisi sneaker males are significantly different in weight , on average they weighed  <dig>  times more than those of the territorial males. this shows that the sneaker male has proportionally greater testes and is reproductively active. in atlantic salmon precocious males and adult males show differential expression in some of the candidate genes but the two male types reproduce at different ages and the adult males do not settle down and defend a nest
 <cit> . this suggests that the regulation of social and reproductive behaviors is complex, and consideration of expression patterns for candidate genes should take species-and context-specific differences into account.

novel genes in the context of social behavior
by rnaseq analysis we uncovered a large set of differentially expressed novel genes with protein annotation during the reproductive period in tripterygion delaisi. key genes with a functional description in the databases could be detected for each of the phenotypes . when comparing the females with the two types of males three  genes are expressed at higher levels in females and four in the two types of males. two subunits of the ccr4-not transcription complex, which function as a general transcription regulation, are more expressed in both male phenotypes in comparison to the females. the function of the ccr4-not complex is involved in all aspects of mrna biogenesis from the transcription of rna to its export
 <cit> . this could be correlated with lower transcriptional activity in females, as less upregulated genes are found in females . col1a <dig>  which encodes for collagen type i alpha, is expressed in higher level in both t. delaisi males relative to the females. this gene is a well-studied gene in the context of bone development
 <cit> . in the brain tissue, collagen can only be found in the blood vessels of the brain, which either suggests development of blood vessels or a possible transport of collagen to other organs for skeletal development. both of these biological functions are enriched for the sneaker male .

it is important to not only focus on enrichments based on go analyses, but to individually look at the genes of interest, as certain patterns could be drawn. the genes defining the sneaker male in t. delaisi mostly have functions related to transport. rab33a, arf <dig> and mfsd <dig> are associated with protein transport, protein trafficking and vesicle transport. klc <dig>  kinesin light chain  <dig>  is responsible for organelle transport along microtubules. for the territorial male some genes related to synaptic plasticity show elevated expression such as gpsm <dig>  a g-protein signaling modulator and ncs <dig>  a neuronal calcium sensor, both involved in the activation or deactivation of the g-protein cascade. the gpsm <dig> gene acts as a sink to regulate availability and stability of gα in the g-protein pathway
 <cit> . this gα component mediates signaling from vasoconstrictive hormone, such as vasopressin 
 <cit> , a previously mentioned candidate gene for aggression in fish
 <cit> . the neuronal calcium sensor , which is also upregulated in the territorial male, is sensitive to cytosolic ca2+ changes and contributes to g-protein-coupled receptor desensitization and increases vesicle release in the presence of calcium. as ncs <dig> was found in the dendroids in mice it may allow for locally regulated protein synthesis, which is linked to long-term synaptic plasticity
 <cit> . also upregulated in the territorial male is the protein kinase cδ  which is a recently-detected pkc isoform that plays critical roles in various cellular functions such as the control of growth, differentiation, and apoptosis
 <cit> . in rodents, though, prkcd is a gene involved in signal transduction that is correlated with behavior
 <cit> . the territorial male also expressed aldh1l <dig> at elevated levels which encodes for an enzyme from the aldehyde dehydrogenase family. a gene from this family  is one of the few genes that was associated with dominance of african cichlid males in a microarray study
 <cit> . although in cichlids this gene was expressed in lower levels for the dominant male against the subordinate male, it might be interesting to study this gene family directly in relation to behavior.

importance of alternative splicing in the context of social dominance
the importance of alternatively spliced gene isoforms has long been accepted
 <cit>  and with the development of rnaseq a more detailed understanding is possible. although most studies using rnaseq focus on expression on the gene level, expression of differentially spliced isoforms might vary even though overall gene expression might not. for humans 10% of the protein coding genes reveal population-specific splicing
 <cit> . for tripterygion delaisi nuclear mrna splicing via the spliceosome is one of the three enriched biological functions differentially expressed for the territorial male, indicating the elevated importance of exon joining and possibly alternative splicing in territorial males . nonetheless, for the differentially expressed genes in the context of social dominance, most alternatively spliced isoforms showed the same expression pattern . however, five differentially expressed genes with functional annotations in the databases were expressed in an opposing manner in two isoforms between phenotypes. an isoform of phf <dig> was more highly expressed in the territorial male and a different isoform in the sneaker male. two isoforms of the genes prkar2b and c7orf <dig> showed opposing expression patterns in the comparison between sneaker male and female, and different isoforms for the genes rap1gap and macf <dig> presented contrasting expression patterns between the territorial male and female. in the case of rap1gap evidence shows that differentially spliced isoform transcript variants encode distinct proteins leading to different functions e.g.
 <cit> . these genes would have been overlooked as not differentially expressed if only expression at the gene level was considered. however, due to the complexity and lack of complete understanding for the patterns of alternative splicing, it is still a major challenge to identify differential expression of isoforms and results need to be interpreted with caution. nonetheless, advances in analysis methods for rnaseq, such as the assembly of clusters of full length alternative spliced isoforms
 <cit>  and models accommodating isoform expression estimates uncertainties
 <cit> , allow the estimation of differential gene expression for isoforms in our species. even though more work is needed to fully understand the precision and accuracy as well as the possibilities and limitations of the methodologies used, this approach will allow for gene expression studies in non-model species of evolutionary and ecological importance.

CONCLUSIONS
phenotypic plasticity was found to be a more important factor in differential gene expression during reproduction than sexual dimorphism as more genes were significantly expressed at different levels in the brain between the two male phenotypes than between males and females. previously suggested candidate genes for social dominance in the context of alternative mating strategies seem to be mostly species-specific and here we present a list of novel genes which are differentially expressed in tripterygion delaisi. some genes that were differentially expressed for the territorial male were related to synaptic plasticity possibly indicating the drastic change in behavior and phenotype. the sneaker male expresses genes associated with differentiation and development. this result suggests that although this type of male is reproductively active it is largely expressing genes involved in development. this is the first study looking at transcriptome data and differential expression for a non-model species  in the context of alternative mating strategies and provides essential information for further studies investigating the molecular basis of social dominance. overall, rnaseq has proven to be a useful tool for the analysis of ecological and evolutionary questions for non-model species.

