BACKGROUND
the idea that only nucleic acid elements could transfer genetic information was challenged by the discovery of prions  <cit> . prions are the causative agents of several neurodegenerative diseases such as creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in humans, scrapie in sheep and bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle  <cit> . once the prion protein  converts to its prion prpsc form, which is in a largely β-sheet-rich, aggregated, amyloid state, it induces the conversion of normally folded, soluble, mainly α-helical prpc into the prpsc form  <cit> . thus, the protein structure is passed at the protein, and not at the nucleic acid level.

although prpsc converts prpc into the prion form, the propagation of the prpsc amyloid is highly specific. prpsc from one species can rarely convert prpc from another species into the prion form. this phenomenon, known as the species barrier, has been used to explain the lack of transfer of the disease from scrapie-infected sheep to humans  <cit> . however, a novel form of cjd is believed to have emerged from the conversion of human prp to its prion form by ingested bovine prions  <cit> . studies of laboratory prpsc have shown that the some species barriers can be crossed whereas others are more rigid  <cit> . the barrier has been attributed not just to the difference in the primary sequence of prp between species, but more importantly to the protein conformations that primary sequence is capable of adopting  <cit> . this difference in conformation of prpsc is believed to give rise to different phenotypes of prion diseases, known as strains, that vary in characteristics such as time of incubation and patterns of neuropathology  <cit> . an in vitro study of mammalian proteins suggests that the barrier is crossed when the prp primary sequence of a certain species is capable of adopting the conformation of a prpsc strain of another species  <cit> .

the phenomenon of information transfer through a protein-only process is not limited to mammals. indeed, several prions have been studied in yeast  <cit> . unlike mammals, where only one prion protein of unknown function has been described, yeast contain several prion protein determinants  <cit> . they share no homology with the primary sequence of prp, but share common features such as high β-sheet content, infectivity and amyloid characteristics  <cit> . in addition, yeast prions also exist as different strains, called variants, that appear to differ in their amyloid conformations, which leads to phenotypic and biochemical variations  <cit> .

two extensively studied yeast prions  and  are altered, aggregated forms of sup35p and rnq1p, respectively  <cit> . sup35p is a translation termination factor and the function of rnq1p is unknown  <cit> .  cells have reduced translation termination efficiency, as sup35p is mainly in the aggregated form, whereas  cells that have non-prion sup35p terminate efficiently  <cit> . mendelian mutants of sup <dig> also have reduced efficiency of translation termination, not because of aggregated sup35p, but due to the mutation  <cit> . however,  can be distinguished from sup <dig> mutants, as sup35p is aggregated only in  strains  <cit> . sup35p has three distinct domains: a c-terminal domain  that performs the function of translation termination, and a n-terminal  and middle  domain that are required for the induction and faithful propagation of   <cit> .

the  prion is not a loss-of-function prion, but rather  cells have the ability to induce  more efficiently than  cells  <cit> . a cross-seeding model has been proposed to explain this phenomenon where the  prion acts as an inefficient seed for the de novo formation of the  prion  <cit> . furthermore, different variants of , analogous to mammalian prpsc strains, are induced in  cells by the overexpression of either the full length sup35p or more efficiently by the sup35nmp  <cit> .

like mammalian prions, yeast prions exhibit barriers across species  <cit> .  formed by sup35p from one species rarely passes the prion conformation to sup35p from other species. sup35p itself has retained its modular architecture in many species. various species of yeast have the n, m and c domains where the sequence of the c domain is highly conserved between species, in contrast to the nm domains, which are often highly divergent  <cit> . however, the n domains of various species share the common features of having a high q/n-rich content and oligopeptide repeats  <cit> .

chimeras of the nm from various species fused to the c domain of saccharomyces cerevisiae, although able to form and propagate as prions in s. cerevisiae, fail to transmit the prion state to s. cerevisiae sup35p or other chimeras  <cit> . this failure to pass the prion state is attributed to the highly divergent sequence of the nm domains. however, a certain variant of s. cerevisiae  is able to transmit the prion state to the chimera of the nm of candida albicans and c domain of s. cerevisiae   <cit>  even though s. cerevisiae and c. albicans share only around 40% similarity in their nm domains. thus, the variant of the prion is important for determining transmission across a species barrier. other studies have shown that prion domains of other species, such as s. bayanus and s. paradoxus, which are much more similar to nmsc, and that co-aggregate with s. cerevisiae  , still exhibit low transmission of the prion state to these foreign species  <cit> .

in this study we focus on the chimera of the nm of pichia methanolica and c domain of s. cerevisiae . nmpm-csc as the sole copy of sup35p can be induced and propagated in its prion state,  , in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . like other chimeras it does not transmit its prion state en masse to s. cerevisiae sup35p, although overexpression of nmpm can induce the formation of s. cerevisiae , albeit at a lower frequency than by the overexpression of nmsc. however, overexpression of nmsc fails to induce nmpm-csc into a prion. prion conversion by overexpressed nmpm is specific to s. cerevisiae sup35p as it fails to induce the prion form of chimeras from other species  <cit> .

when nmpm-csc or nmca-csc are expressed at the same level as s. cerevisiae sup35p, neither the nmpm-csc nor the nmca-csc chimeras are frequently infected by sc to become   <cit> . we examine how tight the barrier is and find that nmpm-csc but not nmca-csc occasionally converts into  in the presence of either of at least two q/n-rich prions,  or . we propose that the species barrier can be crossed by a heterologous seeding mechanism similar to that of the cross-seeding between the  prion and sup35p.

RESULTS
nmpm-csc but not nmca-csc is inactivated in the presence of  at a frequency of 10- <dig> to 10-3
as previously observed, chimeras of the prion domains of either p. methanolica  or c. albicans  fused to the c domain of s. cerevisiae  were functional in the presence of  aggregates  <cit>  . this is phenotypically monitored using a yeast strain that has the ade1- <dig> allele with a suppressible nonsense mutation  <cit> . when the foreign fusions  were ectopically expressed from a plasmid in  ade1- <dig> cells at a moderate, constitutive level, the fusions remained functional and these cells were red on low adenine media  and could not grow on -ade . to determine whether the fusions get inactivated occasionally,  cells containing the fusions were plated onto plasmid selective -ade media. the formation of ade+ colonies showed that the nmpm-csc fusion was inactivated in  cells at a frequency of about 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> . in contrast, the nmca-csc fusion was not inactivated in  cells . as a control these fusions were expressed in the presence of a sup <dig> mutant strain that, like , can grow on -ade, but unlike  does not cause sup35p to aggregate. the nmpm-csc fusion was not inactivated in the sup <dig> mutant yeast .

frequency of ade+ colonies in different yeast strains was determined as described in methods. n/a: not applicable. average and confidence limits were calculated using six independent transformants.

nmpm-csc ade+ colonies have prion properties
to determine if the inactivation of nmpm-csc was due to its prionization, we tested for features characteristic of prions: aggregation and cytoplasmic inheritance. we denote nmpm-csc in its active form as  and in its inactive form as .

if nmpm-csc were in its prion form, most of the protein would be expected to be aggregated. the aggregation state was tested both biochemically and visually. when  or  cells are subjected to high-speed centrifugation most of the protein is in the pellet fraction, whereas in cells lacking the prion most of the protein is in the supernatant fraction  <cit> . similarly, nmpm-csc in  lysates subjected to high-speed centrifugation was present in the pellet fraction and absent from the supernatant fraction . in contrast, lysates from  cells had most of the nmpm-csc in the supernatant fraction .

the  and  prions are not dissolved into monomers when treated with sodium dodecyl sulfate  in the absence of boiling, but break into sds-stable sub-particles that can be resolved on agarose gels  <cit> . likewise, nmpm-csc in  lysates was not dissolved into monomers when treated with unheated 2% sds, whereas nmpm-csc from  lysates remain as monomers .

in vivo, transiently overexpressed green fluorescent protein -tagged prion domains are observed as distinct puncta in prion-containing cells, whereas cells lacking the prion show diffuse fluorescence  <cit> . similarly, when nmpm-gfp was overexpressed transiently  cells showed punctuate dots, whereas the fluorescence in  cells was diffuse . thus the chimeric protein  is in an aggregated state in the ade+ colonies.

one of the characteristic features of prions is that they are passed from cell to cell through cytoplasmic mixing without a nuclear contribution. this is achieved by cytoduction, which involves mating donor and recipient yeast in the presence of a kar <dig> mutation that inhibits efficient nuclear fusion. daughter cells with the recipient haploid nucleus and a mixture of the parental cytoplasms can be selected   <cit> . when  ade1- <dig>  cells were used as donors to cytoduce into a  ade1- <dig> recipient  which, like the donors, was ectopically expressing nmpm-csc, around 23% of the cytoductants displayed an ade+ phenotype , whereas using  as donor cells produced no ade+ cytoductants . thus, the  phenotype is transferred via cytoplasm. taken together, it is clear that nmpm-csc in the ade+ colonies obtained in the presence of  was prionized.

cytoduction was performed as described in methods. five  donors and three  donors were randomly chosen and approximately  <dig> cytoductants for each mating reaction were tested for the ade+ phenotype. donors were isolated independently for each recipient. standard deviation is shown.

 can propagate independently of 
since  aggregates exist in the presence of  aggregates, we first asked whether nmpm-csc could be incorporated into  sub-particles.  and  lysates were analyzed on an agarose gel and probed for the chimeric protein and re-probed for  aggregates . the size distribution of  and  particles was distinct and the distribution of the  particles was unchanged in the presence or absence of the  sub-particles. this suggests that nmpm-csc is not incorporated into  sub-particles and forms independent sub-particles in the same cell. however, it does not rule out the possibility that a small number of nmpm-csc protein molecules are incorporated in the  sub-particles.

to check if  propagation was dependent on the presence of , cytoplasm from  and  yeast was transferred  into a strain lacking native s. cerevisiae sup35p and being kept alive by a plasmid expressing nmpm-csc. this strain cannot maintain , as there is no source of s. cerevisiae sup35p. when  yeast was used as the donor, around 12% of cytoductants were capable of growing on -ade where as no ade+ cytoductants were obtained when  donors were used . all ade+ cytoductants that were tested had sds-stable sub-particles and were cured by low amounts of guanidine hydrochloride . thus,  formed in the presence of  can propagate in the absence of .

 forms variants in the presence of 
when sup35p from s. cerevisiae is ectopically expressed in a  strain, it efficiently joins the pre-existing  aggregate and maintains that particular variant  <cit> . however, when  is formed de novo in the presence of the heterologous prion , it forms many different variants that can be distinguished phenotypically  <cit> . strong  variants suppress ade1- <dig> mutation better than weak  variants, causing the former to be white and the latter pink on complete media. in the presence of  at least two variants of  could be distinguished phenotypically, by the different colors on media containing low amounts of adenine . these variants, as in the case of , could sometimes be differentiated biochemically by the size of their sub-particles  <cit>  . unlike  variants but like at least one strong hybrid  variant , the strong chimeric variant was associated with the larger sub-particles whereas the small sub-particles were associated with the weaker variant   <cit> . some strong and weak  variants distinguished on the basis of color could not be differentiated by a change in the size of sub-particles, but did differ in the amount of sub-particles present .

 formation is enhanced by the  prion but not by poly q aggregates or the non-qn-rich prion y
as the formation of  resembled the de novo formation of  in the presence of , we asked if  could enhance the formation of . variants of  were cytoduced into a sup <dig> mutant, as the change from the  to the  state cannot be monitored in wild type  yeast as native sup35p is functional in these strains. similar to its expression in  strains, the chimeric protein was functional in the presence of all the  variants . to determine if nmpm-csc was inactivated occasionally, sup <dig> mutants with  variants  expressing nmpm-csc were plated on plasmid selective -ade media. nmpm-csc in sup <dig> mutants containing  variants was inactivated at a frequency of approximately 10- <dig> to 10- <dig>  whereas nmpm-csc in sup <dig>  yeast remained functional . ade+ colonies contained sds-stable aggregates of nmpm-csc, indicating that the chimeric protein converted to its prion form in the presence of  .

as two q/n-rich prions,  and , enhanced the formation of , we tested whether an aggregated, non-prion protein could enhance the formation of . the n-terminal region of the huntingtin protein with expanded polyglutamine repeats , which is associated with huntington's disease, fused to gfp was expressed in a sup <dig> mutant strain along with nmpm-csc. htq72-gfp and htq103-gfp, shown to aggregate in wild type strains  <cit> , also aggregated in the sup <dig> mutant, but failed to enhance the conversion of nmpm-csc from a  to a  state . we also tested whether a non-q/n-rich prion, y, a prion from podospora anserine that can propagate as a prion in yeast  <cit> , could enhance the formation of . the prion domain of het-s fused to gfp , was induced into the prion form  in a sup <dig> mutant expressing nmpm-csc, but failed to enhance the formation of  .

discussion
although the degree of similarity is not high between the prion domains of s. cerevisiae and either p. methanolica  or c. albicans , we show here that in vivo the chimeric protein nmpm-csc, but not nmca-csc occasionally prionizes in the presence of  . we show that nmpm-csc does not spontaneously prionize in the absence of the  seed, as it does not form a prion in a sup <dig> mutant. we determine that nmpm-csc does indeed prionize  in  cells by showing that  cells possess characteristic features of yeast prions. nmpm-csc in  cells is aggregated as nmpm-gfp formed puncta in  and not  cells. furthermore, biochemically  also shares the two-level structural organization of the  and  yeast prions  <cit> : nmpm-csc appears to be assembled into large aggregates  that can be broken into sds-stable sub-particles. additionally, we show the  phenotype can be transferred via cytoplasm, which is common to all known yeast prions  <cit> . thus, we show that although the transmission of the prion state across species barriers is not very efficient, the prion state can be transferred occasionally to give rise to a foreign prion.

when two prions exist in the same cell, it is possible for them to form tight interactions or propagate as separate entities. since  was formed in the presence of  we asked whether nmpm-csc molecules are incorporated into  sub-particles. if this were the case, then the mixed sub-particles might have a size distribution distinct from that of  in the absence of . as the size distribution of the  sub-particles is unchanged, and  sub-particles are a different size distribution, this suggests that nmpm-csc is not incorporated into  sub-particles. however, this shift would be observable only if the number of nmpm-csc molecules incorporated into  sub-particles is fairly large, thus not excluding the possibility that a small number of nmpm-csc molecules might be incorporated. this independence of sub-particles is similar to  and  that were shown to form independent sub-particles in the same cell  <cit> . while the de novo formation of , by the overexpression of sup <dig> or sup35nm, is dependent on the presence of , the propagation of  is independent of   <cit> . similarly, the formation of  is dependent on , but  does not incorporate nmpm-csc into its sub-particles and  can indeed propagate independently of . however, unlike de novo formation of ,  is formed in the absence of overexpression of nmpm-csc.

during the de novo formation of  by the overexpression of sup35p or sup35nmp in  cells, several variants of , distinguished by phenotypic differences, are formed  <cit> . analogously, variants of  differing in phenotype and biochemically are formed in the presence of , although nmpm-csc is not overexpressed. we suggest that  cross-seeds , similar to  cross-seeding the formation of . since  forms separate sub-particles from those of , this suggests that s. cerevisiae sup35p and nmpm-csc do not form tight interactions within the cell. furthermore, overexpressed nmpm-gfp and sup35nmsc-gfp do not co-aggregate in the cell  <cit> , suggesting that interaction between endogenous sup35p and the chimeric protein is limited. species that have nm domains that are much more similar to s. cerevisiae, such as s. bayanus and s. paradoxus, have been shown to co-aggregate but there is no transmission of the prion state  <cit> . this suggests that tight interactions might actually hamper the formation of the heterologous prion and that heterologous prion formation might be mediated by transient interactions between the seed and the prionizing protein. indeed, in vitro prp in the non-fiber form from one species is capable of binding prp in the fiber form of another species, but there is no conversion of the non-fiber form to the fiber form  <cit> . thus, stable interactions might actually be inhibitory to the process of heterologous prion conversion.

as  seems to be cross-seeded by  we determined whether  could be seeded by , another q/n-rich prion. surprisingly, the prion domain of rnq1p, that has even less similarity than s. cerevisiae sup35p to nmpm, is able to seed nmpm-csc to give rise to , albeit at a lower frequency than in the presence of  . importantly, unlike the -promoted induction of  which requires overexpression of sup35p or at least its prion domain, the appearance of  in the presence of either  or  occurs in the absence of nmpm-csc overexpression. interestingly, the property of enhancing  formation seems limited to the two q/n-rich prions that we tested. aggregates of gfp fused to htq103p, the mutated first exon of the huntingtin protein , whose aggregation is associated with huntington's disease  <cit>  and enhances de novo formation of   <cit> , fail to enhance the formation of . furthermore, a non-q/n-rich prion y, a prion from p. anserine that can propagate in yeast, that is induced twofold higher in  cells  <cit> , also failed to enhance  formation, suggesting that although q/n-rich prions can enhance the formation of non-q/n-rich prions, non-q/n-rich prions do not always enhance the formation of q/n-rich prions in vivo. in fact, in vivo non-q/n-rich amyloids failed to enhance the de novo formation of   <cit> , suggesting that cross talk between q/n-rich and non-q/n-rich prions might occur only in one direction.

two models have been proposed to explain the ability of heterologous prions to enhance the de novo formation of other prions: titration of inhibitory factors by the heterologous prion, and direct cross-seeding by the heterologous prion  <cit> . one or both of these mechanisms could be playing a role in the cross-seeding activity. in vitro evidence supports the direct cross-seeding model, as many q/n-rich and non-q/n-rich amyloids have been shown to stimulate the aggregation of sup35p  <cit> . since  formation is specific to q/n-rich prions, we suggest that de novo formation of this prion requires interactions between q/n-rich domains. several studies have shown that q and n residues play an important role in the initial step of amyloid formation  <cit> , which might be essential for the formation of . since we see no increase in  formation in the presence of the non-prion q/n-rich htq <dig> amyloid, we propose that interaction of resident prion propagating/enhancing factors that associate with the prion cross-seed might help stabilize the newly forming  seed. for example hsp <dig>  a chaperone required for the propagation of all known yeast prions  <cit> , binds preferentially to  aggregates versus non-prion sup35p  <cit> . as  seeds are probably first formed by an interaction with the  seed, hsp <dig> bound to  might play a role in propagating newly formed  seeds.

although prion variants play an important role in the transmission of the prion state across a species barrier, two studies show that variants cause slightly differing results. in the case of mammalian in vitro-made fibers, syrian hamster prp  fibers were able to cross-seed mouse prp  protein but not vice versa. however, syrian hamster-seeded mouse fibers had properties of the syrian hamster seed and not that of spontaneously formed mouse fiber  <cit> . in the case of yeast, one specific variant of sc was able to cross the barrier and infect the nm domain of c. albicans  to give rise to a novel variant of the prion form of nmca-csc  <cit> . we see that although nmpm and nmsc have very little similarity, nmpm-csc is infected by sc to give rise to not one but at least two variants of . we suggest that the chimeric foreign protein nmpm-csc is heterologously cross-seeded to form  de novo, giving rise to different variants. in the case of homologous seeding of sup35p to form , studies have shown that short peptide sequences mediate initial nucleation to give rise to amyloid fibers  <cit> . we propose that the variant of the infecting prion is important as different peptide sequences may be exposed that allow different foreign protein sequences to interact to lead to prionization. thus the  prion, that has such low similarity with nmpm, might have short stretches of peptides that can interact with nmpm giving rise to . our data suggest that heterologous seeding events between proteins from different species might mimic a crossing of the species barrier.

CONCLUSIONS
we show here that in spite of low sequence similarity between the p. methanolica prion domain and the s. cerevisiae q/n-rich prion determinants, the chimera can convert to its prion form, , in the presence of  and .  has many characteristics of yeast prions such as aggregation and transmission by cytoplasmic mixing. interestingly, more than one variant of  was isolated in the presence of . these results suggest that  is formed anew, similar to the de novo formation of  in the presence of  by the overexpression of sup35p. thus, heterologous seeding events leading to newly formed chimeric prion variants might mimic the crossing of the species barrier.

