BACKGROUND
interest in the welfare and diseases of donkeys is constantly increasing in several countries, mostly due to the recent rediscovery of donkey milk as an alternative food source for milk-intolerant children. clinical research on donkeys needs to be in continual development since they have different reactions compared to horses in many conditions , including infectious diseases, making it more difficult to recognize the symptoms normally observed in horses  <cit> . their current popularity is also due to their use as pets, in addition to recreational purposes, sports activities, donkey-assisted therapy and, to a lesser extent, as pack/draught animals and for meat production  <cit> .

equine piroplasmosis  is a tickborne disease caused by the protozoa babesia caballi and theileria equi. ep is endemic in most equine populations in tropical and subtropical areas of the world and affects all equid species, including horses, donkeys, mules, and zebras  <cit> . chronic cases are more common in donkeys than horses and are usually characterized by nonspecific clinical signs such as lethargy, partial anorexia, poor work performance and body weight loss  <cit> . in acute forms of ep, donkeys can show fever, listlessness, depression, noticeable thirst, swelling of the eyelids, constipation, presence of yellow mucous covering feces, yellowish coloration of urine, and splenomegaly  <cit> . donkeys can also show an asymptomatic form of the infection and, in comparison to horses, they also show a lower parasitemia  <cit> . the most common hematological alteration found in horses is decreased packed cell volume, hemoglobin and erythrocyte number, in addition to hyperbilirubinemia and thrombocytopenia  <cit> . after subclinical, chronic or acute infection, donkeys usually remain asymptomatic carriers with positive antibody titers throughout life  <cit> .

several data are available for the epidemiology of equine piroplasmosis  in horses  <cit>  and information on its epidemiology in italy has also been reported  <cit> . however, few reports exist regarding the prevalence of these parasites in donkeys  <cit>  and, to the authors’ knowledge, only few surveys have been carried out in italy  <cit> . the present study is the first investigation aimed at evaluating and comparing the direct  and indirect  presence of b. caballi and t. equi with clinical signs and clinical pathology data in naturally infected donkeys in italy.

methods
one hundred and thirty eight mixed breed donkeys  ranging from  <dig> to 22 years of age  belonging to  <dig> different farms  in central italy were included in the study. the area was chosen due to the high prevalence of tickborne pathogens previously found in equids  <cit> , the proven presence of the tick vectors  <cit>  and because vet practitioners have frequently reported heavy tick infestations in equids. all the animals were born and reared in italy and had never been moved out of the country. the survey was performed between march and october  <dig> in farms of varying nature and size, including herds for milk production , onotherapy centers  and private facilities  where animals were reared for leisure. de-worming and topical ectoparasite repellents were regularly administered to all the animals who were free from ticks at the moment of evaluation.

a general clinical examination was performed on each donkey; the evaluation also included a body condition score  estimation, following the scheme of pearson and quassat   <cit> . donkeys showing clinical signs not attributable to ep  were excluded from the study to avoid interference on blood analysis. venous blood samples were collected from each donkey from the jugular vein into sterile tubes with  and without  ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid  and maintained at +4°c. the samples with edta were submitted for a complete blood count , which included: erythrocytes count , packed cell volume , hemoglobin , mean corpuscular volume , mean corpuscular hemoglobin , mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration , total leukocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils and platelets . moreover, an aliquot of 200 μl was destined to genomic dna extraction using the qiaamp dna blood mini kit  according to the manufacturer’s instructions. to ensure the effectiveness of the nucleic acid extraction, a pcr targeting the 18s rrna was applied  <cit> . the extracted dna was submitted to a real time pcr sybr green assay to detect  <dig> base pairs of 18s rrna gene of babesia spp. and theileria spp. using the primer bj <dig> and bn <dig> described by casati et al.   <cit> . the method shows a sensitivity of 10^ <dig> dna copies/μl. the species identity was determined by subsequent amplicon sequencing. all pcr products were sequenced using the big dye terminator v  <dig>  cycle sequencing kit  in a 16-capillary abi prism 3130 × l genetic analyzer . sequence data were assembled and edited with seqscape software v  <dig>  , aligned and compared with representative sequences available in genbank  <cit> .

samples without edta were centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 minutes; the separated sera were collected and divided into two aliquots. the first aliquot was used for dosage of total bilirubin  ; the second was utilized to determine the presence of igg antibodies against t. equi and b. caballi using a commercial indirect fluorescent antibody test  .

statistical analysis
prevalence and 95% binomial confidence intervals  were calculated  <cit>  for the serologic and molecular test results.

hematological parameters and serum bilirubin were tested for normality by kolmogorof-smirnov test and then analyzed by anova or mann–whitney u-test for comparison between positive  and negative animals and between donkeys with and without clinical signs. comparison of the clinical pathology results with normal reference values  <cit>  was carried out using a t-student’s test. the chi-square test was performed to evaluate the differences between ifat and pcr prevalence for b. caballi and t. equi.. statistical significance was assessed at the  <dig>  probability level in all analyses.

all statistical analyses were performed using the winpepi  computer program .

ethical statement
tha autor state that the work has been carried out in compliance with relevant guidelines regarding ethical use of animals, approved by the universitary ethical commettee for animal protection and in adherence to a high standard  of veterinary care.

RESULTS
ninety-five  and  <dig>  donkeys tested positive by ifat and pcr respectively. the results of the serological and molecular tests performed on blood samples are reported in table  <dig>  as well as the prevalence  and 95% confidence interval  of single and mixed-infections.table  <dig> 
number of donkeys, prevalence and confidence interval of the equine tick-borne infections investigated using serological and molecular testing


ifat
pcr

pathogens
no. of positive samples 
prevalence 
no. of positive samples 
prevalence 

t. equi

b. caballi

t. equi

b. caballi

t. equi + b. caballi
ifat, indirect fluorescent antibody test; pcr, polymerase chain reaction; ci, confidence interval.



all herds  resulted positive at ifat for both t. equi and b. caballi and at pcr for t. equi. three herds  resulted positive for b. caballi at pcr. the prevalence rates within herd are reported in table  <dig> table  <dig> 
intra-herd prevalence of
babesia caballi
and
theileria equi



herd
number of donkeys
ifat prevalence
b. caballi
pcr prevalence
b. caballi
ifat prevalence
t. equi
pcr prevalence
t. equi
ifat, indirect fluorescent antibody test; pcr, polymerase chain reaction.



the seroprevalence of b. caballi resulted higher than that of t. equi but the difference was not statistically significant . the percentage of pcr positive animals resulted statistically higher for t. equi than b. caballi .

nine  animals were simultaneously ifat and pcr positive for t. equi while  <dig>  were only pcr positive. none of the ifat positive donkeys resulted pcr positive for b. caballi.

abnormal clinical pathology data with respect to normal ranges were detected in  <dig>  samples. fifty-six  of these donkeys resulted ifat and/or pcr positive. hematological alterations included decreased rgb , decreased pcv , decreased hb , increased mch , increased mchc  increased wbc , increased neutrophils , increased eosinophils , decreased platelets , and increased bilirubin . among ifat positive donkeys,  <dig>  had one or more hematological and/or bilirubin alteration:  <dig>  proved positive for b.caballi,  <dig>  for t. equi and  <dig>  were double positives. among pcr positive donkeys,  <dig>  had one or more hematological and/or bilirubin alteration:  <dig>  was positive for b. caballi and  <dig>  were positive for t. equi. the statistical differences between positive  and negative animals are reported in table  <dig> table  <dig> 
mean, standard deviation and statistical association with negative donkeys of hematobiochemical paramethers


negative
ifat positive
pcr positive
pcr and ifat positive

parameters
mean 
b. caballi mean 
t. equi mean 
double positives mean 
b. caballi mean 
t. equi mean 
t. equi mean 














ifat, indirect fluorescent antibody test; pcr, polymerase chain reaction; rgb, erythrocytes; pcv, packed cell volume; hb, hemoglobin; mcv, mean corpuscular volume; mch, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mchc, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; wbc, white blood cell; plt, platelet; tb, total bilirubin.



twelve  of the positive donkeys presented signs related to chronic piroplasm infection at the moment of evaluation and all of them were positive for at least one test . detected clinical signs included mild depression , body condition score ≤  <dig> , inappetence , pale mucous membranes  and mild icterus . mch, mchc, and tb were statistically higher in symptomatic than in negative donkeys while rgb, pcv, hb, and platelets were lower. when the blood parameters of symptomatic donkeys were compared to asymptomatic/positives, hb, mch and tb resulted in being the only statistically different parameters .table  <dig> 
ifat/pcr positivity and changed hematology and serum bilirubin in symptomatic donkeys



donkeys
positivity
clinical signs
clinical pathology
ifat, indirect fluorescent antibody test; pcr, polymerase chain reaction; rgb, erythrocytes; hb, hemoglobin; pcv, packed cell volume; wbc, white blood cell; plt, platelet; tb, total bilirubin; mch, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mchc,mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, mm mucous membranes.

↑, higher than normal; ↓, lower than normal.



discussion
although not statistically significant, the seroprevalence of b. caballi  was higher than that of t. equi  in accordance with the results obtained in donkeys in italy  <cit>  or in other countries  <cit> . the percentage of pcr positive animals resulted statistically higher for t. equi  than b. caballi  proving that also in donkeys t. equi can persist in a subclinical form for longer than b. caballi  <cit> .

in general, the chronic and subclinical natural infection in donkeys included in this study seems to be associated with decreased rgb, pcv, hb and plt and with increased mch. a systematic comparison with previous studies carried out on donkeys is not reliable since they are experimental trials aimed at investigating pathogenic mechanisms or the efficacy of drugs or vaccines often on few splenectomised donkeys  <cit> .

almost all the donkeys having one or more hematological disorder resulted ifat positive for b. caballi and/or t. equi; the only two negative animals had increased wbc, neutrophils or eosinophils but similar alterations are not usually related to piroplasm chronic infections  <cit> . these findings are of remarkable importance since these animals , could not have cleared the parasites from their blood after natural infection, but could only have reduced the level beyond the sensitivity of the pcr test  <cit> . this consideration is also supported by the fact that  <dig>  of the  <dig> symptomatic donkeys were ifat but not pcr positive. most of the alterations were related to hematological signs of anaemia, thrombocytopenia and hemolysis, could suggest the presence of a direct and immune-mediated pathogenic activity of the parasites.. as a consequence of this kind of subclinical infection, the donkeys could have a reduction of their work or production performance, although further specific investigation are needed to verify such occurrence. a similar situation can also occur in horses, in which slight anemia caused by chronic infection can result in poor athletic performances  <cit> . however, because of the naturally more quiet behavior of donkeys, their resistance to diseases and the more rural type of farming, in this species it could be difficult to recognize some subtle nonspecific alteration  without a careful evaluation. piroplasmosis should be considered a differential diagnosis in these animals, which should therefore be monitored for risk of stress . furthermore, these animals should also be considered potential asymptomatic carriers.

t. equi infected donkeys  showed a higher likelihood of having hematological alterations compared with b. caballi infected animals. the only alteration found in donkeys proving positive for b. caballi was a decrease in plt in one subject. this is in contrast with findings reported for horses, where anemia, thrombocytopenia and leukopenia are reported to have a high incidence also in b. caballi positive subjects  <cit> : the low number of positive animals  in the present and in the cited paper could have influenced such statistical results. however, none of the b. caballi infected donkeys showed clinical symptoms and it is possible to speculate that t. equi has a higher pathogenicity than b. caballi in donkeys as suggested for horses  <cit> .

t. equi infected donkeys also have a higher tb serum level compared both to negative and to other positive donkeys. the recent infection causing hemolytic anemia could be the reason for this condition since donkeys simultaneously pcr and ifat positive which are supposed to have a less recent infection since they have already developed antibodies, showed no such association.

neutrophilia was found to be related only to pcr/ifat positive to t. equi . acute experimental infection in donkeys can be characterized by a high absolute neutrophil count  <cit>  but, although these donkeys resulted to be infected, none of them showed signs of the acute form of the disease. more investigations are needed to confirm if similar alterations of white blood cells relate to natural piroplasm infection or are due to concomitant subclinical diseases as we suppose.

in the present study, only hb, mchc and tb resulted to be statistically different between symptomatic and non-symptomatic animals. it could be possible to speculate that donkeys can control the clinical symptoms after natural infection in endemic areas, but, at the same time, they can have some residual hematochemical alterations similar to those of symptomatic animals, exposing them to the risk of disease or poor performance.

it should also be highlighted that  <dig> of the  <dig> donkeys who resulted pcr positive for t. equi were found to be free from clinical signs. these animals confirm that subclinical forms are widespread among donkeys reared in endemic areas, as observed in horses  <cit>  such findings also support the existence of lifelong carriers, which are persistently infected subjects, potentially capable of enhancing the spread of these pathogens.

CONCLUSIONS
the high prevalence of piroplasms and associated hematochemical alterations in non-symptomatic donkeys or in donkeys with minimal clinical evidence found in this study could be more usual than previously considered, especially in areas where piroplasmosis is endemic. such animals should be monitored for red cells, red cell related parameters and thrombocytopenia because unapparent carriers can occasionally exhibit relapses of the clinical disease associated with stress, strenuous exercise, immunosuppression, and steroid administration. furthermore, these animals can act as a source of piroplasms for ticks, increasing the probability of transmission to other animals, including horses. since the effects of this unapparent infection and its possible consequences on the production performance of the donkeys  are not yet known, further studies to investigate such relationships should be performed. currently there is no suitable pharmacotherapy available to clear the t. equi infection from affected donkeys  <cit> . it has therefore become urgent to act with surveillance plans and preventive therapy. the study should also be intended as a contribution for veterinary practitioners because it describes the most usual clinical presentations and laboratory findings of ep in naturally infected donkeys in italian endemic areas.

abbreviations
epequine piroplasmosis

ifatindirect fluorescent antibody test

pcrpolymerase chain reaction

cbccomplete blood count

rgberythrocytes

pcvpacked cell volume

hbhemoglobin

mcvmean corpuscular volume

mchmean corpuscular hemoglobin]

mchcmean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration

wbcwhite blood cell

pltplatelet

tbtotal bilirubin

edtaethylenediaminetetraacetic acid

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

fl carried out the sampling, clinical evaluation and drafted the manuscript. as and vf carried out the sampling and clinical evaluation. fv and sr carried out the ifat and pcr analysis. fb and mc carried out hemato-biochemical analyses. mm participated in the design of the study and performed the statistical analysis. bt conceived the study, and participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. all the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

