BACKGROUND
a key challenge of the post genomic era is the prediction of protein structure. since x-ray crystallography and nmr-based methods are still relatively low throughput, computational inference approaches are of the upmost importance. one of the key approaches to this problem has been to describe fragments that represent specific local structural elements in libraries  <cit> . fragments can be used as input to folding simulation algorithms such as rosetta, tasser and simfold  <cit> .

i-sites motifs represent small, independently folding substructures in proteins and may play a role in initiating the folding process <cit> . the short amino acid sequence patterns associated with i-sites motifs have been found to correlate with common local structures in proteins and match short local structures, such as helix caps and beta-turns, with sequence probability distributions, or profiles. the profiles can be used to predict the local structure given a sequence. i-sites motifs were found by clustering short sequence patterns from proteins of known structure after factoring out redundancy due to homologous relationships. because the patterns are recurrent, and yet clustered from non-homologous proteins, the motifs are almost certainly the results of convergent, not divergent, evolution. local energetic preferences are most likely at the root of the selective pressure leading to the convergent evolution.

i-sites motifs represent small, independently folding substructures in proteins and may play a role in initiating the folding process. in molecular dynamics simulations, peptide sequences with higher i-sites scores correlated with a greater equilibrium stability  <cit> . in experimental studies, peptides with i-sites motif patterns were found to fold to their corresponding motif structures in isolation <cit> . blind predictions of local structure were found to have approximately 44% accuracy when measured as the fraction of the sequence that falls within correct 8-residue segments  <cit> . randomly selected 8-residue segments have an average  <dig> % prediction accuracy.

the scoring function for i-sites predictions may be viewed as a knowledge-based energy function, since a high score of a sequence to an i-sites motif implies a high probability that the sequence segment adopts the motif local structure. a high probability implies a low free energy as an autonomous folding unit. if the i-sites scoring function is capturing an energetic quantity, then might we do better by re-structuring the scoring function to resemble a force field?

a force field generally functions on pairs of atoms rather than on single atoms. to better resemble an energy calculation, the i-sites scoring function should act on pairs of amino acid residues rather than on single residues. a covariant statistical interaction should imply an energetic interaction. that is, amino acids that occur together more often than expected by chance imply the existence of an attractive force, while pairs that occur less often than expected imply a repulsive force.

if energetic stability was the selective pressure for the covergent evolution of local structure motifs, then we can view these motifs as minima in a broad sequence/structure energy landscape. evolving sequences preferentially populated the energy valleys over time. if the sampling of this landscape is representative, then the statistical probabilities  are convertible to energies using the gibbs equation, Δg = -rtlog. the number of occurrences of any pair of amino acids in the context of a structure should be a good measure of their physical interaction energy. hydrophobic contacts, salt bridges and other energetic interactions that contribute to the stability of a local structure should be over-represented in the statistics, while destabilizing interactions such as like-charges should be under-represented. deriving an energy-like score from pairwise sequence statistics is quite different from independently summing probabilities from single positions and calculating a log-likelihood score. the latter approach tacitly and erroneously implies that the hydrophobic effect decreases only by half when one of the pair of interacting hydrophobic sidechains is removed, instead of decreasing to zero, as we know it does.

positional pairwise sequence covariance has been shown to be a weak predictor of residue-residue tertiary contacts within protein families in several studies  <cit> , probably because such paired mutations are rare in evolutionary history. in the present work, however, no mutational pathway is implied since the observed sequences are not the results of divergent evolution. each example in the training set comes from a different ancestral line.

in this work, the i-sites motif library has been modified and refined by adding a pairwise covariance metric to each motif. covariances are expressed in the model as a four-dimensional tensor in which each element is a pairwise positional correlation between two amino acid profile classes. the scoring matrices were trained using expectation/maximization to predict the backbone dihedral angles in a non-redundant set of proteins. the results on an independent test set are reported for three different training strategies.

RESULTS
significant improvements in prediction over the previous i-sites method were obtained by simply using a better model for measuring confidence and by retraining the i-sites profiles on a larger and newer dataset . an overall improvement was found when covariance was added to the profile model without re-training the profiles . adding covariance tensors and re-training the profiles  improved prediction accuracy the most, but only slightly more than by retraining the profiles alone. interestingly, the contribution of covariance to prediction accuracy was found to be positive and significant for non-periodic local structure motifs, whereas prediction accuracy of canonical secondary structure elements  was not greatly improved by covariance, even though each of the individual motifs showed improved prediction after adding covariance. over-fitting was present in some cases, but does not fully explain the shortfall in prediction, which was observed in both training and test data.

several trends were observed in nearly all motifs. the sign of pairwise correlation and the pair of amino acid classes involved usually made good chemical sense. for example, we consistently observed a positive correlation value for hydrophobic sidechains that were in contact in alpha helices.

improvements in local structure prediction
motif prediction accuracy was evaluated for the original and the three new libraries trained. the correctness of a motif prediction was defined using the maximum backbone angle deviation  metric. but motif predictions may overlap, leading to ambiguity. to assure that each position was counted only once, we assigned each position the value  of the highest confidence overlapping motif prediction. these predictions were collected for the entire dataset and sorted by confidence. the overall accuracy was plotted for each of the broad classes of local structure  for each of the four libraries.

additionally, we evaluated confidence as a classifier of true and false predictions using a receiver operating characteristic  curve  <cit> . figure  <dig> summarizes the roc results over all i-sites motifs for the previously described library, version  <dig> , and for each of the new i-sites libraries, isl  <dig> , isl  <dig>  and isl  <dig> , which were trained in different ways. the new motif libraries have a higher overall accuracy and have a greater fraction of high confidence predictions. isl  <dig>  had the highest overall roc , followed by isl  <dig>  , isl  <dig>   and the starting library isl  <dig>  . but although the library with the covariance model was slightly worse overall as a predictor of local structure, it did significantly better at predicting loop and cap motifs than isl  <dig> . the improvements were outnumbered, however, by poorer predictions of beta strands by isl  <dig> . the accuracy of the highest confidence predictions was higher for isl  <dig>  than for isl  <dig>  or any of the other libraries, as seen in the inset in figure  <dig> 

roc and accuracy were measured on test set data, a set of proteins not used in training. to assess the potential over-fitting of the data, we compared prediction accuracy on the training and test set data . differences between these numbers in the libraries containing covariance appear to indicate some over-fitting, but only slight. the overall improvements in accuracy are seen in the test data, showing that the improvements are not the result of over-fitting.

case study: type-i' beta-hairpin motif
although it is not possible to discuss all of the local structure motifs, we can see in a case study that some features of covariant sequence patterns agree with chemical intuition. as an example, consider the type-i' beta hairpin motif. this motif carries a strong preference for the two-character sequence g in positions  <dig> and  <dig> of the turn, where consecutive backbone phi angles are positive. since the sequences do not vary in these positions, they also do not co-vary, and therefore no correlations were observed for those positions . but in the other motif positions, positive correlations occur that would favor having the sidechains together on the same side of the hairpin, and negative correlations occur that would favor contacts where the motif does not have contacts.

positions  <dig> and  <dig> have sidechains that fall on the same side of the 2-stranded sheet and are in contact, and a positive correlation is found between a positive charge  at position  <dig> and a negative charge  at position  <dig>  – a salt bridge. the reversed charge placements are also favored, but like charges at these positions are disfavored.

positions  <dig> and  <dig> point in opposite directions. here like charges are positively correlated and opposite charges are negatively correlated. opposite charges would attract, possibly putting positions 7– <dig> into a turn or bulge conformation instead of a strand. this is an example of negative design. 

comparison of three libraries
the starting motif library, isl  <dig>  was reported in  <dig> along with hmmstr, a hidden markov model for local structure that is ils  <dig>  <cit> , but was not assessed here because it carries additional information about motif adjacencies. the new libraries were trained using an expectation/maximization approach, using three different strategies, which had different effects on the overall accuracy across local structures.

isl  <dig> : profile refined only
as a control experiment in this attempt to demonstrate sequence covariance in local structure, the previous library was updated using only the profile information. the results show that updating the library greatly improved the overall prediction performance. over the years since i-sites was originally trained, the size of the pdbselect <dig> database has grown by about 3-fold. updating the profiles by iterative retraining led to improved accuracy across all local structure types as seen in figure  <dig> 

isl  <dig> : tensor and profile refined together
the second training strategy was to update both the correlation tensor and the amino acid profile at each iteration. we observed that the profiles in library  <dig>  were often lower in information content  than the profiles in the libraries  <dig>  and  <dig>  showing that pairwise correlations can replace the information in a profile and are often sufficient to predict the structure of a local motif. motifs containing conserved glycines or prolines held more of the scoring function weight  in the profile score than motifs that did not contain a glycine or proline. note that, since they do not vary, they cannot co-vary.

isl  <dig> : tensor refined, profile fixed
isl  <dig> , in which the tensor was iteratively updated but the profile was not, was found to have a lower prediction performance than both libraries  <dig>  and  <dig> . by doing this second control experiment, we can see that the improvements in prediction accuracy for helix and strand motifs in version  <dig>  are accounted for by the refinement of the profiles, as in library  <dig> , not by the addition of the covariance tensor. however, we see improvements in accuracy in the prediction of most loop motifs, including helix caps. a possible rationale for this result is that loop motifs are not repeating structures, while beta strands and alpha helices do contain a repeating sequence pattern. a profile, viewed as an all-or-none model, is a better predictor of a multiposition pattern.

CONCLUSIONS
overall we observe that there is little benefit in using pairwise correlation to model the local structural motifs in the i-sites library . furthermore, we conclude from this experiment that, in canonical secondary structure, the profile and the correlation tensor are both being fit to an underlying multivariant sequence-structure relationship, which is better captured by a library of profiles of than by a profile plus a correlation tensor.

to understand this view, consider that both canonical secondary structures, helix and strand, are repeating patterns. a register shift of one residue down the chain produces a new pattern that is changed in all positions, not just two. i-sites already contains multiple solutions for helix and strand, each a different length or register shift. a library of profiles is, in essence, a multivariant model composed of discrete, all-or-none solutions. although we saw significant covariances within each of the helix/strand motifs and each individual motif improved in its performance, the additional peripheral instances that were captured by the improved motif model were already captured by one of the other helix/strand motif profiles in the library. thus improving the performance of each motif did not improve the preformance overall.

for non-canonical local structure motifs, the story is different. these motifs are not repeat patterns, and therefore one instance cannot match multiple register shifts of one motif, only one. by adding covariance to the model, we were able to capture sequence variants that were not already captured by another motif in the library, and performance on these structures improved.

the results are consistent with protein local structures having arisen by convergent evolution, not by duplication followed by uncorrelated or correlated mutations. the variations in sequence space for each type of local structure  are best modeled by multiple independent sequence profiles, and less well modeled by a single profile with a pairwise covariance tensor.

