BACKGROUND
with recent technological advances, genome-wide association studies are now a reality and offer terrific promise for localizing genes responsible for complex diseases. in fact, large-scale genome-wide association studies have successfully identified genetic loci related to a wide array of disorders. currently, over  <dig> publications report putative associations that have been found by this approach  <cit> . a benefit of this relatively unbiased strategy is the potential to identify genes in pathways previously unconnected with the disease of interest. examples include identification of complement factor h  in age related macular degeneration, fgfr <dig> in breast cancer, and cdkn2a as well as cdkn2b in type  <dig> diabetes  <cit> . other successful studies have discovered loci related to a variety of disorders including cancer, autoimmune disease, and cardiovascular disease  <cit> .

genome-wide association studies often utilize multiple stages in which promising signals are identified in an initial stage and followed up in subsequent stages. the process of follow up includes fine-mapping a signal using the same cohort and replicating the finding in additional cohorts. in both cases, snps need to be prioritized for selection in follow up studies since it is currently impractical to experimentally test every snp at our disposal for association with disease. some groups advocate prioritizing snps in genes and/or coding regions over other snps during selection  <cit> . by not only emphasizing nonsynonymous snps but also applying computational methods to detect nonsynonymous variants with the greatest potential to disrupt protein function, others take this strategy a step further  <cit> . such prioritization begins to address the problem of an unwieldy number of snps to evaluate. unfortunately, these gene-centric approaches fail to focus on functionally important snps outside of annotated genes. as will be justified below, a more comprehensive prioritization scheme, which considers snps outside of protein-coding regions, is warranted.

a compelling reason to consider a broader approach for snp selection is that often genome-wide association studies have produced highly significant signals that fall in regions far from any annotated protein-coding gene. it is likely that these findings are true positives since in many cases independent research groups have replicated these results. according to the national human genome research institute's catalog of published gwa studies, to date greater than  <dig> associations have been found in intergenic regions or in regions where the gene is unknown. presumably, many more associations are located in genomic regions devoid of annotated genes but are not reported in the catalog  <cit> . one puzzling example is the region at 8q <dig>  which has been implicated in studies of prostate, breast, and colorectal cancer  <cit> . the closest gene, myc, is a viable candidate; however, it is more than  <dig> kb from the association signals. another region implicated in multiple disorders is 9q <dig>  significant association signals in this region have been detected for myocardial infarction and type  <dig> diabetes and are  <dig> kb from the nearest genes  <cit> .

several researchers have applied approaches utilizing bioinformatics to investigate regions outside of coding regions for the existence of selective pressure. chen et al. demonstrated significant negative selection in regions predicted as mirna targets  <cit> . similarly, others have shown negative selective pressure acting in predicted exon splicing enhancers, cis-elements, and introns  <cit> . furthermore, negative selection has been identified in both conserved noncoding sequences and ultraconserved elements in the human genome although variations in these regions have not yet been linked to changes in phenotype  <cit> . a comprehensive study identifying genomic regions under negative selection utilizing a full array of the annotation currently available has not so far been undertaken. such a study could provide the basis for a snp prioritization scheme that extends beyond snps in coding regions.

here we create a comprehensive scheme for prioritizing snps based on the likelihood that they are functional. our approach involves identifying regions of the genome under negative selection. since these regions appear intolerant of putatively deleterious alleles, they most likely harbor important functional features. we categorize the snps in the human genome based on the annotations available related to gene structure, cross-species conservation, and regulatory elements. by examining the distribution of derived allele frequencies within each class, we assess the strength of evidence for negative selection in each class. we advocate employing this information to weight the snps based on their class affiliations. this approach targets snps in genomic regions that display evidence of function, regardless of whether protein-coding genes are found in the region.

RESULTS
we classified snps in the ensembl database into  <dig> classes based on the annotation available as detailed in the methods section . an examination of these classes revealed that they are not mutually exclusive . interestingly, the vast majority of snps in constrained elements, regions of the genome that show a high level of cross species conservation, did not appear in either coding regions  or the regulatory features constructed by experimentally derived regulatory attributes . these observations emphasize that constrained elements represent a distinct class worthy of separate consideration from coding and regulatory elements. likewise, the majority of snps in coding regions and regulatory features did not reside in constrained elements .

snp counts shown are for all snps in ensembl.

to identify regions of the genome under purifying selection, we compared the distribution of derived allele frequencies  in each class with that of the genome as a whole and, in a confirmatory analysis, with that of ancestral repeats, a well-accepted model of neutral selection  <cit> . for the comparisons, we utilized the allele frequencies from three populations comprehensively genotyped by perlegen--african americans , european americans , and han chinese from the los angeles area   <cit> . an excess of low derived frequency snps in comparison to the genome  implies a region is under negative selection.

we found evidence that suggests the existence of negative pressure for several classes. seventeen classes were statistically significant  in the afr population . similar results were observed for the eur and chn populations . we emphasize the afr population because it possesses greater genetic diversity and many fewer monomorphic snps, thereby increasing our power to detect negative selection. as expected, protein-coding gene related classes such as nonsynonymous, coding, and splice site classes resided on the list of significant classes. constrained element classes and regions where four specific histone methylations have been detected  appeared statistically significant. several other regulatory elements, including microrna binding targets , are also worth noting.

classes with a statistically significant excess of low derived alleles when compared to the genome as a whole are shown. in order to adjust for the multiplicity of testing, we apply an fdr correction with α =  <dig> . only resequenced perlegen snp markers are included in this analysis to minimize ascertainment bias. for our comparisons, we rely on allele frequencies present in the afr perlegen population.

the above analysis rests on the assumption that the vast majority of the genome as a whole is under neutral selection and is therefore an appropriate benchmark for comparison. in order to validate this hypothesis, we utilized snps in ancestral repeats, a well-accepted model of neutral selection, in a second round of analyses for comparison  <cit> . the results from the comparisons with the ancestral repeats supported those from the comparisons with the genome as a whole. six classes were statistically significant when compared to ancestral repeats for the perlegen afr population . again, the analyses using the eur and chn population allele frequencies showed similar results . similar to the comparison with the genome as a whole, the significant classes found in the comparison with ancestral repeats were the nonsynonymous and coding snps as well as all but one constrained elements classes. when comparing these results, it is important to recognize that the comparisons to the genome involved many more observations and, therefore, had a sizable power advantage to detect modest effects. furthermore, we applied a less severe multiple test correction for the comparisons to the genome as a whole because we performed twelve fewer tests due to computational issues .

classes with an excess of low derived alleles when compared to the ancestral repeats are shown. bolded, italicized classes are statistically significant when we apply an fdr correction with α =  <dig> . only resequenced perlegen snp markers are included in this analysis to minimize ascertainment bias. for our comparisons, we rely on allele frequencies present in the afr perlegen population.

some borderline significant classes  are also worth noting . interestingly, the h3k79me <dig> histone methylation class was extremely close to being significant. albeit not as close as h3k79me <dig>  the remaining constrained elements class, miranda elements, and the h3k36me <dig> histone methylation class also seemed to provide strong evidence to support the findings from the initial comparison to the genome as a whole. notably, several classes, including splice sites, dnase i hypersensitivity sites, regulatory features extended , and h3k4me <dig>  which appeared significant in the initial analysis did not appear significant or even borderline significant in the subsequent analysis involving the ancestral repeats. in particular, the regulatory features extended class may not appear significant in this subsequent analysis because this class is built from  <dig> distinct regulatory attributes - some displaying strong evidence of negative selection and other displaying little or no evidence of negative selection. while the regulatory features class as well as these other classes may still represent regions of the genome under negative selection and be functionally important, the confirmatory analysis utilizing ancestral repeats did not substantiate the initial findings.

as mentioned above, we observed evidence for negative selection among the snps in regulatory attributes, h3k79me <dig> and h3k36me <dig>  as well as in constrained elements. we investigated the possibility that our observations were the result of an underlying hitchhiking effect or background selection. for the two regulatory attributes, we considered snps in random genomic regions comparably located to annotated genes . in this approach, we compared the p-values reported above, "real p-values", with the p-values generated using the random genomic regions, "generated p-values". for both the h3k79me <dig> and the h3k36me <dig> experiments, we found that the "real" p-values were considerably smaller than all  <dig> "generated" p-values in comparisons to both the genome and ancestral repeats . in addition, we applied a fdr test correction to the "real" p-values to adjust for the multiplicity of testing involved in performing  <dig> tests. again, the fdr adjusted p-values were smaller than all  <dig> "generated" p-values in comparisons to both the genome and ancestral repeats . these results suggest that a hitchhiking effect or background selection cannot account for the observed negative selection in the regions containing these regulatory attributes.

ranks for each "real" p-value are relative to a set of "generated" p-values produced by performing tests of evidence of selection on sets of snps in random genomic regions comparable, in size and proximity to annotated genes, to the regulatory feature under consideration.

for the constrained elements, we employ an alternative approach to ensure that our observation is not solely due to constrained element snps localized in coding regions. we considered subsets of the snps in the constrained element class that are located outside of genes, at least  <dig> kb from the closest gene, and at least  <dig> kb from the closest gene. in all three perlegen populations, the derived allele frequencies of snps in constrained elements outside of genes were significantly lower than the derived allele frequencies in the genome as a whole and in ancestral repeats . we observed similar results when we only considered constrained elements at least  <dig> kb and constrained elements at least  <dig> kb from the closest gene relative to the genome as a whole and ancestral repeats . in summary, classes created by placing greater restrictions on the constrained elements class still display statistical significance.

classes presented are 1) constrained elements, 2) constrained elements at least  <dig> kb from the closest gene, and 3) constrained elements at least  <dig> kb from the closest gene, 4) constrained elements outside of genes, and 5) h3k79me <dig> regulatory attributes in comparison with the genome as a whole and ancestral repeats. we perform a mann-whitney u-test to compare the daf distribution for snps in constrained elements, constrained elements outside of genes, and h3k79me <dig> regulatory attributes with that of the genome and that of ancestral repeats. we list the resulting p-values as well as the median daf for each class.

as mentioned above, several classes derived from biological experiments have strong evidence of negative selection. for example, the derived allele frequencies in snps in regions known to have specific histone modifications had lower derived allele frequencies than snps in the genome as a whole or in ancestral repeats. chief among these was h3k79me <dig> . this difference was statistically significant in all three populations when compared to the genome and in two of the populations when compared to ancestral repeats .

discussion
here we have shown that snps in several classes of genomic elements appear to be under negative selection. most notably, we find that snps in constrained elements, even when  <dig> kb from the nearest gene, have a lower derived allele frequency than snps in presumably neutrally evolving regions. the constrained elements represent regions of the genome that are highly conserved among multiple species. since it is thought that most snps arose subsequent to the last common ancestor of chimpanzees and humans, cross-species conservation in a region does not imply that the region is intolerant of new snps in humans. however, our work shows that an analysis of snps in human populations definitively demonstrates significant negative selection in these regions. furthermore, since we find evidence for negative selection when the constrained elements are restricted to large distances from the closest annotated gene, we purport that constrained regions provide a meaningful class of putatively functionally important snps unto themselves without any contributions from known genes. these observations are in agreement with the findings of other groups that focused specifically on conserved regions rather than the broader approach we pursue  <cit> .

regulatory attributes represent another potentially useful group of classes for identifying functional snps. our analysis finds two regulatory attributes, h3k79me <dig> and h3k36me <dig>  with substantial support for negative selection. these attributes annotate regions of the genome where methylation of two specific lysines in histone h <dig> have been detected. the covalent addition of methyl groups to histones has been associated with both gene silencing and expression. the durability of the bond allows for epigenetic changes in gene expression that can be passed on to daughter cells. whole genome scans of methylation sites in human cells revealed that many h3k36me <dig> methylations occur within transcribed regions of highly active genes  <cit> . because this methylation peaks near the 3' end of active genes it has been hypothesized to play a role in rna termination  <cit> . whereas the h3k79me <dig> methylation is less well defined, several groups report a modest correlation with both highly expressed and silenced genes  <cit> . regardless of their specific function, we believe that these regulatory attributes represent a refinement over a predicted promoter class since they are experimentally derived and displayed significant evidence of selection despite their small sample size.

in addition, other regulatory classes such as miranda elements have some evidence of negative selection as well . miranda is open-source software that predicts targets for microrna-mediated translational repression in the 3' untranslated region of genes  <cit> . to date, the miranda algorithm has identified  <dig> , <dig> putative binding targets in  <dig>  human gene isoforms for  <dig> currently known human micrornas  <cit> . although the set of rules for target prediction are not identical, our findings regarding microrna binding targets concur with those of chen et al.  <cit> . the miranda algorithm incorporates current biological knowledge on target rules and relies on interspecies conservation. the miranda class is distinctively different from the constrained elements as it does not apply the gerp scoring algorithm to the multiple sequence alignment across the same ten species. in addition, these regions represent an entity whose function is biologically distinct. however, it is not surprising that a class such as the miranda class, which relies on interspecies conservation, shows evidence of negative selection. overall, our analysis highlights specific regulatory elements that appear to have a greater potential to harbor functional snps.

compared to the vast majority of classes we investigate, the individual regulatory elements contain relatively small sample sizes . as with any statistical test, these small sample sizes negatively affect the power to detect a significant result. even so, the miranda elements and mrna polymerase binding site , containing less than  <dig> and  <dig> snps, respectively, show significant results when compared to the genome and borderline significant results when compared to ancestral repeats. given that power is a function of sample size and magnitude of effect, in these cases a significant result suggests a substantial effect. many of the other regulatory and non-protein coding rna related classes are under powered due to their very small class membership  and may be shown to exhibit significant negative selection in future analysis with an enlarged sample. in contrast, other classes with substantial sample sizes such as ctcf, which contains almost  <dig>  snps, are not significant in any analysis. thus, the identification of significant classes does not simply follow linearly with increasing sample size.

applying the information garnered from our analysis to address the problem of an unwieldy number of snps to evaluate in genome-wide association studies represents an additional challenge. our analysis provides the foundation for a comprehensive snp prioritization scheme to select markers meriting follow-up. such follow-up includes replicating association results in independent cohorts as well as searching for causal variants in linkage disequilibrium with associated signals. our data can also be used to weight specific association tests in the initial stage of a genome-wide association study. several researchers have proposed approaches to weighting snps in genome-wide studies using biological information such as we present here. one strategy utilizes a bayesian approach to weighting the hypotheses in an fdr framework  <cit> . another approach relies on hierarchical modeling, which allows for multiple sources of prior information without prejudging their value  <cit> . a third approach involves establishing groups of snps based on prior information and weighting them to optimize the average power of the study  <cit> . however, additional research is needed to determine the most powerful method. regardless of the method, we strongly advocate harnessing the scientific insights we have found regarding genomic elements under negative selection to appropriately target regions most likely to harbor functional variants.

these data also have implications beyond the realm of genome-wide association studies. with the advent of next generation sequencing technologies, the affordability of large-scale genomic sequencing projects is rapidly increasing  <cit> . ventures like the  <dig> genomes project promise to provide whole-genome sequence for a large and diverse set of individuals  <cit> . whole-genome sequencing has been used to identify both tumor-specific somatic mutations  <cit>  and germline mutations in a charcot-marie-tooth syndrome patient  <cit> . while these initial whole-genome resequencing studies focused on coding regions of annotated genes, a prioritization scheme could be employed as an efficient alternative to search for functional single nucleotide variants  outside of coding regions. since whole-genome sequencing will produce even more overwhelming amounts of data, the need to prioritize variants for follow-up will elevate in importance.

we expect in the future that many functional variants will be elucidated outside of the coding regions of known genes. in order to efficiently design studies to follow-up genome-wide association and whole genome sequencing efforts, we advocate a comprehensive prioritization scheme for variants based on evidence of negative selection. our findings here illustrate the importance of considering genetic elements that lie outside of known protein-coding regions and highlight genomic elements which are most likely to contain variants that play a role in disease.

CONCLUSIONS
these data demonstrate that snps outside of coding regions, especially in evolutionarily conserved regions and in putative regulatory elements, appear to be under negative selection. some such snps may have physiological consequences and be responsible for human phenotypic variation. these putative functional snps may be a good set of snps to examine first when trying to find the underlying mutation responsible for observed genetic associations.

