BACKGROUND
intracellular transport in cells is mediated by three different types of motor proteins that travel along filamentous tracks. actin filaments are used by the myosin family of proteins, while transport along microtubules  is mediated by either kinesin-like proteins  or dyneins. the functional difference between these two kinds of molecular motors lies in the polarity of movement. dyneins transport their cargoes toward the minus end of mt, while most klps transport cargo towards the minus and plus end of mt, depending on the position of the motor domain at the amino- or carboxyl-terminus of the protein . the common feature of all klps is a high degree of homology in their motor domain, a  <dig> amino acids region that contains mt- and atp-binding sites and classifies them into one of  <dig> families of the kinesin superfamily  <cit> . human and mouse genomes encode  <dig> klps  <cit>  whose functions classically are transport of cargo, like protein rafts, lysosomes, chromosomes or various membrane vesicles. however, klps also can zipper, cross-link and influence the stability of mt for building and maintaining the mitotic and meiotic spindle apparatus . we show that kbp colocalizes with mitochondria and that it interacts with kif1bα. moreover, we present evidence that this new protein plays a role for the regulation of mitochondrial distribution by regulating the kif1bα activity.

RESULTS
identification and cloning of kbp
we have previously identified two proteins that bind to kif1c, ptpd <dig> and members of the 14-3- <dig> protein family  <cit> . to search for proteins that bind to kif1c between the motor domain and the ptpd <dig> binding region, we employed the yeast two-hybrid system. two screens were made, first with amino acids  <dig> –  <dig> as a bait, to identify possible u <dig> binding proteins, and second with amino acids  <dig> –  <dig> as a bait. only the second screen with the larger bait resulted in possible interacting proteins. out of  <dig> ×  <dig> screened transformants,  <dig> independent isolates of the same cdna were found to interact.

the open reading frame of the identified cdna encodes a protein of  <dig> amino acids , with a calculated molecular mass of  <dig>  kda. a search in the conserved domain database showed weak homology to tetratricopeptide repeat domains  and revealed a very acidic region . the new protein was called kbp . a protein blast search revealed that the kbp protein sequence had been identified before and exists in the huge protein database as kiaa <dig> 

expression of kbp
to estimate the transcript size and prove that the identified clone encodes the complete open reading frame, as well as to check the tissue distribution, northern blot analysis using the whole cdna as a probe was performed. a band of  <dig>  kb was detected in all examined tissues, with the highest expression found in heart and skeletal muscle , which is similar to the expression pattern of kif1b, as shown by nangaku et al.  <cit>  and chen et al.  <cit> . next, we constructed a glutathione-s-transferase-kbp  fusion protein and raised a rabbit polyclonal antiserum against it. when probing lysates from various cell lines with this antibody, a protein of approximately  <dig> kda was detected . this is in agreement with the predicted molecular mass, and the size of the protein in human cells corresponded with the size of transiently overexpressed protein after transfection, indicating that we indeed cloned the complete open reading frame.

localization of kbp in nih3t <dig> cells
to elucidate the function of kbp, we performed immunofluorescence experiments utilising affinity-purified antibodies. immunostaining of nih3t <dig> cells revealed that kbp localized mainly on vesicular structures throughout the cell, which were reminiscent of mitochondria . in the same cells, mitochondria were detected with mitotracker , and the merged pictures show that kbp mainly localized to mitochondria . these results suggested that the main cellular binding partner for kbp is found at the mitochondria.

the klp kif1bα is highly homologous to kif1c, especially within the region used for the yeast two-hybrid screen, and colocalizes with mitochondria  <cit> . to study the possible interaction between kbp and kif1bα we cloned the cdna of human kif1bα and raised antibodies against the carboxyl-terminal part of the protein, a region not present in the kif1bβ isoforms. our antiserum did not cross-react with the homologous kif1c and recognized an endogenous protein that was of the same size as the cloned one . we then tested the antiserum in an immunofluorescence experiment using nih3t <dig> cells and, as expected, detected mitochondria-like structures . staining along mts was also visible . in a parallel staining, the cells were probed with mitotracker, and merging of the pictures indicated an identical pattern. this experiment confirmed that we had cloned a human ortholog of the mitochondria binding α-isoform of the kif1b protein. in addition, the experiment suggested that kbp and kif1bα colocalize and that colocalization likely is mediated through a direct interaction of the two proteins.

this interaction of kbp and kif1bα was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation. transfected  <dig> cells expressed either a vsv-epitope tagged form of kbp or kbp-vsv plus kif1bα. cells were lysed, the proteins immunoprecipitated using anti-kif1b serum, separated by sds-page, transferred to nitrocellulose and blotted with vsv antibody. as shown in fig. 3c, kbp co-immunoprecipitated with kif1b when both proteins were overexpressed. finally, we tested the interaction of kbp and kif1b in untransfected bhk cells . after immunoprecipitation of kbp, kif1b was detected as a co-immunoprecipitated protein on a western blot. in conclusion, kbp interacts and colocalizes with kif1bα.

deregulation of kbp leads to aggregation of mitochondria
kif1bα was identified as a motor protein responsible for the intracellular transport of mitochondria  <cit> . since kif1bα and kbp associated with each other and both proteins localized to mitochondria the question arose whether kbp could be a link between the motor protein and this organelle or whether it could play a role in mitochondria distribution. to investigate this question we used two approaches: overexpression of a deletion mutant of kbp that can not interact any more with kif1bα, and reduction of the kbp expression level using an anti-sense construct. for the first approach, we employed a deletion mutant of kbp lacking amino acids 250– <dig>  this region was chosen because experiments using gst-fusion proteins indicated that the first  <dig> amino acids are sufficient for interaction, whereas a mutant lacking the first  <dig> amino acids was still able to bind kif1b . kbpΔ250– <dig> was not able to bind to a gst-kif1bα fusion protein in a pull-down assay, as shown in fig. 4a. when the kbp mutant was overexpressed in nih3t <dig> cells followed by kbp antibody/mitotracker staining  a mitochondrial aggregation was observed in the transfected cells. overexpression of intact kbp did not affect mitochondrial localization or the organization of the microtubule network .

to support these data and to confirm a function of kbp in mitochondrial distribution in an additional and independent approach, we cloned the kbp cdna in a reversed orientation into the cytomegalovirus promoter based expression vector. transfection of this construct into  <dig> cells reduced the expression of endogenous kbp to an overall 30%, when compared to untransfected cells and as detected by blotting analysis . based on facs-analysis of transfected cells, we assume a transfection efficiency of some 80% with our protocol. this would predict a down-regulation of the kbp protein level to less than 20% in an individual transfected cell. transfected cells were marked for immunofluorescence inspection by including a plasmid encoding ha-epitope tagged 14-3-3γ in the transfections at a 1: <dig> ratio. 14-3- <dig> proteins are very abundant in cells and, as concluded from experiments with  <dig> cells  <cit> , their expression level is only increased two- to threefold after transfection using optimal amounts of dna. therefore, we did not expect an impact of exogenous 14-3-3γ-ha on the mitochondrial distribution process. after transfection, cells were double-stained with monoclonal anti-ha antibodies to identify the transfected cells and with mitotracker to investigate effects of a reduced kbp expression on mitochondria. in fig. 5b,c, two cells are in the frame of the picture, and the upper cell has been transfected and therefore stained with the ha-antibody. in c, staining of the mitochondria revealed the regular distribution in the untransfected cell, but an aggregated status in the transfected cell that would contain a reduced amount of kbp. to confirm that this effect was not the result of 14-3-3γ-ha overexpression, nih3t <dig> fibroblasts were transfected with the 14-3-3γ-ha expression plasmid alone and anti-ha antibody/mitotracker staining was performed. fig. 5d,e show that overexpression of 14-3-3γ-ha did not cause the mitochondria to aggregate. in addition, when similar experiments were conducted using overexpression of gfp similar results were obtained . to exclude the possibility that mitochondrial aggregation is a result of mt depolymerization or changes in the cell shape, the nih3t <dig> cells were transfected with the anti-sense kbp construct and costained with β-tubulin antibody and mitotracker. in this experiment, mitochondrial clumping was used as a marker of transfection. as seen in pictures j to l of fig.  <dig> the clustering of mitochondria was not accompanied by either mt depolymerization or cell shrinking. to conclude, both experiments clearly show the importance of kbp for the distribution of mitochondria in cells.

mitochondria aggregation and the role of kbp
the above results did not answer the question whether kbp is a mitochondrial receptor for kif1bα and is mediating the interaction kif1bα/mitochondria. we therefore analysed the localization of kif1bα in cells with a reduced kbp expression. as described before, cells were transfected with the anti-sense kbp construct and transfected cells identified by staining with mitotracker. in addition, cells were stained with kif1bα antibody. as seen in fig. 6a , a perinuclear localization of mitochondria indicates transfection with the anti-sense kbp construct. the bottom picture shows perinuclear localization of kif1bα and colocalization with aggregated mitochondria. this suggests that kif1bα is still associated with the mitochondria after down-regulation of kbp and that kbp does not function as an adapter.

in addition to kif1b, conventional kinesin  also was described to mediate transport of mitochondria  <cit> . to confirm a specific role of kbp for kif1bα and not kif5b, we tested the interaction between these proteins. therefore, we constructed a plasmid encoding a gst fusion protein encoding amino acids 265– <dig> of kif5b, corresponding to the previously used gst-kif1bα. proteins were purified from bacteria and incubated with glutathione-sepharose and lysates from  <dig> cells transiently overexpressing kbp. as indicated in fig. 6b, only gst-kif1bα associated with kbp. neither gst-kif5b nor gst-grb <dig>  were able to bind kbp. the gst-fusion proteins are visible since the anti-kbp antiserum was generated using a gst-kbp fusion protein and indicate that similar amounts were used for the pull-down.

the above finding suggests that kbp does not bind the kif1bα's carboxyl-terminus, which was shown to mediate cargo interactions  <cit> . to identify the kbp-binding site on kif1bα we generated a mutant with an amino-terminal truncation of  <dig> amino acids  which was not able to bind kbp . together with the data presented in figure 6b this confines the binding of kbp to kif1bα between amino acids  <dig> and  <dig> at the carboxyl-terminus of the motor domain. thus, kbp plays an important role in mitochondria distribution in cells but it is neither a mitochondrial receptor nor a general adapter protein for mitochondria transporting klps.

kbp improves kif1b motility
kbp does not mediate the association of kif1bα with mitochondria since it is still found there when kbp is depleted. we therefore hypothesized that kbp could either increase the time of association of kif1bα with mt, or it could influence the motility of the kif1bα motor domain. to investigate this hypothesis we used latex beads in in vitro motility assays. extracts were prepared from untransfected hela cells or from hela cells overexpressing kif1bα together with kbp or the kbp deletion mutant . extracts from untransfected cells served as control for unspecific moving. the unspecific movements could be attributed to the large amount of kinesin heavy chain present in the extract , which bound beads. the kif5b can be inhibited by suk <dig> antibody  <cit> , and indeed treatment of extracts with the antibody strongly reduced motility in hela extracts. inhibition of unspecific movements could be further improved by coating the beads with kif1b antibody. both treatments together reduced the amount of moving beads by about 90% . upon overexpression of kif1bα together with kbp the number of moving beads was significantly higher than in extracts from untransfected cells. this number was not affected by additional co-overexpression of the kbp deletion mutant . therefore, we assume that more than 60% of the observed movements was caused by the overexpressed kif1bα. when analysing the velocities of moving beads, we noticed that the deletion mutant slightly decreased the velocity of the beads as compared with the wild type . most striking was the strong reduction of the distance traveled by beads in extracts coexpressing kbpΔ250– <dig>  most of which was shorter than  <dig> μm, while in extracts coexpressing wild type kbp the beads traveled longer than  <dig> μm . taken together, our results indicate that kbp increases the motility of kif1bα.

discussion
in the present study we report on the identification of the new kif <dig> binding protein kbp. the association of kbp with kif1bα was verified in vitro, in  <dig> cells transiently overexpressing both proteins and in untransfected bhk cells. anti-sense experiments revealed that kbp is required for a proper distribution of mitochondria in the cell. finally, we showed that kbp increases kif1bα motility in vitro.

the bait used in the yeast two-hybrid screen that led to the identification of kbp contained the sequence from the motor domain to the ptpd <dig> binding region . additional data from binding experiments of kbp to kif1c and kif1bα deletion mutants allowed us to narrow down the binding sequence of kif1b/c for kbp to the carboxyl-terminal region of the motor domain. a high amino acid sequence homology of 90% between kif1c and kif1bα in this region supports the conclusion that kbp can bind to both proteins, and a manuscript describing the role of kbp for kif1c is in preparation. it is important to note that the binding region of kbp is located close to the k-loop, a region in kif <dig> klps that increases the affinity of the motor domain for mt  <cit> . for kif1b, several splice variants involving or located next to the k-loop are known  <cit> , and it will be interesting to check whether the presence of these variants has an effect on interaction with kbp  <cit> . an interaction with the kif1bβ variant would open a role for kbp as a player in neurodegenerative diseases. recently, the role of the k-loop in a  <dig> amino acid construct of the rat orthologue of kif1c was analysed  <cit> . in in vitro experiments this protein was not chemically processive, the k-loop increased the affinity for mt and stabilized a weak binding mode with adp in the active site. the hypothesis was formed that rat kif1c could work in teams of motor proteins, which could generate processive movement of attached organelles. this would be a similar mechanism as proposed for kif1a  <cit> . in our motility assays we observed that kbp increased the motility of beads in extracts from kif1bα overexpressing cells. when the motor protein was overexpressed with kbp, it traveled average distances of 2– <dig> μm and maximally  <dig> μm, while with kbpΔ251– <dig> we observed kif1bα moving an average of  <dig> μm. these experiments do not contradict the data of rogers et al. and klopfenstein et al. since it is possible that kbp facilitates grouping of motor proteins and thus increases the motility. however, it also indicates an alternative mechanism where associated proteins like kbp could increase the motility of single molecules of kif1b.

numerous proteins have been identified that interact with klps  <cit> . these proteins may determine the localization of the klp complex or which cargo is transported. very little, however, is known about associating proteins that regulate either the cargo binding of the klp or its activity. such a klp associating protein that is required for the klp function has been described in yeast. the mt minus-end directed motor protein kar3p is important for meiosis i in s. cerevisiae, and a knock out leads to an arrest in prophase i  <cit> . the associating protein cik1p targets kar3p to mt, implicating this as a reason why loss of cik1p also impairs meiosis, although the effect is less severe  <cit> . several studies describe a regulatory role of the carboxyl-terminus in conventional kinesin processivity. kinesin light chains were reported to inhibit the binding of the heavy chain to mt  <cit> . further, the kinesin tail domain by itself has an atpase inhibiting role that is relieved by cargo binding  <cit> . one function of the light chains and the carboxyl-terminus of the heavy chain may thus be to ensure that kinesin is active only in the presence of its cargo. however, most of these studies have been done in vitro and cannot account for effects of regulating proteins.

the drastic consequences of the loss of kbp expression for mitochondria localization could also indicate that kbp is targeting kif1bα to the mitochondria. however, kif1bα is attached to mitochondria also after depletion of kbp . in addition, klps normally bind their cargo with carboxyl-terminal sequences, whereas kbp interacts with kif1bα amino-terminal sequences. therefore, we do not think that kbp is important for the cargo – kinesin connection. alternatively and mentioned before, kbp may regulate the kif1bα activity, i.e., in the absence of kbp, kif1b is not or less able to move mitochondria.

only two widely expressed klps have been reported to transport mitochondria, kif1bα and kif5b, while kif5a and kif5c are expressed predominantly in neuronal tissues  <cit> . kif5b did not interact with kbp, and it should not be affected by kbp depletion. thus, even if there is some expression of kif5b, a major role of kif1bα for mitochondria transport in nih3t <dig> cells is likely. recently, the drosophila protein milton was described that associates with the kif <dig> ortholog kinesin heavy chain and may play a role similar to kbp since its mutation impairs mt-plus end directed mitochondrial transport in axons and synapses  <cit> . in addition to klps, dynein motor proteins probably can transport mitochondria in cells  <cit> , and this transport would occur in a mt minus-end direction. when force moving mitochondria to the mt plus-ends is reduced, a perinuclear localization of the mitochondria would result. on the other hand, a complete depolymerization of mts by nocodazole treatment led to a diffusion of mitochondria throughout the cytoplasm  <cit> , demonstrating the specificity of the consequences of kbp depletion.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown earlier that protein tyrosine phosphatase d <dig> and members of the 14-3- <dig> protein family interact with kif1c, implying its regulation by phosphorylation. in this manuscript, we have identified the new protein kbp as a klp interacting protein that is required for klp activity. this suggests that vesicle transport in cells may be subject to regulation at the level of klp – microtubule interaction and implicates kbp as a physiological mediator.

