BACKGROUND
corticotropin-releasing factor  is involved in mediating the physiological and behavioral responses to stress  <cit> . beyond activating aversive behaviors, stress also increases some appetitive behaviors. for example, food intake and relapse into drug-taking in models of addiction are both increased by natural crf-releasing stressors  <cit> . such appetitive behaviors have often been viewed as attempts to reduce or avoid unpleasant stress or as overflow from general motor arousal or frustration .

however, despite the traditional association of crf with aversive stress, some crf brain systems also are activated by positive rewards, even in the absence of conventional stressors. for example, crf release is increased in the central nucleus of the amygdala by spontaneous food ingestion  <cit>  and in prefrontal cortex by presentation of pavlovian cues associated with food reward  <cit> . similarly, sucrose ingestion normalizes crf levels in hypothalamus and amygdala in adrenalectomized rats  <cit> . in addition, crf has also been suggested to play an important role in drug reward. for example, cocaine administration also activates crf expression in crh-producing neurons in hypothalamus and amygdala  <cit>  and crf given intracerebroventricularly  or into the ventrolateral bnst can induce reinstatement of drug self-administration behavior in the absence of external stressors   <cit> .

reward activation of crf raises the possibility at least that some brain crf/glucocorticoid systems may participate in positively valenced processes of incentive motivation for reward. one candidate for positive motivation is the attribution of incentive salience to conditioned stimuli that predict rewards, magnification of which causes cue-triggered phasic peaks of increased incentive motivation for associated rewards. incentive salience  has been shown to depend in part on ascending dopamine projections to nucleus accumbens  <cit> . other neurochemical signals converging on the nucleus accumbens from mesocorticolimbic circuits could play roles in enhancing incentive salience too, either directly or by via dopamine modulation  <cit> . does a crf subsystem in nucleus accumbens participate in magnifying the incentive salience of cues previously associated with reward? if so, that provides a novel explanation for why stress sometimes potentiates appetitive motivated behavior, especially when reward cues are encountered. an incentive salience contribution would serve as alternative or supplement to traditional explanations such as escape from aversive states  or general arousal  <cit> . an incentive-salience mechanism could also be relevant to understanding relationships between stress and neural sensitization in causing drug abuse, especially cue-triggered relapse into addiction  <cit> .

here we tested the specific hypothesis that elevated crf neurotransmission in nucleus accumbens shell enhances the incentive salience of cues that have been associated with sucrose reward, and so magnifies 'wanting' for sucrose. nucleus accumbens contains levels of crf receptors that are comparable to those in amygdala  <cit> . the medial shell of nucleus accumbens also contains substantial distributions of crf-immunoreactive and fibers, which might arise in part from hypothalamic crf systems linked to stress, as well as cell bodies   <cit> . whether crf acts directly on nucleus accumbens circuits in ways comparable to dopamine, or interacts with dopamine release in nucleus accumbens, crf release in nucleus accumbens might facilitate incentive salience mechanisms  <cit> . taken together with previous findings regarding the importance of nucleus accumbens in incentive salience amplifications by amphetamine and sensitization, it seems likely that if stress does modulate incentive salience via crf mechanisms it might do so here in medial shell  <cit> .

to selectively measure the enhancement of incentive salience by crf, we used a pure incentive version of the pavlovian-instrumental transfer paradigm. this procedure measures the intensity of peaks of incentive motivation that are triggered by reward cues . it excludes non-incentive explanations related to stress or stress reduction as well as other alternative explanations for increased behavior   <cit> . in short, features of the pure incentive pavlovian-instrumental transfer  procedure allow isolation of incentive salience enhancement by crf from other stress-related mechanisms as explanation for magnified, sudden and intense cue-triggered peaks in incentive motivation for reward.

our results suggest that activation of crf systems in the medial accumbens shell can indeed enhance incentive salience attributed to reward cues. incentive salience, amplified by crf in nucleus accumbens, provides a new explanation of why stressors sometimes cause increased pursuit of rewards, especially at moments when stressed individuals encounter cues that were previously associated with those rewards.

RESULTS
crf and amphetamine in nucleus accumbens increase cue-triggered lever pressing associated with sucrose reward
crf  and amphetamine  microinjections were located in the region of medial shell of nucleus accumbens that contains highest crf levels . crf and amphetamine each dramatically and similarly increased cue triggered incentive motivation to obtain reward , f <dig>  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> , main effect of drug). both crf and amphetamine comparably increased phasic cs+-triggered peaks of increased pressing on the lever that previously had been associated with sucrose reward compared to vehicle, but did not increase lever pressing at other times  , f <dig>  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> , significant interaction) .

post-hoc comparisons indicated that crf enhancement of cue-triggered peaks of lever pressing was exclusively due to the highest dose of crf . specifically,  <dig> ng crf microinjections tripled the amplitude of phasic peaks in pressing on the sucrose-associated lever during the 30-sec cs+ tone or clicker and in the 30-sec period immediately after it, compared to the same lever after vehicle microinjections , but not during other periods. an equivalent tripling of cue-triggered peaks in lever pressing was also produced by amphetamine  microinjections at the same sites  , used as a standard here for enhanced cue-triggered 'wanting', and confirming previous results  <cit> . by contrast, the low dose of crf  failed to significantly enhance active lever pressing over vehicle despite the possibility of a slight trend , and by itself the 30-sec cs+ elicited merely a modest rise of only 50% over pre-cue baseline in lever pressing after vehicle microinjections, which was less than half the maximum drug-enhanced levels.

associative cue specificity: cs+ vs baseline
in order to rule out motor arousal and general frustration effects of crf as explanations of increased peaks in incentive motivation, it is crucial that enhancement not also apply to the plateaus of lever-pressing during periods between cue-triggered peaks. motor arousal and aversive effects can be caused by intracerebral microinjections crf  <cit> . however, motor arousal and frustration effects of crf would be expected to remain relatively constant over a  <dig> min test, or at least last longer than the minute or so impact of a cue. thus if motor arousal or aversive states were the explanation for elevated instrumental behavior here, lever pressing during baseline periods in between auditory stimuli should have been elevated too – not only when a cs+ was present. however, neither crf  nor amphetamine  produced detectable increases in baseline instrumental responding during no-stimulus baseline periods , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , n.s.). baseline instrumental responding in the absence of any cs  was never increased by any microinjection . this dissociation between enhanced cue-triggered incentive motivation during cs+ versus unchanged baseline responding was separately confirmed in a two-way anova by a significant interaction between the presence/absence of cs+ and administration of either crf  or amphetamine  .

associative cue specificity: cs+ vs. cs-
similarly, the cs+  was the only conditioned stimulus that ever significantly increased lever pressing on the sucrose associated lever , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> , main effect of cue type; figure 3). the control cs-  failed to increase lever pressing over the baseline pre-cue period in any drug condition . that selective pattern of only-cs+ enhancement is required by the hypothesis of incentive salience magnification, which posits that enhanced incentive salience is attributed specifically to stimuli previously associated with reward.

a useful way of further assessing the associative specificity of cs+ effects versus cs- effects on pavlovian-instrumental transfer effects is to calculate transfer scores between them. a transfer score directly contrasts pressing during cs+ versus cs- by subtracting cs- pressing from cs+ pressing on a within-subject basis, so that the remainder shows the enhanced cs+ effect for each individual rat. when we calculated this, the resulting transfer scores confirmed that both the crf high dose  and amphetamine  microinjections significantly and specifically amplified the incentive effect of the cs+ on pressing the sucrose-associated lever, compared to vehicle and low dose crf microinjections .

thus, crf  and amphetamine  magnification of cue-triggered peaks in lever pressing applied only to the cs+ that previously was associated with sucrose ucs, and not to the control cs- which did not signal sucrose.

temporal reversibility of cue-triggered pursuit: dependence on cs+ presence
if increased lever pressing for reward is caused by excessive attribution of incentive salience to the reward's cs+, then the temporal pattern of peaks of cue-triggered responding should be phasic, reversible, and repeatable  <cit> . in other words, peak bursts of active lever pressing should come and go with successive presentations of the 30-sec cs+, and disappear again soon after each presentation. a temporal analysis of responding confirmed this pattern for crf  and amphetamine  enhancement of pressing on the sucrose-associated lever during cs+ presentations . a magnified peak of pressing on the lever previously associated with sucrose reward was triggered anew by each presentation of the cs+ sucrose cue after crf  or amphetamine microinjections, maximally elevating during its 30-sec period , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ; main effect of cue presence). pressing rose within seconds of each cs+ and remained dramatically elevated throughout the  <dig> sec presentation. after almost every cs+, pressing decayed significantly within  <dig> min of its end, and always descended to baseline levels again before the next cs occurred  <dig> min later.

this temporal pattern of cue-triggered phasic peaks of pressing  is important because it further rules out alternative explanations mentioned above, based on traditional crf/amphetamine effects that have more constant time course durations . those include increased motor arousal, general impulsiveness or aversive states that would last longer than  <dig> sec, and so should be present during no-stimulus baseline periods  between cs+ tones. by contrast, the enhanced incentive salience interpretation specifies that crf should specifically amplify attribution only to the reward cs+, just as amphetamine microinjection does, and so seems to fit best this observed pattern of effects.

target specificity of cue-triggered incentive motivation: active versus inactive levers
cue-triggered increases in efforts to obtain sucrose were directed specifically to the active lever that had previously earned sucrose reward during training, and not to the other lever , f <dig>  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> , significant interaction; figure 4). rats made few responses on the second control lever that had never been associated with sucrose reward. pressing on the control lever was not increased during the cs+ by either crf  , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , n.s.) or amphetamine  , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> , n.s.). lever specificity was further confirmed by finding a significant difference between previously-active lever versus always-inactive lever in pressing during cs+ , and a significant interaction between lever identity and drug in the microinjection-induced enhancement of cue triggered increases in pressing , f <dig>  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ). thus, the cs+ sucrose cue selectively triggered increased pressing only on the lever previously associated with obtaining sucrose. that suggests that our crf incentive on pit lever pressing are not explained by nonspecific motor arousal induced by crf, or a general sensorimotor tendency to emit more pressing movements regardless of target, even if crf produced any motor or arousal effects .

pavlovian approach crs to sucrose dish
presentations of cs+ also elicited pavlovian approach conditioned responses to the sucrose dish , either as a pavlovian s-r habit elicited by the cs+, or as a discriminative instrumental response to earn sucrose. however, crf and amphetamine microinjections both suppressed conditioned dish approach below the vehicle control level . that suppression is noteworthy because it helps rule out the several remaining alternative explanations. for example, approach suppression by crf indicates that the enhancement of pit cannot be due to crf potentiation of s-r pavlovian habits, because dish approach was the only s-r habit ever actually paired with cs+ tone during training. similarly, approach suppression indicates that crf did not potentiate discriminative instrumental responding  to signal that instrumental approach would be reinforced, and this instrumental relation might later have been generalized to lever pressing  <cit>  because any such instrumental relation between approach and reinforcement was actually suppressed by crf and amphetamine during the pit test, and not enhanced. sucrose dish entries during the first cs+ were especially suppressed by both crf doses , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). sucrose dish approaches were similarly suppressed by amphetamine microinjection . suppression of dish approach during the cs+ by crf and amphetamine may have occurred possibly as a secondary consequence of increased response competition from higher cue-triggered rates of lever pressing that occurred at the same time.

the suppressive effects on dish approach crs after microinjection of crf or amphetamine were associatively specific to the cs+  , and the same was true for amphetamine microinjection . neither crf nor amphetamine microinjections decreased food cup entries below vehicle levels during the baseline  <dig> s pre-cue periods , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) or during cs- presentations .

finally, we note that crf effects on pit versus dish approach were independent and partially dissociable by dose: both  <dig> ng and  <dig> ng crf doses suppressed cue-triggered dish approach during cs+ presentations early in a session, but only  <dig> ng crf increased lever pressing. that indicates that suppression of dish approach is not a sufficient cause of crf enhancement for cue-triggered lever pressing, which appears to require independent incentive motivation mechanisms recruited by the higher dose.

fos plumes: identifying zones of local neuronal activation
to help identify where our crf microinjections actually acted in the brain we used a fos plume mapping procedure to visualize spread of neuronal gene transcription triggered by  <dig> ng crf in tissue around microinjection sites  <cit> . the local expression of fos protein is a useful marker for geographic spread of pharmacological impact, even if c-fos transcription is not invariably tied to neuronal activation, at least for drugs that induce acute fos transcription immediately around a microinjection site . measuring the size of the resulting local fos plume caused by a microinjection objectively assesses the spherical volume of tissue and intensity of neuronal response impacted by local drug action. fos expression in a local neuron might either reflect direct drug action on receptors on that neuron, or else reflect indirect action from adjacent neurons containing receptors that act on fos-expression neurons via local circuits. in either case, the fos plume reflects a local sphere of functional modulation induced by crf microinjection, and provides quantitative information on its intensity and size. the boundaries of the plume reveal where the drug stops having an intense functional impact, even if drug molecules spread further beyond the plume in lower concentrations insufficient to trigger gene transcription.

for microinjections of crf  we identified two zones of elevated fos expression: intense versus moderate elevation zones . each zone was defined by  <dig> independent criteria. an inner zone of intense fos elevation was defined as the mean radius within which 1) absolute fos expression was increased by at least  <dig> order of magnitude over normal tissue levels , and 2) relative fos expression was increased by at least twice over the levels produced at equivalent locations after vehicle microinjections . an outer zone of moderate fos elevation was defined at the mean radius within which 1) absolute fos expression was increased by  <dig> times  over normal tissue levels, and 2) relative fos expression was increased by  <dig> times over the level of equivalent points after vehicle locations .

the mean inner zone of intense fos elevation produced by crf microinjection at the behaviorally most effective dose  was approximately  <dig>  mm in radius  and the outer zone of low elevation was an additional  <dig>  mm radius . therefore, to represent these zones we assigned color-coded symbols of corresponding  <dig>  mm radius in size to represent each inner zone, surrounded by similarly colored but more pale halos of additional  <dig>  mm radius to represent each outer zone. thus symbols and halos served to bracket the estimated range of intense-moderate functional activation likely to mediate the mapped microinjection effects on behavior.

to calculate the 3-dimensional plume volume produced by crf  <dig> ng microinjections, we assumed a roughly spherical shape and calculated the inner intense sphere to contain a volume of approximately  <dig>  mm <dig>  and the outer sphere to contain a volume of approximately  <dig>  mm <dig>  because the entire medial shell is approximately  <dig>  mm <dig> in total volume, these volumes meant that the inner sphere of a crf  plume filled approximately 2% of total medial shell volume, whereas its outer sphere filled approximately 13%. of course, some microinjections near borders may not have filled the shell to quite that extent if they partially penetrated other structures such as the medial core .

we mapped the extent of activation diffusion as reflected by fos plume around each microinjection site. in order to further assess the role of diffusion into other structures or the ventricles, we took two additional steps. first, we compared pit effects for 'hits' in nucleus accumbens shell versus 'missed' anatomical control sites in lateral septum dorsal to the nucleus accumbens. no enhancement of pit by crf or amphetamine was evident in rats with dorsal anatomical control sites outside the nucleus accumbens , indicating that the pit enhancement effects described above was not due to diffusion upwards along cannulae tracks to dorsal structures. second, we inspected individual brain slices to identify any sites in medial shell where the fos plume could touch the wall of the lateral ventricle. this seemed worth doing because intra-ventricular crf administration in the  <dig> ng range has been reported to produce arousal and conditioned aversion effects, and so conceivably might have been responsible also for pit magnification effects here. to assess if leakage into ventricles was the primary source of crf effects here, we compared magnitude of pit enhancement by crf in rats with fos plumes that touched the ventricle wall versus the group of rats with plumes contained entirely within the nucleus accumbens. two rats had plumes that definitely touched lateral ventricle, and another two had plumes that might have touched, whereas  <dig> rats had plumes fully contained away from the ventricle wall. by themselves, the group of  <dig> rats with ventricle-touching plumes did not show a significant pit enhancement effect by crf . by contrast, the group with non-touching plumes contained fully within nucleus accumbens away did show an enhancement of pit by crf microinjection . that pattern across groups indicates that the significant pit enhancement effects described above were not driven primarily by crf ventricle diffusion in this group. finally, we found no significant difference between these two groups , indicating that most sites tested in nucleus accumbens contributed comparably to the pit effects described above.

functional fos plume mapping of microinjection effects on behavior
functional site effects were mapped for all cannulae placements in nucleus accumbens and adjacent structures . colors for symbols and halos represented the magnitude of behavioral effects produced by crf  microinjections at each microinjection site change score in elevation of pressing on sucrose-associated lever minus to the control vehicle effect at that same site in the same rat). we chose the sagittal plane primarily to map fos plumes and functions because sagittal view allows the entire rostrocaudal and dorsoventral extents of medial shell to be viewed on a single atlas map . additional supplemental maps were also constructed in coronal and horizontal planes to allow full 3-d mapping of functional effects  <cit> .

the fos plume maps for localization of function showed that most nucleus accumbens microinjections were successfully placed in the intended posterior-central zone of medial shell that has highest levels of crf receptors and terminals, and within that target zone most crf  microinjections produced comparable magnifications of pit . the spread of local fos plumes did not otherwise extend to other structures around the medial shell, including dorsal structures, except that a few microinjections may have penetrated approximately  <dig>  mm into the medial border of nucleus accumbens core.

although more remains to be done in future regarding localization of crf function for incentive motivation in nucleus accumbens and related structures, these initial maps indicate that crf activation in our present study was restricted to the nucleus accumbens medial shell, and possibly a small strip of adjacent core. within that zone of medial shell, crf activation appears sufficient to magnify the level of incentive salience attributed to a cs+ that was previously associated with reward .

discussion
our findings show that a crf subsystem in nucleus accumbens can magnify the positive incentive motivation triggered by a cue previously associated with reward , and so spur appetitive behavioral pursuit of that reward. crf  microinjections in medial shell of nucleus accumbens directly increased cue-triggered instrumental lever pressing behavior aimed at that sucrose reward, without increasing behavior in the absence of the pavlovian cs+ or reward cue. the crf-induced pattern of excessive cue-triggered pursuit of reward appeared remarkably similar to that caused by amphetamine microinjection in the same rats at the same sites  <cit> , suggesting that both crf and amphetamine in the nucleus accumbens may prime cue-triggered seeking of incentives via overlapping mesolimbic mechanisms. this is the first specific evidence to support the hypothesis that a brain limbic crf sub-system can magnify any purely positive or appetitive motivational process, such as increased incentive salience, to spur cue-triggered pursuit of rewards  <cit> .

perceptual synergy of cue with crf/amphetamine incentive salience attribution
enhancement of instrumental lever pressing co-depended on the simultaneous presence of crf  microinjection in nucleus accumbens plus the pavlovian auditory cue in the environment that previously was associated with sucrose reward . neither crf nor cue alone was sufficient to produce maximum peaks of incentive motivation. each time the cs+ was presented to a rat after crf microinjection its lever pressing was dramatically magnified to a peak roughly double the level shown by the same rat before and after that cs+ , and roughly 300% over normal peaks that rat showed during the same cs+ on tests after control vehicle microinjections. each cue-triggered peak lasted approximately  <dig> min, and instrumental responding then always fell back to control levels .

this selective pattern of enhancement limited to cs+ indicates that motivation enhancement was not a tonic consequence of crf effects that lasted minutes or more . instead cue-triggered incentive motivation came and went with each cs+ as an intense time-locked phasic, reversible and repeatable peak, fitting the prediction of the hypothesis that crf in nucleus accumbens can magnify the incentive salience of cues associated with reward, rather than directly driving increased levels of appetitive behavior in the absence of reward cues. this reversible crf pattern is highly similar to the cue-locked enhancement pattern of amphetamine observed here and in previous experiments, a pattern that originally helped implicate identify incentive salience features mediated by mesolimbic dopamine systems  <cit> .

ruling out alternative explanations
not hedonic self-medication or reinforcement?
the ability of stress to promote pursuit of rewards is in a sense over-explained by traditional interpretations. that is, there are many different potential alternative explanations already available that may apply to some cases of real-world stress , and even more alternatives introduced in various animal models of triggered-relapse . the potential over-abundance of explanations makes it especially important to rule out traditional ones before positing any new explanation, such as the hypothesis that crf in nucleus accumbens magnifies an appetitive or positive motivation mechanisms such as cue-triggered incentive salience. so it is worth briefly summarizing how features of crf results in the pure incentive pit procedure used here eliminate traditional alternatives that might otherwise have explained crf's amplification of cue-triggered incentive motivation for reward.

a common view of how stress might motivate binge eating and food intake, addictive drug relapse, gambling, or other excessive reward pursuit is to induce anhedonia, dysphoria, frustration, or related negative aversive states that individuals try to counteract by pursuing and consuming hedonic rewards  <cit> . crf may indeed produce aversive states at many brain sites. however, several observations rule out aversion escape or mood enhancement by reward consumption as explanations for crf's enhancement of cue-triggered incentive motivation for sucrose. first, rats never obtained any primary sucrose reinforcement while under crf effects, and so no sucrose consumption ever actually improved their hedonic state during test. further, amphetamine microinjection, which is generally thought to produce positive motivational effects via mesolimbic dopamine and related neurotransmitter activation, produced exactly the same pattern of enhanced cue-triggered incentive motivation as crf. most important, if crf caused a negative state that maintained increased seeking of sucrose, then that pharmacological state should have remained visible throughout most of the half-hour test. again, however, tonic elevation was not expressed in lever pressing; instead elevated peaks of lever pressing came and went with the auditory cs+ stimulus under crf. finally, it is relevant to note that the cs+ could not have acted as an instrumental discriminative stimulus to signal sudden sucrose availability, because our rats had never in their lives been instrumentally reinforced for pressing the lever in the presence of the cs+ , and instead the only behavioral response that had ever earned sucrose before was actually reduced during cs+ by crf . overall, therefore, it is not plausible that crf caused rats to press more as an instrumental attempt to escape or reduce a persistent negative hedonic state.

not sensorimotor arousal?
several of the same considerations also rule out other alternative explanations for our results such as crf-induced arousal, psychostimulant or accelerant, or general sensorimotor activity effects. for example, although crf in the nucleus accumbens does indeed cause increased locomotion and grooming behavior  <cit> , that chronic state-like consequence would apply over most of the entire 30-min test regardless of whether cs+ was present or absent. but baseline pressing was not elevated in the absence of cs+, and that cue-triggered pattern of the sucrose-lever increase, together with the lack of increase on the inactive lever, seem to rule out elevated general motor arousal as explanation for crf's ability to magnify cue-triggered peaks of incentive motivation

interaction with other crf and limbic systems
we emphasize that our finding that crf in medial shell of nucleus accumbens causes increased incentive salience attribution to reward cs+ does not contradict traditional notions that crf systems in other brain structures may mediate mostly negative or aversive stress effects. nor does it contradict suggestions that some appetitive behavior seen in stress may reflect attempts to reduce those aversive effects. however, it shows that the alternative phenomenon of enhanced positive incentive motivation triggered by reward-related cues may co-occur when generated by some crf subsystems, such as in the medial shell of nucleus accumbens. this conclusion implies that blocking aversive effects per se may not be enough to block the increased in appetitive pursuits produced by stress. instead, the increase in cue-triggered pursuit of incentives follows rules that govern the attribution of incentive salience to pavlovian conditioned stimuli for reward  <cit> .

the similar enhancements by crf and amphetamine of cue triggered incentive motivation indicates it might be of future interest to examine potential interactions between crf and mesolimbic dopamine or corticolimbic glutamate projections in modulating reward cue signals in nucleus accumbens. interaction is compatible with reports that, for instance, aversive stressors can cause dopamine release in nucleus accumbens   <cit> . regardless of the role of dopamine per se in stress, crf might interact with mesolimbic mechanisms of incentive salience in nucleus accumbens either directly or by modulating dopamine-related and/or glutamate-related signals  <cit> . we caution that, although potential interaction might possibly seem to imply that crf antagonists could be used therapeutically to reduce excessive incentive salience in stress, the actual effect of crf receptor manipulation on dopamine release in nucleus accumbens may involve complexities that could complicate such predictions. for example, the crf- <dig> antagonist cp- <dig>  has been reported to increase cocaine-associated dopamine release, at least in rostral shell of nucleus accumbens and pre-frontal cortex  <cit> , and so any speculation about the potential relation of crf antagonists to incentive salience must await future empirical investigation.

CONCLUSIONS
paradoxical positive incentive motivation magnification by crf systems in nucleus accumbens?
everyone agrees that stress is predominantly an aversive motivational state. similarly, crf delivered to hypothalamus and amygdala may produce predominantly aversive effects, which typically suppress appetitive behaviors such as normal food intake  <cit> . however, our findings indicate that particular crf subsystems, particularly in nucleus accumbens, magnify a positive motivational process triggered by reward cues that independently spurs pursuit of reward. specifically, our results that crf receptor activation in medial shell of nucleus accumbens directly increase the attribution of incentive salience to a cs+ that was previously associated with reward. phasic cue-triggered peaks of incentive motivation to obtain sucrose reward are seen whenever a synergistic combination of conditions is met: simultaneous cs+ or cue presence plus crf co-activation in nucleus accumbens. crf's magnification of cue-triggered incentive salience appears remarkably similar to effects of amphetamine in nucleus accumbens, suggesting that stress and addictive drugs might both prime excessive cue-triggered seeking of incentives via overlapping mesocorticolimbic mechanisms.

one possibility for a natural role is that crf nucleus accumbens systems might ordinarily be activated in conjunction with stress-related glucocorticoid elevation. that seems consistent with demonstrations that hpa activation and glucocorticoid hormones may contribute to binge eating, drug addiction, and other excessive reward pursuits  <cit> . glucocorticoids actually increase crf expression in structures such as amygdala and bnst, and conceivably in accumbens shell too  <cit> . thus, stress and glucocorticoids might 'energize' goal directed behaviors in part by activating crf accumbens mechanisms that amplify the incentive salience of stimuli associated with reward  <cit> . future studies will be needed to address the question of how crf interacts with glucocorticoids, dopamine, and other limbic neurochemical systems to modulate incentive salience.

our results suggest that although stress and hypothalamic crf have predominantly aversive motivational effects, activation of crf systems in the medial accumbens shell can actually enhance appetitive behavior via purely positive motivational effects. this provides a novel explanation for why stress may sometimes exacerbate cue-triggered binge eating, drug addiction relapse, and other excessive pursuits of rewards.

