BACKGROUND
the evolutionary origin of parasitism throughout the tree of life remains a central issue in evolutionary biology and has attracted intense theoretical and empirical laboratory-based attention. in this respect the platyhelminthes  have received great attention from evolutionary biologists as a model system for investigating the adaptive radiation associated with the evolution of parasitism . the phylum is represented by an assemblage of superficially simple metazoan animal groups and has long been considered to provide a key to understanding the evolutionary origin and diversification of bilaterally symmetrical metazoan groups  <cit> . it includes about  <dig>  extant species of both free-living and parasitic forms  <cit> . the conventional view of the phylum 'platyhelminthes' is that it contains three major clades acoelomorpha , catenulida, and rhabditophora  <cit> , but recent phylogenetic studies based on morphological  <cit>  and molecular evidence  <cit>  have suggested non-monophyly  of the platyhelminthes. this is inconsistent with long-held prevailing concept of "the phylum platyhelminthes" as defined in most zoological textbooks. subsequent studies have separated the acoelomorpha from the remaining catenulid and rhabditophoran platyhelminthes, with the acoelomorphs occupying a pivotal basal position among the bilateria  <cit>  and the platyhelminthes  as relatively derived members of the lophotrochozoa  <cit> . nevertheless, it is generally accepted that the platyhelminthes contains four major groups, each having a unique anatomy, body size, and life style: the 'turbellaria' , monogenea , trematoda , and cestoda . among these, the latter three groups  are represented by diverse obligate parasitic flatworms of invertebrates and vertebrates that cause diseases in a variety of host animal groups, including domestic animals and humans.

the monophyletic grouping of neodermatans is considered to be beyond doubt  <cit> , but sister-group relationships among its subordinate groups  are still under vigorous debate  <cit> . depending on the data sources employed for phylogenetic analysis by previous authors, relationships inferred were not compatible with each other . although a closer relationship of monogenea with cestoda has received broader support from morphological and molecular sequence data, phylogenetic analyses of partial 28s rdna sequences  <cit>  and complete 28s plus complete 18s sequences  <cit>  suggested a different result, rejecting a long established clade of cestoda+monogenea . inconsistency in phylogenetic conclusions by previous authors concerning sister-group relationships among three major neodermatan groups, suggests the need for additional independent molecular markers to resolve this issue.

the monogenea are composed of mostly ectoparasitic species which live on external organs  of a broad range of aquatic vertebrate host, especially fishes, with some exceptional species occurring in internal organs of the host  <cit> . as illustrated in fig.  <dig>  the phylogenetic position of the monogenea, and its monophyly, remain outstanding issues, because the evolutionary origin of ecto- and endo-parasitism in major parasitic platyhelminth groups can be elucidated only if its phylogenetic position within the neodermata clade is fully resolved  <cit> . if monogenea are resolved as paraphyletic, occupying the earliest branching lineages, then ectoparasitism as the earliest life habit of neodermatans may be inferred with confidence.

with a few exceptions, animal mitochondrial genomes are circular in form, ranging from 13~ <dig> kb in size. each genome contains  <dig> genes:  <dig> protein-coding genes, two ribosomal rna genes and  <dig> trna genes  <cit> . comparative analysis of the mitochondrial genome information  has become a popular molecular tool for resolving the deeper node of phylogenetic interrelationship in a variety of metazoan groups  <cit> . to date, the complete mitochondrial genome sequence has been determined for  <dig> flatworm species , but the taxon sampling is highly biased toward endoparasitic flatworms i.e. cestodes and trematodes that are of medical or economic importance . no complete mitochondrial genome information from monogenean species has been available as yet and this lack of information has hindered better understanding of the impending phylogenetic issue as well as mitochondrial genome evolution among major lineages of the parasitic platyhelminthes. for these reasons, comparisons of a monogenean mitochondrial genome with other flatworms are expected to be very useful for resolution of phylogenetic relationships in conjunction with gene rearrangement among the mitochondrial genomes of three neodermatan groups . in the present study, we revisited the phylogenetic issue of the monogenea within the parasitic platyhelminthes based on the comparisons of the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of a polyopisthocotylid monogenean,microcotyle sebastis goto,  <dig> with published data from other flatworm species.

RESULTS
general features of m. sebastis mtdna genome
the complete mitochondrial genome of m. sebastis  is  <dig>  bp in size, one of the largest flatworm mitochondrial genomes published to date. the genome is composed of  <dig> genes  consisting of  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> trna genes and two ribosomal rna genes but lacking the atp <dig> gene, which is a common feature in flatworm mtdnas . m. sebastis mitochondrial dna  is a+t-rich  . the a+t-richness of the entire sequence is more or less similar to those in some cestodes  and schistosomes , whereas this value is considerably higher than that found in f. hepatica  and p. westermani  . the values for at-skew and gc-skew of m. sebastis mtdna were calculated according to the formulae  for the former,  for the latter  <cit> . for the entire sequences, at skew and gc skew are - <dig> ,  <dig> , respectively. the skewness in protein coding sequences  is very similar to that of entire sequences, but the at skewness is relatively lower for the trna genes, ribosomal rna genes and non-coding region . the lower value of at skewness in these genes is generally considered to be associated with the formation of stem-loop secondary structures . it is notable that the extremely high value of gc skewness  was encountered in the highly repetitive region . this unexpectedly high gc skewness is due to the configuration of a stem-loop structure with some cases of g:t base pairing  in each of nine 53nt-repeat units.

atermination codons were not included.

the majority of protein-coding genes  appear to use atg as the start codon, while the other genes are predicted to start with att  and ata , respectively. seven of the  <dig> genes terminate with taa  and the other three use tag  as the termination codon. although incomplete termination is common in metazoan mtdnas  <cit> , it is relatively rare in the flatworms studied thus far. only two genes  are inferred to end with incomplete codon ta and t, respectively, each of these is immediately adjacent to the downstream trna genes trne and trnn.

twenty-two nucleotide sequence segments  were predicted to fold into a cloverleaf secondary structure . the putative secondary structures common in  <dig> trna genes include an amino-acyl stem of  <dig> nucleotide pairs , a dhu-stem of 3- <dig> ntp with a 4- <dig> nt loop, an anticodon stem of  <dig> ntp with a loop of  <dig> nt, and a tΨc stem of 3- <dig> ntp with a loop of 3- <dig> nt. some exceptions to these common features are trns <dig>  and trns <dig>  in which each of dhu arms is missing and replaced with an unpaired loop  as found in all other flatworm species  <cit> . anticodon sequences of  <dig> trnas were identical to each of their corresponding trna genes found in other flatworm species with an exception that the trnr has a tcg anticodon sequence, rather than acg as those found in other platyhelminth groups.

a total of  <dig> intergenic regions, varying from a single nucleotide to  <dig> nt long in size, were found in the m. sebastis mtdna genome. of these, two intergenic sequences, i.e., the highly repetitive region  and unassigned region  adjacent to each other are most prominent. the hrr located between trnk and uar contains seven identical repeat units of a 53-nt sequences plus two additional repeat units, each abutting directly onto upstream and downstream of seven consecutive repeat units, respectively, with some sequence modifications: two substitutions  or with a truncated sequence of 5-nt from 3' end of the repeat unit . a 53-nt repeat unit is predicted to form a stem-loop secondary structure  with a  <dig> base paired-long stem and a loop of  <dig> nucleotides. of  <dig> base pairs in the stem region, there are  <dig> a:t, five g:t, one g:c, three mismatch pairings  and two unpaired a's, respectively. the highly structured a:t and g:t base pairings with avoiding c  account for an extremely high level of gc skewness  in this repeat region. although there are some mismatched base pairings and two unpaired a's in the stem region, the predicted putative secondary structure is considered to be analogous to those reported in cestode species . this stem-loop structure, although its function is still unclear, has often been assumed to be associated with replication origin. the second largest intergenic sequence, an unassigned region , is located between the hhr and nad <dig>  this region contains a peculiar orf -like sequence segment of  <dig> nt comprising  <dig> codons including the starting codon  and termination codon taa. although atp <dig> gene has never been found in flatworm mitochondrial genomes, the size of the unattributed orf is more or less similar to the atp <dig> genes reported in other metazoans. in order to confirm its identity, we conducted the hydropathic profile comparison with other published atp <dig> genes  using macvector program . the predicted hydropathy profiles of the orf candidate displayed very different patterns from the other sequences compared. direct sequence comparisons of the orf candidate using both nucleotide and amino acid sequence were also performed, but nearly no similarity was detected. moreover, the at content of the orf candidate  was much higher than the average  of  <dig> protein-coding genes. thus, taken together the evidence does not provide unambiguous support that this sequence is atp <dig> and therefore we designated it as an unassigned region .

molecular phylogeny of the neodermata
as explained, we prepared three independent amino acid sequence datasets for phylogenetic analyses. from  <dig> protein-coding genes , a concatenated amino acid sequence dataset containing  <dig>  homologous positions was prepared for the following phylogenetic analyses. implementation of the maximum likelihood mapping analysis showed that more than  <dig> % of all random samples of the quartet  were fully resolved, indicating that the dataset contains a high level of tree-like phylogenetic information. of  <dig>  homologous positions,  <dig>  variable sites were phylogenetically informative under the maximum parsimony  criterion. phylogenetic relationships among major neodermatan groups using bayesian inference , maximum likelihood , and maximum parsimony  analyses are shown in fig.  <dig>  the heuristic search option of the maximum parsimony criterion using inferred gaps as missing characters generated a single most-parsimonious tree  as represented in fig.  <dig>  all three phylogenetic methods produced the same tree topology in the branching patterns except for one minor change in their respective position between t. crassiceps and e. multilocularis: the bi and mp found echinococcus species  sister to three taenia species, whereas the ml analysis showed relationships of  ) t. crassiceps). in all phylogenetic methods used m. sebastis, representing the monogenea, was positioned as sister to the trematoda+cestoda clade comprising all endoparasitic members. phylogenetic analyses of dataset # <dig> , and dataset # <dig>  yielded trees identical to that shown in fig.  <dig>  this result is not concordant with the long-standing prevailing hypothesis that has favored closer relationship between the monogenea and cestoda based on morphology  <cit>  and 18s rrna molecules  <cit> . the concept of 'cercomeromorphae'  was first advocated by janicki  <cit> . brooks and his colleagues  <cit>  have persistently advocated strong support for the 'cercomeromorphae' clade  based on phylogenetic surveys of morphological characters. with respect to the possession of a hook-bearing posterior end structure in larval stages of tapeworms , considered as being homologous to the posterior opisthaptor of monogenean groups, it has long been accepted from morphological systematists as a key character uniting cestoda and monogenea  <cit> . furthermore, as shown in fig.  <dig>  many recent works based either on molecular data, or on the combined dataset of morphology+molecular sequence have suggested different conclusions concerning the sister-relationships among three neodermatan groups, depending on the data sources examined. of these, our data are consistent with that of the most recently published result of molecular phylogenetic analysis of the combined complete 18s+28s rdna data  <cit>  in which the conventional concept of 'cercomeromorphae' was not supported. the position of m. sebastis was strongly supported by high bootstrap resampling and posterior probability values  in the analyses of mp and bi, but received slightly lower support  in the ml analysis. in order to evaluate the stability of the monogenean position in the neodermata clade, the unconstrained 'best tree' was statistically tested with each of the alternative phylogenetic hypotheses  using the parsimony-based templeton test  <cit>  and likelihood-based shimodaira-hasegawa test  implemented in paup*  <dig> b <dig> and tree-puzzle  <dig> , respectively. resulting tree statistics demonstrate a significant difference  between the unconstrained optimal topology  and the constrained alternative topology , indicating that the position of monogenea within the neodermata clade is robustly corroborated by the current mtdna dataset. this is the first mitochondrial genome-based molecular phylogeny supporting the position of the monogenea as sister group to the trematoda+cestoda. consequently, our result adds another independent line of molecular evidence that refutes the 'cercomeromorphae' hypothesis. this interpretation is further supported by the comparison of gene arrangement patterns of the flatworm mitochondrial genomes. in order to statistically evaluate the paraphyly of the trematoda found in all analyses, the templeton test  and shimodaira-hasegawa test  were applied to unconstrained 'best tree' and constrained  phylogenetic estimates. although mp based phylogenies were not significantly different, those estimated using ml were . there is no evidence to suggest that trematoda, or indeed the digenea or those digenean taxa included, are not monophyletic from nuclear genes or morphology. we suspect that resolving the trematoda as paraphyletic is likely artefactual, but we can only speculate as to what may have caused this bias; e.g. base compositional differences between schistosomes and other digeneans , poor taxon sampling . additional sequences from a broad taxon sampling of both cestodes and trematodes and gene-by-gene analyses may resolve this anomaly.

the gene arrangement of m. sebastis displays notably different patterns, compared to those found from other flatworm species . the difference in the gene arrangement of m. sebastis from other flatworms includes some translocations of the protein-coding genes , trna genes , and two noncoding regions . in general, the flatworm mtdna gene order appears relatively well conserved, with the exception of the african schistosoma mansoni and other schistosomes s. haematobium and s. spindale whose gene order is markedly different from those of other flatworms including other congeneric east asian lineages s. japonicum, s. mekongi, and s. malayensis  <cit> . a major gene rearrangement among these schistosomes was interpreted as being supporting evidence for phyletic differentiation between the two independent geographic clades  <cit> . aside from those of schistosomes, all gene arrangement changes encountered between cestode and trematode groups are remarkably minor and limited to very few translocations among some trna genes  and the non-coding regions. this indicates that cestodes and trematodes show high similarity in their gene arrangement pattern, but differ substantially from the monogenean member m. sebastis. the shared gene arrangement among cestodes and major lineages of trematode members is very likely to reflect a common ancestry, rather than being due to convergent evolutionary events. along with a robust sister-group relationship in all phylogenetic analyses of amino acid sequences, gene arrangement data also provide the supporting evidence for the closer relationship between cestoda and trematoda. nevertheless, we are still limited by the lack of information from the closest outgroup of the neodermata with which to detect the plesiomorphic condition within the neodermata. recently, the partial sequences of the mitochondrial genome became available  for a macrostomid 'turbellarian' microstomum lineare  <cit> , but this showed almost no shared gene boundaries with the neodermatan groups, making it intractable for use in phylogenetic analysis using gene arrangement. further comparisons of gene arrangements based on more sampling of the complete mitochondrial genomes from the closest outgroup taxa will provide useful information for resolving the issue of mitochondrial genome evolution among major groups of the flatworms.

evolution of parasitism in the neodermata
evolutionary diversification and adaptive radiation of the parasites are strongly correlated with their life cycle patterns. accordingly, the evolutionary history of major parasitic platyhelminth groups can be traced by examining the evolutionary changes of parasite-host associations  <cit> . tracking back to their historical transformations of different life history forms during the evolutionary process can convincingly be clarified only if it is interpreted within a robust phylogenetic framework. the interrelationships of the major neodermatan lineages is required to determine how parasitic platyhelminths evolved, and which life cycle pattern  arose first within the neodermata clade. if monogenean monophyly is true, as supported by the majority of previous works, it is expected that a single shifting event from ecto- to endo-parasitism or vice versa is equally possible to explain the evolutionary scenario of the parasitic patterns found in the neodermatan groups. an endoparasitic life style appears to be plesiomorphic when inferred from morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  phylogenies where trematoda are sister group to cestoda+monogenea. in contrast, in gene trees where cestoda and trematoda are sister taxa  <cit>  , it can be postulated that ectoparasitism is the plesiomorphic condition. indeed, it has often been considered among parasitologists that a parasitic group with a simple  life cycle and higher specificity to its host groups is more primitive than the group with more complicated life cycles  <cit> . therefore, the simple, direct life cycle pattern displayed by monogenean groups has been assumed to be primitive and also correlated with high level of host specificity  <cit> : trematodes and cestodes display rather complicated life cycle, such as utilizing many invertebrates i.e., molluscs  or arthropods  as intermediate hosts prior to entering into the final life stage in various vertebrate hosts . in contrast, the majority of monogenea are ectoparasitic on a broad range of aquatic vertebrates and have only one host with high host specificity during their life cycle, not involving intermediate hosts . the position of monogenea in the mitochondrial gene tree  is compatible with the idea that a parasitic group maintaining simpler life cycle  is more primitive than the group with more complicated life cycles , if we accept that a single host life cycle precedes a two or more host life cycle. considering it in conjunction with the interpretation of life cycle patterns within the neodermata, our mitochondrial gene tree corroborates the idea that ectoparasitism arose first in the neodermatan phylogeny , probably in an early lineage of monogenean groups, and that endoparasitism was secondarily acquired  in cestodes and trematodes  after their common ancestry diverged from the monogenea. this result contradicts the previous hypotheses that the common ancestor of the neodermata acquired endoparasitism as the first mode of parasitism.

evolution of host-parasite association in the neodermata
during the last decades, there has been a debate regarding the order of host types in parasitic platyhelminths: what host type was the earliest form involved in the life cycles of the common ancestor of the neodermata, i.e., 'vertebrate first' vs. 'mollusc first' ? under the parsimony assumption, in which the hypothesis with fewer inferences of character transformation is preferred, mapping of host adoption by each of the stem groups of the neodermata onto the previously accepted phylogenetic relationships has suggested two different ways of interpretation in relation to their life cycle evolution  <cit> . the simplest, most parsimonious scenario  proposed first by littlewood et al  <cit>  was that the proto-trematodes first acquired an endoparasitic association with vertebrates and that independent adoptions of invertebrates by the trematoda  and cestoda  were subsequent acquisitions . on the other hand, it has also been suggested that the association of common ancestor of the trematoda with molluscan hosts was primitive , and that the vertebrates were involved in the life cycle of the common ancestor of the monogenea+cestoda clade as independent initial hosts apart from that of trematodes, with the crustaceans as subsequent intermediate hosts adopted by the cestoda groups after the ancestral cestode was diverged from the monogeneans . the 'mollusc first' hypothesis has received relatively broader support from the authors who intended to explain the digenean evolution in relation to host distribution  <cit> . this view was based on some assumptions that the aspidogastrea is the most primitive group among the neodermata  <cit> , and that the trematoda  is the sister group of all the other neodermatan groups. but this scenario is not parsimonious, because it necessitates extra assumptions of secondary loss and/or gain of invertebrate  and vertebrate hosts during the divergence of major groups of the neodermata. notwithstanding the difference in their way of interpretation, both of these alternative explanations were made on the basis of previous phylogenetic assertion that monogenea and cestoda are most closely related  and that the trematoda is sister to the monogenea+cestoda. the underlying phylogenetic hypothesis on which most of previous authors relied is seriously challenged by the conclusion of the present study in which the monogenea are positioned as sister group of the trematoda+cestoda, refuting the 'cercomeromorphae' theory. a possible scenario, not refuted by our mitochondrial gene tree, is that the monogenean lineage is the earliest offshoot within the neodermata clade. however, further verification is required that the monogenea are indeed a monophyletic group; paraphyly, with trematoda+cestoda as the most derived lineage would confirm this scenario. if monogenea were paraphyletic it would be most parsimonious to infer monogeneans had diverged before either trematodes or cestodes. if the interpretation of monogenean evolution suggested here is correct , then it is convincing to postulate that the most recent common ancestor of the neodermata giving rise to the monogenea adopted vertebrate ectoparasitism as its initial life cycle pattern and that the intermediate hosts of the trematoda  and cestoda  were subsequently added into the endoparasitic life cycles of the trematoda+cestoda clade after the common ancestor of these branched off from the monogenean lineage. vertebrate parasitism first  is fully supported. although some authors have argued that cestodes are the most derived of all neodermata , there is no conclusive evidence available for ordering which intermediate host form was first introduced into the life cycles of trematodes and cestodes. our interpretation based on the mitochondrial genome phylogeny is likely to be the simplest  explanation in understanding the evolution of host-parasite associations coupled with the modes of parasitism in the neodermata. as cribb et al  <cit>  pointed it out in detail, however, evolutionary estimation of the character transformation using a parsimony approach does not always produce the best solution and it might be misleading when information utilized for the analysis is incomplete. the uncertainty of the closest relatives to the neodermata and its life cycle pattern has not been resolved yet, and therefore our interpretation should be further verified by evidence concerning the identity of the closest sister group of the neodermata and the life cycle mode in which it was engaged. thereafter we will be much more confident of the conclusion that the ectoparasitism arose first within the neodermata representing the vast majority of parasitic flatworms.

CONCLUSIONS
the evolutionary origin of parasitism within the neodermata was inferred for the first time from a phylogeny of the neodermata, estimated with complete mitochondrial genomes from all parasite classes. comparisons of inferred amino acid sequences and gene arrangement patterns of a polyopisthocotylid monogenean microcotyle sebastis with other published flatworm mtdnas indicate that monogenea are sister group to the trematoda and cestoda within the neodermata clade. from this finding, we suggest that ectoparasitism likely arose first in the neodermatan phylogeny , probably in an early lineage of monogenean groups, and that endoparasitism was acquired secondarily  in cestodes and trematodes after their common ancestry diverged from the monogenea. in association with the evolution of life cycle patterns, our result lends strong evidence that the most recent common ancestor of the neodermata giving rise to the monogenea adopted vertebrate ectoparasitism as its initial life cycle pattern and that the intermediate hosts of the trematoda  and cestoda  were subsequently added into the endoparasitic life cycles of the trematoda+cestoda clade after the common ancestor of these branched off from the monogenean lineage. complex life cycles, involving one or more intermediate hosts, arose through the addition of intermediate hosts and not the addition of a vertebrate definitive host.

