BACKGROUND
to gain insight into biological processes, biologists often rely on model organisms. focusing the funding and research efforts of many research groups on one model organism is considered more likely to advance the field than scattering the same resources over a large number of organisms. a recent application of this philosophy is in genome sequencing: rather than simultaneously initiating the sequencing of the genomes of many individuals from a species, typically a single representative is chosen. in microbiology the initial choice of model strain is frequently a well-characterized laboratory strain, often selected at a time when the ability to determine population structure and to measure genetic distances was limited . there is merit in choosing a physiologically well-characterised laboratory strain for genome sequencing, as it facilitates the interpretation and annotation of sequence data. however, it has often become apparent that the model strain initially chosen does not represent important features of the species  <cit> . for micro-organisms, the diversity of their genomes is such that even the best possible choice of initial strain for sequencing may not assure that the genome obtained adequately represents the species  <cit> ; additional strains may need to be studied  <cit> . to acquire information about a species' genome as efficiently as possible, we require a method to choose strains for analysis on the basis of how well they represent the species.

the problem of choosing representative model strains is complicated by the fact that the value of an organism as a representative depends on the features it is meant to represent. as an example illustrating this problem, assume that we require model organisms that represent a larger group of organisms in terms of amino acid sequence at a particular open reading frame . suppose that we are able to find a single model organism which represents the entire group; i.e. blast searches find significant homologies between the amino acid sequence of the model protein and proteins from the other organisms. let us assume that homologies between the protein of the model organism and the more distant members of the group are low, albeit still significant. we would conclude, using the blast homology criterion that we have represented the group, and have done so efficiently, using only one model organism. however, if we were then to try to use this same organism to design pcr primers for amplifying the orf in all members of the group, the model organism would fail for the more distant members. likewise if we were to investigate another, less conserved orf across the group, the model organism may fail to show significant homology to a large number of members of the group even at the amino acid sequence level. another difficulty in choosing model organisms is that our selection will be based on limited and biased information obtained in a screen of the group we wish to represent, such as sequences from a few genes or restriction fragment length polymorphism  data which may not represent, or only be loosely linked to, diversity across the entire genome.

in this paper we describe and evaluate approaches for the rational selection of model organisms, which take these problems into consideration.

RESULTS
finding the best model organism
as illustrated in the introduction, there will be some threshold distance, i.e. level of genetic difference, between the model organism and other organisms, above which the model organism will no longer be a useful representative, and different applications will have different threshold values. if we need a model organism for some specific application where a threshold distance, t, is known, the problem of selecting the best model organism can be solved by choosing the organism for which the greatest number of other organisms lie within this genetic distance, t. we refer to this criterion as best coverage.

for the purpose of illustration we display a constructed example where distances between organisms are the distances on a plane . intuition suggests that model organisms chosen according to the best coverage criterion will be central to the group of interest. for example, in figure 1a organism a is the most central, it has the best coverage for any choice of threshold distance. conversely, a non-central organism such as organism b has worse coverage for any value of t. choosing a model organism in the example in figure 1a is trivial because the members of the group are distributed in a highly symmetrical fashion. however, in many cases members of a group will not be symmetrically distributed and there will be no obvious central organism. in such a case, shown in figure 1b, the value of the threshold distance, t, will affect the decision as to which organism is best. depending on the choice of t, organism a, b, or c could be preferred. figures 1c and 1d display coverage for increasing values of t for the marked organisms in 1a and 1b respectively. note that in figure 1d organism a is best for low threshold values and that organism c is best for high threshold values, however, taken as an aggregate over a range of t values organism b is superior.

finding the best threshold distance for selecting model organisms from a group poses a number of difficulties. firstly, as noted, different applications require different thresholds and so no one threshold distance will be ideal as a basis of model strain selection, unless the model strain is only to be used for one particular application. secondly, even if we knew in advance the exact feature which we want the model organism to represent, there will only be limited information on the variation in this feature for the entire group of organisms -after all, if the organisms were exactly characterised there would be no need to pick model organisms for further study. lastly, if we want to make a good choice of model organisms we will need to initially sample a large number of members of the group the model organisms are supposed to represent. this favours the use of methods that produce "quick and dirty" estimates of relationships between members such as short sequence alignments, fragment length polymorphism, biotyping or enzymatic activity. the resulting distances will only be a rough guide to the true relationship between organisms, and their relationship to t for specific applications will be unknown.

these considerations suggest that a good criterion for choosing a model organism is that it be representative for a range of t values. this can be implemented by normalising the available distances within a group to be represented to have a maximum of  <dig>  and summing the coverage criterion for t at steps between  <dig> and  <dig>  e.g. { <dig>  <dig> ,  <dig> ...  <dig> ,  <dig> }. we refer to this score as being the total coverage for the model organism, as it is an aggregate over a range of t values. the best total coverage  method picks the organism for which this score is largest. relating this to the coverage graphs  the btc method picks the organism with the largest area beneath the curve, for 1c this is organism a, and for 1d it is organism b.

determining the number of model organisms required
we can see in figure 1a, and especially 1b, that for small threshold values, even the best possible model organism, as selected by the best total coverage method, cannot represent the entire group of organisms. rather than choosing a single model organism we would prefer, if possible, to choose a set of model organisms so that as many organisms as possible lie within the threshold distance of at least one model organism for a particular application. obviously coverage will continue to improve, or at least not get worse, as more and more model organisms are allowed. indeed, in the ideal case every unique organism would be chosen as a model organism. however, financial and time constraints usually mean that such a solution is not feasible. plotting the increase in coverage for different numbers of models organisms allows one to judge when no significant improvement results from adding another model organism, or whether the improvement outweighs the cost of dealing with an extra model organism. for example, figure 1e shows the btc score  for the data set in figure 1b with from one up to thirty model organisms allowed. in this example the graph suggests that only marginal improvements in coverage can be obtained by having more than one or two model organisms. in the case where there are distinguishable clusters of genetically similar strains, the value of k could be predetermined based on the number of clusters.

computational strategies for implementing the methods
for practical application of the strategies outlined above, we must consider the computational complexity of finding the best set of model organisms. for a group of n isolates and a predetermined number of model organisms k there are n!/k!! possible sets of model organisms to be tested, and for each set of model organisms it requires nk operations to calculate coverage, because for each of the n isolates, at worst k putative model organisms must be checked to determine if the distance between the isolate and the model organism is less than t. so, for a fixed k, it will take time proportional to nk +  <dig> to compute the best set of model organisms. this means that for large n and k it will become computationally intractable to test all possible sets of model organisms. for example, for k =  <dig> model organisms from a set of  <dig> organisms there are  <dig>  possible sets of model organisms to consider, for k =  <dig> model organisms there are  <dig> , <dig> sets to consider, and for k =  <dig> there are  <dig>  ×  <dig> 

to avoid this problem a greedy approximation to the exact method can be used. initially one model organism is chosen, the one that gives the largest total coverage score, then model organisms are added one at a time, at each stage picking the organism which gives the largest improvement in the total coverage score, until some predefined number of model organisms have been selected. we name this the greedy-btc method.

test of the effectiveness of the greedy-btc method for choosing model organisms
we tested the performance of the greedy method in several ways. firstly we compared the greedy-btc method against the exact-btc method using a range of simulated sequence data . the greedy method gave similar results to the exact method for problems with small  numbers of model sequences . for larger numbers of model organisms we would expect that the greedy method would perform less well relative to the exact method. however, in this context we are not so concerned with finding an optimal solution – a good solution will do.

secondly we compared the greedy-btc method against both a large number of random selections of model organisms and researchers' selections based on phylogenetic evidence. we used two mlst data sets:  <dig> strains of enterococcus faecium  <cit> , and  <dig> strains of candida albicans  <cit> . six researchers  were given copies of the two trees and asked to select three and five model strains respectively that they felt would be good representatives of the group of strains based on the phylogenetic tree.  the trees in figures 2a and 3a show the researchers' selections of model organisms and the greedy-btc choice of model organisms. figures 2b and 3b compare the performance of these selections along with  <dig> random selections of model organisms. the greedy-btc strains performed better than random selection in all but 4/ <dig> cases and always outperformed the human selections.

an interesting outcome of this experiment is that strain selections which seem almost identical based on the phylogenetic tree, for example those selections represented by red and green circles in figure 3a, performed quite differently. this is probably because trees cannot  reflect all of the information in the distance matrix  <cit> .

assessing usefulness of the method in choosing model organisms representing characters unknown at the time of selection
as pointed out in the introduction, selection of model organisms will often be based on characters different from the ones which will later be studied using the model organism. since different loci may evolve according to different processes in different lineages  <cit> , selecting a model organism using one set of characters does not guarantee that it is representative for other characters. the exchange of genetic material between organisms of different species  will produce additional problems of a similar nature. the true test of a method for selecting model organisms is therefore if it can arrive at a model organism which is reasonable representative for characters not used in its selection.

we therefore tested the btc method on three examples of micro-biological data sets in which we could assess the representativeness of model organisms for characters not used in their selection. in each case we began by using one character set to choose the greedy-btc model strains for k in the range 1– <dig>  as in the previous example with simulated data we compared the greedy-btc score to the total coverage score attained by random sets of model organisms for each data set and value of k. then, for a fixed value of k, we compared our choice of model organisms with random choices of k organisms, in terms of how well they represented the characters not used in the selection of the model organisms.

the first example was a sample of  <dig> pseudomonas aeruginosa strains, for which both rflp typing data and sequence data  are available  <cit> . we used the rflp data for model strain selection. as expected, the plot of greedy btc score versus k for the rflp based distances  showed a gradual improvement in total coverage as increasing numbers of model strains are used. for each value of k  we compared the total coverage of the greedy-btc model strains to the total coverage of  <dig> randomly chosen sets of k strains. for all values of k tested the greedy-btc score is in the top quartile of the distribution of scores for randomly chosen strains.

to assess the representativeness of the btc model strain on the pvds data  we fixed k =  <dig>  as the total number of strains was fairly small, and figure 4a did not suggest any obvious clustering in the data . we then measured the total coverage of the selected model strain for the pvds gene and compared it to the total coverage of the remaining  <dig> strains .  in 55% of cases random selection did equally well , but in 45% of the cases random choice gave a worse representation than the btc selected model strain.

the second data set consisted of partial sequences of seven genes  of  <dig> enterococcus faecium strains  <cit> . we constructed seven test data sets, for each a distance matrix was generated by taking the hamming distances from the sequences for six of the loci . using these distances we carried out selection of model organisms separately for each of the seven test data sets. we then tested the performance of the greedy-btc method by assessing how well the model organisms represented the seventh locus .

for each value of k  we compared the total coverage of the greedy-btc model strains to the total coverage of  <dig> randomly chosen sets of k strains. the results for one of these data sets  are shown in figure 5a. the greedy-btc model strains were always in the top quartile of the distribution of scores for random strains.

to assess the representativeness of the greedy-btc model strains on the omitted gene  we fixed k =  <dig>  and compared the five greedy-btc model strains to random selections of five strains. figure 5b shows the performance on each data set. in one case the greedy-btc model strains outperformed the random strains and in six cases the greedy-btc model strains performed about equally to the median random score. however, note that the distribution of random scores is skewed – i.e. the best random sets of strains had scores about 5% higher than the greedy-btc model strains but the worst random sets had scores about 10% lower than the model strains. figure 5c shows the aggregate performance over all seven data sets. picking strains systematically using the btc method did better than picking a random set of five strains in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases.

the third data set consisted of partial sequences of seven genes  of  <dig> candida albicans strains  <cit> . similarly to the previous example, we generated seven distance matrices, each based on six of the loci, and, using these distances, carried out selection of model strains. we then tested our choice by assessing how well the model strains represented the alleles at the seventh locus .

for each value of k  we compared the total coverage of the greedy-btc model strains to the total coverage of  <dig> randomly chosen sets of k strains. the results for one of these sequence sets  are shown in figure 6a. the greedy-btc model strains were always in the top quartile of the distribution of scores for random strains, and for k =  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> the scores for the greedy-btc model strains were outside the range of scores for random sets of strains.

to assess the representativeness of the greedy-btc model strain on the omitted gene  we fixed k =  <dig>  and compared the three greedy-btc model strain to random selections of three strains. figure 6b shows the performance on each data set. in four out of seven cases the greedy-btc model strains outperform randomly chosen strains at representing the omitted gene, but for aat1a and acc <dig> random selection does better. figure 6c shows the aggregate performance over all seven data sets, in  <dig> cases out of  <dig> the greedy-btc model strains outperformed the randomly chosen strains.

CONCLUSIONS
the greedy-btc method outperformed selections based on phylogenetic evidence made by researchers with experience in phylogenetics. by testing the greedy-btc choice against the exact-btc where feasible or against a large number of random selections of model strains we also demonstrated that the method comes close to achieving optimal representation of organisms .

the greedy-btc also performed well in the more challenging situation where the characters to be represented were not used in model strain selection; for most of the biological data sets, with the exception of two loci in the candida albicans data, the greedy-btc model organisms did an equal or better job than random organisms of representing data not used in model strain selection.

one interesting feature of the distributions of total coverage scores for random organisms is its skewness – many sets produce good scores but there is a long tail of poor scores. this feature seemed to be consistent across a range of data sets. this means that picking organisms at random may occasionally do a little better than using the greedy-btc method but it may also do a lot worse.

the three biological data sets analysed suggest that the btc method we have developed should facilitate selection of model organisms that will be representative of the group of interest for a wide range of applications. nevertheless, differences in the rate of evolution at different loci plus other phenomena such as horizontal gene transfer place limits on the degree of reliability of selected model organisms in terms of representativeness in regard to other, unknown loci. we would therefore suggest that if the btc method were used to select organisms for a project associated with major expenses , such as a genome sequencing project, it would be advisable to begin by eliminating part of the input data and testing how well the method works at selecting model organisms that capture the diversity of the omitted part of the data. such an analysis will not only provide a general idea of how well the selected organisms will represent the sample, it will also reveal if some of the markers intended for selection may give misleading information. if, for instance one of them had been acquired by horizontal gene transfer, this should become apparent as poor representation of allelic diversity at that marker locus by model organisms selected on the basis of the remaining markers.

we note that one problem our method does not address is how to obtain a suitable collection of the group of organisms on which the btc method is to be used to choose representatives. the btc method is aimed at optimally representing a group defined by its user, and highly prevalent genetically similar subgroups in this user-defined group will carry more weight than low prevalence groups. therefore, if the group is biased so that particular groups are over represented, the btc choice of model strains will be biased as well.

