BACKGROUND
understanding biological responses to individual toxic chemicals and chemical classes is clearly of key importance for pollution assessment, both for monitoring exposure to existing environmental contamination and for informing the risk assessment of off-target effects. however, ecotoxicological research frequently focuses only on easily measurable endpoints, typically mortality, although more sensitive tests on effect endpoints such as reproduction and growth are also used widely. thus, a major challenge for ecotoxicology is understanding toxic mechanisms at a molecular level, and how these molecular changes relate to functional changes at the organism and population level  <cit> . the 'ecotoxicogenomic' post-genomic approach has clear benefits, and is currently generating interest from end users such as regulatory authorities as well as from research scientists  <cit> . in order for this potential to be realised, a solid bedrock of research is needed to characterise the fundamental responses of important test organisms to a range of model toxins covering a wide chemical space. it will be important to determine just how specific omic fingerprints of toxicity are, and whether they can be used successfully to distinguish between different modes of toxic action, and hence yield novel information on mechanistic toxicology. this 'systems toxicology' approach has been applied in widely used model organisms such as the laboratory rat and other vertebrates  <cit> . however, these animal models have the benefit of many more existing data  <cit> . in addition, it is often easier to perform manipulative experiments, and there is a much greater scope for complementary mechanistic cell-based work, such as histopathology. in contrast, the situation with non-model, ecologically relevant species is quite different.

the term 'ecologically relevant' is not precisely defined: clearly the most relevant level for studying the effects of chemicals is the community and/or ecosystem, and there are approaches which aim to understand, or at least quantify, responses to pollution at this level . here, however, we refer to controlled studies on single species that may already be widely studied but are not classic model organisms; for example, animals used in regulatory ecotoxicity tests fall into this category, such as the earthworm eisenia fetida, the enchytraeid enchytraeus albidus, and collembolans folsomia candida and orchesella cincta for terrestrial, and daphnia magna, gammarus pulex, chironomid larvae and mytilus species for aquatic testing. working with these animals presents some common challenges: none has a fully sequenced genome; it is not generally possible to obtain antibodies against specific molecular targets; they are often so small as to preclude ready dissection of internal organs or tissues; it is impossible or extremely difficult to modulate gene activity, for example by creating knockout strains; and there is in general much less knowledge about fundamental biological systems, such as signalling pathways or gene regulation, in these organisms. modern omic approaches offer a potential opportunity to circumvent some of these drawbacks  <cit> . in particular, metabolomics and metabonomics have one great advantage for work with non-model organisms: because metabolites are detected directly, and primary metabolites at least are identical across different species, samples can trivially be analysed with no need for prior knowledge of the gene and protein sequences  <cit> . metabolomics also reports on the final integrated phenotype of an organism, as metabolism is the final downstream product of gene and enzyme regulation  <cit> . as a consequence, we decided to carry out an integrative study of the metabolic response of lumbricus rubellus to copper, using both nuclear magnetic resonance -based metabolic profiling and cdna microarrays for transcript profiling.

the earthworm l. rubellus is a common species with a worldwide distribution  <cit> . it is found even in shallow and contaminated soils, so it is appropriate for both laboratory and field studies  <cit> . it has also been the subject of an expressed sequence tag  sequencing project, permitting the construction of cdna microarrays  <cit> . copper is an essential element that is also highly toxic to soil invertebrates in high concentrations. hence, as well as inducing general toxic-response pathways, there will also be specific biological mechanisms for copper handling that may be expected to be perturbed, and thus copper is an excellent model toxin for demonstrating an integrative ecotoxicogenomics approach. we exposed worms to sub-lethal levels of copper in a semi-field situation using buried mesocosms, and monitored the dose response using transcriptomics  and metabolomics . we also measured changes in reproduction and general condition as measured by body weight and by a well-characterised cellular bioassay; monitoring these functional endpoints is important for phenotypic anchoring of the omic data  <cit> . our aim was to look for links between the different levels of information  to obtain stronger inferences about the mechanistic effects of copper than could be gathered from the individual datasets alone. a secondary aim was to test the hypothesis that copper exposure up-regulates histidine metabolism in l. rubellus  <cit> .

RESULTS
ecological and functional endpoints  have been reported in a previous study  <cit> . in brief, there was no effect on mortality, confirming that the exposure was appropriate for probing sub-lethal molecular responses, but the other functional assays all showed a response at medium to high levels of copper .

metabolomic analysis
we were able to reliably profile  <dig> different small-molecule metabolites across all samples using 1h nmr spectroscopy and software for assisted manual fitting of chemical standards . the manual fitting approach has been shown to give high-quality data on single compound concentrations  <cit> . the metabolomic analysis rests critically on the quality of the data obtained from this step; given the high degree of spectral overlap in one-dimensional proton spectra, and consequent difficulty in fitting the data, care is needed for reliable assignment. as well as assignment, the quality and reproducibility of the spectral fitting step is also a valid concern. we acquired data for one sample for five instrumental replicates; hierarchical cluster analysis  of all compound concentrations shows that these replicates are more similar than any other two sample spectra . this confirms not only, as expected, the high instrument precision of nmr  <cit> , but also that our fitting of compounds was very reproducible. compound assignments were made on the basis of the chemical shift and multiplicity of standards in the chenomx software library and from online databases  <cit> . in addition, a two-dimensional correlated spectroscopy  spectrum was acquired for a representative sample, and used to help confirm assignments. we have assigned 2-hexyl-5-ethyl-furan-3-sulfonic acid  previously, and lombricine is assigned on the basis of its structure and expected high concentration in earthworms  <cit> . we also ran spectra of authentic compounds and spiked them into the sample when assignments were doubtful, for example, for purine nucleotides, which have singlet resonances in the aromatic region that are close in frequency, and are thus usually unreliable to assign from database values alone. in addition, a compound which we had previously tentatively assigned as n-α-methylhistidine  <cit>  was found to be n,n-α-dimethylhistidine  after comparison with authentic standards. however, we could not obtain a sufficiently pure sample of dmh to use for quantitation, so we averaged concentrations for 1-methylhistidine and dimethylglycine, fitted to the imidazole and n-methyl protons of dmh, respectively. we were able to fit almost all of the peaks in the spectra . the few remaining unfitted resonances include some at around  <dig>  and  <dig>  ppm ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  ppm  and  <dig>  ppm . however, these unfitted peaks represent only a tiny fraction of the overall intensity. finally, one sample in the  <dig> mg/kg dose group had a very high xanthine concentration , which had high leverage in multivariate analyses, and so this one data point  was treated as a missing value.

amean value, expressed as a percentage of the most concentrated metabolite .

bnumber refers to label in additional file  <dig> 

ccorresponds to the labels in figure  <dig>  aa, amino acid.

factor analysis showed a clear relationship with copper on axes  <dig> and 2; in addition, it was obvious that at the highest-concentration dose  the worms were very different to the others along the second orthogonal axis . this was also true following varimax axis rotation, although, in this case, the copper-related differences dropped down to axes  <dig> and  <dig>  hca showed that the high-concentration samples  formed a separate cluster to the low-concentration samples , with the intermediate  <dig> mg/kg worms falling into both of these clusters . given that not many samples were available for cross-validation, and that the metabolic responses to copper were clearly non-linear, we chose not to use additional supervised multivariate methods.

metabolic changes
there is currently no 'metabolite ontology' database that allows one to systematically annotate individual compounds into different groups; approaches based on network topology for the definition of elementary modes are exciting, but are still under development, and cannot be applied at the whole-organism level for metazoans  <cit> . hence, we performed a simple annotation based on existing biochemical knowledge. we note that our annotations were not performed systematically; it is also important to realise that many metabolites should be annotated to multiple categories, which we did not attempt to do. nevertheless, this simple approach may be a useful first step in interpreting metabolomics data.

several metabolite groups exhibited a coordinated response; this was especially clear for the lipophilic amino acids . several other possible coordinated responses were identified, including sugars, nucleotides, organic acids  and, possibly most interestingly, 'cell membrane compounds' . it should be noted that attempting to assign 'metabolite ontologies', at however limited a level, offers an option that simply does not exist to any great extent for genes: that of chemical similarity.  of the groups we have labelled in figure  <dig>  the 'cell membrane' group does not include any compounds that directly form cell membranes, but, instead, those that could be involved in either the anabolism or catabolism of lipid compounds. it should be noted that this is the most structurally diverse group that we labelled, containing an amino acid , as well as metabolites that form polar lipid head groups . in addition, we assigned the earthworm metabolite hefs to this group: the very high tissue concentration of hefs implies it has some kind of structural or stabilising role. as amphiphilic compounds are known to stabilise cell membranes during desiccation stress  <cit> , and desiccation is a common and severe hazard faced by earthworms, we argue that the high hefs concentrations probably reflect a role in membrane stabilisation.

having identified these potential groups through multivariate pattern-recognition analysis, we examined the actual data for coordinated functional group responses in more detail; selected groups are shown in figure  <dig>  which represents the percentage difference compared with controls . the coordinated response of the lipophilic amino acids is, again, very clear, and shows a non-linear response to copper: all of these metabolites are reduced at intermediate concentrations, and increased again at the highest level of  <dig> mg/kg . in contrast, the membrane compound group shows a definite increase in response to copper . the hefs response also fits well within this group, supporting its classification as a 'membrane compound'. even within these functional groups, fine-scale inter-metabolite relationships can be observed: myo-inositol and scyllo-inositol are the two most highly correlated metabolites within this group, with an apparently sigmoidal response to copper, presumably indicating metabolism through a common enzyme from lipid breakdown/turnover. the organic acids also show a sigmoidal-type relationship, with the compounds directly produced by the citric acid cycle the most closely related; lactate should probably not be considered part of the same functional group . the remaining plots do not show grouping to the same extent: the sugars glucose and mannose both decrease in response to copper, but glucose-6-phosphate is not evidently correlated with these in any way . similarly, there is no obvious correlated response for the nucleosides as a group ; although nicotinate and uridine are both very highly correlated, the fold changes for these two compounds are very small, less than 10%. larger changes are seen for inosine and xanthine, which decreased in response to copper; both of these are breakdown products, of purine and pyrimidine nucleotides respectively. finally, the amino acids  showed little overall grouping. 3-methylhistidine decreases in response to copper, while glutamine shows large variations . in general, the fold changes are very small, with the large majority being less than twofold up or down. this contrasts with the transcript data, where larger fold changes are observed.

non-targeted metabolite profiling has often been explicitly categorised as a biomarker discovery tool  <cit> , with the implication that the aim of a metabolomic study is to discover a small number of biomarkers in amongst the biological noise. this approach may be advantageous when the desired outcome is a screening tool , when a single  robust biomarker will enable the use of simpler and more robust predictive models  and targeted detection. an additional advantage not often made explicit is that this greatly enhances the transferability between different laboratories and, hence, the overall potential use and scientific value of the biomarkers. however, this approach is limited when seeking to integrate large datasets and to relate these to biological functions. in the current study, considering the coordinated responses of functionally related metabolites showed clear group responses, which would not have been obvious if only the most strongly changing metabolites had been investigated.

histidine compound metabolism
gibb et al  <cit>  reported that histidine increased in earthworm tissue in response to copper contamination at levels comparable to the present study , and speculated that this might represent a metabolite-level cellular response for direct detoxification of copper, as observed for the increase in free histidine seen in plant tissues in response to nickel  <cit> . in addition, histidine and dmh in l. rubellus were affected by metal contamination in worms sampled from the field  <cit> . we thus had a particular interest in histidine and related compounds, and examined their responses to copper in detail in addition to the general analysis above. we looked at both tissue and normalised concentrations ; it should be noted that the calculation of tissue concentrations assumed 100% extraction of metabolites and, hence, these values are likely to slightly underestimate true concentrations. there was a weak negative correlation with copper for histidine and 3-methylhistidine, and no apparent relationship with dmh . the earlier study used an aqueous tissue extraction  <cit> , which would not prevent metabolic activity, especially as earthworm proteases are particularly active  <cit> , and therefore their results may have included contributions from protein-bound histidine. it is certainly likely that a histidine-rich protein could be responsible for detoxification by binding copper  <cit> . thus, we also extracted earthworm tissue in water, which was left at room temperature for  <dig> hours to allow any enzymatic activity to go to completion, and re-analysed the samples using nmr spectroscopy. aqueous extraction causes extensive proteolysis, inferred from a large increase in free amino acid concentrations, which is effectively complete after one or two hours . in general, the observed concentrations of amino acids were approximately two orders of magnitude higher than in chloroform/methanol extracts, and the separation of the different copper dose groups by factor analysis had completely disappeared . considering the histidine compounds only, there were essentially no dose-related differences compared with the chloroform/methanol extracts, indicating that there was no increase in protein-bound histidine that might reflect an increase in metal-binding proteins. we currently have no sure explanation of why our results are different to those previously observed. however, a note of caution has been sounded about the genetic variability of lumbricus species used in laboratory tests  <cit> , and we have previously observed high variability in histidine levels in l. rubellus that may have resulted from genetic differences between populations  <cit> . the population used by gibb et al  <cit>  may have had a different genetic background.

lipid analysis
in addition to the polar fraction, we also analysed the total lipid fraction by 1h nmr. lipid spectra are dominated by resonances from fatty acids; because these are all chemically similar, it is not usually possible to identify individual compounds by nmr, and thus it should be thought of as a way of obtaining information on the relative distribution of different moieties, which still constitutes useful biochemical information  <cit> . given this, it was not possible to fit individual compound concentrations as for the polar compound data, and so we used a different approach for data analysis. a set of  <dig> integral regions was selected manually ; note that this does not equate to  <dig> separate compounds. a heat map of fold change relative to the control group shows quite clearly that the worms at the highest dose level,  <dig> mg/kg, are very different from the other groups . this is also visible on a single-sample  basis . factor analysis showed that one sample  was an extreme outlier, which was also apparent on examining the original spectra, and so we excluded this sample and re-analysed the data. this showed clearly, using two different forms of scaling, that the  <dig> mg/kg worms were separated from the control and low-dose group worms along axis  <dig>  while the  <dig> mg/kg worms were intermediate . inspection of the original spectra confirmed that there were real and visible differences in spectral features . regions a and c-i represent signals that were decreased by copper exposure; a represents vinylic protons from unsaturated fatty acids, e represents protons allylic to two double bonds from polyunsaturated lipids and g probably represents protons from allylic methylenes that are not adjacent to another double bond. c represents glycerol peaks from triacylglycerols and d represents glycerol peaks from glycerophospholipids. f possibly represents plasmalogens, and h and i both represent signals from terminal methyls.  region b contains a peak from an unassigned metabolite that is only present in the copper-treated worms, and is absent in the controls. even though this peak is of very low intensity compared with the largest signals in the spectrum , it is a very specific response and so could still prove a useful future biomarker, possibly using some more sensitive detection method following compound identification.

microarray analysis
there were  <dig>  cdna reporters on the microarray. of these,  <dig>  consistently yielded high-quality data and  <dig>  exhibited a change in the level of transcription of more than twofold in one treatment group . one-way analysis of variance , with correction of the error rate for multiple tests following the approach of benjamini and hochberg  <cit> , revealed  <dig> of these transcripts as significantly altered . direct functional information relating to earthworm transcripts is negligible. however, approximately one-third display a significant homology  to human orthologues, and so we concentrated on these transcripts for further analyses. there were clear differences of expression in the different dose groups . pattern recognition analysis using principal components analysis  indicated that the major effect was at the two highest dose groups, which were clearly separated from the other samples .

we used a k-means clustering approach to show that the transcripts fell into four response groups , which displayed similar dose-dependent profiles with respect to copper exposure. one group comprised of genes showing a general dose-dependent increase with respect to copper , and two groups displayed the converse relationship being separated by the degree of down-regulation observed in the two lower copper doses . the most intriguing cluster, however, were those transcripts that were up-regulated when exposed to a low dose of copper with a subsequent down-regulation at higher doses . this profile indicates that the organisms' hormetic response to copper is also manifest at the level of transcription  <cit> .

to complement the purely statistical approaches that provide insight into the coordination of transcript response, we also analysed the bias in gene function within transcripts  to identify those that displayed more than twofold changes in transcript level in response to any of the copper exposures. we chose this group to be 'inclusive' because, although we recognise that it includes a small quantity of noise due to the quantity of transcripts analysed, it provided a more complete representation of functional group effects. this was especially desirable given that, because functional assignment was based on the top human orthologues, only about one-third of the reporters could be assigned confidently. we used a background created by those human orthologues assigned to the complete reporter set to calculate the representation bias for gene ontology terms for those orthologues assigned to transcripts exhibiting copper-induced twofold change in expression  <cit> . the ontology groups that were significantly overrepresented  are summarised in additional file  <dig>  the clear disruption in genes associated with mitochondrial electron transport strongly implies a copper-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, consistent with previous observations in other organisms  <cit> . even a slight reduction in the capacity for adenosine triphosphate  production by aerobic respiration would result in a redistribution of energy production through anaerobic processes, and this is indeed evident through the changes in genes involved with sugar mobilisation for energy production . we also observed transcript changes that we interpret as representing functional interactions between copper and other essential metal ions, in particular changes in expression of calcium- and iron-binding proteins. finally, there were clear alterations in lipid metabolism at the transcript level, complementing the observations made at the metabolite level.

the power of calculating functional representational bias is inherent in the cumulative nature of the data obtained from a profiling approach. however, it is also important to extract specific transcript profiles of genes with an established and expected functional link to copper . for example, metallothioneins are widely responsive to metal exposure, including copper for particular isoforms, in a large number of organisms. hence, we were interested in determining any such specific responses to copper in l. rubellus. the observed up-regulation of multiple reporters  indicates that earthworm metallothionein, surprisingly  <cit> , is induced by copper at a far lower exposure concentration level than by cadmium. copper exposure also increased general toxic stress in the worms, as shown by the induction of hsp <dig> and hsp <dig> ; our observations here from the transcript profiles are consonant with previous targeted immunochemical analyses of hsp <dig> levels in earthworms exposed to copper and metalliferous soils  <cit> . copper toxicity also causes an increase in generation of reactive oxygen species, as a result of the mitochondrial dysfunction discussed above. this could explain the increase we observed in specific glutathione-s-transferases , also previously seen in response to copper toxicity  <cit> . these reactive oxygen species also damage dna  <cit> . similar dna damage is also highly likely to have been a factor in the current study, as reflected by the alteration in levels of dna repair enzymes and of enzymes implicated in cell cycle control, with both increases and decreases in transcript levels observed in response to copper . ultimately, copper-induced damage leads to apoptosis  <cit> , which again is consistent with the transcriptomic data, with down-regulation of apoptotic regulators . summarising, the responses discussed here all represent plausible modes of cellular disruption, and all of them have been demonstrated previously to be induced by copper exposure. in sharp contrast, when we consider the response of a number of established control genes  <cit>  and compare them with the other groups we have selected here, we see that they are not copper responsive . this strongly supports the technical and biological validity of the transcript data. further external validation is given by comparison with the metabolomic data, where the observations of metabolites are highly consistent with the metabolic changes suggested by the microarray data.

samples for both microarray and metabolomic analysis were chosen by selecting worms with the best condition from each independent mesocosm, thus avoiding obviously diseased and/or parasitised worms. this has two major advantages for the molecular data. first, it avoids major confounding factors, for example, from chance-affected worms. secondly, even in the case that there would be an interaction with copper treatment, for example, through copper toxicity decreasing the resistance to external factors, one would expect the molecular mechanisms induced to be general and stress-related. thus, even though we may have selected individuals that did not provide the most accurate representation of ecological fitness under metal stress, the molecular endpoints will be more closely related to specific copper-induced mechanisms.

integration of the different datasets
there are multiple possibilities for integrating omic datasets, but these can be considered essentially to fall into two categories: statistical, that is, relying wholly on data-driven associations between variables ; and knowledge-based, that is, using prior knowledge about biological organisation and pathways/networks . clearly, an optimal solution would use information from both of these approaches; but then this, in the limit, effectively becomes a full model of metabolism, and this is not currently achievable, even for highly controllable unicellular model organisms. here we have chosen a separate analysis of datasets and subsequent combination of observations.

specific genes that are up- or down-regulated were identified from the transcriptomic data . relatively few could be unambiguously annotated to metabolic enzymes; two of these are from carbohydrate metabolism, mannosidase and maltase-glucoamylase. fortuitously, the metabolic substrate and product of these enzymes, respectively, could be identified in the nmr spectra. figure  <dig> shows that in both cases there is a negative correlation between transcript and metabolite levels. this can be readily rationalised for the mannose/mannosidase relationship, that is, increase in the catabolic enzyme results in a decrease in substrate concentrations, but the opposite argument should hold for glucose/maltase-glucoamylase. this is a useful reminder that it may be dangerous to over-interpret metabolite pair relationships such as these, as the most important factor, metabolic fluxes, cannot be inferred directly from gene transcript levels or metabolite concentrations alone. more interestingly, these molecular data could be very clearly related to ecologically important endpoints. it is clear that a high-sugar/low-transcript level is, in both cases, associated with the low copper doses, and there is a distinct change in both metabolite and transcript concentration for the high-dose samples . moreover, the worms have a positive energy balance for the first condition , that is, they gain weight over the course of the experiment, but a negative energy balance, losing weight, for the second condition .

in addition, a more powerful approach than looking for alterations in single genes is to search for functional gene groups that are co-ordinately regulated. this is achievable for the transcript data, given that gene ontology  classifications are available. figure  <dig> shows that a number of transcripts represented with overrepresented ontology groups mapped onto specific kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  pathways, and it illustrated the impact of copper on genes involved in the electron transport pathway and converse impact on glycolysis, thus indicating the severe remodelling in energetic metabolism upon exposure to copper. the majority of transcripts for electron transport were up-regulated , and this picture was even clearer for the glycolytic transcripts, which were all up-regulated . conversely, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase  transcript levels were decreased by copper . although this represents only one enzyme, it indicates that the gluconeogenic enzymes, as would be expected, were regulated oppositely to the glycolytic enzymes.

these observations are directly reflected by the metabolomic data, where a set of organic acids that are citric acid cycle intermediates were altered as a functional group, and there was a decrease in free sugar concentrations . in addition, when these observations are considered together with the links to specific transcripts and functional endpoints , and the changes in metabolites directly involved in maintaining cellular energy levels , it is clear that energy metabolism in l. rubellus was profoundly impacted by copper treatment.

interpretation of energy reserve data
some copper-responsive metabolites were those related to maintenance of cellular energy levels, in particular adenosine phosphates. in general, adenosine monophosphate  and adenosine diphosphate  levels were both high and correlated to each other, and also showed some positive correlation to copper. this, combined with the lack of any detectable 1h signal for phospholombricine, implies that the worms' cellular energy reserves were exhausted, and thus not truly representative of in vivo metabolism. this is not a simple artefact of the extraction procedure: for comparison, a neutralised 6% perchloric acid extract tells a similar story about the energetic state, that is, amp and adp both higher in concentration than atp, and also completely lacking a signal from phospholombricine . the worms were sampled under conditions that would have preserved metabolic integrity, by flash-freezing into liquid nitrogen, storage at -80°c, and lyophilised tissues extracted directly into ice-cold solvent/water mixtures. in addition, the high quality of the mrna extracted for the microarray analyses confirms the preservation of the biological integrity of the samples. thus, we conclude that the general trend of the adenosine phosphates  data  is a reflection of a general disturbance in energy metabolism, as also shown by decreases in free sugars, and up-regulation of transcripts for breakdown of these sugars and catabolism of energy reserves, even if it may not be a true 'snapshot' of in vivo metabolism. indeed, any extraction procedure is necessarily selective and different protocols will give different windows on the metabolome. techniques such as high-resolution magic-angle-spinning of tissue biopsies  are increasingly used for biochemical and biomedical investigations  <cit> , even though this will lead to far more extensive enzymatic changes than the extractions used here.

sensitivity
there was a clear impact on both metabolomic and microarray profiles at the second-lowest additional copper concentration of  <dig> mg/kg. this is either as sensitive or more sensitive than the functional parameters measured, such as weight change, reproduction and the neutral red retention time  bioassay, all of which had lowest-observed-effect concentrations  of  <dig> mg/kg or higher, and much more sensitive than an endpoint based on mortality for which no significant effect was found at any of the tested exposure concentrations  greater than  <dig> mg/kg)  <cit> . this sensitivity seems a fairly general rule, at least for laboratory experiments, where metabolomics has been shown to be extremely sensitive to individual chemicals compared with traditional endpoints  <cit> . such sensitivity provides an interesting insight into the likely value of such analyses for regulatory testing regimes. here omic approaches may provide insights on low effect level metabolic dysfunctions which may have implication over a life-time exposure, but may not be revealed in the time-limited chronic bioassays that form a cornerstone of modern chemicals policy  <cit> .

like some of the observed phenotypic responses , the omic data  very clearly demonstrate a non-linear response to copper. this was also true for the weight change data, with an initial increase in body weight followed by a clear decrease at higher concentrations. it has been argued that hormesis is a very general response to potential toxins, with low-level exposure either being beneficial or stimulating a compensatory response  <cit> . while the response seen for copper may merely represent the fact that this metal is both essential and toxic for earthworms, it is currently the case more generally that a mechanistic basis for understanding such 'hormetic' responses is lacking. while initial suggestions have been made to explain hormesis in terms of an overcompensation of homeostasis to disruption that is mediated by the different affinities of stimulatory and inhibitory regulatory pathways  <cit> , such suggestions have yet to be confirmed or refuted in empirical studies. our data clearly show that the hormetic response in this case is manifest at a molecular level, indicating a possible role for metabolomics in understanding the mechanistic nature of the response.

CONCLUSIONS
drawing reliable inferences from omic data is often difficult, especially for non-model organisms which may be less well annotated than standard laboratory models. here we have used a dual metabolomic and transcriptomic strategy, with each element providing complementary data, thus reinforcing the inferences made from the independent datasets. interpreting the data in terms of functional groups, for both transcript and metabolite data, showed clear molecular group responses to copper. the integrated dataset indicated a clear alteration of energy metabolism as a result of sub-lethal copper exposure, with an increased switch to metabolism of stored carbohydrates, presumably as a consequence of copper interfering with mitochondrial function and reducing the amount of energy available from oxidative phosphorylation. these molecular impacts resulted in higher-level endpoints, including a reduction in body weight at high copper levels, reflecting the changes in energy metabolism, and a decrease in lysosomal integrity, indicating effects on membranes that could parallel the observed impacts on mitochondrial function.

