BACKGROUND
psoriasis is one of the most prevalent chronic inflammatory disorders caused by an interplay of genetic factors and the environment on the background of dysregulated immune system  <cit> . the disease affects  <dig> - 3% of the population worldwide  <cit>  and can be variable in morphology, severity and distribution. there are several clinical variants of psoriasis, but the most common variant, plaque psoriasis, is characterised by chronic, symmetrical, silvery-scaled, sharply circumscribed plaques  <cit> . plaque psoriasis is the most common form of the disease and can begin in childhood and late adolescence  or in adulthood , with a predilection for elbows, knees and the scalp.

although the cause of psoriasis remains unknown, it is thought to be a complex and multifactorial disorder brought about by the combination of multiple susceptibility genes  <cit> , a dysregulated immune system  <cit>  and environmental factors  <cit> . through genome wide association studies   <cit> , a number of genetic variants have been identified as contributing towards psoriasis pathogenesis. a unifying model that integrates genetic, environmental and immunological aspects of skin inflammation has been proposed  <cit> .

in recent years, progress has been made in understanding the pathogenesis and treatment of psoriasis. pathogenesis is mainly linked to activation of several types of leukocytes that control cellular immunity and to a t-cell-dependent inflammatory process in skin that accelerates the growth of epidermal and vascular cells in psoriasis lesions. current therapeutic approaches against the disease take advantage of proteins or antibodies aiming either at specific inflammatory co-activators or more generally at immune cells  <cit> . while there is now increasing insight into the genes conferring disease susceptibility, much less is known about the types of regulatory networks of expressed genes which define the molecular signature of the disease.

the first large-scale and detailed gene expression studies of psoriasis identified various differentially expressed genes by comparing non-lesional and lesional skin against normal tissue  <cit> . recent studies have attempted to elucidate the molecular pathways underlying in psoriasis  <cit> . however, determining genes that contribute to complex human disorders through analysis of microarray data is challenging due to the large number of gene predictors, their possible interactions, and the small number of samples. termed the “small n, large p” problem  <cit> , this implies that classical statistical methods cannot be implemented directly in functional genomics approaches for the identification of diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers. in this respect, decision trees have proven to be a sensible non-parametric method for classification and variable selection  <cit> . random forest  classification is an ensemble of cart decision trees and has been found to outperform other machine learning techniques for analysis of microarray data  <cit> .

in this study, a computational methodology based on decision tree predictors is developed to discover molecular sub-groups from gene expression data and illustrate gene signatures associated with each group. the random forest  algorithm  <cit>  is used here to  cluster psoriasis transcripts into subgroups and  discriminate between disease phenotypes and generate gene signatures that best differentiate them. rf has been shown to be robust in noisy data, to avoid over-fitting in cases where the number of features is larger than the number of observations and to be particularly suitable for the feature selection process  <cit> .

more specific to the current analysis, we first analysed gene expression profiles in normal and disease skin tissues, so as to define common differentially expressed genes. this core gene set was then used to group psoriatic tissue samples through rf clustering of real and synthetic data, as previously developed  <cit> . this step resulted in dividing psoriatic tissues into two subgroups according to similarity of gene expression patterns. finally, rf classification was used to derive gene signatures able to discriminate between normal and disease phenotypes, including the above-proposed new psoriatic subgroups. such gene signatures are discussed in following sections with respect to their effect on defining distinct molecular characteristics and were validated through comparisons with other psoriasis gene expression studies.

molecular profiling of psoriatic phenotypes followed by classification of tissue samples into appropriate disease classes has the potential to derive clusters of similar transcription responses from the entire repertoire of profiles generated. especially in the case of a homogeneous clinical patient group, such as plaque-type psoriasis, the classification of transcriptional patterns into appropriate sub-groups may reveal distinct molecular mechanisms that may operate within this group and may explain variability in response and options of disease treatment. overall, given the predictive nature of the decision model employed, such patient categorisations can lead to significant insights into disease mechanisms and novel, targeted therapeutic approaches.

RESULTS
a pipeline  for patient stratification according to gene expression profiles in psoriasis was implemented to generate molecular sub-groups and uncover gene signatures associated with each disease group. such an approach has possible predictive implications: given relevant expression measurements for key signature genes, uncharacterised tissue samples can be ascribed to these predefined disease classes, which can reflect different disease prognosis or response to treatment.

gene expression patterns define a core set of dysregulated genes among normal, non-lesional and lesional skin
skin samples from psoriatic patients were either of inflamed, lesional type  or non-inflamed, non-lesional tissue . these were analysed together with skin samples from normal individuals . relevant gene expression measurements for the disease classes  were obtained through the genetic association information network . differential expression analysis was performed and involved three pairwise comparisons between tissue datasets , resulting in three sets of differentially expressed probe sets per pair . a set of  <dig> probes was shared across all datasets  and corresponded to a total number of  <dig> unique genes, of which  <dig> genes were over-expressed and  <dig> under-expressed in pp samples compared to nn . this group of genes constituted a core set of genes expressed differentially across the three disease phenotypes and was used to derive disease-specific expression patterns in the rf-based procedure described in the following sections.

unsupervised hierarchical clustering was carried out on the set of  <dig> core genes to explore and visualise the patterns of gene expression from normal  to non-lesional  and then to lesional  skin samples. figure 2b shows an overview of gene expression for the core probe sets, clustered according to similarity of expression across nn, pn and pp samples. this visualisation represents a striking outline of the varying transcriptional patterns at each disease phase, progressing gradually from generally non-differentiated gene expression in non-inflamed tissues , to markedly differentiated genes in lesional samples .

principal component analysis  was used to assess the clustering of samples when progressing from un-inflamed to inflamed skin. there was a clear distinction between lesional  and non-lesional  phenotypes , manifested as distinct clusters of samples from normal to the involved phenotype through non-involved skin. normal and psoriatic un-involved samples  co-clustered away from involved cases , in agreement with previously published analyses  <cit> . this demonstrated the changes in gene expression profiles across nn, pn and pp skin and revealed a marked difference between inflamed  skin and un-inflamed  phenotypes.

among the strongly dysregulated genes in the core gene set , several of the under-expressed genes were found to encode proteins involved in fibrotic processes and immune responses. for example, fn <dig>  pdgfc, myh <dig> are involved in the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, which participates in fundamental processes such as the regulation of cell shape, motility and adhesion  <cit> . dixdc <dig>  cgnl <dig> and sspn encode cell adhesion and junction proteins. betacellulin , il1f <dig>  cd <dig>  fn <dig>  pdgfc and scarb <dig> are immune response genes. in addition, megf <dig>  btc, fn <dig>  phf <dig> belong to the family of growth factors that activate the epidermal growth factor receptor, egfr  and according to a previous study btc plays an important role in skin morphogenesis  <cit> . among the over-expressed genes, several participate in keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation . of note is klk <dig>  potentially involved in the modulation of hyperkeratosis in a psoriatic lesion and may be implicated in preventing excessive keratinocyte proliferation, resulting in increased shedding of corneocytes. this is clinically reflected in the copious quantities of scale that are shed by psoriasis patients  <cit> . genes ltb4r <dig> and ppard are also involved in keratinocyte migration. finally, a group of up-regulated genes snrpg, snrpd <dig>  snrpd <dig>  snrpa <dig>  snrpc, sf3b <dig>  sfrs <dig> is involved in spliceosomal assembly. overall, most dys-regulated genes were found to be consistent with current knowledge.

distinctive gene expression patterns between lesional and non-lesional tissues 
following the general patterns of psoriatic tissue differentiation, the use of decision tree ensembles was explored to classify samples into pn and pp classes and derive the major gene patterns able to discriminate the psoriatic phenotypes . we used  <dig> tissue samples from psoriasis patients, each characterised by a vector of core gene expression values, and a random forest  classifier  <cit>  was applied to distinguish samples in lesional  and non-lesional  phenotypes. the classifier employed  <dig> trees with training of each tree performed on 2/ <dig> of samples and testing on the remaining 1/ <dig> . the prediction accuracy of the classifier was high .

the random forest classifier was then used to indicate the relevant importance of features in the classification, i.e. which genes are more important in predicting the appropriate disease class. genes were ranked through the gini index  in terms of their discriminative power  and figure  <dig> shows genes with the highest gi when distinguishing inflamed  from non-inflamed  skin. five genes indicated through this procedure were il1f <dig>  c7orf <dig>  aqp <dig>  btc and tuft <dig> and were all related to immune response processes.

identification of molecular sub-types within psoriatic tissue samples
in addition to key patterns that defined disease outcome in psoriatic tissues above, we used random forest in unsupervised mode, as a clustering platform to group lesional psoriasis samples based on their gene expression properties . the aim was to generate two sub-groups among disease tissues , before further classification runs could identify molecular differences among them . as described previously  <cit> , first synthetic data were generated by randomly sampling the gene expression observations. then, a random forest predictor was built to distinguish the real from synthetic data  and define a similarity measure between the psoriatic cases in the form of the random forest proximity measure. finally, clara clustering of the proximity matrix partitioned the psoriatic cases into two groups, named pp <dig> and pp <dig> . the adjusted rand index to indicate the difference between the two identified sub-groups was - <dig> .

the rf-derived proximity measure can be used to generate a multi-dimensional scaling  plot, where dissimilarities between samples return a set of points in low dimensional euclidian space, similar to principal component analysis. the mds plot projects data into a 2d space giving the similarities among patients and their respective classes. the distinction of samples in two groups, pp <dig>  and pp <dig>  is shown through the mds plot in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  similar clustering of pp phenotypes in two clusters has been noted through hierarchical clustering  and was used as means of determining the optimum number of psoriatic sub-groups.

the relationship between these sub-groups and clinically measurable parameters, was assessed. psoriasis area and severity index , body mass index , age of onset, age and body surface area  were evaluated against subgroups pp <dig> and pp <dig>  of these, age was found to be significantly altered between the two subgroups . it is emphasised here that plaque-type psoriasis constitutes a homogeneous clinical group, distinct from other forms of psoriasis. therefore, it is not surprising that such coarse-grained clinical parameters can not capture the subtle differences in plaque psoriasis sub-groups . instead, our focus here is to distinguish the underlying biological mechanisms, in terms of distinct biochemical pathways and interactions that act in these subgroups, as we report in following sections.

having separated psoriatic samples in two sub-groups, a new gene expression matrix, where pp samples were split in pp <dig> and pp <dig>  was used as input to another round of rf classification . the core genes  were used as variables to classify  <dig> samples in any of the four classes . the purpose of this series of experiments was to assess the discriminatory power of different genes in deriving the four disease classes through classification. the classifier showed good prediction accuracy . figure  <dig> shows the mds plot for this classification experiment, illustrating the relative clustering of samples in four skin phenotypes. as before, non-inflamed tissues  clustered away from the inflamed tissues . additionally, the relative segregation of the two pp subgroups was also apparent.

the contribution of particular genes in differentiating the corresponding disease phenotypes was also assessed through gini index as variable importance measure and figure  <dig> illustrates a measure of the discriminative power of genes in classification. functional information of the five top-scoring genes is listed in table  <dig>  in terms of chromosomal location, go class and pathway participation. this set of most informative genes in figure  <dig> and table  <dig> was also confirmed by calculating the empirical p-value by permutating the tissue labels  <cit>  .

to extract the differences in gene expression between the two psoriasis sub-groups, we generated a co-expression network of the core genes for each of these groups . this resulted in two networks for pp <dig> and pp <dig> with different topological properties. the pp <dig> network consisted of  <dig> nodes with  <dig> edges, whilst pp <dig> had  <dig> nodes with  <dig> edges. after clustering with mcl  <cit> ,  <dig> clusters were identified for each patient group, pp <dig> and pp <dig>  and functional enrichment analysis of the largest clusters has indicated different biochemical pathways linked to each of these groups. the pp <dig> network clusters were enriched in signaling pathways, such as wnt, notch, tgf-beta, erbb signaling pathways, whereas clusters in pp <dig> network were more involved in metabolic pathways . this indicated that the two lesional psoriatic sub-groups possess different functional properties, suggesting different underlying biological processes.

identification of key genes associated with disease sub-classes and comparison with other studies
variable importance analysis was used to derive highly discriminative genes in classification of disease sub-types. as described previously , the gini index , calculated from rf classification , was used to rank each of the  <dig> genes in terms of their discriminatory effect in assigning samples in each of the four tissue groups . the  <dig> genes with highest gi were schematically represented in a circular layout  to show their effect in each of the four classes. for example, btc, part of the erbb and erk signaling pathways, has gi equal to  <dig>  for samples classified in the pp <dig> class and a significantly lower gi when classifying samples in the other tissue groups . similarly, the importance of the other  <dig> genes in classifying samples in the four phenotype classes was determined and is illustrated .

in the nn group, cnfn and bub <dig> were more frequently selected to define a split in the classification trees of the forest, whereas btc, il1f <dig> and tmem <dig>  were important in classification of pn samples. within the pp group, btc, c20orf <dig>  eef1a <dig>  cnfn, il1f <dig>  prss1/try <dig>  sspn and uchl <dig> showed high discriminative value for identifying the pp <dig> sub-group, whereas btc, cnfn, il1f <dig>  klk8/klk <dig> and txndc <dig> exhibited high importance for the pp <dig> sub-group . to further support linking these genes to psoriasis-related biological mechanisms, the pubmatrix tool was used to look up the discriminatory genes in the context of eight terms, including”psoriasis”, “nk cells”, “t cells”, “immune response”, “wnt signaling pathway”, “notch signaling pathway”, “tgf – beta signaling pathway” and “erbb signaling pathway”  <cit> . out of  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes were found to occur together with these terms in biomedical literature, as seen in figure  <dig> . interestingly, btc, which exhibited a high discriminative value when characterising pp <dig> sub-type, was found to be related with the erbb signaling pathway. the latter was a highly enriched pathway in this sub-group and indicates a potential therapeutic target. il1rn also had a high gi for samples classified as pp <dig> and was previously found to be highly related with t cell activation and immune response.

the pipeline outlined above was replicated with two other psoriatic datasets from  <cit>   and  <cit>  . skin samples were grouped into sub-types according to their gene expression patterns as for the gain dataset, using similarities derived from the proximity matrix through random forest . the circular representation of the most important genes was also followed here and the  <dig> most informative genes from gudjonsson and  <dig> from yao datasets are shown . by comparing across the three datasets and the relevant gene signatures, the importance of specific genes was noted. btc, cnfn, il1f <dig> were important discriminant genes in the gain data, while snrpc and smurf <dig> played a greater role in the yao and gudjonsson datasets. generating a consistent outcome of gene signatures across all datasets is challenging, as patient cohorts may vary significantly. although the yao data seem difficult to reproduce, considerable similarity exists between the other two datasets. specifically, one of the disease subgroups in these dataset points to pathways related to notch signaling, erbb and tgf beta suggesting that this group may be more amenable to related therapeutic options .

we note that evaluation of psoriasis transcriptomes has been assessed elsewhere  <cit>  and the observed low reproducibility across various studies was attributed to wide variability in clinical protocols, platforms and sample handling among different datasets. it is envisaged that the application of the present and similar strategies for predictive modelling and stratification of expression patterns, as well as the availability of larger patient studies will bridge the disparities between various studies and yield a sharper picture of gene contributions to this complex disorder.

CONCLUSIONS
large-scale genome characterisations, through the analysis of gene sequence and expression data, are gaining increasing interest and have the potential to greatly improve our understanding of the physiological and molecular mechanisms underlying disease pathogenesis and progression. various models of data stratification and identification of patient groups through various data mining protocols are used to support a decision making process in biomedicine. data mining procedures based on algorithms such as support vector machines , neural networks, decision tree algorithms and mathematical programming approaches have been used to select sets of genes for diagnostic purposes and to identify molecular roles which are - as yet- unknown  <cit> . here we have illustrated the use of random forest to partition psoriatic tissues in appropriate disease groups and generate estimates of relevant gene predictors.

psoriasis is a common, complex immuno-genetic inflammatory disease of primarily the skin. the underlying genetics of the disease are complex with numerous implicated susceptibility genes, where replication of single loci has been confirmed for only a handful of these genes. patients suffering from psoriasis can exhibit a host of different clinical phenotypes and response to therapy is varied and unpredictable, even within a similar clinical phenotype, suggesting underlying transcriptional differences between and within the clinical groups. the ability to investigate the underlying immuno-genomic components of these clinical sub-phenotypes has not been a possibility, until now. identification of different transcriptional signatures and their associated molecular pathways contribute toward defining a set of biomarkers, which could serve as diagnostic and therapeutic responder tools. we have outlined a computational strategy to identify molecular sub-types and corresponding putative biomarkers that may be crucial in the understanding and prediction of disease pathogenesis. of the  <dig> common differentially expressed genes identified between normal, psoriatic lesional and psoriatic non-lesional groups,  <dig> genes  were up-regulated and  <dig> genes  were down-regulated. dysregulated genes discovered in this study were involved in epidermal cell modulation, cell cycling and immune responses.

microarray analysis of gene expression has been widely used to differentiate lesional and non-lesional skin of psoriatic patients  <cit> . recently, large-scale analysis using whole genome array platforms on numerous patients per sample group have been undertaken with the aim of identifying gene expression profiles associated with a specific psoriatic phenotype  <cit> . in this work, we present a method for identifying sub-phenotypes of lesional skin from psoriasis patients based on patterns of gene expression that characterise each group and differ significantly from normal human skin. this approach is based on a decision tree analysis of gene expression data, the extraction of associations among gene expression patterns and the identification of functional annotations and molecular signatures.

the random forest decision tree model was applied to lesional skin group to derive patient sub-groups , which are characterised by specific differentially expressed genes. the pp <dig> group was defined by the up-regulation of hla-e, which is the inhibitory ligand for innate nk cells. hla-e takes part in processing and presenting antigen to innate immune cells. the pp <dig> group had more up-regulated genes related to the cells of the adaptive immune system such as ctla- <dig> , ifi <dig> , il4il , ptpn <dig>  and most interestingly serpinb <dig>  which has been identified through genome-wide association studies  as a new psoriasis susceptibility locus in the chinese population  <cit> .

with regards to mechanistic details on the pathways that operate in psoriatic sub-groups, the erbb signaling pathway has been identified for subgroup pp <dig> . this pathway consists of a family of four related receptor tyrosine kinases  which, when activated trigger many different signal transduction pathways leading to increased proliferation, survival, motility, and invasiveness  <cit> . all of these responses are important aspects of wound healing and psoriasis has many elements in common with wound healing. the main clinical feature of psoriasis relates to the thickened epidermis as a result of what may initially have been an epidermal barrier insult. an attempt to restore epidermal integrity is reflected in the activation of the erbb signaling pathway. however in psoriasis it is possible that this pathway, along with other signaling pathways is dysregulated  <cit> .

other signaling pathways seem to be in effect in psoriasis sub-group pp <dig> , for example signaling by bmp. bone morphogenetic proteins  are members of the transforming growth factor-beta  superfamily and regulate a large variety of biological responses in different cells and tissues. it has been reported that bmps are implicated in a variety of pathobiologic processes in skin, including wound healing, psoriasis, and carcinogenesis  <cit> .

in our analysis, when several patient clinical variables were compared across the two classes , we found age to be significantly altered in these subgroups, indicating that this is an important factor in disease manifestations. it is worth noting that although the differences in pp <dig> and pp <dig> groups are quite marked on a transcriptional level, yet they are clinically difficult to distinguish. this observation may help explain why some patients have a different disease course to others and why some respond better to therapy than others within a given clinical phenotype. the ability to generate molecular sub-types provides putative biomarkers, which with further refinement and replication, could prove to be useful in predicting disease severity, progression and response to therapy in an individualised manner.

random forest has become a popular tool for analysing high-throughput genomic data. due to the large number of variables associated with characterisation of clinical samples through gene expression measurements, reduction of dimensionality through feature selection or prioritisation is critical in disease property prediction. here, we use random forest for  disease classification through gene expression patterns and analysis of variable importance to generate potential disease biomarkers, and  clustering of gene expression measurements to derive disease subgroups. despite some limitation in reproducibility across different psoriasis datasets, we believe that through our study there is an emerging picture of important gene predictors in psoriasis, as well as differentiation of disease in patient subgroups. future work based on richer datasets that profile larger patient cohorts, with stringent clinical phenotyping, will have the potential to draw clearer conclusions about this complex autoimmune skin disease.

in this study, we generated biologically meaningful phenotypic classes using a ‘core’ of the highest differentially expressed genes and then further addressing the molecular variations among the groups responsible for lesional psoriasis. this might uncover subtle differences in disease pathogenesis allowing the emergence of new treatments for psoriatic individuals and further facilitate the development of personalized treatments for the disease. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first analysis identifying substantial phenotypic groups in psoriasis, based on patient gene expression profiles and using a classification pipeline. further analysis and discovery of patterns and associations of transcripts of different cell-types  must be done to shed light on the contribution that different cell types make towards the pathogenesis of psoriasis. we would then gain a better insight into this unique skin disease and hopefully, resolve some of the outstanding issues related to its pathogenesis and treatment.

