BACKGROUND
filamentous fungi detect and respond to a variety of signals. as saprophytes or parasites, fungi need to monitor the nutrient status, presence of a host and host defenses, and avoid or respond to osmotic or oxidative stress, light and other environmental variables  <cit> . although fungal development is less complex than that of higher multicellular eukaryotes, internal signals are probably required to program major differentiation steps: hyphal extension and branching, sporulation, mating, secondary metabolite accumulation and production of infection structures. finally, regulation of transcription, translation and cell division is expected to be similar to that of other eukaryotes. indeed, fungal models such as budding and fission yeasts, neurospora and aspergillus have figured prominently in cell biology and genetics  <cit> .

protein kinases have roles in every aspect of regulation and signal transduction, and provide new targets for drug development  <cit> . most eukaryotic protein kinases, with the exception of the histidine kinases found in two-component sensory systems, belong to a superfamily defined by a conserved protein kinase domain . there are nearly  <dig> members of this superfamily in human and mouse  <cit> . the epk superfamily can be classified into several major groups. the members of each of these groups are related according to the signals that activate them and the kinds of protein substrates they phosphorylate. the original classification of hanks and hunter  <cit>  has been extended, refined, and applied to many eukaryotic genomes including some fungi  <cit> . beginning a few years ago there has been an increasing effort to sequence filamentous fungal genomes  <cit> . there has, however, been no complete study of the kinomes of the recently sequenced filamentous fungi. furthermore, in addition to identifying and classifying the kinases in the genomes, there is now a unique opportunity to discover species-specific properties, as well as general trends related to taxonomic group or other properties that are shared between different sequenced fungi.

based on the kinomer database  <cit> , we developed an automatic pipeline that predicts all putative kinases from any given proteome, and classifies them. we then analyzed their distribution, and tested different potential classification methods. in addition to the basic epk domain present in almost all putative kinases, other domains of the protein are essential for kinase activity and interaction with effector proteins and substrates. in the human kinome,  <dig> additional domain types were identified, and additional domains were recognized in over half of the kinases  <cit> . we identified all additional domains that are present in the fungal kinomes according to pfam classification, and discuss their presence or absence in the different groups. finally, we show that the information contained in the domains is sufficient to classify the fungi. our analysis can be applied to any other taxonomic or protein groups, and suggests a great functional richness of kinases in different organisms.

RESULTS
we have studied the distribution, domain content and kinase density among  <dig> species representing the dikarya or higher fungi, including two phyla . in this analysis, we obtained the full proteome for each fungal genome from diverse sources, and then used the kinomer database  <cit>  to identify and classify each predicted kinase. this database classifies the eukaryotic protein kinases into two groups: 'conventional'  and 'atypical'  protein kinases. this classification, based on sequence similarity, also allows the construction of an accurate multi-level hmm library that can be used to search and classify each putative kinase in any organism to each of the  <dig> basic sub-groups .

taxonomy follows  <cit>  and  <cit> . saccharomycotina  are often referred to as hemiascomycota and we have retained the tag _he in the abbreviated species names in the figures, for simplicity.

*subphylum: u, ustilaginomycotina; a, agaricomycotina; p, pezizomycotina; s, saccharomycotina; t, taphrinomycotina; class: so, sordariomycetes; l, leotiomycetes, e, eurotiomycetes; d, dothideomycetes.

distribution of kinases in each functional sub-group
the initial result of this work is a list of putative kinase proteins, classified by the kinomer library. figure 1a shows the distribution of the  <dig> populated groups of kinases  found by applying the kinomer hmm library to each of the  <dig> fungal proteomes studied. the main populated groups of kinases are agc, cmak, cmgc and ste, all of them belonging to the protein kinase superfamily  <cit> . these four groups include 88% of all predicted kinases on average. the least populated groups are alpha and tk with only  <dig> and  <dig> representatives for all fungi, respectively. within the hemiascomycota group  the number and distribution of the different kinase groups are generally similar . in contrast, within the filamentous ascomycota  and the basidiomycota groups, the variation in terms of kinase number is much higher. when we look, however, at the normalized frequency of kinases in each group , it is evident that, despite minor variations within the different phyla and subphyla, the overall proportion of each group is quite similar in each kinase sub-group: agc includes about 20% of all kinases in each species, camk about 30%, etc.

thus, most variation between species diminishes upon normalization. nevertheless, in terms of the kinome size, we can see two distinct groups. the first one has larger kinomes with, on average,  <dig> kinases, and includes the ascomycetes aspergillus clavatus, aspergillus niger, neosartorya fischeri, aspergillus nidulans and ascosphaera apis and the basidiomycetes cryptococcus neoformans and malassezia globosa. the second group includes all other fungi in our study, having an average of  <dig> putative kinases . thus, the larger group has, on average, almost twice the number of kinases compared to the smaller group. the large variation in the total number of kinases might be related to partial genome duplication event. this assumption is supported by considerable evidence of genome duplication in fungi  <cit> . however, expansion of the number of predicted protein kinases does not correspond to the overall predicted frequency of duplications. aspergillus nidulans, for example, has an expanded number of kinases compared to a. fumigatus and a. oryzae , yet the estimated frequency of duplications  <cit>  is quite similar for these three members of the genus aspergillus. about a third of our samples seem to have undergone a possible duplication event of either the kinome and/or the genome of these fungi.

as mentioned above, the hemiascomycota  group seems to be much more compact in terms of kinase number. this indicates, perhaps, a "tighter" evolution of this group with respect to their signaling pathways. for those fungi that have not undergone kinome duplication, the number of kinases found for each group is remarkably similar , given the large evolutionary differences between them. the reasons for independent expansion of protein kinase gene families are not clear, but it has been proposed that genes involved in regulatory interactions might retain duplication. the result would be selective expansion of these classes of genes. modeling of the effects of three genome duplications in arabidopsis over the past  <dig> million years suggests that duplications of regulatory genes are retained, particularly, for large-scale events, because signal transducer proteins act in complexes  <cit> . the zygomycete rhizopus oryzae genome has undergone a high level of duplication  <cit> . in this species, we found  that the main kinase families are expanded about two fold. here again, after normalization the relative number of kinase families are within the range of the dikarya which are shown in figure 1b. analysis of other zygomycete species will answer the question of whether expanded numbers of kinases are a more general property of this phylum.

one striking exception to the overall similarity in the  distribution of kinases among the major subfamilies is the tkl kinase family  predicted for laccaria bicolor. it is generally thought that there are no tyrosine kinases  in fungi and our results support this. nevertheless, in our data the basidiomycete laccaria bicolor shows, exceptionally, a huge number of tkl protein kinase genes. pending direct experimental evidence, of course, this suggests a large deviation of this fungus kinome towards the tkl group.

kinome and proteome size
an expanded and/or diverse kinome may provide a more flexible signaling network. this implies that overall parameters like kinome size as compared to proteome size might not always follow classical  taxonomy. a striking example comes from recent work on the genomes of myxobacteria, which are prokaryotic, but contain an unexpectedly high number of eukaryotic-like  protein kinases  <cit> . the proteome and kinome sizes of the fungi used in this study vary considerably. we note that the predicted fungal proteomes are only as accurate as the assumptions used in their construction. for example alternative splicing, a major source of protein diversity, is not taken into account, although there is evidence for biologically important alternative splicing events in fungi . figure 2a shows the correlation between proteome and kinome sizes. the hemiascomycota  fungi form a fairly uniform cluster . these species have smaller proteomes and tend to be highly similar in terms of kinome and proteome size. the ascomycota  and basidiomycota groups have larger proteomes and also show greater variation; a subset of the filamentous ascomycetes forms a compact group, quite variable in proteome size, but with very similar kinome sizes .

another way to look at this information would be to calculate the kinome density. this is the percentage of the total number of predicted kinase proteins within the total number of proteins predicted for each fungal species. figure 2b shows the kinase density for all the fungi, sorted by value. it suggests that filamentous ascomycetes and the hemiascomycete yeasts can be classified according to their kinome density. the basidiomycetes have a much more variable kinome density and therefore it would be difficult to classify them based on this parameter. a wilcoxon test  confirmed that the ascomycete and hemiascomycete fungi could be successfully classified using their kinome density values. this difference in kinome density might represent the result of evolutionary pressure toward diversification of signal transduction pathways. although this seems logical, there is really no obvious correlation between kinome density or diversity and the "lifestyle"  of the sequenced species that we have studied. s. pombe is the only exception within the ascomycetes, having the largest kinome density of all fungi studied. s. pombe though is the only species belonging to the taphrinomycotina subphylum within the ascomycetes, which represents its own subphylum branch. thus we cannot anticipate whether this is a unique difference or a trend of its subphylum . interestingly, the second densest fungal kinome belongs to s. cereviseae, another type of yeast.

domain distribution
most protein kinases act in combination with other kinases and other signaling effectors, and are modulated by phosphorylation cascades. other domains within these proteins have important regulatory activity, link to other signaling modules, or provide a localization signal  <cit> . we therefore studied the identity and number of domains flanking the kinase catalytic domain epk in each predicted kinase. to this aim we searched the putative kinases against the pfam database .

the  <dig> fungal species have a total of  <dig> putative kinase sequences, matching  <dig> significant pfam domains, which makes an average of  <dig>  domains per kinase. according to pfam,  <dig> domains have kinase catalytic activity and the remaining  <dig> have non-kinase domain activity. this suggests that the kinase proteins have an enormous richness of functional domains, with an average  <dig>  of non-kinase domains and  <dig>  kinase domains per sequence. we find that there are a total of  <dig> different domain types, of which  <dig> are annotated in pfam to have kinase activity : pkinase , pkinase_c , pi3_pi4_kinase , bcdhk_adom <dig> , rio <dig> , pkinase_tyr  and alpha_kinase . the pkinase domain is the most common type of kinase domain in our fungi, where it represents about 87% of all catalytic domains, and in pfam, with more than  <dig> representative sequences. but pkinase is not the only conserved kinase catalytic domain type. there are  <dig> additional putative kinases with a catalytic kinase domain different from the classical kinase catalytic domain pkinase: pkinase_c is a kinase c terminal domain, pi3_pi4_kinase is a phosphatidylinositol 3- and 4-kinase domain, bcdhk_adom <dig> is a mitochondrial dehydrogenase kinase domain, rio <dig> is a typical serine kinase domain, the pkinase_tyr kinase, a tyrosine kinase domain and alpha_kinase an alpha kinase domain. those additional kinase domains represent almost 13% of the catalytic kinase domains, and add a rich variety of specific kinase catalytic functions to the kinome.

very interestingly, while pkinase  appears almost in every fungal species, pkinase_tyr and alpha_kinase domains are much more rare . pkinase_tyr is highly represented only in laccaria bicolor while isolated tk and tkl kinases were found in several species in our analysis and in the kinomer database  <cit> .

of the first  <dig> most common domains in the fungi studied here,  <dig> are also present in the human kinome, reflecting a highly conserved kinome functional milieu: pkinase_c , pi3_pi4_kinase , fatc and fat , fha , hatpase_c , c1_ <dig>  and pbd . these functional domains have very broad and general functions, thus explaining why they appear in all types of fungi and also in the human kinome. the exception is bcdhk_adom3; this domain is involved in the regulation of the dehydrogenase complex that breaks down branched-chain amino-acids and it is similar to the hatpase_c family  <cit> . interestingly, however, these are, as mentioned, the  <dig> most common accessory domains in fungi, while in human only two of them, pkinase_c and c1_ <dig>  are also among the  <dig> most common domains. the remaining six domains that do exist in the human kinome are far less common than in fungi, indicating that these kinase associated domains could be good indicator of functional differences among species.

we believe that the kinome domain distribution, both in type and number, should be indicative of functional and evolutionary differences between fungi. in the next section, we show that this variability is enough to differentiate among different fungal phyla and subphyla.

domain analysis and principal component analysis grouping
taxonomic classification is not always a straightforward task. in this work we tested several criteria for clustering all  <dig> fungi studied here, based on the number and type of kinases and additional domains . following that, we compared the results with fungal taxonomy  <cit> . we found that the most informative clustering was achieved when considering only the distribution of the most common accessory domains. figure  <dig> shows the pca clustering of the different fungi, based on the frequency and type of the  <dig> most common domains found among all fungal kinomes . this classification yields  <dig> clusters of fungi which show a high correspondence with classical taxonomic classification.

as illustrated in figure  <dig>  the pca grouping shows that the domain distribution is more similar among the pezizomycota subphylum of the ascomycota and among the saccharomycota subphylum of the ascomycota. among the basidiomycetes the domain distribution is less tight, although still distinguishable from the first two groups. though only five species are currently available for analysis, it is noticeable that m. globosa and u. maydis both belong to the subphylum ustilaginomycotina and are fairly close to each other . likewise, dots  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  which represent members of the agaricomycotina: c. neoformans, p. chrysosporium and laccaria bicolor, are closely located. assuming that s. pombe forms its own singleton cluster,  <dig> members of the fungi family in this study are clustered by the pca into one of four groups according to their domain distribution. four species fall outside these clusters. of those, two do not reside in any group, and two are mixed: among the ascomycetes, one member of the pezizomycota  and one member of the saccharomycotina  crossed to the other side of the cluster boundaries. very interestingly, here again s. pombe , clusters differently from the pezizomycotina and saccharomycotina groups. indeed, when looking closely at the domain content, there are several examples in which s. pombe is quite different from its ascomycete relatives. for example, it has a much lower density of hatpase_c domains, a higher percentage of heat domains and a higher percentage of the rapamycin_bind domains. it would be difficult to conclude whether this reflects any aspect of fission yeast lifestyle, or is simply a consequence of evolutionary distance among the species. the pca results indicate clearly that the domain distribution includes different evolutionary information at the level of the subphyla.

while the classification, based on the most common functional domains from the kinome, is very similar to the classical taxonomy it would also be interesting to try and understand the functional and evolutionary implications of the rare domains appearing only in a certain phyla or fungal species. for example, the ascomycete a. nidulans has unique domains like cnh, fad-oxidase_c, rcc <dig> and many more, making a total of  <dig> unique accessory domains, which suggests that a. nidulans has possibly acquired a diverse kinase-related functionality. currently, based on its physiology, there is no obvious clue as to why this should be so, but since a. nidulans is one of the best-studied model genetic species there may be a good basis to understand this result in future studies.

from the most common domain distribution, there are some clear cases of variations between the subgroups. for example the polo_box domain appears in all basidiomycota and in the saccharomycotina, while is quite rare within the filamentous ascomycota. polo boxes appear to mediate interaction with multiple proteins through protein-protein interactions. the heat domain, common in both ascomycete subphyla pezizomycotina and saccharomycotina, is extremely rare in basidiomycetes . many heat repeat-containing proteins are involved in intracellular transport processes. although we cannot fully understand how these differences directly impact the function of the different species, there is a clear correlation between the domain distributions and the taxonomic classification.

CONCLUSIONS
the overall distribution of protein kinases within very different fungal phyla and subphyla seems to be very similar. the overall kinome density is in good agreement with taxonomy. the distribution of additional domains, which could have functional implications, does differ significantly between species, and seems able to provide a functional classification that overlaps with taxonomical classification. although generally the classical phyla classification correlates with the kinome density and domain distribution, there are exceptions. basidiomycota do not cluster by kinase number, but they have a similar kinome to proteome ratio. ascomycetes are well clustered by all criteria, with two exceptions: a. nidulans has a different kinome to proteome ratio and a different kinase distribution. nevertheless, a. nidulans is not unusual according to the pca analysis. among the filamentous ascomycetes, there is no obvious clustering according to class within the subphylum pezizomycotina. we note, however, that the class eurotiomycetes is over-represented in the sequenced genomes published to date, perhaps because the beneficial , harmful , or pathogenic  members of this group, which have drawn much attention over the years. schizosaccharomyces pombe has a very high kinome density much similar to the saccharomycotina group. the predicted proteome of laccaria bicolor has an extraordinary number of tkl kinases; further work can determine whether this is an anomaly, or a more general trait found in mycorrhizal symbionts  <cit> . finally, the pca approach based on the most common domains clusters the pezizomycotina group and the saccaromycotina group very tightly, while the basidiomycetes are more divergent. the approach taken here could be repeated for additional groups of proteins  in order to study their evolution and variability within each fungi phylum. these data can also be used to guide experimental work to elucidate the function of individual protein kinases and the signal transduction pathways they function in.

