BACKGROUND
sorghum  is a staple cereal crop for millions of people in the marginal, semi-arid environments of africa and south asia. its unique and advanced ability to grow in regions of low and variable rainfall highlight its potential to impact agricultural productivity in widespread water-limited environments  <cit> . originating and evolving across the diverse environmental landscape of africa, morphological and physiological adaptation strategies has advanced sorghum as a naturally heat and drought-tolerant warm season c <dig> grass that is more efficient at utilizing water, nitrogen and energy resources with respect to other major crops, including maize and wheat  <cit> . occupying seven million hectares of farmland, the united states is currently the world’s top sorghum producer , followed by india , mexico , and nigeria  . cultivated in diverse climates and environmental conditions, the challenges of increasing performance and yield on marginal lands and cooler climates remains at the forefront of sorghum improvement efforts worldwide  <cit> .

sorghum is globally established as an important source of food, feed, sugar and fiber, and recent interest in bioenergy feedstocks also spotlights sorghum as an attractive alternative for sustainable biofuel production  <cit> . framed upon the  <dig> sorghum reference genome  <cit> , translational genomic resources have been developed that directly impact research in other closely related c <dig> feedstock grasses, including switchgrass and miscanthus <cit> . comprehensive understanding of the genetic and molecular mechanisms that regulate metabolite biosynthesis, transport and storage in these species is essential for the efficient development of biofuel feedstocks.

global transcriptome profiling further provides a means to access gene networks for the discovery of functional connections between genes, mrnas and their regulatory proteins, and complex traits expressed through coordinated and dynamic gene networks across different tissues and developmental stages  <cit> . over the last decade, microarray-based expression profiling has provided a reliable high-throughput platform for genome-wide analysis of gene expression in many organisms. microarrays offer substantial advantages for functional genomics, as they are increasingly cost-effective, provide a comparable accuracy of expression profiling to rna-sequencing, and have been shown to provide comprehensive expression data  in a given tissue  <cit> . well-established microarray data analysis tools are also available for querying, visualizing and analyzing the genomes and predicted genes  <cit> , as well as for analyzing the transcriptome profiling data and integrating with other public datasets  <cit> .

to provide insight into the sorghum transcriptome, we generated a record of gene expression in a set of seven tissues and six diverse sorghum genotypes. the choice of samples reflects our aim to develop and enrich the current sorghum transcriptome literature. previous studies have predominantly focused on reproductive tissues, and the majority of these reports do not represent the complete sorghum transcriptome. several of these studies have also been limited to the reference genome  or keller, a recently resequenced sweet sorghum variety  <cit> .

comparable whole plant transcriptome maps are available for a number of other model species, including arabidopsis thaliana <cit> , maize  <cit> , barley   <cit> , rice   <cit> , and soybean   <cit> . these recent transcriptome surveys were constructed with only one genotype or line/accession for their respective species of interest, whereas the present study aims to highlight the practical importance of examining expression profiles across diverse tissue types, developmental stages, as well as genotypes in order to accurately target genes and metabolic pathways for the efficient development of improved feedstocks.

fundamental understanding of sorghum genomics is necessary for improving sorghum for agronomic and compositional traits. specifically, genotypes with high biomass and increased levels of fermentable stem sugars are ideal for developing feedstocks for the biofuel industry. we developed this genomic resource, the whole-transcriptome array as well as the vegetative transcriptome in diverse genotypes and tissues, in order to facilitate the characterization of molecular networks and regulatory mechanisms governing important metabolic pathways including, but not limited to, cell wall biosynthesis for lignocellulosic biomass as well as synthesis, translocation, and storage of fermentable photosynthates for energy content. the relevance of our dataset is demonstrated by genotype and tissue-specific expression of the phenylpropanoid and lignin biosynthetic pathway genes.

intended as readily available public resource for functional gene characterization, the transcriptome data presented here is available through ncbi's gene expression omnibus  under accession number gse <dig>  and the sorghum genome array is available through affymetrix .

RESULTS
generation and quality assessment of data
a whole-transcriptome exon array for sorghum bicolor was custom-designed by chromatin, inc.  and affymetrix: sorgh-wta520972f. this genechip contains  <dig> , <dig> probes covering  <dig>  exons  across the sorghum bicolor genome , chloroplast and mitochondria. the sequences used to construct the probesets included all identified sorghum bicolor exons from the sbi <dig> assembly . multiple probes were chosen for each exon, with a minimum of one probe per exon and  <dig> probes per gene. in addition to standard affymetrix controls, positive controls in the microarray design included probes for constitutively expressed sorghum bicolor genes . probes for intronic regions of actin and ubiquitin were also utilized to determine background expression levels.

to study the sorghum transcriptome and build a gene expression atlas, we collected  <dig> diverse samples from various developmental stages and tissue types . in order to broadly capture sorghum genetic diversity, we included genotypes representing three major ideotypes, including grain, sweet, and bioenergy sorghums. our study includes r <dig>  an elite grain sorghum characterized by the valuable agronomic traits of uniform growth and disease resistance  <cit> . grain sorghum is cultivated primarily for its high starch content, applications in human/animal health and nutrition, and as biofuel feedstock for ethanol production  <cit> . we also included two sweet sorghums, fremont and atlas, that produce increased biomass and accumulate high levels of fermentable carbohydrates in the stem. additionally, fremont is drought resistant and flowers early, while atlas is less susceptible to lodging  and flowers later  <cit> . we also selected three bioenergy or high biomass lines, pi <dig>  pi <dig>  and ar <dig> that produce increased levels of cellulosic material and are photoperiod sensitive, which allows the plant to produce higher amounts of vegetative matter under long day conditions . pi <dig> is specifically a forage line, a fast-growing, highly digestible grass utilized for livestock feed  <cit> .

the primary goal of this study was to obtain relevant and applicable data for the research community developing sorghum as a global feedstock; this research interest guided our sample selection towards vegetative tissues, with a strong bias for stem tissues. a comprehensive trancriptomic profile of sorghum inflorescence and leaf data was recently made available to the community  <cit> . we compared the leaf rna sequencing dataset with the present leaf dataset to demonstrate and confirm that our microarray analysis approach towards transcriptome profiling was appropriate. the spearman correlation of the transcriptome across technologies is  <dig>  , which is consistent with several studies comparing rna-seq and microarray methods for genome-wide transcriptome profiling  <cit> . the present comparison corroborates these studies and demonstrates that the microarray platform for expression profiling correlates well with current sequencing methods. with a common goal of crop improvement, complementary datasets such as these generate a core of information that can be explored for the functional characterization of genes and genetic pathways.

we assessed data quality for hybridization by comparing normalized signals of all probe sets between biological replicates using pearson’s correlation analysis. the biological replicates were highly correlated, with an average pearson’s correlation coefficient of  <dig>  . the highly reproducible results of the replicate data further validate the quality of the microarray platform and present dataset. previous studies have consistently established strong correlations between qrt-pcr data and microarray data processed using robust multi-array analysis   <cit> . however, we also tested a small subset of these genes via qrt-pcr to validate the array-generated expression data and expression patterns across multiple tissue types .

to further assure data quality, we also examined the general expression patterns of well-characterized genes that have been highlighted for tissue-specific expression in previous studies. in microarray experiments with rna isolated from shoot tips, we observed high expression levels for homologs of spatula, a shoot tip transcription factor that is strongly expressed in shoot tips and young leaf primordia  <cit> . similarly, the sorghum homolog for tip2- <dig>  a root-specific aquaporin gene  <cit> , was also expressed at higher levels in our study using root-isolated rna .

global gene expression patterns
we detected the expression of  <dig>  genes in at least one of the  <dig> samples, representing  <dig> % of all genes on the array . the number of expressed transcripts detected in the various tissues ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . expressed genes were determined following established methods  <cit> , and with a conservative and arbitrary expression threshold cutoff of  <dig> , we found that  <dig> % of genes on the array were detected in all tissues  . gene ontology  annotation analysis of these constitutively expressed genes reveals that most are involved in basic biological processes including development, protein synthesis/modification, and signal transduction . similar to published work in maize, expression of constitutive genes varied among the samples, with the coefficient of variation  ranging from 5% to 129%. with a cv of  <dig> %, we identified a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, sb09g <dig>  as one of the most stably expressed genes . this class of genes was also identified in the maize atlas as the most stably expressed among variable tissues  <cit> .

a diverse range of plant tissues was sampled in this study; however,  <dig> % of the probesets were not detected above our designated expression threshold level. several plausible explanations can account for this incomplete expression coverage, including gene expression from specific tissues and/or developmental stages not included in this study, false positive gene models, and levels of expression below detection threshold limits. further, the arrays were developed utilizing the btx <dig> reference sequence and do not capture polymorphisms, copy number variation and presence-absence variation across all the sampled genotypes.

transcriptome-based classification of sorghum tissues
a pearson’s distance correlation matrix was constructed to compare and evaluate the transcriptome data from each sample . this data shows strong correlations among and within the individual tissue types. the associated dendrogram reveals clustering according to tissue type as well as genotype, highlighting the significance of genotype-specific expression in this study . utilizing go categories, functional analysis of the identified gene sets revealed enrichment of known tissue-specific biological processes. for example, the leaf and shoot-associated gene sets were enriched for photosynthetic genes relative to the roots, as expected . we found that components of protein synthesis were overexpressed in the seedling roots and shoots, whereas genes involved in metabolism were over-represented in the shoot tip and stem tissues . these data identify core sets of genes associated with various biological processes and are clear targets for future study aimed to definitively characterize their functions in specific tissues.

differential transcriptomes of developmentally distinct vegetative tissues were also apparent from the principal component analysis  . the pca reveals clustering of functionally related tissue types, and the first two principal components  of this analysis explain 68% of the variance among samples . apical meristematic zones of the roots and shoot tips clustered together and weakly clustered with leaves, shoots and stem tissues. the large group of stem tissues  including internode, pith, and rind strongly clustered together and weakly with the remaining tissues. these results are consistent with previous studies in maize and p. halli crop models, that show core similarities among stem-associated tissues and subsequent divergence of root and leaf samples  <cit> .

interestingly, three out of  <dig> stem samples clustered near the group of meristematic tissues . all three of these 'outlier’ samples were collected at the top internode,  <dig> days after planting  in three of the six sampled genotypes . at 70dap, the stem samples from same genotypes clustered with the other stem samples. these lines are characterized as high biomass genotypes, whereas the remaining three genotypes can be characterized as either grain or sweet lines . the pca indicates that at 61dap, the patterns of gene expression in the stem of the high biomass lines are more related to meristematic regions, or regions of active growth. while it is possible that these three stem samples were collected too close to the meristematic shoot tip region, further study may indicate that the differential transcriptome in the stems of these lines capture a transition zone of gene expression in which sorghum commits to post-reproductive pathways of sugar production and grain fill versus continued biomass production. this result further demonstrates the importance of examining genotype, tissue type, as well as temporal expression patterns when targeting transcriptional programs of interest.

tissue and genotype-specific patterns of gene expression
to identify tissue-specific genes, we created genotype-specific datasets for pi <dig>  fremont, and ar <dig>  each representing one of three major classes of sorghum: forage, sweet, and high biomass types respectively. excluding replicate tissues from the same major organ, we identified genes exclusively expressed in the leaf, shoot, root, shoot tip and stem . the leaf and meristematic shoot tips expressed the greatest number of tissue-specific transcripts across all three genotypes, whereas the seedling shoots expressed the fewest number of tissue-specific genes. of particular interest in this dataset is the extent of variation observed across genotypes. for example, in stems, over  <dig> stem-specific genes are identified in representative examples of sweet and high biomass sorghum. over  <dig> stem-specific genes are detected in forage sorghum; however, only  <dig> stem-specific genes are common among all three sorghum types. this lack of shared tissue-specific genes across genotypes is observed in all major tissue types. we also carried out this analysis for the small rnas included on the array . similar to gene expression, we observed both tissue and genotype-specific expression of the small rnas . for purposes of functional crop improvement, these results highlight the significance of intra-species variation in sorghum and the importance of selecting the appropriate genotype for targeted changes to gene expression via transgenic and breeding approaches.

to illustrate the expression dynamics among tissues, we also calculated the relative gene expression levels  of each of the major tissues . consistent with previous studies, tissues with a relatively higher number of tissue-specific genes  had a wide distribution of genes deviating from their mean expression. stem-associated tissues had similar expression profiles and gene expression was closer to the overall average across tissue types  <cit> .

we next attempted to determine whether functional gene classes were over-represented in specific genotypes. go analysis did not reveal statistical differences in the enrichment of go slim terms using agrigo  multi-test adjustment method)  <cit> . however, this can partially be attributed to the incomplete annotation of the sorghum genome, as well as stage and tissue-specific expression not captured in our sample collection.

to identify genotype-specific expression patterns, we examined the expression of several known sugar metabolizing enzymes and sucrose transporters in sorghum with the hypothesis that differential expression of these genes would be observable across genotypes . differential expression between sweet and grain sorghum has recently been shown  <cit> , and our results further validate this observation, with the majority of sugar-related genes showing differential expression among tissues and genotypes. for example, sweet and high biomass varieties showed consistently higher expression of sps <dig> and sps <dig>  sugar phosphate enzymes thought to play significant roles in sucrose biosynthesis, compared to grain varieties . a comprehensive gene list and more detailed expression analysis of sugar related genes across genotypes may provide insight into the mechanisms governing trade-offs in sorghum grain yield and stem sugar content.

we further analyzed tissue-specific transcripts to identify shared and specifically expressed genes in multiple tissues . to avoid variation in gene expression due to genotypic differences, we chose samples from the genotype atlas for this analysis. we identified  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes that are specifically expressed in leaf, stem and root and  <dig> and  <dig> unique genes that are expressed in shoot and shoot tips, respectively . we also identified  <dig> genes that are specifically expressed in stem rind  as compared to  <dig> genes that are specifically expressed in stem pith . this dataset provides a unique opportunity to discover target sets of genes in core sorghum varieties that may be useful for modulating gene expression in a tissue-dependent manner. for example, these rind and pith-specific genes can be studied as potential candidate genes for biomass content and targets for compositional modification of biofuel feedstocks. further, identification of promoter elements and corresponding dna-binding regulatory proteins that regulate tissue-specific expression of genes could be identified from these data. as a direct application of this study, we are currently analyzing the promoter regions of candidate genes that are differentially expressed in the rind versus pith region of stem tissues.

tissue-specific expression of genes involved in the phenylpropanoid-monolignol pathway
to exemplify the functional utility of this data, we highlighted the expression data of  <dig> key enzymes associated with the phenylpropanoid-monolignol biosynthesis pathway . currently, one of the primary strategies for bioenergy feedstock improvement is through lignin modification. alterations in lignin content and composition aim to improve the digestibility of forage and saccharification efficiency of lignocellulosic biofuels  <cit> . thus, modifying the expression of genes in the lignin biosynthesis pathway is an attractive approach to achieving this goal.

annotated in several databases, the majority of known and putative genes and homologs were analyzed for: phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , coumaroyl shikimate 3’-hydroxylase , ferulate 5-hydroxylase , cinnamate 4-hydroxylase , 4-coumarate:coa ligase , cinnamoyl coa reductases , hydroxycinnamoyl coa:shikimate hydroxycinnamoyl transferase , caffeoyl-coa 3-o-methyltransferase , caffeic acid 3-o-methyltransferase , and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase . similar to previous studies in maize and switchgrass, the highest expression of these genes was found in the roots and stems  <cit> . further, hierarchical clustering reveals that the expression of lignin biosynthesis genes varies with developmental stage, as well tissue type and genotype . distinct expression signatures of gene homologs as well as clustering of above-ground vegetative tissues according to developmental stage has precedence in maize and, in general, most of the lignin genes showed organ-specific expression patterns consistent with studies in related species  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
comprehensive transcriptome profiling provides a global overview of gene networks and allows for the discovery of functional connections between genes, mrnas and their regulatory proteins. in the present study, we constructed a gene expression atlas covering an array of tissues, developmental stages and genotypes using the first commercially available sorghum microarray . we observed tissue and genotype-specific expression patterns of relevant metabolic pathways that highlight the significance of intra-species variation in sorghum.

developed as a new resource for crop breeding and genomic discovery, sorgh-wta520972f is produced by affymetrix and is available to the public research community. we are currently utilizing this microarray to identify differential gene expression related to key metabolic processes  for the identification of regulatory regions. additional avenues for future study with this array are wide-ranging and can include gene expression profiling during abiotic/biotic stress, plant infection and disease establishment to investigate genetic mechanisms and applications to plant breeding and crop improvement. detailed expression analysis of small rnas included in the array design may also reveal key insights in diverse biological processes, including rna-guided gene regulation. sorgh-wta520972f can also be utilized in quantitative trait locus  mapping and validation methods . minimal costs associated with microarray analysis allow for the generation of high-throughput expression profiles or combinations of profiles of elite breeding lines for accelerated crop-breeding efforts. applications of this resource can target numerous agronomic traits in sorghum as well as provide insight in closely related grasses  for improved feedstock development.

