BACKGROUND
the application of laparoscopy, minimally invasive technique, along with its advantages and superiorities, has become an alternative approach to conventional surgery in small animal veterinary medicine
 <cit> . laparoscopy created huge changes in the field of surgery from large incisions in open surgeries to very small incisions. within the context of laparoscopy, single incision laparoscopy is a newly growing technique to reduce the invasiveness of conventional multiple portal laparoscopic surgery. single incision laparoscopic surgery  reduces surgical trauma and adhesion through implementing a small number and/or size of portals
 <cit> . sils is a feasible technique for different ablative and reconstructive procedures such as cholecystectomy, appendectomy and splenectomy in human
 <cit> .

splenectomy in dog is a common operation for tumors
 <cit> . in human, hematological immune mediated diseases, non responsive to medical treatment, itp and hemolytic anemia are the most common indications of splenectomy
 <cit> . the ideal indication for the laparoscopic splenectomy is an elective splenectomy in blood donor dogs to prevent transmission of hemobartonella infection
 <cit> . clinical and experimental researches were conducted to elaborate laparoscopic and open splenectomy
 <cit>  resulting in the recognition of laparoscopy as a gold standard procedure for splenectomy
 <cit> . in veterinary medicine, the feasibility of multiple portal laparoscopic splenectomy and its superiority over the conventional open technique was documented
 <cit> . conventional laparoscopy performed safely in laboratory animals, porcine, caprine, canine and human
 <cit> . the objective of this study was to compare single  with three portal  laparoscopic splenectomy in dogs.

RESULTS
both sils and conventional surgery were performed successfully and all dogs were recovered uneventfully. splenic mobilization was successfully performed via a single umbilical incision. the final incision was extended for organ removal. there were significant difference  between sils and conventional surgery in the operative time  and the length of the surgical scar . there was no significant difference in the length, diameter and weight of the spleen between two groups . there were no post-operative complications including inflammation, infection, hernia formation and dehiscence up to one month after surgery. slight and superficial rupture of spleen with very negligible and minor bleeding occurred in  <dig> cases  that was managed immediately without any particular requirement to perform open surgery or using additional portals to accomplish operation.

discussion
the purpose of this study was to investigate the possibility of replacing sils with conventional standard  <dig> portals laparoscopy for splenectomy in dog. accordingly, the operative time and scar length were found to be significantly less in sils compared to conventional method. single portal position in sils provided similar visualization, manipulation and exposure of splenic hilum as in conventional laparoscopy. insertion of single umbilical portal reduced the chance of accidental injury to splenic parenchyma compared to inserting three separate portals in conventional method.

recently, the application of sils techniques has been described in many intra-abdominal procedures in human
 <cit> . the goal of single port access  surgery is to minimize the incision required to perform the procedure while maintaining the surgeon’s comfort
 <cit> . to the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report in using sils for splenectomy in dog. in general, less morbidity, short length of hospital stay, less post operative pain and excellent cosmetic results were considered as advantages of sils to the conventional multiple portals laparoscopic surgeries
 <cit> . moreover, sils splenectomy seems to be safe for intra operative visualization of the splenic hilum during transection of vessels and removal of spleen
 <cit> .

the operative time is an important parameter for surgical assessment. in the present study, the operative time was shorter in sils  than conventional method of laparoscopy  for splenectomy in dog. part of this difference might be due to the use of ultracision harmonic scalpel for sealing and cutting of the vessels and splenic attachments. also, the experience of the surgeons has great impact on the outcome and operative time of this study. in one study on splenectomy using conventional laparoscopy in dog, the operative time was quite long in conventional three portals laparoscopy  compared to open surgery . apparently, experience of the surgeon could explain, in part, a long operative time. in other words, laparoscopic surgical times and complications tend to decrease with an increase in the level of the surgeon's experience, denominated learning curve
 <cit> .

the most time consuming part of the laparoscopic splenectomy is the time dedicated to remove spleen from the abdomen, which may be associated with the rupture of spleen. in the present study,  <dig> dogs  had slight and superficial rupture of spleen with negligible minor bleeding. this was managed successfully but elongated the surgical time.

CONCLUSIONS
the single incision laparoscopic surgery  could be an available, feasible and safe alternative to multiport laparoscopy for dogs undergoing elective splenectomy. it presented advantages in relation to operative time and surgical scar, without any particular complication. the use of the appropriate vessel sealer to ensure hemostasis would facilitate the procedure and decreases the operative time.

