BACKGROUND
inflammatory bowel disease , broadly classified into ulcerative colitis  and crohn’s disease , is a chronic gastrointestinal  illness of uncertain etiology with high morbidity and relapse. symptoms range from abdominal pain, weight loss and diarrhea to ulceration, perforation and complete obstruction of the gi tract. although the precise etiology of ibd remains unclear, several factors are believed to play a role in its development and progression, including host genotype, immune disequilibrium, the composition of microbial communities resident in the gi tract and environmental factors  <cit> . in particular, the interactions between intestinal epithelial damage and microbial incursion have become new research hotspots.

the human intestinal tract plays host to approximately  <dig> trillion microorganisms, with at least  <dig> - <dig>  bacterial species. the intestinal microbiota is now considered to be a functional organ associated with normal physiological processes, such as metabolism, immunological response and intestinal epithelium morphogenesis  <cit> . thus, there are many areas of host health that can be compromised when the microbiota is drastically altered. ibd clearly involves a breakdown in interactions between the host immune response and the resident commensal microbiota. several investigators have documented changes in the gut microbiota associated with ibd, especially a dramatically reduced diversity in the phylum firmicutes and concomitant increase in proteobacteria <cit> . in humans, a therapeutic strategy called fecal bacteriotherapy involving transfer of fecal material from a healthy donor to an ibd patient has successfully ameliorated the disease  <cit> . that the restoration of microbial diversity is effective suggests the intestinal microbiota alteration may play a key role in disease pathogenesis. however, our knowledge of the microbiota shifts associated with ibd is far from complete, and it remains a question whether these changes are responsible for the origin of ibd, or alternatively, a direct or indirect consequence.

murine models, for example, il- <dig> deficient  mice and dextran sodium sulfate -treated mice, have contributed enormously to understand the pathogenesis of ibd. previous reports on dss-induced colitis in murine models revealed that oral dss-induced mucosal injury is more extensive in animals with commensal bacterial depletion compared to conventionalize counterparts. contradictory data was seen in il- <dig> deficient  mice, showing that il-10−/− mice fail to develop spontaneous colitis if reared in germ-free conditions  <cit> . the difference may be caused by a variety of pathogenic mechanism, however, the research is limited by the time, cost and ethics and a new animal model is in badly need. the zebrafish model as an established developmental biology model has recently come to the fore in the study of developmental biology and disease processes. fleming et al. developed an ibd-like model in zebrafish larvae using  <dig>   <dig>  6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid , which enable study of host-bacterial interactions in detail in ibd processes  <cit> . the zebrafish digestive tract is similar to that of mammals in its development, organization and function, and observation of the larvae gut following induction of ibd reveals region specific disease changes with biological, pathological and clinical relevance to the human condition  <cit> . additionally, the zebrafish environment is relatively easy to manipulate and embryos can conveniently be produced in large numbers. finally, the intestines of the zebrafish can be embedded in whole for analysis.

zebrafish are well suited for studying host-bacterial interactions as they have innate and adaptive immune systems similar to higher vertebrates  <cit> . comparative metagenomic profiling of zebrafish and mouse gut microbiota revealed that they share six bacterial divisions, including proteobacteria, firmicutes, bacteroidetes, verrucomicrobia, actinobacteria and planctomycetes divisions  <cit> . besides, microarray analysis of gnotobiotic zebrafish has revealed transcriptional alterations in response to the microbiota that consistent with mammals, demonstrating an evolutionarily conserved role of the gut microbiota in vertebrate development  <cit> . moreover, the resident commensal microbiota in both fish and mice provide similar functions in the gut: they ferment polysaccharides to short-chain fatty acids  and play an important role in defense against pathogenic infection  <cit> . in addition, studies in zebrafish gut differentiation show that in the absence of microbiota, the larvae gut is arrested in specific aspects of differentiation and altered in specific aspects of its function, which can be reversed by the introduction of bacteria later in development  <cit> . another study revealed alterations on gut microbiota after feeding the zebrafish dietary probiotic lactobacillus rhamnosus for 10 days, which has significant effects on the reproductive physiology  <cit> . all of this suggests that the microbiota in zebrafish gut may play the same role in disease pathogenesis as in mammals.

the aim of the work reported here was to carry out a molecular analysis on the composition of the intestinal microbiota in zebrafish larvae with tnbs-induced ibd-like colitis applying pcr-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis . a range of tnbs doses and exposure times were investigated in order to find out whether the intestinal epithelial damage and microbiota alternations in colitis processes are dose and time dependent fashion. furthermore, we aimed to identify specific bacterial species of the gut microbiota that could be associated with the pathogenesis of colitis in zebrafish by dna sequence analysis. consequently, we also revealed the establishment of the resident microbiota in larval zebrafish gut from individuals of developing fish from  <dig> dpf to  <dig> dpf. within the present work, we analyzed the zebrafish tnbs-induced enterocolitis in greater detail and first defined the changes of the intestinal microbiota in zebrafish ibd-like models, which might provide novel knowledge on the role of intestinal bacterial dysbiosis in ibd pathogenesis and show technical feasibility of studying host-bacterial interactions in ibd processes.

RESULTS
pathological changes in tnbs-induced enterocolitis
the record of the dose-dependent and time-course survivorship of the embryos/larvae is shown in figure  <dig>  the treatment of tnbs started from 3 days post fertilization  until harvest at  <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> dpf in each tnbs-exposed group. before  <dig> dpf, there was no significant difference in the percentage of survivorship in any of the tnbs-exposed groups compared to the controls. at tnbs concentrations of  <dig> and 50 μg/ml, no significant increase in mortality was observed over the whole exposure time, whereas a slight increase  in mortality was observed in the dose of 75 μg/ml tnbs.

for evaluation of enterocolitis changes caused by tnbs exposure, a simple scoring system was devised . intestinal bulb, mid-intestine, and posterior intestine were assessed separately. total enterocolitis score representing the cumulative values of these separate parameters for all  <dig> segments of the intestine is shown in figure 2a. zebrafish collected at  <dig> dpf showed no significant difference between tnbs-treated and control samples. however, changes were first observed at  <dig> dpf in the high dose of 75 μg/ml tnbs exposed larvae . at  <dig> dpf, there was a significant dose-dependent increase in the enterocolitis score of tnbs-exposed groups , as compared with the score of  <dig> in the control. it demonstrated administration of tnbs to the embryo medium was able to induce enterocolitis.

representative pictures of the statistically significant groups are shown in figure 2b. in the intestine bulb, the epithelium of control samples was characterized by projections and clefts, whereas in tnbs-treated samples the epithelium appeared smooth and the lumen was expanded. in the mid-intestine region, higher numbers of goblet cells were observed in tnbs-exposed fish compared with controls. histological analysis did not show epithelial architecture disruption in the posterior intestine of both control and tnbs-exposed groups. in addition, goblet cells were observed in the regions of intestinal bulb and posterior intestine of larvae exposed to tnbs, while the presence of goblet cells remained restricted to the mid-intestine in the control.

the increase in goblet cells observed in tnbs-exposed larvae was further detected using ab-pas staining as described above. as it is shown in figure 3a, the number of goblet cells significantly increased with time and in a dose-dependent pattern. representative pictures of maximum and minimum numbers of goblet cells in all  <dig> regions of the intestinal tract were shown in figure 3b.

inflammatory cytokine production in larvae exposed to tnbs
tnf-α expression was examined using immunofluorescence to measure inflammatory reactions in larval zebrafish exposed to tnbs. in our study, tnf-α appeared as red fluorescent light in plasma around the nucleus within the intestinal epithelium . in the control groups, tnf-α staining is absent from the gut . however, tnf-α expression was stimulated significantly with increasing concentrations of tnbs . in addition, larvae exposed to the same dose of tnbs, tnf-α immunofluorescence levels increased as the exposure time grew . it proved tnbs exposure primarily evoked an inflammatory response within the intestine dose and time dependently.

shifts in intestinal microbiota during tnbs-induced inflammation
the pcr-dgge fingerprints showed changes of the composition and diversity in gut microbiota of the twelve groups of fish . the first eight lanes represent the dgge profiles of control and tnbs-exposed fish harvested at  <dig> dpf, whereas the lanes  <dig> to  <dig> represent the profiles of fish at  <dig> dpf and the last twelve lanes are the profiles at  <dig> dpf. at each of the time point, the gel shows the dgge profiles of  <dig> groups: control , 25 μg/ml tnbs-exposed , 50 μg/ml tnbs-exposed  and 75 μg/ml tnbs-exposed .

the dendrogram based on dgge banding similarity patterns showed that samples from different time points were separated into three different clusters , indicating the establishment of the gut microbiota during zebrafish development from  <dig> to  <dig> dpf. at  <dig> pdf, the microbial composition in the control and tnbs-exposed groups especially the 75 μg/ml tnbs-exposed group had a significant variation, whereas at  <dig> and  <dig> dpf, the community profiles were not clearly distinct. it revealed tnbs exposure resulted in intestinal microbiota alteration by  <dig> pdf.

the alternations of shannon-wiener diversity indices according to the intensity of bands were showed in figure  <dig>  as we can see, during the bacterial colonization of the zebrafish gut from  <dig> to  <dig> dpf, the biodiversity of intestinal microbiota was increased. meanwhile, larvae exposed to tnbs had a lower community diversity of gut bacteria compared to control group at  <dig> dpf.

bacterial species associated with inflammatory disorder
in order to define the key members of intestinal microbiota that likely contributed to the pathogenesis of tnbs-induced inflammatory disorder, we further identified the alteration of the dominant bacterial species in zebrafish gastrointestinal tract. nineteen sequences of 16s rrna gene fragments were obtained and sequenced. these genes were assigned to  <dig> bacterial phylotypes based on the highest sequence similarity  matched to genbank sequences obtained by blast analysis . we next quantified the relative abundance of fragments in dgge profiles of the  <dig> bacterial phylotypes .

as shown in figure 7a, the composition of the bacterial community in larvae digestive tract changed over time to become dominated by the bacterial phyla of proteobacteria and firmicutes. in particular, the proportions of proteobacteria phylum, including hydrocarboniphaga daqingensis , limnobacter sp. , comamonas sp. , salmonella sp.  and aeromonas caviae , were dramatically increased from  <dig> dpf to  <dig> dpf .

meanwhile, the significant alterations in the abundance of the  <dig> bacterial phylotypes between the tnbs-exposed groups and controls at  <dig> dpf were revealed . the sections of proteobacteria , such as hydrocarboniphaga daqingensis, limnobacter sp. , citrobacter freundii , comamonas sp.  and salmonella sp. , showed an increase in relative richness in the gut microbiota of zebrafish exposed to tnbs as comparison with the control group . however, citrobacter werkmanii  was less abundant in tnbs-exposed groups than in the control . in addition, firmicutes bacteria consisting of lactococcus plantarum , and streptococcus sp.  were less present in tnbs-exposed fish .

quantitative real-time pcr was performed to verify the changes found by dgge. the toltal number of bacteria was significantly increased from  <dig> dpf to  <dig> dpf . however, no differences in total number of bacteria were found between tnbs-treated groups and the control. at  <dig> dpf, lactobacillus group was significantly reduced in the tnbs-exposed groups . numbers of burkholderia increased significantly , but not enterobacteriaceae family . which was consistent with the dgge result.

enterocolitis severity and tnf-α expression correlate with the composition in gut microbiota
we had observed the severity of enterocolitis in tnbs-treated zebrafish increased in a dose-dependent pattern at  <dig> dpf as compared with contols , whereas the abundance of proteobacteria  dramatically increased and the proportion of firmicutes  decreased significantly . we may predict that colitis severity would correlate with tnbs-induced changes in composition of gut bacteria. accordingly, we calculated the correlation between enterocolitis scores and the density of burkholderia and lactobacillus group separately by pearson correlation analysis. we found that the colitis scores correlated with the abundance of burkholderia  and the richness of lactobacillus group . these findings demonstrate that tnbs-induced enterocolitis correlate with changes in the composition and density of the gut microbiota.

in the same way, we generated the correlation between tnf-α expression and tnbs-induced alterations in of gut microbiota. it came to the same conclusion that tnf-α expression correlated with the density of burkholderia and lactobacillus group and intestinal microbiota diversity, separately .

phylogenetic analysis of the predominant bacteria
a phylogenetic tree depicting the evolutionary correlations among  <dig> bacteria and some of their relatives available in genbank , inferred on the basis of aligned 16s rdna sequences, is shown in figure  <dig>  it showed that the dominant sequences from the zebrafish gut were phylogenetically clustered into  <dig> phylum: firmicutes  and proteobacteria .

discussion
in the present study, we established a zebrafish model organism to mimic human ibd using tnbs originally described by fleming et al. it is confirmed that gut physiology and pathology relevant to this human disease state can be rapidly modeled following tnbs exposure, including intestinal epithelial damage, increase in goblet cells, production of inflammatory cytokines and intestinal microbiota dysbiosis. from the histological assessment of damage severity in the gut it was apparent that all larvae from the healthy control group showed no overt features of enterocolitis, while larvae exposed to tnbs exhibited pathological features consistent with enterocolitis time- and dose- dependently. the results present a detailed characterization of the development of intestinal inflammation in tnbs-treated larval zebrafish and establish a basis for using zebrafish to explore unique bacterial communities involved in the pathogenesis of ibd.

the aim of this study was to characterize the intestinal microbiota dysbiosis in the gut of zebrafish with ibd induced by tnbs, and to identify individual bacterial species that contribute to these dysbiosis. it is widely believed that ibd involves a breakdown in relations between the host immune response and microbial population resident in the gi tract. reduced richness or diversity of bacterial species has been reported widely in patients with ulcerative colitis and crohn’s disease, as well as in animal models with ibd, which was consistent with our observation  <cit> . it could be hypothesized that, from its gut microbial community composition, the healthy larvae may have been more likely to format a stable micro-ecosystem with the intestinal environment, the gut epithelium and the mucosal immune system, therefore, less susceptible of developing ibd. most studies suggest that the gut microbiota is an important factor in the pathogenesis of ibd, however, little is known about the contributions of particular intestinal species to health and disease.

recently, increasingly molecular profiling techniques are being employed for the detection and characterization of the unculturable bacteria in the human colon. studies based on dgge have shown a faecal microbiota dysbiosis signature associated with cd, characterised by a decreased presence of faecalibacterium prausnitzii, bifidobacterium adolescentis, dialister invisus, an unknown clostridium sp. and an increased presence of ruminococcus gnavus <cit> . others revealed that bacteroides vulgatus, bacteroides uniformis, and parabacteroides sp. were more commonly present at higher levels in healthy controls than in uc or ibd patients  <cit> . the changes of the intestinal microbiota in ibd patients were not only investigated in western population, but also a research on the faecal bacterial dysbiosis in chinese cd patients showing an increase of the richness γ-proteobacteria  and a reduced proportion of bacteroides and firmicutes <cit> . such differences were also observed by others applying terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism  and fluorescent in situ hybridization   <cit> . in murine models of ibd, bacteroidales  and lactobacillus sp. were predominantly associated with the dss-induced colitic and healthy rats, respectively  <cit> . obviously, there were significant differences between the experimental sets from which samples were sourced. this may be caused by many factors including genetics, variations in environmental conditions from different geographic locations, as well as the microbiological status of food and water. despite these differences, most of the studies have shown an increase of some opportunistic pathogenic proteobacteria and a decreased proportion of firmicutes phylum in cd, uc, or ibd.

the role of the microbiota in the zebrafish larval tnbs model has not been previously described. our results showed that the dominant bacterial species were altered in the larvae intestine with tnbs-induced ibd, which was characterized by an overrepresentation of proteobacteria and a relative lack of firmicutes phylum. we observed that limnobacter sp., comamonas sp. and salmonella sp., major members of proteobacteria, had a significantly elevated abundance and became to be dominant in the samples from tnbs-treated groups. this is consistent with previous reports in ibd, which suggests that the host-microbial interactions are evolutionarily conserved and bacterial communities within the zebrafish intestines contribute the same to ibd etiology as in mammals. this work thus highlights the potential use of zebrafish in the study of gut microbial contributions to the pathogenesis of ibd and also other intestinal disorders. in fact, the zebrafish has shown several unique advantages that make it superior to other animal model organisms for microbial investigation. to start with, the composition of the mucosal- and luminal-associated/faecal microbiota has been shown to be significantly different in human digestive tract  <cit> . some believe the mucosal-associated microbiota seems of a closer link to the disease process than the faecal microbiota, as ibd is a disorder of mucosal inflammation. for a better understanding, characterisation of the mucosal-associated bacteria is therefore required. however, investigations are limited due to the difficulties of sampling of mucosal biopsy from healthy people. besides, there is no conclusion whether the mucosal- or luminal-associated microbiota represents the accurate composition of the microbiota from patients with ibd. in contrast, our samples contain both the luminal- and mucosal-associated microbiota of the entire gi tract, which could reveal a better picture of the intestinal microbiotal composition. furthermore, there was significant inter-individual variation in gut bacterial composition among both healthy and ibd groups in either humans or animal models research. the high inter-individual variability may cause confusion whether the microbiota shifts owing to the disease or the lifestyle and environmental changes. whereas in zebrafish models, as each sample contains about  <dig> larvae, the individual differences could be greatly eliminated and more focusing on the differences in microbial communities between ibd groups and the healthy control. finally, although studies have indicated a role for the microbiota in ibd development, to further understand this relationship between microbiota and host immunity and its degradation in inflammatory disease of the intestine, the next step must surely involve signaling pathways and molecular mechanisms through which the host recognizes gut microbiota and stimulates inflammatory processes. rodent studies indicate that initial recognition of microbiota in the extracellular environment occurs via pathogen-recognition receptors , which recognize microbial-associated molecular patterns   <cit> . some studies have shown that tlr <dig> knockout mice did not develop enterocolitis upon treatment with dss and tlr <dig> antagonist antibody ameliorates inflammatory response in colitic mice  <cit> . in addition, a meta-analysis revealed that genetic variations in tlr <dig> presented a statistically significant risk of developing cd and uc  <cit> . it is reasonable to speculate that gut microbiota play a role in the development of ibd via tlr signaling pathways. in zebrafish models, reverse genetic analyses using target-selected mutagenesis or antisense morpholino oligonucleotides  provide additional means for identifying molecular mediators of host–bacterial relationships in the gut  <cit> . the completion of the zebrafish genome will facilitate these approaches and many more recently studies show the feasibility of studying host–microbial interactions in genetically engineered zebrafish.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we represented for the first time the molecular characteristics of intestinal microbiota dysbiosis in larval zebrafish with tnbs-induced ibd-like colitis. the present study defined a reduced biodiversity of gut bacterial community in ibd-like colitis. the intestinal microbiota dysbiosis in zebrafish ibd-like models was characterized by an increase of proteobacteria and a reduced proportion of firmicutes. the major challenge here is elucidating whether alterations in the gut microbial composition represent cause, or consequence, of host inflammation and disease state in ibd. in deed, it could be hypothesize that the chemicals, eg, tnbs, oxazolone, or dss, affect the microbiota composition and then alterations in the microbial community initiate mucosal immune-mediated inflammation via tlrs signaling pathways. it is possible that changes in gut microbial ecology are crucial determinants in the susceptibility to experimental enterocolitis. however, in the present study, we observed that the intestinal epithelial damage and the overproduction of inflammatory cytokine  appeared ahead of the intestinal microbiota shifts. this may suggest that the chemicals initiate inflammation and the progressive inflammatory damage to the host intestinal mucosa applies pressure on the intestinal microbiota that further shifts community structure. or the host and the microbiota interact in both ways and there is a feedback loop that perpetuates the inflammation. in characterizing these changes in community structure and function, it may be possible to provide new clues into determining the aetiological mechanisms of ibd and alter these events to prevent or ameliorate the disease.

