BACKGROUND
the development of techniques to directly study genes in the environment, first by pcr and cloning of 16s rrna genes and later by metagenomics has provided a more realistic view of the microbial community structure of natural environments. historically, a gap between cultured microbes and the real natural diversity was recognized and expressed as the “great plate anomaly”  <cit> . we are now in a better position to assess the selective bias introduced by nutrient-rich laboratory media. “classical” marine bacteria, such as vibrio species, easily isolated in pure culture, are now recognized as rare inhabitants selected by laboratory conditions  <cit> . on the other hand, the most abundant marine microbes such as candidatus pelagibacter, are extremely difficult to retrieve in pure culture and are still largely studied by direct sequencing of the biomass or, at best, of a few isolated strains  <cit> . rather than such unexpected findings remaining restricted to the marine habitat, they rapidly turned out to be the norm, especially in the case of aquatic systems, e.g. the high abundances of low gc actinobacteria in freshwater  <cit>  and even in the ocean  <cit>  and many other groups that are just starting to be known and studied  <cit> . a similar discovery was made regarding hypersaline environments. the classical extreme halophiles that have been studied for decades such as halobacterium or haloarcula were barely detectable by molecular approaches in saturated brines  <cit> . instead, slow growing and extremely fastidious to isolate microbes, such as haloquadratum walsbyi, have shown to be dominant worldwide in neutral saturated brines  <cit> . recently, a new group of extremely small archaea  were discovered by metagenomic approaches to be also relatively abundant in saturated brines, but no culture of these microbes is yet available  <cit> .

in a large metagenomic study carried out in a solar saltern in which different salinities were studied by direct  <dig> pyrosequencing  <cit> , it came as no surprise when in intermediate salinities  the classical moderately halophilic bacteria such as salinivibrio or halomonas <cit>  turned out to be nearly absent. the few studies carried out by pcr and cloning of 16s rrna  <cit>  had already indicated the presence of bacteria distantly related to nitrococcus mobilis. metagenomic assembly provided many contigs that clearly belonged to gamma-proteobacterial cells that gave consistent hits to the genomes of both nitrococcus mobilis nb- <dig> and alkalilimnicola ehrlichii mlhe- <dig>  assembly of the metagenome allowed to reconstitute large genomic fragments and indicated that this was a new microbe  distantly related of the previously mentioned.

in an attempt to retrieve this new microbe, oligotrophic media were designed to isolate bacteria from a ca. 20% salinity saltern ponds in isla cristina, huelva  and from the large number of colonies screened, a microbe with 95% identity of the 16s rrna gene to alkalilimnicola could be isolated. independently, a sample from the intermediate salinity saltern in santa pola also gave a similar isolate. both microbes, like most environmentally successful aquatic microbes, are extremely slow growing and fastidious to maintain in the laboratory. their genomes have now been sequenced and assembled and they have proven to be representatives of the bacteria that were dominant in the 19% saltern pond metagenome. actually they seem to be very abundant at all medium salinity  neutral hypersaline waters for which metagenomes are available.

RESULTS
two strains, m19- <dig> and uah-sp <dig>  were isolated from saltern ponds of intermediate salinity  in south west and south east spain  respectively. both microbes are representatives of a novel group of ectothiorhodospiraceae that by metagenomics appeared to be the dominant bacterial group in saltern ponds of intermediate salinity  <cit> . by 16s rrna sequencing they were tentatively assigned to a new genus “spiribacter” and two separate species “spiribacter salinus” m19- <dig> and “spiribacter” sp. uah-sp <dig>  a complete taxonomic description is being prepared . the genomes of the two isolates have now been fully sequenced and assembled into a single contig .
a. ehrlichii


spiribacter salinus 
spiribacter 
a
. 
ehrlichii 
ani 
*
*ani, average nucleotide identity  <cit> .

general characteristics and comparison with other ectothiorhodospiraceae
the phylogenomic relationships of “spiribacter” with other members of the family ectothiorhodospiraceae that have been completely sequenced are shown in figure  <dig>  allochromatium vinosum dsm  <dig> and thioflavicoccus mobilis  <dig>  two purple sulfur marine bacteria which belong to the family chromatiaceae, were used as outgroup. the family ectothiorhodospiraceae is composed of purple sulfur photosynthetic bacteria that are in most cases halophilic and also often alkaliphilic  <cit> . many of the most classical isolates come from alkaline hypersaline lakes  <cit> . the results confirm the initial phylogeny described by 16s rrna gene sequence comparison . both strains appear monophyletic and only distantly related to the closest neighbor arhodomonas aquaeolei dsm  <dig>  an aerobic chemoheterotroph  <cit> , and nitrococcus mobilis nb- <dig>  an obligate chemolitotrophic bacterium  <cit> . the average nucleotide identity  between the two strains was only  <dig> %, what fits with what is expected of different species of the same genus  <cit> . both microbes have genomes close to  <dig> mbp , making them the smallest genomes described within the ecthiorhodospiraceae and for any halophilic bacterium. the genomes are very streamlined with a median intergenic spacer of only 14– <dig> nucleotides, also the smallest of any member of this family . the gc content is relatively high as seems to be the case with all the ectothiorhodospiraceae sequenced till now. the genomes were composed of a single circular replicon with only one rrna operon and with a high level of synteny, considering the relatively low ani between the two genomes . it is clear from the comparison with the closest available complete genome  how “spiribacter” species are simplified in their metabolic versatility, missing the chemolitotrophic and carbon fixation pathways. the small number of is and other mobile genetic elements and absence of crispr system and flagellum was also remarkable. all these are frequently observed characteristics of oligotrophic microbes with streamlined genomes that reach high population densities in aquatic environments, such as ca. pelagibacter ubique in the ocean.

ecological insights
in a previous work, metagenomic sequencing indicated that the communities at 19% salinity had already a marked halophilic profile with the hyperhalophilic haloarchaeon haloquadratum predominating in numbers  <cit> . however, a major difference with the nacl saturated ponds was the presence of the gammaproteobacterium associated to alkalilimnicola-nitrococcus that we now know corresponds largely  to “spiribacter” representatives. to confirm this, we have analyzed the recruitment of the two genomes from the available metagenomes of hypersaline waters. besides the 19% metagenome we also used data from a san diego saltern metagenome  <cit>  also representing intermediate salinity ponds. as shown in figure  <dig>  m19- <dig> was the known bacterial genome recruiting most in san diego 12-14% and in santa pola 19%, only two halophilic archaea, h. walsbyi and ca. haloredivivus, recruited more. the data confirms that “spiribacter” is a very abundant microbe in intermediate salinities but its abundance decreases sharply at both high and low salinities . in this sense, it can be considered a bona fide moderate halophile that prefers to inhabit intermediate salinities. former definitions of moderate halophiles  <cit>  were based on laboratory studies of growth rates at different salinities, but are often misleading as shown clearly by the lack of representation of most moderate halophiles defined this way in intermediate salinities. besides, the growth salinity range in the laboratory is often very wide, with very similar growth rates over most intermediate salinities. some of the assembled metagenomic contigs described before were now clearly associated with “spiribacter” . actually, these were the largest contigs obtained from the 19% metagenome confirming the abundance of “spiribacter” cells in this environment. however, many of these contigs had lower similarities while still being syntenic to “spiribacter” genomes  indicating that there might be other “spiribacter” species present in significant amounts in this specific sample.

the recruitment of m19- <dig>  shows the typical metagenomic islands  <cit>  that are found when a well-represented microbe is compared to the metagenome of its habitat. these islands are a reflection of the diversity of co-existing clonal lineages that diverge in genomic regions delineated by the islands. the most remarkable feature in the case of strain m19- <dig> is the small number and size of these islands concordant with the highly streamlined genome and relatively restricted metabolic versatility. genomic island   <dig> accumulates  <dig> of the  <dig> is elements of the genome but no specific function could be attributed to the few other genes present. gi <dig> was the largest and contains a large urease cluster. ureases are not present in strain uah-sp <dig> and, although the cluster in m19- <dig> recruits very little at high identity, it showed many hits below 97% identity indicating the presence of other lineages that carry ureases. the rest of gi <dig> contains many toxin-antitoxin systems as is typical of flexible genomic islands of bacteria in general. gi <dig> is the cluster coding for the o-chain of the lipopolysaccharide which is a typical genomic island in all gram-negative bacteria and its variability has been attributed to its major role as a phage recognition target  <cit> .

to assess the presence of “spiribacter” associated microbes worldwide, we have searched the complete ribosomal database project for 16s rrna sequences highly similar  to that of either strain. the results described in additional file 1: figure s <dig> indicate that they are found worldwide  and always  in intermediate salinity hypersaline waters.

metabolism
both strains of “spiribacter” were isolated on media for heterotrophic aerobic microbes . the genomes confirm that these microbes are devoid of any photosynthetic or chemolithotrophic capabilities, what sets them apart from most members of the ectothiorhodospiraceae. no carbon fixing pathways were detected either. the only other member of this family with a purely heterotrophic metabolism is arhodomonas aquaeolei, a halophilic aerobic heterotroph isolated from a petroleum reservoir  <cit> . in concordance with their heterotrophic nature, transporters formed a large fraction of the genes in both genomes. transporterdb  predicts  <dig> and  <dig> transport-associated genes for m19- <dig> and uah-sp <dig>  respectively. in comparison, in s. ruber, which has a much larger genome than either of them , a similar number of genes  was detected by the same method.

one of the main carbon and energy sources for halophilic microorganisms in the salterns is glycerol. massive amounts of this compound are produced by the unicellular green algae dunaliella, the main primary producer in these hypersaline habitats, as a compatible solute to provide osmotic balance  <cit> . in its catabolic degradation, glycerol is converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate , a glycolysis intermediate, by two different pathways. the first pathway, involving glycerol kinase and glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  <cit> , was found as a complete cluster in both “spiribacter” strains. these clusters included also two genes encoding a glycerol-3-phosphate abc transporter and a glycerol-3-phosphate regulon repressor. in strain uah-sp <dig>  three other different glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase genes were also found together in a separate location of the genome. in the second pathway, glycerol is metabolized to dha first and then phosphorylated by a dihydroxyacetone kinase into dhap. in strain m19- <dig> this second route is totally absent while in uah-sp <dig> a dha kinase was found, indicating the ability to use both pathways. besides, located near this dha kinase gene, another gene coding for a phosphoenolpyruvate dependent dha phosphotransferase system was found. although apparently redundant, this second enzyme seems to be involved in the transport of dha rather than in catabolism of this compound  <cit> . the same dha uptake system has been found before in the haloarchaeon h. walsbyi <cit> . the authors of that study suggested that h. walsbyi can use dha as carbon and energy source, which is known to be released by s. ruber  as a byproduct of glycerol metabolism.

glycine betaine  is another important osmoprotectant that could be an abundant carbon source in hypersaline environments. along these lines, strain m19- <dig> has two paralogous operons of four sarcosine oxidase genes located in separate regions of the genome. sarcosine oxidase is a heterotetrameric enzyme that catalyzes the oxidative demethylation of sarcosine  to yield glycine that can be further catabolized and used as a source of carbon and energy  <cit> . strain uah-sp <dig> did not have these genes. another difference indicating different lifestyles for both isolates was the presence of a complete cluster encoding a cytochrome c oxidase  complex involved in microaerobic respiration in strain uah-sp <dig>  this heme-copper oxidase provides a better adaptation to respiration under microoxic conditions  <cit>  indicating that strain uah-sp <dig> might be specialized in comparatively less oxygenated microenvironments.

regarding nitrogen metabolism, neither “spiribacter” genomes have genes that code for nitrogen fixation or nitrate/nitrite assimilation. both genomes have the gene coding for a high-affinity ammonium transporter amt, indicating that nitrogen uptake occurs in its most reduced form, ammonia. accordingly, the essential genes involved in ammonia assimilation and amino acid metabolism, glutamine synthetase and glutamate synthase, were found. besides, several abc transporters for exogenous nitrogen-rich organic compounds such as basic amino acids, putrescine/spermidine and polyamines were also found. in addition, each genome contained other non-shared genes that can provide nitrogen rich compounds. for example, strain m19- <dig> contained a complete urease gene cluster , including the genes for the transport and conversion to ammonia, while strain uah-sp <dig> carries an abc transporter for the nitrogen rich osmolyte taurine   <cit> . inorganic phosphate appears to be mainly transported in both microbes by the high-affinity phosphate transport system, pstscab. both genomes contained also the abc transporter phncde, a high affinity uptake system for phosphonates. phosphonates are organophosphorus compounds characterized by the presence of a carbon- phosphorus bond and could be used also as a nutritional source of phosphorus in response to phosphate starvation  <cit> .

as expected from the evident streamlining of these genomes, regulatory mechanisms were very scarce. only two sigma factors involved in response to environmental stresses were found, σ <dig> a heat shock sigma factor and σ <dig> that has been linked to the regulation of nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . along similar lines, only two two-component regulatory systems were found, one involved on survival under nitrogen limited growth conditions  and phobr that regulates the response to variations in the level of extracellular inorganic phosphate  <cit> .

osmoregulation
despite the small genome size, both “spiribacter” strains appear to have all the typical salt-out osmoregulatory mechanisms. the salt-out strategy is based in keeping most of the inorganic salts out and using organic osmolytes to balance the high salinity of the environment  <cit> . these “organic compatible solutes” include amino acids and derivatives such as glycine betaine and ectoine  <cit> . in the case of “spiribacter”, judging by the number of betaine transporters in these genomes  it seems that this compound has an important role. besides, a choline transporter beth was also present. choline itself is not an osmoprotectant but we found in both genomes the key enzymes for the synthesis of glycine betaine from choline, choline dehydrogenase , glycine betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase  and the transcriptional regulator   <cit> . ectoine is another widely distributed compatible solute commonly synthesized by halophilic bacteria  <cit> . ectoine biosynthesis is a separate branch along the pathway for the synthesis of the amino acid aspartate. in both “spiribacter” we found the complete ectabc gene cluster, diaminobutyric acid  acetyltransferase , daba aminotransferase  and ectoine synthase   <cit> .

it has been suggested that an important adaptation to saline environments may be an increase in the number of acidic amino acids to reduce their surface hydrophobicity. we have characterized the two strains m19- <dig> and uah-sp <dig> proteomes by virtual 2d-gels and to analyze the differences in protein acidity we have compared them to those from a salt-in halophilic archaeon , a salt in halophilic bacterium , a marine bacterium  and a freshwater bacterium  . the whole proteome pi plots showed the change from the bimodal pattern of the freshwater marine bacterium, f. taffensis, to a single peak around  <dig>  for halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  this figure shows how the pi distribution of the second peak representing basic proteins, that contains the transmembrane proteins, has evolved toward acidity in response to increase in salinity of the environment. in a manner similar to halobacterium sp. nrc- <dig>  both “spiribacter” showed reduction of the amount of basic amino acids resulting in a single peak at around a pi  <dig> . in any case, recent evidence indicates that the low pi peak that characterizes many halophiles is more a condition for a salt-in strategy than a reflection of that mechanism really taking place in the cells  <cit> .

another way to gauge the salt adaptation of a microbe is the reliance on the na+ gradient to actively transport nutrients into the cell. both “spiribacter” strains have secondary transporters that catalyze the translocation of solutes across the cytoplasmic membrane using electrochemical ion gradients, for example, the tripartite atp-independent periplasmic family transporters  <cit> . thirteen and fifteen of these transporters  that catalyze uptake of c4-dicarboxylates, sugars and metabolites using the na+ gradient were found. both microbes also possess several genes encoding na+ symporters for proline, bicarbonate or anions and na+/h+ and na+/ca2+ antiporters, consistent with adaptations to a high-salt environment  <cit> . the genomes contain also a cluster of six genes coding for the multi-subunit na+/h+ antiporter mrp  <cit> , which has been suggested to be the main mechanism to maintain ph homeostasis. in response to osmotic stress, bacteria can also accumulate k+ as an osmoregulatory solute and ph regulator  <cit> . the uptake of k+ is catalyzed by multiple uptake systems  <cit> . interestingly, both “spiribacter” strains only harbour the gene cluster trkah that codes for the trk transport system, while in s. ruber genome four copies of a trka and two copies of a trkh gene and also the k+ efflux system kefb were present  <cit> .

xanthorhodopsin 
xrs are rhodopsin proton pumps that sometimes use a carotenoid pigment antenna to harvest light, a mechanism that is convergent with that of the chlorophylls of photosynthetic microbes and widens the light absorption spectrum  <cit> . xr was first discovered in the extremely halophilic bacterium s. ruber <cit>  but later on they have been found to be widespread in marine and halophilic microbes. recently, a separation of xanthorhodopsins in two families has been proposed on the grounds of the gene sequence and predicted biophysical properties  <cit> . one of these families, group ii xrs, lack some essential keto-carotenoid binding sites and have been described as being devoid of the carotenoid antenna characteristic of group i  <cit> . both “spiribacter” genomes were found to contain rhodopsin-coding genes that, after sequence comparisons, cluster clearly with the xr genes found in other microbes . the predicted proteins contained all the characteristic functional groups of proton-pumping rhodopsins . these results suggest that both xrs are functional. furthermore, the phylogenetic analysis  and the characteristic genes found in the cluster  indicate that both closely related genes of “spiribacter” encode xrs affiliated to subgroup ii. this xr subgroup, was found in a heterogeneous group of different alpha and gamma proteobacteria, mostly of marine origins, and in marine eukaryotes. actually, group ii xrs have already been found by other authors in metagenomes in medium salinity, hypersaline and fresh water habitats  <cit> .

regardless of whether they have carotenoid antennas or not, all rhodopsins require the chromophore retinal. the gene clusters including the xr gene of group ii, always contain four of the genes involved in the synthesis of the retinal precursor β-carotene from isopentenyl diphosphate  . in addition, uah-sp <dig> has a paralogous gene  coding for crtb  located elsewhere in the genome. the presence of two phytoene synthase paralogs has been already reported in the genome of the gram-positive bacterium corynebacterium glutamicum <cit> . the authors reported that both phytoene synthases were functional leading to an overproduction of carotenoids. another difference between the two strains involves the location of the β-carotene  <dig> '-monooxygenase  gene. in m19- <dig> this gene was found within the cluster while in uah-sp <dig> this gene appeared at a distant locus in the genome .

CONCLUSIONS
in recent years it has become apparent that planktonic aquatic habitats are often dominated by microbes that have highly streamlined genomes  <cit> . they tend to be sessile and, in the case of heterotrophs in euphotic waters, often have rhodopsins. in high-salinity hypersaline habitats, two archaeal groups appear to occupy this niche, haloquadratum and the nanohaloarchaea. in intermediate salinities there appears to be more diversity and the “spiribacter” representatives fill a significant gap. the widespread distribution of this microbe and its natural range indicates that it is present in  <dig> to 25% salinities worldwide. in other words, it is an ecological moderate halophile in the same manner haloquadratum is an ecological extreme halophile. thus the classical classification based on growth rate range in the laboratory can be replaced by a more realistic classification based on ecological distribution. the classical microbes classified as moderate halophiles, such as halomonas or salinivibrio, have been shown to be almost absent from hypersaline habitats and, at least in the case of halomonas, appear to be just salt tolerant opportunistic marine bacteria that happen to survive higher salinities and be thus isolated often from moderately saline waters.

“spiribacter” shows many characteristics in common with dominant aquatic microbes such as ca. pelagibacter or ca. actinomarina. the cells are small, although not as small as the marine counterparts, and so is the genome. motility is absent as in most genuinely planktonic prokaryotes. flagellar motility only has bearing when there are significant gradients of nutrients to traverse. this is unlikely to be the case in the water column of large aquatic habitats such as the ocean. besides, the genes involved in motility and chemotaxis impose an additional genomic burden. a major difference between the planktonic marine habitat and its hypersaline counterpart  is the nutrient status. hypersaline waters tend to be eutrophic and organic matter is supposed to be plentiful for heterotrophs. however, the energetic efficiency of streamlined cells such as “spiribacter” has to be a significant advantage even under relatively nutrient rich conditions. h. walsbyi genome was not considered to be streamlined. it is a relatively large genome , has very low coding density  and contains several is, repetitive elements  <cit>  and genomic islands  <cit> . however, the abundance of is elements seems to be a general feature of haloarchaea and could be related to their proven level of promiscuity  <cit> . furthermore, many regions identified as non-coding have revealed a rich content of small rnas  <cit>  that might be very important for the biology of this microbe, i.e. the apparent wastefulness of the haloquadratum genome might just reflect our ignorance of archaeal biology.

the comparison of both “spiribacter” with the only other bacterium that seems to be naturally abundant in hypersaline waters, the bacteroidete s. ruber, is also interesting. both bacteria are carriers of similar xanthorhodopsins, although the type present in “spiribacter” seems to operate without the associated carotenoid antenna that was originally characterized in this type of rhodopsins  <cit> . salinibacter however is motile and also carries sensory rhodopsins and chemotaxis machinery. actually, the real relevance of s. ruber in the planktonic brines is not very clear. in metagenomes the available genomes do not recruit very extensively and, although its numbers are significant, they are always very far from those of the archaeal members of the population. salinibacter together with many high gc haloarchaea, that are often isolated from salterns, could live attached to particles, a niche that is often overlooked but can explain the need for motility to commute between particles or get to the most nutrient rich areas.

