BACKGROUND
previous cancer genome analyses were limited to protein-coding regions, which covers less than two percent of the human genome. these efforts successfully discovered a number of critical oncogenes and tumor suppressors. however, a large number of cases still remain inexplicable with those genes. the vast majority of cancer mutations are found in regions that are extraneous to protein function. these mutations in noncoding regions may act as driving factors that perturb the regulation of gene expression. the most critical criterion for identifying driving mutations is their recurrence  <cit> . it can be more complicated to characterize mutation recurrence in noncoding regions than in protein-coding genes. in a recent study  <cit> , the significance of mutation recurrence at a given locus in noncoding regions was calculated by a probabilistic model based on the expected and observed mutation rates.

recent studies suggest that the genetic and epigenetic features can determine the landscape of cancer mutations . for example, schuster-böckler et al.  <cit>  profiled a set of diverse genetic and epigenetic factors in terms of their association with the chromosomal density of cancer mutations. polak et al.  <cit>  found that cell-of-origin chromatin features are a strong determinant of the distribution of cancer mutations. these studies suggest that a range of genetic and epigenetic factors can be used to estimate the significance of cancer mutations. a critical aspect of regulatory mutations that has not been previously dealt with is their genes targeted by enhancer-promoter interactions. the recent growth of chromatin interactome data enables to characterize the targets of noncoding regulatory mutations. in addition, the transcription factors  whose binding is affected need to be examined, because critical noncoding mutations may act through altering the binding of tumorigenic tfs. we sought to construct a classification method that can predict functional noncoding mutations based on the significance of mutation recurrence and a wide range of related features. a total of  <dig> features were collected and used for the training of our classification model. recurrence significance was assessed by testing different sizes of target and background windows.

saturation of cancer gene discovery may be achieved with ~ <dig> samples per tumour type in addition to >  <dig> exomes that are currently available  <cit> . noncoding mutation discovery probably requires more samples because of a larger mutation target size. millions of potential regulatory sequences exist in mammalian genomes  <cit> . unfortunately, only a small number of whole-genome sequenced cancer samples have been made available. moreover, unlike protein-changing mutations, it is complicated to identify functional noncoding variants as distinguished from inconsequential variants. in a previous work, machine learning was employed to predict noncoding mutations that exert high regulatory impacts through tf binding disruption  <cit> . these prompted us to develop a machine learning method that can learn the features of the mutations that are recurrent in a small-sized cancer cohort and then predict functional mutations whose recurrence may appear with additional samples.

RESULTS
study overview
the overall schematic workflow of this study is depicted in fig.  <dig>  we obtained whole-genome pan-cancer somatic mutation calls from public resources and used breast cancer somatic mutations to obtain the instances of the training set for the classifier. we examined the recurrence of each mutation among the pan-cancer samples and also measured the statistical significance of the recurrence level. the raw count or statistical significance of recurrence was used to classify the mutations into true and false sets. of the breast cancer mutations, we investigated those in potential regulatory regions of protein-coding genes through enhancer-promoter interactions. we profiled the genetic and epigenetic features of the mutation sites and the cancer-related or functional features of the target genes mapped to the mutations. in addition, we examined the features of the tfs whose binding sites were expected to undergo motif gain or loss due to the mutations.fig.  <dig> the overall schematic workflow. the construction of the training set and the training of our random forest classifier that aims to predict recurring mutations in breast cancer




based on these mutation-, gene-, and tf-related features, we trained a random forest classifier to predict recurring mutations. we performed a 10-repeated 5-fold cross validation  and used the receiver operating characteristic  curve to quantify the classification performance. random forest was employed because the ensemble method usually shows higher performance in multi-dimensional problem space as compared to conventional methods such as support vector machine . we compared the performance of svm and artificial neural network  with that of random forest . in addition, we conducted a leave-one-out-cross-validation . through the loocv, we predicted important mutations from a test set including instances of only one sample and a training set consisting of instances from the rest of the samples.

performance evaluation of raw and significant recurrence models
we trained a random forest classifier for a total of  <dig> sets of true and false mutations based on the raw recurrence and recurrence significance model. the first  <dig> sets were based on the raw recurrence model. raw recurrence was calculated in the window of 5 bp, 10 bp, or 20 bp, and the mutation was assigned to the true set if the recurrence count was greater than a cutoff  . the other sets were generated based on the recurrence significance model. recurrence was first obtained in the window of 5 bp, 10 bp, or 20 bp, and then its statistical significance was computed based on the background window of  <dig> kbp,  <dig> kbp,  <dig> kbp, or  <dig> mbp . the mutation was assigned to the true or false set with the p-value cutoff of 5 × 10− <dig> for the recurrence significance model. the false sets were randomly composed as a subset of non-recurrent mutations such that they were three times the size of the true sets.table  <dig> performance of recurrent mutation prediction: raw recurrence model





the sets of true and false mutations were cross-validated using the random forest classifier based on  <dig> features . prediction accuracy was calculated by averaging  <dig> 5-fold cvs. then, we drew an roc curve of prediction accuracy and quantified the performance of the classifier using the auc . the auc values of the  <dig> test sets from the raw recurrence model  indicate that our classifiers were trained properly when the raw recurrence count was  <dig> or higher. in particular, the recurrence window of 10 bp generally outperformed 5 bp or 20 bp. we considered the statistical significance of recurrence to account for local background mutation frequency. first, in order to compare the significance model with the raw recurrence method, the p-value threshold was adjusted to 5 × 10− <dig> to render the number of mutations in the true set comparable to the size of the true set in the raw recurrence model . we performed 10-repeated 5-fold cv for varying window size . as a result, we determined that the 10 bp window was most suitable for the significance model. for the 10 bp window, the highest auc was achieved when the background window was  <dig> mbp or  <dig> kbp. however, because smaller true sets generally resulted in better aucs, we further adjusted the p-value cutoff, and found that the  <dig> kbp and  <dig> kbp background windows performed better than the  <dig> mbp window when the size of the true set was comparable . therefore, the  <dig> kbp and  <dig> kbp windows were considered as the best background size for the recurrence significance model. meanwhile, our classifiers trained using randomized true/false labels showed the average auc of  <dig>  ~  <dig>  .

comparison of raw and significant recurrence model
as seen in tables  <dig> and  <dig> and , the auc of the recurrence significance model was not explicitly superior to that of the raw recurrence model. we speculated that the number of mutations in the training set mattered because the auc from smaller true sets tended to be higher. in order to equalize the numbers of true mutations in the training sets, we adjusted the p-value of the significance model. as a result, for the significance model of 10 bp windows, the p-value thresholds were set to 3 × 10− <dig> for  <dig> kbp and 5 × 10− <dig> for  <dig> kbp background windows. with these thresholds, training sets with background windows of  <dig> kbp and  <dig> kbp both resulted in  <dig> true mutations, which was the same as ≥  <dig> raw recurrence counts in 10 bp windows . similarly, to match the significant recurrence model with the raw recurrence model of ≥ <dig> counts, we used the additional p-value cutoff of 3 × 10− <dig>  with this threshold, the numbers of the true mutations that were filtered using  <dig> kbp and  <dig> kbp background windows were  <dig> and  <dig>  which were close to  <dig> for ≥ <dig> recurrence counts in the raw recurrence model. using the adjusted p-value cutoffs, we compared the raw recurrence model of 10 bp windows with two significance models of 10 bp windows  based on the roc curve . as a result, the classifier showing the highest performance was from the significance model with the 10 bp recurrence window,  <dig> kbp background window, and p-value cutoff of 5 × 10− <dig> . this particular classifier showed an auc of  <dig> .fig.  <dig> roc curves comparing the raw recurrence and significant recurrence model




prediction on new or external samples
we employed an loocv to test the utility of our classifier in predicting significant recurrent mutations in a new cancer sample based on the features learned from reference cohort samples. our classifier was trained by using mutations in  <dig> breast cancer samples and then used to predict significant mutations in the one sample left out from the training process. we observed the proportion of the mutations that are truly recurrent according to the significance of the prediction result for each mutation as measured by the number of positive votes by  <dig> decision trees in our random forest classifier . by a majority vote of the individual trees, both the classifier trained with the raw recurrence model  and the classifier trained with the significant recurrence model  preferentially identified mutations that were actually recurrent in terms of the raw recurrence count  or the recurrence p-value .fig.  <dig> proportion of positive votes by  <dig> decision trees of the random forest. a-b proportion of votes by the classifier trained with the raw recurrence model  for mutations in the test samples. c-d proportion of votes by the classifier trained with the significant recurrence model  for mutations in the test sample. a, c voting for mutations having no , moderate  recurrence, or high  raw recurrence. b, d voting for mutations whose recurrence significance was low , moderate , or high 




there were mutations that were actually recurrent but not positively predicted. these may indicate inconsequential mutations that do not share the features of functional regulatory mutations. on the contrary, there were mutations that were positively predicted but not actually recurrent . there is a possibility that the recurrence of these mutations is not detected because of limited sample size. to estimate the capability of our method to predict mutations whose recurrence can be revealed only by additional samples, we recalculated the recurrence of each mutation using external datasets which were not used when training our classifier. we observed that the top-voted mutations from our random forest classifier were more likely to exhibit their recurrence upon sample addition than most recurrent mutations from the raw recurrence model or most significant mutations from the significance model . however, this pattern was not observed when we used lung cancer instead of breast cancer as external samples , in agreement with the fact that our random forest predictor relied on the features of the genome, epigenome and transcriptome of breast cancer. in addition, the random forest classifier trained based on the significance model with the background window size of  <dig> kbp outperformed that based on the background window of  <dig> kbp.fig.  <dig> number of mutations whose recurrence was revealed by sample addition. the top-voted mutations from the random forest trained with the significant recurrence model  were compared to the same number of the most highly recurrent mutations based on the raw or significance model. a-b recurrence recalculated in the window of  10 bp and  100 bp after the addition of new breast cancer samples. c-d recurrence recalculated in the window of  10 bp and  100 bp after the addition of lung cancer samples




measuring variable importance
variable importance was measured by the mean decrease accuracy of random forest . among others, the chromatin accessibility signals  at the mutated site in the cancer cells and cells-of-origin stood out as the most important feature in both the raw recurrence and significant recurrence model. other important features with high importance in both tests included the cancer gene score  of target genes in the protein interactome , the sum of the differentially gene expression scores between cancer and normal for the downstream genes of the mutation target genes in the regulatory network , the distance between the mutation site and its nearest cancer risk locus , the h3k27me <dig> signals in the cancer cells, and the h3k4me <dig> signals in the cells-of-origin.table  <dig> feature list and variable importance


p < 5 × 10−6



meanwhile, the h3k9me <dig> and h3k36me <dig> signals in the cells-of-origin but not in the cancer cells stood out under both recurrence models. in addition, the importance measure for the h3k9me <dig> signals in the raw recurrence model significantly differed from the significance model. this may reflect the fact that heterochromatin has high mutation rates due to the lack of dna damage repair activity. in contrast, the importance of h3k36me <dig> in the significance model was remarkably higher than that in the raw recurrence model. biological implications of each variable’s importance remain to be further investigated.

CONCLUSIONS
we applied machine-learning techniques to facilitate the discovery of important mutations in cancer. our machine leaning method was capable of processing multiple features concertedly, enabling us to consider various genetic and epigenetic factors that have direct or indirect relevance to mutagenesis and tumorigenesis. of particular importance and novelty, one of the factors that turned out to be critical in the prediction processes was the oncogenic relevance of mutation target genes. this factor was made available by leveraging the data of three-dimensional chromatin structure that provide long-range interactions between promoters and enhancers. we considered the expression change of the genes due to the linked mutation, their effects on downstream genes in the regulatory network, and their physical or functional interactions with known cancer genes. an additional benefit of using the chromatin interactome data was that we were able to filter mutations residing in regulatory regions.

we observed that both the raw and significant recurrence models worked properly. we found a proper window size for recurrence identification to be 10 bp, with which our classifier achieved the highest performance under the significance model. meanwhile, the background mutation rates calculated within a  <dig> kbp window showed the best performance. in addition, we proposed important features to consider when inferring cancer-driving mutations. for example, the chromatin accessibility signals showed particularly high explanatory power. we also identified other features such as the distance of the mutation site to known cancer risk loci and several histone marks that signify regulatory activity. as described above, our network-based scores for target genes also played an important role in mutation classification. overall, most of the identified features had biological relevance.

our method was able to find putative driver mutations that show low or no recurrence in currently available samples but may show recurrence when additional cancer samples are interrogated. our analyses using external additional samples propose that our machine learning approach will make it possible to expand the catalog of putative noncoding driver mutations until mutation discoveries have reached saturation through large-scale whole-genome analyses.

