BACKGROUND
in the research on mesenchymal stem cells adipose tissue-derived stem cells  are increasingly being used as an alternative cell source to bone marrow-derived stem cells  <cit> . as the bone marrow-derived cells the ascs have the potential to differentiate into osteocytes and chondrocytes, as well as other multiple other cell types  <cit> .

for the monitoring of gene expression during routine culture of primary ascs and in studies on their differentiation, quantitative pcr is often the method of choice, due to its reliability, affordability and ease to perform. however, the validity of the gene expressions determined by this method is heavily dependant on the optimal selection of reference genes to which the genes of interest are to be normalized. the importance of selecting appropriate reference genes is often overlooked. however, normalizing to genes that are responsive to the test conditions will lead to erroneous results  <cit> . the expression of an optimal reference gene will ideally be unchanged in the cells irrespective of the experimental conditions and the level of expression should also be similar to the expression level of the genes of interest. to further minimize the risk of bias due to variations of expression levels in a single housekeeping gene, several groups have suggested that at least two housekeeping genes should used for normalization purposes  <cit> .

traditionally, reference genes include structural genes such as beta-actin or genes involved in metabolism such as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase . however, during cell differentiation, genes that are involved in the modulation of the cytoskeleton or metabolic pathways are often changed, rendering these genes useless for normalization purposes  <cit> . in addition, ribosomal rna is often used for normalization, as the total amount of ribosomal rna is believed to be relatively stable. when determining the levels of 18s rrna, however, some groups compare the amounts of 18s rrna between samples where the input load of total rna has been adjusted. as the ribosomal rna makes up for the bulk of rna in the samples, such an approach will invariably lead to the assumption that the rrna levels in the cells are unchanged. in fact, several studies have shown that the levels of ribosomal rna do vary under some conditions  <cit> . yet another problem in normalizing to ribosomal rna content, is that the very high levels of ribosomal rna make it difficult to establish a baseline value in most real-time pcr protocols.

recently, studies showed that several genes normally used as reference genes had varying expression levels in differentiating embryonic stem cells  <cit> . also, two studies on adipose-derived cells lead to contrasting results. in one study on cultured adipocytes and preadipocytes exposed to different hormones, the authors found gapdh and transferrin receptor to be the least changed  <cit> , whereas another study on adipose tissue biopsies found 18s rrna to be the most and gapdh to be the least suitable reference genes  <cit> . while it seems unlikely that we can identify a gene whose expression is constant under all phases through the cell cycle and under any differentiation conditions, it is feasible to select reference genes that are stable under a subset of selected conditions. thus, the purpose of this study was to select a set of reference genes, which are suitable as internal standards in studies on adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell growth and differentiation. we have studied the expression of  <dig> often used reference genes during the first five passages of primary ascs, after osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation of the ascs, and after hypoxic exposure for up to two weeks.

RESULTS
asc characteristics, rna yield and quality
excess human adipose tissue was obtained from two female patients, undergoing elective surgery at grymer privat hospital, skejby, denmark in accordance with protocols approved by the regional committee on biomedical research ethics in northern jutland. the two donors were  <dig> and  <dig> years of age and had bmis of  <dig> and  <dig> respectively. the ascs were isolated from abdominal adipose tissue, and were induced to become osteocytes, chondrocytes, and adipocytes. the histochemical stainings  and the gene expression studies demonstrated that the cells could differentiate towards chondrogenic, osteogenic, and adiopogenic lineages, thus confirming their identity as mesenchymal stem cells.

in addition to the differentiation procedures, the cells were grown for up to five passages, with rna being harvested from each passage. also, cells were exposed to hypoxia  for up to two weeks.

the yield of rna varied between the samples from  <dig>  μg to  <dig> μg, reflecting larger cell numbers as the cells were cultured for longer periods. by spectrophotometric analysis, we ascertained that the purity of the samples were very high with a260/a <dig> ratios ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . the integrity of the rna was determined by electrophoretic analysis. using an algorithm of the agilent software, the samples were assigned rna integrity numbers  which describes the integrity of the rna on a scale from  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> . the integrity of the rna was high in all samples, with rins above  <dig>  for all samples . the rna samples were thus suitable for the sensitive analysis by real-time rt-pcr.

ranking of the housekeeping genes and determination of optimal number for normalization
for the selection of the reference genes, we analyzed the genes tubulin, beta-polypeptide , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , beta-actin , beta-2-microtubulin , ubiquitin c , 60s acidic ribosomal protein p <dig> , cyclophilin a , tyrosine 3/tryptophan 5-monooxygenase activation protein , tataa-box binding protein , beta-glucuronidase , hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase  as well as rrna 18s , all included in the human endogenous control panel from the tataa biocenter . in order to identify the most stable reference genes across all the tested conditions, the expression levels of all reference genes were analyzed using the genorm software. the analysis showed that the expression levels of tbp, gusb, ymhaz, and the ppia varied the least across all the tested conditions, and tubb, hprt <dig>  gapdh, and actb varied the most . secondly, the optimal number of reference genes was assessed calculating the pairwise variation between a given number of reference genes and the inclusion of an additional gene . a large variation indicates the added gene has a significant effect and should be included. a cut-off value of  <dig>  has been proposed, where the inclusion of an extra gene has little effect on the normalization  <cit> . as seen in figure 2b, the inclusion of three genes as opposed to two  has a small effect. in the interest of an optimal determination of the variation of the other genes, we opted for the use of three reference genes  in the further analysis.

variation of reference genes across different growth conditions
in order to demonstrate the differences between the highly and little variable reference genes in our study, we normalized three of the most commonly used reference genes namely 18s rna, beta-actin and gapdh as well as the four least variable genes to the geometric mean of tbp, gusb, and ymhaz . as shown in figure  <dig>  the levels of 18s rna increase up to 2-fold with increasing passages and during differentiation. contrary to this, the levels of beta-actin decrease more than 2-fold during passaging. the levels mrna of gapdh, which has previously been identify as a suitable reference gene for normalization in the study of preadipocytes  <cit> , appear to be relatively stable during passaging, however, there is a decrease of transcript during chondrogenesis and a 2-fold induction during hypoxic culture. this hypoxic upregulation is not surprising, as gapdh has previously been shown to be highly regulated by the oxygen tension in numerous other cell types  <cit> .

effect of choosing suboptimal reference genes
to illustrate the effect of normalizing to reference genes, whose levels are not constant under the experimental condition, we have chosen to determine the expression levels of the chondrocyte-specific transcription factor sox <dig> and the hypoxia-inducible growth factor igf- <dig>  after chondrogenic induction or hypoxic treatment, respectively. the levels of expression are normalized to either the geometric mean of tbp, gusb, and ymhaz, to beta-actin and to either 18s rna for sox <dig> or gapdh for igf- <dig>  as can be seen in fig.  <dig>  when normalizing to the geom mean, the expression of sox <dig> is approximately 8-fold up-regulated after three weeks of chondrogenic induction when compared to levels at passage  <dig>  normalizing to 18s rrna or beta-actin leads to a 2-fold under- or overestimation of sox <dig> transcript levels, respectively. more dramatic results were obtained in the analysis of igf- <dig> induction by hypoxia. as seen in figure  <dig>  when the cells are exposed to mildly hypoxic conditions for a week, the levels of igf- <dig> message increase almost 2-fold. however, when normalizing to expression levels of gapdh, which is strongly regulated by hypoxia, it erroneously appears that igf- <dig> is down-regulated by hypoxic treatment. conversely, when normalizing to beta-actin, an overestimation of igf- <dig> induction occurs.

discussion
the recent decade has seen an almost explosive surge in the publications of research on adipose-derived stem cells. understanding the differentiation of these cells will come about in a collaborative effort between a multitude of laboratories using different approaches. for a research group to build on the results of others, there must exist reliable data on gene expression patterns during cell expansion and differentiation. for the determination of even minute changes in mrna expression levels, real-time rt-pcr technology has proven a powerful tool. however, as we have shown in this paper, to reliably determine small changes in expression levels in a quantitative manner, great care must be taken to select a number of reference genes for normalization purposes, thus limiting the effect of sample to sample variations.

in this study, we have identified a number of reference genes, which are suitable for gene expression studies in adipose-derived stem cells exposed to a variety of growth conditions. in the study by gorzelniak et al , on selection of reference genes to study gene expression in preadipocytes and mature adipocytes exposed to different hormones, the authors demonstrated that for that particular experimental set-up, gapdh and transferrin were the most suitable gene for normalization  <cit> . in our study, we have shown that the expression of gapdh is downregulated during chondrogenesis and upregulated in hypoxic conditions, yet is in the other conditions relatively stable, confirming the previous data. other research groups have demonstrated the suitability of using 18s rrna as reference genes in research on adipose tissue samples  <cit> . complementing those results, we have in this paper shown that during the culture and passaging of primary asc cultures, the levels of 18s rrna increase at least two-fold from the initial values. in addition, we demonstrated the effect of choosing an inappropriate housekeeping genes, by normalizing the expression levels of sox <dig> and igf- <dig> to different housekeeping genes. the choice of reference gene had dramatic effects on the quantitation of changes in gene expression. notably, using gapdh for normalization led to the erroneous conclusion that the expression of igf- <dig> is down-regulated during hypoxia. our results further underscore the need for any researcher to carefully select reference genes prior to gene expression studies. in particular, if no studies have previously been done that compare gene expression levels for that particular experimental set-up, a small number of suitable reference genes should be identified. in our study we have chosen to select the reference genes by the genorm algorithm. a recent study comparing three different algorithms for detecting least variable genes, demonstrated only minor differences between the ranking of genes using these different methods  <cit> . based on our results and those of other groups, we recommend testing a small subset of genes encompassing ppia, ymhaz, tbp, and gusb, and selecting the two to three least variable.

CONCLUSIONS
for studies on gene expression during mesenchymal stem cell growth and differentiation, adipose-derived stem cells are increasingly being used. for detection of small variations in gene expression levels in these cells, real-time quantitative rt-pcr is the method of choice. however, for the accurate determination of differences in transcripts between samples, a valid normalization strategy must be employed. in this study, we have demonstrated that several of commonly used reference genes including 18s rrna and beta-actin are unsuitable for normalization during growth and differentiation of primary cultures of adipose-derived stem cells. we have identified four suitable reference genes, and recommend normalizing expression values of genes of interest to the geometric mean of at least two of these. using this subset of reference genes allows for a reliable quantitation of even small gene expression changes in the cells.

