BACKGROUND
since its early recognition as a 'lace-like' intracellular organelle  <cit> , the endoplasmic reticulum  has emerged as a structure of pivotal importance in eukaryotic cell function  <cit> . the er mediates lipid biosynthesis and, by acting as the entry point of nascent proteins into the secretory pathway, controls the insertion of polypeptides destined for secretion  <cit> . further, er-resident enzymatic systems control the topology, assembly and early glycosylation of integral proteins destined for intracellular organelles and the cell surface  <cit> . in addition to its biosynthetic functions, the er also plays a key role in cell signalling by acting as a regulated store of calcium ions  <cit> . in healthy cells, intra-luminal ca2+ levels regulate a plethora of spatiotemporally distinct vital cellular processes including intracellular ca2+ signalling and protein folding within the er  <cit> . any disruption of the homeostatic mechanisms governing intra-luminal er ca2+ levels has serious pathophysiological consequences and can often trigger cell death  <cit> .

in spite of the cardinal role of the er in cell physiology, the mechanisms underlying its structural and functional plasticity are not fully understood. in live cells, the er is a tubulovesicular structure extending in 3-dimensions from the inner nuclear membrane to the cell cortex  <cit> . the er morphology is highly dynamic  <cit> , not least because of the budding of transport vesicles from specialised transitional  sites  <cit>  exiting to the golgi apparatus and their fusion upon returning to the er  <cit> . consequently, mechanisms must exist which enable the er to sustain its signalling functions in spite of ongoing changes in morphology  <cit> . evidence showing that the er contains a single continuous lumen argues for the potential diffusion of various molecules throughout the entire er network  <cit> . however, some functional studies suggest that ca2+ signalling may involve structurally segregated ca2+ stores in a discontinuous er network  <cit> . one cell type where the resolution of such issues is especially important is the neurone. in neurones, the er is present in the soma and throughout the axons and dendrites  <cit> . in addition to supporting often localised protein synthesis  <cit> , the neuronal er is thought to regulate synaptic plasticity and integrative physiology in a manner that is likely to depend critically on er morphology  <cit> . for example, in central neurones, where the dendritic er extends into many, but not all, dendritic spines  <cit> , the degree of continuity in the er lumen would determine the spread of post-synaptic ca2+ signals between adjacent spines and possibly over much longer distances to the soma  <cit> .

from the above, a definition of the architecture of the er in live cells, including neurones, is of paramount importance in determining the ability of the er to act as a signalling organelle and whether its possible fragmentation  <cit>  is a physiological process that shapes ca2+ signalling  <cit> . unfortunately, present methods to define the architecture of the er have severe limitations. thus, immunocytochemical and thin-section electron microscopic methods are cell-destructive and limited by the volume of tissue that can feasibly be analysed  <cit> .

the introduction of lipophilic vital dyes such as diic <dig> has facilitated live imaging  <cit> , but many are non-specific, cytotoxic or unsuitable for long-term studies. moreover, as noted previously  <cit> , the use of such dyes relies upon their diffusion in the plane of the lipid bilayer. thus, they can only access er membranes which are by definition continuous, leaving open the possibility that discontinuous tracts of er may go unlabeled. a major step forward has been the introduction of vectors capable of expressing genes encoding er-targeted green fluorescent protein  <cit> . such vectors show excellent targeting specificity to the er lumen, minimal binding to cellular components, and suitable optical properties for quantitative photobleaching. unfortunately, the utility of such cdna vectors is limited by the low efficiency with which post-mitotic cells, such as neurones, can be transfected  <cit> .

we now describe a powerful and versatile new tool for defining the architecture and dynamics of the er in live cells, including neurones, based upon the lentivirus-mediated transduction  <cit>  of a novel er-targeted gfp reporter . through fluorescence imaging, we show robust and specific expression of lv-pin-kdel in the er of simple cell lines, astrocytes and neurones in both dissociated culture and in live brain slices and explants. moreover, using a fluorescence loss in photobleaching , strategy, we demonstrate that the neuronal endoplasmic reticulum is continuous in lv-pin-kdel-transduced explant cultures.

RESULTS
the development of a system to dissect the dynamics of the neuronal er was achieved in two stages. first, the construction of a versatile reporter for the faithful visualisation of the er was achieved and second, its insertion into a 3rd generation lentiviral system capable of neuronal transduction. constraints guiding construction of the reporter included requirements for  a cleavable signal peptide for its targeting into the lumen of the er, for  a green fluorescent protein for visualisation in live cells and  a motif for concentration of the reporter in the er lumen. although such constructs are available commercially, most suffer from requirements for intron splicing, lack of cloning sites and epitope tags for alternative modes of detection  <cit> . for these reasons we, therefore, designed an entirely novel reporter based upon the trafficking probe pin-g – which we described recently  <cit> .

the pin-g construct encodes an artificial type i membrane protein containing a signal peptide, gfp and ha and cmyc epitope tags . upon inspection of the pin-g sequence we noted a region 3' to gfp that, upon mutation at position  <dig> to a stop codon , would be predicted to cause premature truncation of pin-g to yield a soluble, ha-tagged, gfp, lacking the c-myc and transmembrane domains of pin-g . more important, pin-mdel is predicted to contain a carboxy-teminal met-asp-glu-leu  sequence that could readily be mutated to the carboxy-terminal lys-asp-glu-leu  motif that serves to retrieve er-resident proteins once they have reached the early golgi-network  <cit> . using site-directed mutagenesis we, therefore, first converted pin-g to pin-mdel and then mutated the methionine codon  of pin-mdel to a lysine residue . the resulting construct – pin-kdel – was then tested for its ability to target the endoplasmic reticulum.

as shown in figure 2a, immunoblots of lysates from transfected hek <dig> cells revealed bands of  <dig>  kda for pin-mdel and pin-kdel, confirming truncation of the pin-g reporter . the pin-mdel and pin-kdel bands were of higher mass than that for soluble gfp, indicating that they did not arise through partial degradation. in contrast to the kdel motif, the mdel sequence does not mediate er retention. thus, pin-mdel is predicted to be secreted from the cell following its traffic via the anterograde secretory pathway, while pin-kdel is retained intracellularly within the er  <cit> . in support of this contention, anti-gfp elisa of cell culture supernatants from hek <dig> cells transfected with pin-mdel showed significant levels of gfp immunoreactivity, while those from pin-kdel transfectants were similar to either mock-transfected or non-transfected cells .

direct evidence for targeting of pin-kdel to the er was obtained through deconvolution fluorescence imaging of transfected cells treated with established antibody markers  to membranous organelles including the endoplasmic reticulum  <cit> , the golgi apparatus   <cit> , the early endosomes   <cit>  and the lysosomes   <cit> .

as shown in figure 3i – l, hek <dig> cells transfected with pin-kdel yielded a pattern of fluorescence that overlapped exclusively with the er marker sec61β , but with no other major organelles. moreover, the pattern of expression of pin-kdel was identical to that seen with a commercially available er-targeted gfp reporter   <cit> . equally important, the targeting of pin-kdel to the er did not appear to be cell-specific as transfection of the cos- <dig> monkey cell line yielded a strong pattern of er expression , whose morphology was similar to that reported previously  <cit> .

in contrast to pin-kdel, pin-g was localised throughout the secretory pathway including the er , golgi apparatus , early endosomes  and lysosomes . the control reporter pin-mdel was primarily localised to the er  and golgi apparatus . however, pin-mdel was absent from endosomes  and lysosomes , consistent with the notion that the presence of an igκ leader sequence, but no additional trafficking motifs, directed it to the lumen of organelles of the anterograde secretory pathway. in cells transfected with gfp alone, fluorescence was dispersed throughout the cytoplasm . no fluorescence labelling was seen upon omission of primary antibody to mock-transfected cells . as with, pin-g, we found no evidence for cytotoxicity or inclusion body formation  <cit> .

to explore the utility of pin-kdel in resolving the er in live cells, cos- <dig> cells  were transfected with pin-kdel and, after  <dig> h, imaged directly at consecutive intervals ranging from  <dig> sec to several hours. as shown in fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  pin-kdel fluorescence reveals the endoplasmic reticulum of live cells to be a tubular lattice structure whose morphology can change markedly within seconds. although gfp has been reported to be phototoxic  <cit> , both the integrity of the cells and the er are retained even after prolonged and repeated light exposure for periods of up to  <dig> h.

taken together, the data above indicate that pin-kdel is a useful probe for imaging the er in both fixed and living mammalian cells. to extend the utility of the probe to visualising the er in live neurones, pin-kdel was engineered into a 3rd generation replication-defective, self-inactivating lentiviral gene delivery vector pseudotyped with a heterologous envelope containing protein g of the vesicular stomatitis virus, indiana serotype   <cit> . the lentiviral vector system has been shown to be capable of mediating gene transduction in diverse dividing and non-dividing mammalian cells, including neurones  <cit> . the resulting viral particle preparation, termed lv-pin-kdel, showed robust expression of pin-kdel within a few days  that reached a maximum at day  <dig> which was sustained until day  <dig>  post-transduction . the pattern of fluorescence observed  was identical to that seen upon direct transfection of cos- <dig> cells . the efficiency of transduction, while dependent upon viral titre , often reached 70–80% of the total cell population in hek <dig> and cos- <dig> cells.

more significant, lv-pin-kdel was able to mediate transduction of a wide-range of neuronal cell types including the n <dig>  and shsy5y  neuronal cell lines, hippocampal neurones in dissociated culture  and cortical neurones in organotypic  and explant  preparations. the efficiency of transduction was typically 30–70% and depended on the tissue thickness and viral titre. in brain slices and explants, transduction was most evident in supraficial layers although occasionally cells deeper in the tissue were labelled. our data also support the contention that lentiviral preparations pseudotyped with vsv-g show some specificity for neurones  <cit> . however, in dissociated culture lv-pin-kdel expression was noted in some astroglia . in all neurones and glia examined, the er extended throughout the cell with no evidence of marked fragmentation.

we next asked whether lv-pin-kdel could be used to examine the morphology of the er in live glia and neurones? in these experiments lv-pin-kdel-transduced astrocytes and cortical neurones were imaged directly at consecutive intervals ranging from  <dig> sec to 8'. to identify changes in morphology, the fluorescence intensity of each frame was presented as a ratio of the maximum image intensity. as shown in fig  <dig>  and additional file  <dig>  pin-kdel fluorescence reveals rapid, continuous, dynamic rearrangement of the er throughout the cell. a similar dynamic picture of er morphology was obtained in frames captured from cortical neurones  and additional file 3). here, the er was found to extend continuously from the soma into the neurites. dynamic changes in er structure, including thinning and coalescence into regions of high density, occurred on a timescale of seconds. in no instance did we find evidence for fragmentation of the er, again suggesting its internal continuity in neurones.

finally, we asked whether the er in neurones was comprised of a single continuous compartment using a fluorescence loss in photobleaching , strategy. here, lv-pin-kdel cortical explants were imaged and then subjected to continuous irradiation at a single small  site with laser light of sufficient energy to induce photobleaching. following the bleach period, the neurones were then re-imaged and images quantified pre and post-bleach. a comparison of images of an explant neurone pre-  and post-bleaching for  <dig> minutes  at a site on the soma  caused 94% loss of fluorescence . significantly, fluorescence decreased in all other regions of the cell including both initial  and more distal dendritic regions  by 50–90%. no loss of fluorescence was seen in cells that had not undergone spot photobleaching. thus, fluorophores located at even the furthermost regions are able to diffuse into the er located in the irradiated spot on the soma. we next asked if fluorescence bleaching at a site on the dendrites could induce a global decrease in lv-pin-kdel fluorescence. a comparison of images of a different explant pre-  and post-bleaching  at a site on the dendrites  revealed a decrease in fluorescence in all regions of the cell . the decrease in fluorescence upon  <dig> minutes of photobleaching showed some variation, with regions proximal to the bleach site  experiencing greater loss than most other regions . loss of fluorescence was greatest at sites where the dendritic arbour was thin  and lower for dendrites that were thicker . however, irrespective of their magnitude, decreases were detected throughout, including at the soma . again, no loss of fluorescence was seen in cells that had not undergone spot photobleaching. qualitatively identical results were obtained in all cells studied, . throughout, we found no evidence for tracts of fluorophores that failed to succumb to complete depletion. in cases where bleaching was incomplete, such as those where the bleaching spot was on dendrites rather than somata , more prolonged bleach periods eventually removed >95% of the fluorescence.

discussion
in this paper, we have described the design, characterisation and utility of a novel lentiviral vector – lv-pin-kdel – for defining the morphology of the endoplasmic reticulum in live neurones in vitro and in situ. our vector builds upon the advantages of the previously documented and commercially available gfp-based er-targeting vectors  <cit> , while eliminating their disadvantages. thus, lv-pin-kdel and its parent pin-kdel vector show excellent and specific targeting of gfp to the er lumen, but are simpler, smaller, intron-less constructs containing additional functionality by virtue of sequences encoding an ha epitope for immunocytochemistry or pull-down assays, and restriction sites for further modifications. although somewhat demanding to prepare, the lv-pin-kdel pseudovirus can be made in large batches and stored indefinitely  <cit> . once thawed, expression is effected simply by addition of the viral suspensions to target cell preparations. the most important feature of lv-pin-kdel, however, is the ease with which it is expressed in post-mitotic cells, and particularly in neurones, which are otherwise notoriously difficult to transfect.

here we have shown that lv-pin-kdel is readily expressed in simple hek <dig> and cos- <dig> cell lines, astrocytes and central neurones grown in dissociated and organotypic cell culture. furthermore, we have also obtained expression in neurones of the dorsal root ganglion, exocrine and other cells . it is also noteworthy that lentiviral expression is possible through direct microinjection into select brain regions in whole animals  <cit> . the pleiotropy of lv-pin-kdel is primarily a function of the vsv-g coat with which it is pseudotyped  <cit>  and the use of a strong cmv promoter. the vsv-g coat protein mediates transduction of most mammalian cell types, but pseudotyping with alternate coat proteins and the use of other promoters could readily be used to alter the patterns of cell expression  <cit> .

the lentiviral gene delivery system we employed is based on a 3rd generation replication-deficient system optimised for gene therapy applications. as such it shows considerable biosafety and can be used in standard level ii conditions  <cit> . although non-infectious, the lv pseudovirus does mediate stable insertion of pin-kdel into the genome and, thus, requires caution in handling to avoid accidental exposure by inhalation or injection  <cit> . such stable integration does, have advantages, however, not least in the facile preparation of cell lines and transgenic animals.

the precise patterns of lv-pin-kdel expression we obtained conform to those anticipated from previous studies on er morphology. in live cos- <dig> and hek <dig> cells, the er is highly dynamic, showing the sliding, ring closing and branching motions documented elsewhere  <cit> . the structure and dynamic nature of the neuronal er also conforms to that found in previous studies  <cit>  on hippocampal cultures.

taken together, the flip data argue that a period of localised photobleaching causes a global decrease in fluorescence in the neurone that is specific to the bleached cell and is independent of the site of bleaching. the decreases in fluorescence observed are greater when bleaching is localised to the soma compared to the dendrites. this observation is in accord with the notion that the laser intersects a greater er volume element, and, hence, bleaches more fluorophores per unit of time in somata rather than dendrites. irrespective of the site, photobleaching causes a loss of fluorescence throughout the cell, compatible with a single continuous er-lumen between soma and dendrites. these results, thus, fit well with recent observations on the ability of calcium signals to flux between these compartments in dopaminergic neurones  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have developed a lentiviral-based method – lv-pin-kdel – to express a novel er-targeted fluorescent reporter in the nervous system. the lentiviral system is easy to use and affords high levels of transduction in diverse cells including simple cell lines and primary neurones in dissociated and slice culture. using lv-pin-kdel, in conjunction with imaging and laser-induced photobleaching, the er has been shown to be a highly dynamic structure with a single continuous lumen. the availability of the lv-pin-kdel system, and its use in conjunction with probes of physiological function should now permit us to test this possibility rigorously and dissect the interplay between neuronal er morphology and those signalling pathways involved in nerve function.

