BACKGROUND
delimiting species is an old systematic problem, which continues to be controversial . if species delimitation estimates are based solely on mtdna, groups can be influenced by the timing of speciation and the migration rates or dispersal capabilities of the species  <cit> . in addition, it is crucial to better understand species boundaries in deep-water groups. estimation of divergence times in deep-sea faunas is a promising approach to understand events that have influenced both the evolution of these neglected marine organisms and the changes in this poorly explored environment.

species are the fundamental units in many studies on systematics, biogeography, epidemiology, and conservation biology . species also constitute the unit for assessing biodiversity and therefore accurate identification of individuals is crucial in many areas of inquiry. in systematics and biogeographical analyses, species are frequently used as terminal taxa in phylogenetic analysis. however, relatively little effort has focused on the process of identifying and delimitating such species. in addition, there are no universal criteria by which species should be delineated and identified, and both, non-tree based  and tree-based approaches have been applied  <cit> .

in octocorals, species identification has traditionally been based on external morphology  and sclerite composition  <cit> . the taxonomy of precious corals is particularly enigmatic, because many species were described based on small deep-sea fragmentary samples, limiting our understanding of their real intra-colony and intraspecific variation  <cit> . in addition, some descriptions are imprecise and the whereabouts of the type material remains unknown.

molecular species delimitation usually uses tree-based methods to assess monophyly  <cit>  or more recently have applied genealogical-based coalescent methods . tree-based methods reconstruct the evolutionary relationships among individuals and look for reciprocal monophyly, but are often dependent on the method/model of tree inference and it is not uncommon that single-gene trees differ from concatenated gene-based inferences. thus, concatenation of markers and multilocus coalescent approaches have been favoured more recently . species-tree inference and estimation of divergence times from a single locus  and multi-individual data are possible in a species tree framework  <cit> , although these analyses are usually carried out using multilocus datasets  <cit> . however, coalescent-based approaches can show signal for lineage divergence despite the lack of monophyly in gene-trees, which can be common in recently diverged species  <cit> . time-calibrated phylogenies have also the advantage of using general speciation models, which examine species boundaries from sequences by identifying evolving lineages bridging the coalescent with speciation in the phylogeny  <cit> .

the particular interest on coralliidae phylogenetics responds also to the intricate evolution of its axial characters and the questionable validity of its two currently recognized genera, in addition to aspects of their biology and conservation, as most species are of commercial interest for the jewelry industry. the diversity of colonial forms among the various species of precious corals corresponds with various shapes of the supporting axis. branching varies from sparse, in corallium abyssale bayer, to profuse, in paracorallium japonicum kishinouye. terminal branchlets vary from stout and blunt to slender and delicate. the surface of the axis may be smooth or distinctly marked by narrow longitudinal grooves underlying the coenenchymal canals and some species include pits  <cit> . coenenchymal sclerites are basically of the radiate type, slender rods and smooth or rough double clubs  <cit> .

corallium and paracorallium, the two accepted coralliidae genera, comprise  <dig> and  <dig> described species, respectively. most have been documented from the pacific ocean and only two species are from the eastern north atlantic  <cit> . coralliidae is closely related to paragorgiidae  <cit> , whose members lack a supporting axis. the most complete molecular phylogenetic hypothesis for octocorallia  <cit>  shows that scleraxonia, the suborder containing coralliidae, is polyphyletic. to date, limited molecular systematic studies of coralliidae  <cit>  have provided evidence for major discrepancies between phylogeny and generic taxonomy. additional studies of precious corals include genetic surveys, radial growth rates, dating, and recruitment estimates  <cit> , but little is known about their phylogenetic relationships. furthermore, all precious corals are currently threatened not only by the jewelry industry but also the trawling activity on seamounts and other deep-sea rocky habitats  <cit> . however, not all precious coral species have been included in the cites list  due to difficult identification and uncertainty about population status.

in this study, before understanding the phylogenetic relationships within coralliidae, it was important to delineate species boundaries with particular interest in the precise membership of the type species of the family, corallium rubrum linnaeus, and to re-evaluate the validity of the genus paracorallium bayer & cairns. here, we provide an extended phylogeny of coralliidae based on a large geographical and broad taxon sampling and using data from five mitochondrial regions. we use these data for a genealogical approach to assess the significance of clustering and lineage divergence and delimit species of precious corals.

RESULTS
concatenated analysis
the phylogeny obtained from the concatenated approach for cytochrome c oxidase subunit i , 16s ribosomal rna , nadh dehydrogenase subunit  <dig> , and nadh dehydrogenase subunits 3– <dig>  mtdna, splits basally into two supported clades . clade i is further divided into two subgroups, clade i-a including corallium rubrum, the type species of the genus, nested within a small group of paracorallium species  and c. medea bayer. clade i-b includes several corallium species  but several species sampled from multiple localities appear polyphyletic or paraphyletic. such is the case of c. imperiale and c. laauense, which have a wide geographical distribution throughout the pacific ocean. corallium imperiale has been reported from hawaii, new zealand, new caledonia, antarctica and california and c. laauense from hawaii, new zealand, tasmania and antarctica . many of these widely distributed morphospecies, however, showed no meaningful biogeographic structure.


clade ii includes species of corallium and paracorallium with hemispherical autozooids, an axis with grooves and without polyp rods , others with pits  and characterized by sufficient morphological resolution, reflecting on the phylogenetic pattern of these species, all monophyletic and most with allopatric distributions. for the sympatric species c. konojoi and c. elatius are restricted to japan and taiwan, and are sister species, but c. secundum, c. niveum and c. kishinouyei, endemic to hawaii, appear in three separate clades .

species tree and divergence times
phylogeny of the mtdna obtained from the calibrated species-tree approach also identified the same main clades, including corallium rubrum within clade i-a, and a clade i-b comprising the species with long rod sclerites, cylindrical autozooids and smooth axes . the relationships among coralliid species of clade ii differed slightly in the species-tree when compared with the concatenated gene-tree . diversification time of clade i-b was more recent in the species tree  than in the gene tree . in contrast, the diversification times for clade-ii were more ancient in the species tree  than in the gene tree .


species delimitation
a traditional taxonomic study of clade ii delineated  <dig> morphospecies that were congruent with the general mixed yule-coalescent  model , but resolution within clade i was lacking . the single-threshold model yielded a total of  <dig> ml clusters , including clades i and ii, and the time at which the speciation-coalescent transition occurred was ca.  <dig>  mya. the seven gmyc species for clade ii are congruent with the morphological diagnosis for c. kishinouyei, corallium sp.  <dig>  c. secundum, c. niveum and p. thrinax, and two cases of merging for c. konojoi−c. elatius and paracorallium sp.−p. nix .


the multiple threshold model yielded more ml clusters , and the multiple times at which the speciation-coalescent transition occurred was  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  mya . the eight gmyc species for clade ii, delineated from the multiple-threshold model, were less congruent with the morphological diagnosis in general. in clade i, the resolution of the species was incomplete and the gmyc delimitation was highly incongruent .

discussion
octocoral species are often described on the basis of diagnostic sclerites and external morphology, but these characters may show phenotypic plasticity, varying within colonies, among habitats or along the life cycle of the colony  <cit> . phylogenetic studies in octocorals have showed a lack of resolution using mitochondrial markers, with coi and msh <dig> barcodes identifying ca. 70% of morphospecies correctly  <cit> . our study presents the most comprehensive phylogeny for the precious corals to date. the study encompasses the geographical range of the family and the majority of recognized species  and includes multiple individuals for  <dig> of these species from their known distribution ranges. analyses of these data recover several well-resolved clades in coralliidae, and many terminal relationships are supported in clade ii. the use of up to five mitochondrial regions showed discordant results in certain parts of the tree, especially for the species in clade i. the two approaches  produced incongruent topologies, but both hypotheses reject the taxonomic status of the coralliid genera, showing that they are not reciprocally monophyletic.

coralliidae is closely related to paragorgiidae according to both nuclear and mitochondrial sequences  <cit> , their sclerites are clearly homologous, and a third monotypic family  was erected to accommodate a single species  <cit> . paracorallium, according to mitochondrial data, is not a valid taxon. uda et al.  <cit>  justified the validity of the two genera of coralliidae based on the genetic distance between p. japonicum and c. konojoi and differences in their mitochondrial gene arrangements, but our study shows that those differences are meaningless when the genera are densely sampled. furthermore, they could not include the type species of each genus, corallium rubrum  and c. tortuosum . furthermore, no species from clade i-b were included, and divergence and anagenesis are no longer used to justify higher taxonomic ranks, in the absence of monophyly. our results, including the type species for both genera, clearly show that the type species of paracorallium is closer to c. rubrum than to some other paracorallium species. thus we synonymize paracoralliumnew synonymy with corallium.

the corallium laauense−imperiale clade  has wide geographical distribution throughout the pacific ocean and probably high dispersal abilities. their colonies branch mainly in one plane, and are irregularly pinnate, with short terminal branchlets arising vertically from the principal branches, and forming arcades or galleries often inhabited by polychaete annelids  <cit> . the autozooids form cylindrical calices with distinct longitudinal grooves and the coenenchyme sclerites are characterized by 8-radiates in the type material of both species but some differences exist in the presence of double-clubs and the rind and axis coloration  <cit> . gray  proposed the use of three genera based on the form of verrucae  and the branching pattern: corallium, for c. rubrum; pleurocorallium moroff, for c. secundum and hemicorallium gray for c. johnsoni <cit> . in the hypothesis here presented clade i-b included species related to c. johnsoni  and grouped by bayer  in a uniform group characterized by a “long spindles in the autozooid verrucae = rods”   <cit> . for these reasons we resurrect the genus hemicorallium for clade i-b characterized by presence of rods and cylindrical autozooids.

in general, the species of clade i-b  are very similar in morphology and have been separated by little differences in the calyx’s morphology, the absence/presence of the radiate-sclerites or double-clubs, and coloration. the observed low resolution in mitochondrial loci for these species could be the result of limited genetic variation induced by gene flow, recent diversification times , incomplete lineage sorting, or hybridization, among other factors, but could also be explained by phenotypic plasticity in a broadly distributed species complex  <cit> .

in contrast, the species of clade ii exhibit older diversification times , more restricted geographical distributions, and limited dispersal abilities, implying a strong role for geographic isolation. in addition, the establishment of discrete and monophyletic clusters is a general consequence of sufficient time for speciation  <cit> . a similar case of discordance between sister clades has been reported for terrestrial earthworms in the genus hormogaster <cit> . a testable explanation is that the mode and tempo of morphological diversification significantly increased in clade i as a product of larger effective population sizes, wider geographical and ecological distributions, and, as a consequence, higher selective pressures acting on a morphologic continuum  <cit> . such process can be expedited either if the ancestral population of clade i had larger phenotypic plasticity or if clades i and ii have dramatically different reproductive strategies . testing either scenario awaits significantly increased, and precisely designed, new deep-sea sampling.

diversification times estimated with concatenated gene-tree vs. species tree approaches showed significant overestimation within the former approach. this may be common especially for groups with recent divergence events  <cit> , which is consistent with the general pattern of recent divergence times seen in other species trees  <cit> . moreover, species delimitation of precious corals should rely on diverse sets of data, including morphological characters and proxies of reproductive isolation  hopefully in association with biogeographic patterns. analysis of genomic data and population genetics using fast-evolving markers such as simple sequence repeats  and single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit>  should provide additional valuable information for delimiting recently diverged species.

CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic hypotheses recovered by mtdna concatenated gene trees and species trees reject the taxonomic status of both currently recognized coralliid genera, but it is compatible with the genus hemicorallium, as proposed by gray , as sister to corallium. paracorallium is polyphyletic and nested within corallium, and thus it is here synonymized with corallium, the type genus of the family. we further re-erect the genus hemicorallium, to include the species . in addition, species delimitation in clade i-b  remains unclear. molecular resolution of species within coralliidae differs among clades i and ii. dated phylogenies indicated that species from clade i have diverged recently while maintaining gene flow, hybridization or incomplete lineage sorting. this approach is also useful to understand the poor resolution of some species with broad distributions and recent diversification times  vs. species with allopatric distributions and older diversification times  that showed greater levels of mtdna resolution and clustering.

