BACKGROUND
while similarity  of dna sequence between organisms can be used to propose potential gene functions, transcriptional regulation, and protein pathways , there are often major differences in the protein products, functions, and pathway involvement of genes with nearly identical sequences  <cit> . consequently, sequence homology may be viewed as a means of generating an initial "draft" hypothesis for the gene network of a newly sequenced organism that can be built upon using high throughput experimental techniques such as dna chips and microarrays for mrna transcript profiling  <cit> , protein abundance profiling with mass spectroscopy and 2-d gel electrophoresis  <cit> , and protein-protein and protein-dna binding assayed using seldi mass spectrometry  <cit>  and protein chips  <cit> . in addition, new genetic technologies, in particular small interfering rna  for selective gene suppression facilitate high-throughput massively parallel perturbation of the gene and protein networks of biological systems  <cit> .

given the potential scale and complexity of experiments and resulting data sets, biologists need a modeling and simulation framework to optimally design experiments and interpret results. the problem is not simply one of "reverse engineering" to find the optimal "best fit" gene, protein, and/or metabolite interaction model to explain a set of experimental results; rather, modeling should suggest the range of hypotheses that can potentially explain the results of one experiment and select the optimal next experiment to reduce the number of possible alternative hypotheses, with the goal of converging to a biological system model that can be used to predict the effect of molecular perturbations.

a major challenge of modeling biological systems is that conventional methods based on physical and chemical principles require data that is difficult to accurately and consistently obtain using either conventional biochemical or high throughput technologies, which typically yield noisy, semi-quantitative data   <cit> . in particular, microarray gene expression ratios are ultimately obtained from pixel counts of relatively messy images. boolean networks  are computationally simple and do not depend on precise experimental data, and thus they are suitable for handling both the complexity of biological networks and the challenge of generating and comparing multiple hypothetical networks as described in the above scheme. however, boolean models have inadequate dynamic resolution to accurately describe the behavior of a biological network  <cit> . in contrast, differential equation models  can be computationally expensive and sensitive to imprecisely measured parameters. even the lower throughput rt-pcr method for gene expression measurement  cannot produce quantitatively precise data that can be accurately mapped to actual mrna concentrations in the sample. because of computational limitations, continuous modeling approaches  are limited to finding the single model that best fits experimental data given some set of constraints, such as a maximally sparse gene interaction network  <cit> .

fuzzy logic  <cit>  provides a mathematical framework that is compatible with poorly quantitative yet qualitatively significant data. fuzzy logic is a natural language for linguistic modeling, thus it is consistent with the qualitative linguistic-graphical methods conventionally used to describe biological systems. fuzzy models are rule-based; accordingly, there is a potential scalability problem as the number of antecedents  and variable states  increase, causing combinatorial explosion. non-scalable conventional fuzzy logic has previously been used to analyze microarray data  <cit> . however, because of the nonlinear scalability of the modeling method and resulting computational expense of generating rules for multiple inputs, this method allows for only one possible positive and one possible negative regulator for each gene, thus yielding few biologically meaningful insights and experimentally testable hypotheses.

the problem of rule set combinatorial explosion is addressed by the union rule configuration  developed by combs and andrew  <cit> , which allows for linear growth in rule set complexity with both resolution  and number of inputs  at the cost of having to represent nonlinear relationships between inputs as hidden layers  <cit> . in the linear  fuzzy logic scheme, there are distinct fuzzy rules for each individual input to a given output. for example, given input variables a and b to an output c, there would be a set of rules relating a to c  and another set of rules relating b to c . after each rule is applied individually, the intermediate evaluations of the fuzzy state of the output variable  are aggregated by a fuzzy union  operation . this contrasts with conventional fuzzy logic , which has rules relating all combinations of inputs evaluated by a fuzzy intersection . for the example with inputs a and b to output c, rules would read as, e.g., "if a is low and b is low then c is low", "if a is low and b is high then c is high", etc., leading to a combinatorial explosion avoided by the urc.

the utility of linear  fuzzy logic has been demonstrated in its ability to qualitatively model the lac operon of e. coli  <cit> . in our previous work, a urc fuzzy logic model was constructed from existing qualitative biological knowledge about the interaction of genes and limited quantitative data on protein and metabolite concentration and enzyme kinetics, showing the power of linear fuzzy logic to describe complex multi-component regulation. here, the linear fuzzy logic method is extended to tackle the inverse problem of gene network reconstruction from real quantitative microarray data where there are many inputs. this involves both methods for mapping the experimental data to the fuzzy logic membership functions and a useful implementation of the urc fuzzy logic to represent the gene networks. in addition, a robust algorithm for performing searches through the exponentially large space of possible gene networks is presented.

to address the problem of generating all plausible hypothetical network models that explain an experimental data set, we are initially proceeding with an exhaustive search of possible gene interactions to find those that fit the data within some error threshold. thus, the problem we are tackling is of exponential complexity with o growth in the number of possible rules for the behavior of a given "output" gene of a gene interaction node, where n is the number of  genes that can possibly control it and m is the number of possible rules describing the effect of each single input gene on the output gene. on the other hand, if a linear fuzzy logic scheme is not used, the problem would grow at an unacceptably high o rate. the number of possible rules for each gene-gene interaction  is given by nn, where n is number of fuzzy sets that describe the state of a variable. hence, we will constrain the size of the problem by  setting the minimum number of fuzzy sets to three, the minimum for meaningful resolution,  limiting the number of possible input genes that are allowed to control the output of the output gene at each node of the fuzzy network model, and  not allowing nonlinear gene interactions which would require hidden layers. the last condition is not particularly severe, as a typical nonlinear interaction  interaction between two regulatory proteins at a gene is mediated by an intermediate complex between the proteins that can be represented as an independent node in a network model. therefore, "hidden layers" may generally be avoided by including more biological detail as explicit nodes in the model: for example, explicitly including the temporary interaction between proteins within a scaffolded cellular signal transduction complex, or by incorporating as model nodes the various topological states of a region of dna influencing transcription factor binding, or in general, adding sufficient biological detail such that interactions between inputs can be linearly modeled.

we apply partially scalable, linear fuzzy network modeling to a data set commonly used for demonstrating computational methods in systems biology, microarray experiments of yeast cell cycle gene expression  <cit> . these data were obtained in  <dig>  prior to subsequent technical and statistical advances to improve data quality. however, to keep our case study as general as possible and demonstrate the ability of the fuzzy logic approach to handle other similarly noisy data sets, we do not do any data processing other than the fuzzy modeling process . exhaustive search is used as a brute force "reverse engineering" method to find all possible gene network models that fit the data for a set of twelve genes known to participate in the yeast cell cycle.

we show that the search converges to a small number of models describing the expression of each gene within a fit tolerance. models found from the data for one particular yeast cell cycle time series are also capable of qualitatively predicting data from another time series experiment . in addition, given the constraints of the search algorithm  and our limitation to pure transcriptional data, we find that the best fitting fuzzy network models collectively recover some direct and indirect functional relationships between genes predicted by interactions found by previous biochemical experiments as well as quantitative and statistical methods based on transcriptional correlations.

RESULTS
yeast cell cycle data set
as a proof of concept, we have used exhaustive search to generate fuzzy gene networks based on yeast  cell cycle microarray time series data sets presented in  <cit>  . researchers frequently use these data sets to demonstrate and validate statistical and clustering analysis , mathematical modeling  <cit> , and reverse engineering methods  <cit> . biological details of the yeast cell cycle transcriptional network and some computational methods for its analysis are reviewed in  <cit> .

s. cerevisiae cell cycle regulatory protein-dna interactions were also the subject of a recent extensive experimental study  <cit>  and there is a large amount of previously obtained biological knowledge on the interaction of yeast cell cycle proteins, i.e., information contained in the yeast proteome database  <cit>  and the kegg pathway database  <cit> . consequently, predicted transcriptional network models we derive for the spellman et al.  <cit>  data set can be tested against numerous independent data sets and compared with models obtained using other methods.

we focus on the  <dig> key yeast cell cycle genes listed in table  <dig> with descriptions taken from the yeast proteome database. the protein products of these genes have been extensively studied using conventional biological techniques and are known to regulate each other and play key roles in controlling cell cycle. consequently, observed correlations between the genes of table  <dig> in cell cycle microarray data are most likely the result of real biological activity rather than noise. in addition, cell cycle gene subsets similar to this one have been the subject of other recent gene network modeling and reverse engineering publications . figure  <dig> shows the current understanding of the interactions of the cell cycle protein subset.

there are three sets of gene expression time series in  <cit>  measured for cells synchronized by different methods, called the cdc <dig>  alpha, and cdc <dig> sets. we fit models on the basis of the cdc <dig> data set since it contains the least number of missing data. time points in the cdc <dig> set for which there is missing data for one or more of the  <dig> genes are excluded from the rule search. we perform an exhaustive search with a maximum of  <dig> inputs per node, as detailed in the methods. a microsoft excel workbook with the complete fitting data set is provided in additional file  <dig>  including all the fuzzy rule models for each gene obtained from exhaustive search with an emin threshold of approximately  <dig> .

results of fitting to data
the plausible model subset generally contains common rule patterns. for example, table  <dig> lists the models for clb <dig> expression with the highest fit scores found in the exhaustive search. the rules are in the format used for the example described in the methods section. table  <dig> shows three models for each gene in the network: the best fitting rule  and the two highest scoring rules with different combinations of input genes. the scores for each of the three models are provided in corresponding rows at the bottom of the table. figure  <dig> shows the best fitting interaction network diagrams for each node gene from table  <dig> 

to test whether the linear fuzzy gene network models found for one set of experimental data  can accurately predict another set of results for the same system, we analyzed the microarray time series for alpha cell synchronization presented in  <cit> . there are some missing values for some genes at some time points in the alpha data set, which are set to zero and could potentially lead to discrepancies between the modeling and experimental data only at those points. figure  <dig> shows the predicted time series for the expression ratio of four genes  given the highest  scoring models in table  <dig>   these models fit the original cdc <dig> training data with very different calculated tolerances  ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  .

discussion
using exhaustive search, we found linear fuzzy networks that predict cdc <dig> cell cycle microarray data for the expression of most of the twelve yeast genes we analyzed. the rule search typically converged to a small set of "plausible" models at a given fit error  tolerance for each gene . even for genes for which no highly fitting model could be found, such as swi <dig>  the best model  predicts the qualitative behavior of independently measured alpha time series data . moreover, models that are more predictive  of the cdc <dig> training data provide quantitatively accurate predictions of the alpha data . notably, these consistently good fits for the alpha data set were achieved using exactly the same arctangent data normalization and fuzzification scheme applied to the cdc <dig> data set. this suggests that the fuzzy processing methods described here can be generally applied for data sets obtained from different microarray experiments, provided a roughly symmetric distribution of log <dig> ratios about  <dig>  such that sets  <dig> and  <dig> both remain meaningful – though the ratios could be re-centered if necessary. in general, our results demonstrate the ability of qualitative fuzzy rule models to interpret the results of quantitative data and make predictions that can be statistically analyzed. consequently, these models can be used to pose experimentally testable hypotheses.

measurements of mrna expression from microarray experiments complement information from additional gene knockout, dna-protein and protein-protein experiments. a model based on pure transcriptional data will thus necessarily contain indirect relationships between proteins and miss other direct purely protein-protein interactions. however, gene network models can suggest functional roles and relationships for genes and proteins, and these models are necessary in complex system analysis to design and interpret further experiments that will specifically determine protein function and identify actual chemical interactions. to see what biological insights can be derived from fuzzy gene network models, we can examine areas of agreement and discrepancies between the best-fitting models found in our exhaustive search  and the current understanding of the yeast cell cycle network .

focusing on cln <dig>  we found positive regulation by cln <dig> and negative regulation by cdc <dig> , which are correlations expected from biological knowledge  and found by soinov, et al. using a supervised learning method  <cit> . in addition, the model for cln <dig> includes a direct connection with cdc <dig> and an indirect connection with mbp <dig>  that are consistent with their relative positions in the cell cycle . the best-fit model for cln <dig> depended solely on a positive interaction with cln <dig>  revealing the strong co-transcriptional connection between cln <dig> and cln <dig>  the connection between clb <dig> and clb <dig> was also found in the model for clb <dig>  other successfully found interactions include the negative regulation of cdc <dig> by clb <dig> and the positive regulation of clb <dig> by mbp <dig> 

some biologically accurate relationships were found that were absent from the supervised learning analysis of  <cit> . notably, the model successfully recovers the apparent inhibition of clb <dig> by cdc <dig>  which is not shown in figure  <dig>  but arises from cdc <dig> protein presenting clb <dig> protein to proteases for degradation . there are several biological relationships that are not found in the best-fitting networks of figure  <dig>  such as an interaction between swi <dig> and swi <dig> . the best-fitting models for swi <dig> include a repressing action by mbp <dig>  which is inconsistent with biological knowledge  suggesting that mbp <dig> and swi <dig> activity should correlate . however, closer examination of the spellman data set reveals that the amplitude of mbp <dig> transcription varied within a small range, and the measurement could have been very noisy, resulting in a potential error by the algorithm. 

in general, determining which relationships found in the fuzzy gene network represent biologically accurate interactions is a question that must be resolved by analyzing other data sets or from new experiments. the multiple plausible hypothetical input gene combinations can be used to optimally design experiments to add most information for least effort  to revise fit errors and produce a new, more realistic set of hypothetical networks.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work, we describe partially scalable, linear fuzzy logic models for biological network modeling. we demonstrate our approach by developing network models that accurately predict transcriptional data from typically noisy and semi-quantitative microarray experiments. looking at the transcription network alone provides us with a view of the system at the "gene interactions" level. as measurement technology rapidly advances, the methods we describe can be extended to comprehensive heterogeneous data sets. to address the problem of analyzing the complex results of an exhaustive fuzzy model search and designing optimal experiments, we are currently developing pattern recognition methods to better visualize and interpret potentially large sets of models. in addition, we are considering stochastic methods to accurately sample and characterize the "space" of all possible fuzzy models to  more efficiently identify the subset of plausible models and  identify common patterns among all the models to gain a better understanding of the system and its evolution. while it is tempting to develop methods to obtain a single "optimal solution" as in a classic inverse problem, this is not appropriate for complex biological systems. scarcity of both data and biological understanding mean that at best experiments will merely limit the space of potential solutions.

biological system analysis is a dynamic reverse engineering problem, requiring continuous acquisition of new experimental data – data that should be acquired from experiments designed and informed by continuous modeling. linear fuzzy rule network models are a promising methodology for an integrated modeling and experimental approach. since fuzzy rule models are enumerable, methods developed for combinatorial optimization can be extended to them. moreover, linear fuzzy network models can simultaneously contain both quantitative and qualitative information, providing a common framework for a broad range of biological data, including mass spectrometry analysis, rt-pcr, single cell imaging, metabolite profiling, and other technologies yet to be developed.

