BACKGROUND
the monocytic/granulocytic system as well as differentiated macrophages constitute the primary cellular effectors of the immune response, playing a pivotal role in the detection and elimination of foreign bodies such as pathogenic microorganisms. recognition of foreign microorganisms by these cells ultimately results in phagocytosis and in the eventual destruction of pathogens by lysosomal enzymes. macrophages perform a variety of functions other than phagocytosis  <cit> . the phagocytic process is accompanied by intracellular signals that trigger cellular responses such as cytoskeletal rearrangement, alterations in membrane trafficking, activation of apoptosis, release of chemical mediators such as growth factors, pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines  <cit> . such mediators, produced by activated macrophages, are essential for microbe killing but also potentiate inflammatory reactions; thus regulation of this production is therefore critical to kill pathogens without inducing tissue injury  <cit> .

natural oils are extensively used in cosmetics as well as in folk medicine for the treatment of a growing number of more or less specific pathologies. recently the clinical use of essential oils has expanded worldwide also including therapy against various kinds of inflammatory diseases, such as allergy, rheumatism and arthritis. these activities have mainly been recognized through clinical experience, but there have been relatively little scientific studies on biological actions of these natural extracts. for instance, the tea tree oil as well as eucalyptus oil have been demonstrated to possess antiseptic properties against a range of bacteria  <cit>  and have been used in a number of products against oral pathogens and different forms of infections. it has also been suggested that tea tree  <cit>  and lavender oils  <cit>  are able to suppress allergic symptoms through the inhibition of histamine release  <cit>  and cytokine production  <cit>  in in vitro and in vivo. monoterpenoid components of aromatic constituents of eucalyptus oil are traditionally used as analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretic remedies and are commercially available for the treatment of the common cold and other symptoms of respiratory infections. phytochemical analysis has shown that the profile of the monoterpenoids changes among the eucalyptus species, with potential variations in therapeutic properties. in eucalyptus globulus, the major monoterpenoid component is eucalyptol , constituting the 60–90%  <cit> , that has been reported to inhibit the production and synthesis of tumour necrosis factor-α , interleukin-1β , leukotriene b <dig>  and thromboxane b <dig> in human blood monocytes  <cit> . an anti-inflammatory activity of eucalyptol in patients with bronchial asthma has been also described in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial  <cit> . these findings provide scientific support at least for some of the traditionally accepted uses, in folk medicine, of essential oils, and in particular of eucalyptus oil, although a direct relationship is still to be demonstrated.

to our knowledge, actually there are no available data concerning the influence of eucalyptus essential oil on the cellular components of the immune system, the only exception is for the effect on some cytokine production  <cit> . the aim of the present study has been to investigate whether essential oil from eucalyptus globulus  is able to affect the phagocytic activity of human monocyte-derived macrophages  in vitro and of peripheral blood monocytes/granulocytes from immuno-competent rats treated in vivo in absence or in presence of immuno-suppression induced by administration of the chemotherapeutic agent 5-fluorouracil .

RESULTS
in vitro effect of eucalyptus oil on morphological features and phagocytic activity of human mdms
eo treatment, at both concentrations used in our experiments, did not affect the macrophage viability, as revealed by the trypan blue exclusion method . morphological observation of human mdms  showed that after  <dig> h treatment with  <dig> % or  <dig> % eo, cells assumed the typical activated morphology, also exhibited by lps-activated mdms, showing an enlarged size, more abundant microvillous structures as compared to the untreated macrophages, a rougher surface with prominent filopodia, blebs, and rufflings. confocal microscopic observation, after fluorescent beads administration to cell cultures , showed that eo is able to dramatically increase, in a dose dependent manner, the phagocytic activity of mdms, to higher extent compared to the lps treatment. in fact, as reported in fig. 2h, in untreated control cultures  <dig> % of cells were phagocytic, with a mean of  <dig> beads phagocytosed per cell. in cultures treated for  <dig> h with lps, the percentage of phagocytic cells is lightly increased , while no increase were recorded in the mean number of beads/cell. conversely, in sample  <dig> h treated with  <dig> % eo, the percentage of phagocytic cells increases to  <dig> % and the average number of phagocytosed beads/cell raises to  <dig>  the treatment with the highest concentration of eo , increased so dramatically the phagocytic activity of mdms, showing up to  <dig>  phagocytosed beads/cell, that the majority of cells engulfed with indigestible beads possibly died, leading to a registration of only 10% of phagocytic cells. moreover, pre-treatment with eo  <dig> h before the addition of lps to cell culture was able to increase, without any cytotoxicity and in a dose-dependent manner, the phagocytic activity of human mdms in comparison with the treatment with lps alone .

we excluded a non specific effect on macrophage phagocytic activity caused by the oil preparation, by testing other two oil extracts, lavender oil  and the tea tree oil  in parallel with eo. the results obtained , showed that treatment with both lavender and tea tree oil extracts do not affect mdms phagocytic activity, also confirming the dose-dependent stimulatory effect of eucalyptus oil. cell viability  showed that lavo, similarly to eo, resulted not toxic, indicating that the lack of the effect on mdms phagocytic ability observed is not ascribable to oil cytotoxicity. instead, a moderate effect on cell viability of the teatreeo extract has been recorded.

scanning electron microscopy observation showed, after beads addition to eo treated cultures, the presence of numerous polarised cells exhibiting elongated lamellopodia and filopodia , indicative of a pseudopodial activity. in cell cytoplasm of the eo activated mdms, a higher number of phagocytosed beads , compared to the untreated control  were observed, also distributed at the filopodial and lamellopodial structures, suggesting that an active cell motility might contribute to the increased phagocytic ability towards the foreign bodies.

effect of eucalyptus oil on production of pro-inflammatory and immune-modulating cytokines by human mdms
in spite of the morphological features typical of activated macrophages, and of the increased phagocytic ability acquired by eo-treated or pre-treated mdms, the release in the extracellular medium of pro-inflammatory and immune-modulating cytokines was significantly lower compared to that recorded for lps treatment alone . this effect is particularly evident for the pro-inflammatory cytokines conspicuously produced by mdms under lps stimulation, such as il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α. in detail, in absence of lps stimulation, eo activated macrophages produced very low levels, comparable to the untreated control, of il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α . moreover, in accordance with the anti-inflammatory properties ascribed to eo, pre-treatment with eo 24h before the addition of lps to cell culture was able to significantly decrease the lps-induced cytokines production . no significant effect on the production of the other immune-modulating cytokines tested  was recorded for both eo or lps treatments .

cytoskeletal elements mediating the eucalyptus oil stimulated internalization
we also investigated whether the observed differences in lps- or eo-induced internalization and cytokine production were associated with differences in the cytoskeletal elements that mediate phagocytosis. in particular, we verified if the phagocytic ability of lps- or eo- stimulated mdms required integrity of the microtubular network. to this purpose, control cells and macrophages, pre-treated with lps or eo, were treated with the microtubule-destabilizing agent nocodazole and the phagocytic ability was tested after fluorescent beads administration. confocal microscopic observation  showed that, after damage of the microtubular network by nocodazole treatment , while controls and lps-stimulated mdms were still able to internalize beads , in eo-stimulated cells bead uptake was almost completely inhibited . these results clearly suggest that lps- and eo-induced phagocytosis occur possibly by means of different mechanisms, since only the eo-stimulated internalization requires integrity of the microtubule network.

moreover, as shown in fig. 5b, eo stimulation is able to provoke a more dramatic reorganization of microtubular filaments respect to lps, strongly suggesting that tubulin plays an important role in the eo-induced macrophage activation.

in vivo effect of eucalyptus oil on activation of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from immuno-competent rats
we firstly assessed the effect of eo on peripheral blood mononuclear cells  after in vivo administration to immuno-competent animals, following the scheme of treatment reported in fig. 6a. the evaluation of haematological parameters at t <dig> revealed that eo treatment was able to significantly increase the percentage of circulating monocytes in peripheral blood of treated rats compared to the untreated controls, while no significant modification in the percentage of circulating granulocytes and lymphocytes was evidenced . concomitantly, an increment in the phagocytic activity of granulocytes, and at higher extent of monocytes, obtained from treated animals, was recorded .

we also examined the monocytic/granulocytic fraction for the expression of surface molecules that may be indicative of leucocytes activation. in particular we evaluated the expression of cd <dig>  the receptor for the extracellular matrix component hyaluronan that mediates the leukocyte/endothelial interactions leading to extravasation  <cit> , and of cd <dig>  a marker of circulating monocyte activation  <cit> . cytofluorimetric analysis showed that at t <dig> eo treatment induced a significant increase of the expression of cd <dig>  as well as the percentage of cd25+ cells in circulating monocytes compared to the untreated control rats, and this effect also persisted at t <dig>  after  <dig> days from the end of eo administration . no significant modification in the expression of cd <dig> or in the percentage of cd25+ cells was evidenced in circulating granulocytes and lymphocytes .

ex vivo evaluation of the phagocytic activity of monocytes derived macrophages  obtained from treated and untreated animals at t <dig>  revealed that the stimulatory effect recorded in circulating monocytes was also retained in differentiated macrophages . the ex vivo phagocytic ability of mdms obtained from eo treated rats was increased not only towards a non-specific foreign bodies such as fluorescent beads, but also towards microbiological pathogens, as observed after infection with staphylococcus aureus .

in vivo effect of eucalyptus oil on phagocytic activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from immuno-suppressed rats
finally we verified whether eo treatment could be also able to induce a recovery of peripheral blood mononuclear cells activity after bone marrow suppression induced by 5-fluorouracil , a chemotherapeutic agent extensively used in the treatment of different types of cancer  <cit>  producing myelotoxicity as side effect  <cit> . the schematic diagram of treatment is reported in fig. 8a. the evaluation of haematological parameters at t <dig> revealed that eo treatment was able to induce a recovery of the percentage of circulating granulocytes that was significantly reduced by 5-fu treatment, while no modification was recorded in the percentage of circulating monocytes, that, on the other hand, was not influenced by the chemotherapeutic agent .

5-fu treatment also induced a decrease of phagocytic activity of peripheral blood granulocytes/monocytes, but in eo/5-fu treated animals the granulocytes/monocytes phagocytic ability was restored to values near to that of untreated immuno-competent rats . finally, the ex vivo experiments revealed that the recovery of phagocytic activity was also present in differentiated macrophages obtained from 5-fu/eo treated animals, compared to rats treated with 5-fu alone .

discussion
some biological effects of eucalyptus oil  extract such as its antiseptic properties against a range of microbial agents  <cit>  and, recently, its anti-inflammatory potential, both in vitro  <cit>  and in vivo  <cit> , mainly concerning the effect on some cytokine production, have been demonstrated. however, rather little is known about the influence of this essential oil on the cellular components of the immune system, and in particular on the monocytic/macrophagic system constituting one of the primary cellular effectors of the immune response against foreign particles and pathogen attacks.

in this study we present findings indicating that eo from eucalyptus globulus is able to induce morphological and functional activation of human mdms in vitro, dramatically stimulating the phagocytic response of these effectors of the innate immune defence. the acquisition of morphological features of eo activated macrophages and the increased phagocytic ability is coupled to a low release of il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α pro-inflammatory cytokines, in contrast to that recorded under lps stimulation.

the differences in lps- or eo-induced cytokine production were associated with differences in the cytoskeletal elements that mediate phagocytosis, since eo-stimulated internalization requires integrity of the microtubule network, while lps-stimulation does not. this suggests, almost preliminary, that lps and eo might act by means of different mechanisms, possibly involving different phagocytic receptors. it is actually known that internalization by macrophages occurs by a restricted number of phagocytic receptors present on their surface  <cit> . specifically, infectious agent are mainly phagocytosed by complement receptors , after relatively non specific opsonization with complement, and by fc receptors  after specific opsonization with antibodies. important differences in the molecular mechanisms underlying phagocytosis by these two different receptors are actually recognized. these include differences in the cytoskeletal elements that mediate ingestion, differences in vacuole maturation, and differences in inflammatory responses. in particular, fcr-mediated phagocytosis is tightly coupled to the production and secretion of pro-inflammatory mediators such as cytokines and reactive oxygen intermediates  <cit> , while cr-mediated phagocytosis is not. furthermore, only the cr-mediated internalization requires integrity of the microtubular network  <cit> . on this context, our data indicate that eo might implement pathogens internalization stimulating the cr-mediated phagocytosis. eo-induced implementation of innate cell-mediated immune response, coupled to reduced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and toxic oxygen intermediates, might have profound implications for the inflammatory response during pathogen infections.

the presence in the eo treated cultures of numerous phagocyting polarised cells, exhibiting elongated lamellopodia and filopodia, indicates that stimulation of pseudopodial activity and cell motility might contribute to the augmented phagocytic capability. the in vitro stimulatory effect was achieved using concentrations of the essential oil ranging from  <dig> % and  <dig> % , doses that resulted absolutely non toxic and up to  <dig> fold lower than those used in vitro by other authors  <cit> .

implementation of innate cell-mediated immune response has been observed not only in in vitro experiments but also in treated bdix rats after  <dig> days eo administration. the stimulatory effect in treated animals, mainly involving the peripheral blood monocytes/granulocytes, led to a raise in the percentage of circulating monocytes as well as to an increment in the phagocytic activity of granulocytes and mostly of monocytic cells. these latter cells also exhibited an enhanced potential of extravasation ability, as suggested by increased expression of cd <dig> on their cellular membrane  <cit> , as well as characteristics of activated monocytes  <cit> , as indicated by the higher percentage of cd25+ cells in circulating monocytes, compared to the untreated control rats.

the stimulatory effect on phagocytic ability recorded in circulating monocytes was also retained in monocyte-derived macrophages from treated animals, as showed by the ex vivo experiments. the eo dose used in the in vivo experiments  did not produce evident toxic effect on treated rats, as suggested by the lack of body weight reduction and of animals mortality. this dose was comparable to doses recommended for oral therapy in humans and much more lower than dose that have been described to exhibit sub-acute toxicity in rats   <cit> .

besides the effect of eo on the cell-mediated immune response in immuno-competent rats, this essential oil is also able to induce a dramatic recovery of granulocytes/monocytes activity after bone marrow suppression produced by 5-fu administration. in fact, combined treatment 5-fu/eo not only inhibited myelotoxicity, as resulted by the restoration of granulocytes number to normal values, but also raised the phagocytic activity of granulocytes and monocytes as well as of the ex vivo analyzed monocyte-derived macrophages, significantly decreased in animals treated with the chemotherapic alone. since myelosuppression continues to be a major dose-limiting side effect for most chemotherapeutic agent such as 5-fu  <cit> , our results suggest that the combination of eo with 5-fu might be taken into account for the prevention of immunotoxicity and myelotoxicity caused by 5-fu administration, even if additional studies should be carried out to demonstrate that the antitumor activity of 5-fu is not influenced by this combined therapeutic strategy.

moreover, further experiments are in progress to determine whether the immuno-stimulatory effect, observed both in vitro and in vivo, could be due to the major monoterpenoid component eucalyptol , constituting the 60–90% of eucalyptus oil  <cit> , or is related to its synergic cooperation with the other minor components present in the crude extract; preliminary results seem to be indicative of this later hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
most knowledge of the therapeutic use of plant essential oils is acquired through folklore, and only some activities of these natural extracts are actually supported by scientific studies. but plants are an important source for drug discovery, and investigations on biological actions of plant medicinal extracts, as well as the understanding of the mechanisms underlying these actions drive the search for novel drugs.

overall, our data, demonstrating that eucalyptus essential oil from eucalyptus globulus is able to implement the innate cell-mediated immune response, provide scientific support for an additional use of this plant extract, besides those concerning its known antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties. thus, the present study stimulates further investigations also using single components of essential oil extracts from various species of eucalyptus for development of a possible new class of immuno-regulatory agents useful as adjuvant in immuno-suppressive pathologies, in infectious disease as well as in tumour chemotherapy.

