BACKGROUND
the retinoblastoma protein  was the first tumor suppressor protein to be identified  <cit> . its loss of function is linked to the development of numerous human cancers  <cit> . this protein is a major regulator of cell cycle, differentiation and apoptosis. many of rb's effects on cell-cycle control derive from its ability to interact with and inhibit the e2f family of transcription factors  <cit> . ablation of rb function in both cultured cells and animals, results, as expected, in deregulated proliferation, but also, more surprisingly, in apoptosis, according to both p53-dependent and p53-independent signaling pathways  <cit> . however, some reports demonstrate that rb can also act as an inducer of cell death and point to a controversial role for this protein in the regulation of apoptosis  <cit> .

in normal cells, the activity of rb predominantly depends on the level of phosphorylation of the sixteen potential cdk phosphorylable serine/threonine residues span on the protein  <cit> . it is assumed that the phosphorylation of several critical sites is required to abolish the ability of rb to interact with e2f factors and to inhibit cell cycle progression. in cancer cells, three main mechanisms account for inactivation of the rb pathway: genetic inactivation, sequestration by viral oncoproteins  or hyperphosphorylation as a consequence of perturbations of cdk activities. caspase-dependent cleavage may also play a role in rb regulation in both cancer and normal cells  <cit> . some recent data suggest that rb relocation may also regulate its tumor suppressor function, as observed for other tumor suppressor proteins , which can be inactivated by a nuclear export mechanism. a nucleocytoplasmic localization of rb has already been observed for cells with high levels of rb  and cytoplasmic sequestration of rb has been observed in some cancer cells  <cit> .

in this paper, we have evaluated the possibility that distinct intra-cellular locations of rb may account for the contradictory effects of rb in apoptosis control described in the literature. to this end, we examined the cellular localization of rb in a range of cell types – tumor or otherwise – of human and rat origin, using several experimental procedures , both in the absence and the presence of stress. surprisingly, we found that a fraction of rb is localized in the mitochondria of proliferative cells regardless of cell malignancy. this is the first evidence of a mitochondrial localization of rb. more specifically, rb was detected in an internal compartment of the mitochondria, within the inner-membrane, data also supported by the incubation of rb with mitochondria and alkaline treatment.

RESULTS
mitochondrial rb is detected by cell fractionation studies
here, we are interested in finding out whether rb may also be located in other cell compartments, in addition to its conventionally reported nuclear localization. to achieve this, a cellular subfractionation study was first of all conducted in order to isolate enriched mitochondria and nuclei fractions from untreated or etoposide-treated human and rodent cells, such as human primary fibroblasts , human fibrosarcoma cells , rat pheochromocytoma cells  and rat immortalized fibroblasts . then the total extract  and subcellular fractions  were loaded on gel and analyzed using the western blot technique . putative contamination of the mitochondrial fractions was monitored by detecting cytosolic  and nuclear  marker proteins, and antibodies directed against cox ii or cytochrome c  confirmed the enrichment of mitochondrial fractions. even if nuclear fractions are contaminated to varying degrees by mitochondria, which are often difficult to separate using a specific mitochondria isolation method, mitochondrial fractions are nevertheless not contaminated with either nuclei or cytosolic proteins. in this study, as already outlined, the rb protein is detected in nuclear fractions of untreated human cells, yet, surprisingly, a fraction of rb is also detected in the mitochondrial fractions of these cells , suggesting that rb may also be located at this site in parallel with the classically-described nuclear localization. the graph  shows that the ratio mitochondria/nuclei of rb level in untreated cells is greater than those of pcna , indicating that most mitochondrial rb is not due to a nuclear contamination.

in order to see if this mitochondrial localization of rb is challenged by apoptosis induction we used etoposide, a dna-damaging drug acting as a topoisomerase ii inhibitor, to activate p <dig>  as described in the literature, the amount of full-length rb is reduced in nuclear fractions, and this also seems to be the case for mitochondrial rb . nevertheless, the etoposide-treated human or rodent cells display no major change in rb nuclear or mitochondrial distribution, as observed by the fractionation study.

next we verified that the protein detected in the mitochondrial fraction was indeed the rb protein by transfecting fr3t <dig> cells with rb sirnas or with control sirnas, and then we isolated mitochondria using the same subfractionation method as before . incubation with rb sirnas substantially reduced the amount of rb in the total extract  , as well as in the mitochondrial fraction  . taken together, these data provide direct evidence that a proportion of total cellular rb protein is located in the mitochondria in the living cells taken from rodents or humans. furthermore, as mitochondrial rb has been detected in primary human cells  , we can suggest that this localization occurs in normal cells and thus is not associated with a transformed character  of the cells we tested.

mitochondrial localization of rb
consequently, in order to more accurately determine the exact mitochondrial localization of rb, we performed a mitochondrial subfractionation study using mitochondria taken from pc <dig> rodent cells. we used a classic protocol to separate the mitochondrial outer-membrane  from the inter-membrane space  and from the mitoplast  . all the fractions were then investigated for the presence of endogenous rb by immunoblot. the enrichments in each mitochondrial subfraction were tested by immunoblotting for β-subunits of f1-atpase and ant for the mitoplast fraction and vdac and umtck for the outer-membrane fraction. the contamination of mitochondrial subfractions with cytosolic or nuclear proteins was assessed by detecting actin and tfiid. as shown in fig.  <dig>  rb is once more detected in the total mitochondrial fraction . at mitochondria, rb is detected in the mitoplast fraction  of the mitochondria and is absent in the two other mitochondrial subfractions . these results suggest, firstly, that rb is located in an internal compartment  and, secondly, that rb may be transported across the outer-membrane to its final destination inside the mitochondria. this could be accomplished by an interaction with mitochondrial transporter complexes located on the mitochondrial outer-membrane.

study of the in vitro interaction of rb with mitochondria
afterwards, to further validate these results, we tested the in vitro interaction ability of rb protein with isolated mitochondria in an acellular assay. for this purpose, we prepared vectors expressing the full length of rb, together with luciferase  and bax  , and analyzed the binding of the corresponding in vitro translated proteins to mitochondria in a cell-free system. the fate of methionine-labeled proteins was tested by analyzing the interaction with fresh rat liver mitochondria from rodent cells according to the protocol previously described for bax in the literature  <cit> . as illustrated in fig. 3a, the rb protein  is found to bind strongly to mitochondria, similar to bax binding ; only slight amounts of rb and bax remained in the supernatant . in contrast, the non-mitochondrial protein luciferase used as negative control barely binds to mitochondria  and the majority of the luciferase remains in the supernatant . this result is consistent with the data from the subcellular fractionation study and suggests that rb has a high affinity for mitochondrial binding. it is important to note that the interaction of rb with isolated mitochondria was performed in a buffer, which could enable importation of protein into the mitochondria. consequently, we cannot exclude the possibility that rb might be imported into an internal compartment in this study.

to answer this question, but also in order to determine whether rb is only weakly bound to mitochondria or whether there is a strong interaction, mitochondria pre-incubated with full length rb produced in vitro were subjected to an alkaline treatment. the alkaline treatment is able to destroy any interaction of proteins that are weakly bound to mitochondria. this is the case for the bax binding previously described  <cit>  and which we used as a positive control for the alkaline treatment . interestingly, the rb protein is resistant to alkaline extraction , implying that the interaction between rb and mitochondria involves strong binding. these data are in agreement with the result of rb mitoplast localization from the mitochondria subfractionation study, and suggest that rb may be tightly bound to the mitochondria inner-membrane, either in the inter-membrane space or in the matrix side. moreover, we cannot exclude the possibility that rb matrix-side location may play a role in control of the expression of mitochondrial encoded genes, somehow similar to its nuclear activity. the recent discovery of sankaran et al. concerning the contribution of rb to the expression of genes encoding proteins of mitochondrial respiration machinery  <cit> , together with our findings concerning the mitochondrial localization of rb, paves the way for the possibility of rb involvement in mitochondrial biogenesis and function.

lastly, our findings concerning the mitochondrial localization of rb do not exclude its classically observed nuclear localization. thus, it is important to note that the antibody most widely used in the literature to detect rb – the g3- <dig> antibody – recognizes the rb protein in both nuclear and mitochondrial fractions using the western blot method. conversely, in immunofluorescence studies, the g3- <dig> antibody we used cannot detect any mitochondrial pattern of rb . this may be explained by the inaccessibility of the antibody to mitochondrial-located rb, either because of a masked epitope or due to the inability of the antibody to bypass the outer mitochondrial membrane. however, when we quantified the amount of mitochondrial rb with respect to the total rb from the western blots  and then normalized to the same number of cells, we found that mitochondrial rb level was between 1% to 3% in comparison to the total rb depending on the cell type. these results may explain why mitochondrial rb was not previously observed.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our results support the presence of a fraction of the total amount of rb protein in the mitochondria in both rat and human cells. although some data revealing a cytosolic location of rb have already been reported for tumors exhibiting a high level of cdk <dig> activity  <cit> , these results are original because, to our knowledge, there is no data in the literature concerning a mitochondrial localization of rb, with most bibliographic data pointing to a nuclear localization. nevertheless, this type of location is not exhaustive: we found that most of the rb was located in nuclear fractions, as previously described. the mitochondrial localization of rb has been visualized by both cell fractionation and in vitro assays. at mitochondrial level, rb seems to reside inside the organelle inasmuch as it was solely detected in the mitoplast fraction. altogether, the results present strong evidence for the mitochondrial localization of a small fraction of cellular rb, in parallel to the nuclear localization classically described, and support the specificity of this interaction.

