BACKGROUND
a central aim in population biology is to discern the relative contribution of intrinsic  and extrinsic  factors to fluctuations in population size and demographic composition, with increasing emphasis placed on quantifying the complex interplay between the two  <cit> . the mounting number of long-term ecological studies available for the measurement of population dynamical parameters, although still relatively rare, is providing a more refined understanding of the combined effects of these mechanisms  <cit> . for instance, investigating the relationships between population density, environmental conditions and survival probability using mark-recapture techniques has provided important advances in this regard .

given that populations of large, long-lived mammals tend to have a relatively low capacity for growth due to their long generation times and low reproductive output  <cit> , it is hypothesized that intrinsic factors should regulate growth only near carrying capacity. indeed, there is good evidence that this is the case in many large mammal species  <cit> , with many studies concluding that extrinsic factors are the predominate drivers of change when populations are below carrying capacity  <cit> . however, the complex relationships that exist between extrinsic and intrinsic control mean that there is no species for which there is a complete understanding of how abundance is regulated over the complete range of population densities  <cit> . another bugbear is that many populations with a high degree of age-dependent fecundity and mortality may not reveal density dependence if the time series used in the investigation is short relative to generation time  <cit> . in practice, it is usually only possible to examine the combined effects of density and environmental conditions through measurements made over long periods spanning an array of population densities or levels of food availability. as such, there are only a few case studies where this has been done for long-lived mammals, and most of those have focussed on island populations of ungulates  <cit> .

changes in the population size of large marine predators is potentially indicative of larger ecosystem changes given that their predominate regulator appears to be environmental stochasticity influencing food availability over vast oceanic foraging regions . upper trophic-level marine predators such as seabirds and seals are particularly amenable to the examination of such mechanistic hypotheses because they are easily monitored during their obligatory onshore breeding phase  <cit> . access to such rare datasets is particularly important given the predictions of climate change over the next few decades  <cit> , and recent evidence for broad-scale changes in population trends in birds and mammals throughout, for example, the southern ocean  <cit> .

the well-documented population decline and possible recent stabilization of one of the most wide-ranging southern ocean predators, the southern elephant seal  at macquarie island, has been the focus of intensive demographic studies for over fifty years  <cit> . population censuses from the 1940s to the present and capture-mark-recapture studies from the 1950s and 1990s have provided extensive demographic data for this population at both low and high population densities  <cit> . there is strong evidence that this population responds to environmental stochasticity via modifications to individual survival given that this parameter is highly sensitive to the at-sea foraging conditions experienced by an individual over its predominately aquatic life cycle  <cit> . foraging elephant seals breeding at macquarie island range widely over millions of square kilometres of the southern ocean  <cit> , and it has been established that their feeding areas are associated to some extent with the pack ice zone and colder sea surface temperatures – these environmental conditions are known to fluctuate with el niño-southern oscillation  patterns  <cit> . in this region, enso follows an approximate seven- to eight-year cycle during which time ocean productivity can fluctuate substantially  <cit>  .

it has been suggested that changes in ocean conditions affect southern elephant seals either directly by modifying the availability of food resources, or indirectly by affecting sea ice dynamics and hence, ocean productivity  <cit> . while some studies have shown that survival  <cit> , weaning mass  <cit>  and weanling sex ratio  <cit>  are reduced or modified during el niño conditions, the macquarie island population of elephant seals has shown a consistent positive relationship between el niño and pup survival  <cit> . these contrasting relationships may arise from the different climatic conditions associated with enso events in different regions of the southern ocean  <cit> .

there is also some evidence for density regulation in southern elephant seal populations, mainly via space limitation on land while breeding  <cit> . however, competition for food at high population densities may also occur during the at-sea foraging phase  <cit> . in this paper we expand greatly on previous work by amalgamating capture-mark-recapture data collected over two extended periods of differing population density at macquarie island:  the years between  <dig> and  <dig> when the population was relatively abundant, and  between  <dig> and  <dig> when it was approximately  <dig> % smaller. our main aim was to identify whether there is evidence for density and environmental effects on survival rates and how these mechanisms combine to explain the observed phenomenological trends of population size over the last  <dig> years. we achieve this by  assessing the concurrent age-, and sex- specific survival at the two different density levels,  testing for density dependence in adult and first-year survival between and at both densities, and  testing for the effects of environmental variation as represented by enso on adult and first-year survival.

RESULTS
phenomenological evidence for density dependence
for the high-density time series , there was good evidence for density-dependent population growth, with the summed akaike's information criterion corrected for small samples size  weights for the three density-dependent models =  <dig>  % . there was also strong evidence for density-dependent population growth for the low-density time series , where the summed aicc weight for the density-dependent models was  <dig>  % .

sample-size corrected akaike weights  and the number of yearly transitions  for density-independent models: random walk , and exponential , and density-dependent models: ricker-logisitc , gompertz logistic , and θ-logisitc , of the population growth of southern elephant seals during the high-density era and low-density eras. the sum of the aicc weights for the density-dependent models represents the combined percentage support for density dependence .

capture-mark-recapture
the parametric goodness-of-fit bootstrap results for both the high- and low-density eras showed evidence for lack of fit to the cormack-jolly-seber  model assumptions  and over-dispersion. non-compliance with the cjs assumptions, in particular the assumption that all animals from both datasets had the same resighting probability, may have influenced survival estimates. however, it has been shown that increased variation in resighting rate inflates the variance of survival estimates rather than their means  <cit> .

to account for over-dispersion, the inflation factor, c, was used to correct the aic values in all remaining analyses. for the high-density dataset, ĉ was calculated for each model set using the observed and simulated deviance and deviance degrees of freedom. for the low-density dataset, the values of ĉ calculated for each model set were considered too high  to be incorporated directly into the correction of aic, so the model sets were compared with values of ĉ ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> to look for major discrepancies in first-year survival estimates and model weighting .

during the low-density era and for the model set examining the effect of age, the model-averaged parameter estimates for first-year survival varied by a maximum of ±  <dig> % with ĉ ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . likewise, model rankings only changed relative to the recapture probability p . in the sex-effect model set, model-averaged parameter estimates for first-year survival varied by only  <dig>  % with changes to ĉ, and the general model ϕ p had >  <dig> % of the model weight for all values of ĉ . varying ĉ within the soi-covariate models  and the density models  also indicated little change to the model ranking with respect to survival probability, although there was some bias in the estimates of survival probability . models examining the effects of population density and soi together demonstrated little bias  in parameter estimates with varying ĉ, although model rankings varied substantially . it should be noted, however, that the presence of excessive over-dispersion provides important information regarding the population structure in its own right. previous work has determined that capture heterogeneity and survival vary as a function of weaning mass  <cit> , so a certain degree of over-dispersion is expected.

sex and age effects
for the high-density era, the model that incorporated time- and age-based survival had over  <dig>  % of the model weight . neither first-year or adult survival varied with gender  p was allocated >  <dig>  % of the model weight; table 3); therefore, male and females were pooled for all subsequent analyses. the most parsimonious model for the low-density era was one that incorporated time and age effects on survival . there was no evidence that first-year survival varied with gender , so males and females were again pooled for all subsequent analyses.

effects of time , and age  on the probability of survival  and recapture  of southern elephant seals during the high-  and low-density  eras. models are ranked according to their akaike weights , the relative change in aicc score , and number of parameters  based on an inflation factor  of  <dig> .

effects of time , age , and sex  on the probability of survival  and recapture  in southern elephant seals during the high-  and low-density  eras. models are ranked according to their akaike weights , the relative change in aicc score , and number of parameters  based on an inflation factor  of  <dig> .

environmental conditions and density considered separately
for the high-density era, there was strong evidence that the probability of both first-year and adult survival varied with the standardized soi . the most parsimonious model contained the soi covariate representing the environmental conditions during the time naïve seals were foraging . for the low-density era and over all values of ĉ, >  <dig> % of the model weight was allocated to models with first-year survival varying with soi measured during the pregnant mother's pre-partum foraging trip . however, the model-averaged estimates of first-year survival varied by  <dig> % over the range of ĉ examined. despite this variation in first-year survival, this model set clearly shows that environmental conditions  during the year of the mother's pre-partum foraging trip describe an important component of the variation in first-year survival .

effects of age , time , and environmental conditions represented by the southern oscillation index  during the newly weaned seal's foraging period  , and during a mother's pre-partum foraging period   on the probability of survival  of southern elephant seals during the high-  and low-density  eras. models are ranked according to their akaike weights , the relative change in aicc score , and number of parameters  based on an inflation factor  of  <dig> .

when the density covariate was considered alone, there was evidence that first-year survival varied with annual density in the high-density era . for the low-density era, model weightings varied substantially over the range of ĉ; however, estimates of first-year survival varied by only  <dig> %. there was weak evidence for a density effect on first-year survival during this era .

effects of age , time , density of breeding females , and density of breeding females lagged by one year  on the probability of survival  in southern elephant seals during the high-  and low-density  eras. models are ranked according to their akaike weights , the relative change in aicc score , and number of parameters , based on an inflation factor  of  <dig> .

combining intrinsic and extrinsic factors
during the high-density era, the model including the soi values measured during the mother's pre-partum foraging trip had >  <dig> % of the model weight , but there was no evidence that density explained additional variance in first-year survival . when population density was low, the high degree of variation in model weighting with changes to ĉ made determining the combined effects of these two covariates on first-year survival suspect  . nonetheless, we assumed the same ĉ value from the high-density era to contrast models; this revealed that the models with the most support  incorporated the mother's foraging trip soi, and there was little evidence for a density or pup-year soi anomaly effect .

effects of age , time , density of breeding females , density of breeding females lagged by one year  and environmental conditions  of southern elephant seals during the high-  and low-density  eras. models are ranked according to their akaike weights , the relative change in aicc score , and number of parameters , based on an inflation factor  of  <dig> .

discussion
determining the factors that regulate populations through time can be complex because even the simplest nonlinear, density-dependent population models may exhibit a large range of complex dynamic behaviours  <cit> . while environmental stochasticity tends to inflate the variance in population size and demographic rates, negative density feedback at high population sizes has the opposite effect  <cit> . however, density regulation may become undetectable at lower population sizes  <cit>  or when environmental conditions are favourable  <cit> . using an extensive dataset collected from a long-lived mammal, we found that first-year survival varied as predicted with population density, but only when population size was relatively high and when models ignored indices of environmental stochasticity.

when the effects of density and environmental variation were examined together, the negative density feedback mechanism was apparently overwhelmed by the more dominant influence of stochastic environmental forcing. this observation underscores the importance of examining the competing and complex interaction between environmental control and density regulation over a large range of population sizes, especially in long-lived species susceptible to high environmental stochasticity  <cit> .

these results suggest that density regulation in this system may operate when populations are at or near carrying capacity – a state where intra- and inter-specific competition for resources and intra-specific competition for mates is likely to be highest. this notion is consistent with data from studies investigating the dynamics of other long-lived mammals  <cit> . however, the magnitude of these effects is dwarfed by density-independent stochastic environmental conditions that affect food availability during a pregnant mother's foraging trip. indeed, this forcing also overshadowed any negative influences on survival experienced during a naïve seal's first trip to sea, despite previous, albeit weak, evidence that environmental conditions during that period influence first-year survival  <cit> . although the phenomenological evidence for density dependence is pervasive across many different taxa  <cit> , including the species under study, high environmental variation can sometimes mask even strong density dependence, especially if the effects are lagged  <cit> . nonetheless, we found evidence for density regulation that would not have been detected using the low-density dataset alone, demonstrating the complex meshing of endogenous and exogenous forces in shaping animal population sizes  <cit> .

previous work has shown that many pinniped species demonstrate strong density dependence in various demographic rates and life history traits.  <cit> , although these may be detectable only during poor-resource years  <cit> . density dependence in elephant seals has been shown to operate mainly during breeding where concentrated adult aggregations onshore can directly affect pup survival or the age at first reproduction  <cit>  even though the exact form and strength of density dependence acting in this species is still a matter of some debate  <cit> . there is also ample evidence that pinnipeds demonstrate density-regulated somatic growth rates, with lower growth experienced at high population densities  <cit> .

the incorporation of density effects into the models considered also revealed the dominant mechanisms by which environment stochasticity controls population abundance patterns over time. when environmental stochasticity  was examined without the effects of density, the most parsimonious model predicted that the conditions during an individual's first year of life best explained variation in survival when population size was high . however, when the effects of density were also included in the models, there was more evidence that the environmental conditions experienced by the mother when she was gaining body reserves that would eventually sustain her pup were most important . had we failed to consider density effects directly, we would have erroneously concluded the mechanism by which population density exerts its influence on dampening environmentally induced variation in life history traits. with density included in the model set, the pregnant mother's environmental context clearly emerged as the most dominant force in shaping her offspring's survival probability. this supports previous work suggesting that wean mass, an indirect expression of the mother's capacity to sequester sufficient resources prior to giving birth, was the most important determinant of first-year survival  <cit> . however, unlike that previous study, our analyses add another piece to the puzzle by demonstrating the degree to which environmental stochasticity in the mother's foraging phase dominates intrinsic regulation.

we must also consider that the weak effects of population density on first-year survival are unlikely to capture the full mechanistic component of density regulation in this population, especially given the strong phenomenological evidence for density dependence in both relative-density periods. in addition to vital rates such as survival, density-dependent regulation may apply to other aspects of a species' biology, such as growth, behaviour, incidence of disease and distribution  <cit> . eberhardt  <cit>  proposed that the negative effects of increasing density on population growth are greatest in juvenile survival, followed in turn by the onset of puberty, fecundity and, finally, adult survival. in large mammals, density dependence is most commonly identified in vital rates that influence recruitment, in particular, juvenile survival, and less frequently in adult survival  <cit> . indeed, there was evidence for density-dependent regulation in a small elephant seal population at marion island operating through changes to fertility  <cit> , and it has also been shown that elephant seal population growth is highly sensitive to adult fertility  <cit> . however, pistorius & bester  <cit>  dismissed juvenile survival as an important driver of change in population growth at marion island. this may be explained by the relatively small population at marion and direct evidence that a decline in the age of female primiparity has occurred there recently  <cit> , suggesting that the dominant mechanisms driving the phenomenology of self limitation in the marion and macquarie island populations may be different.

our results have important implications for the assessment of environmental change in the southern ocean and antarctic region. given their status as upper trophic-level predators foraging over vast areas of the subantarctic and antarctic oceanic zone, variation in abundance and life history parameters in this species may be indicative of larger changes occurring throughout the antarctic ecosystem  <cit> . the extensive demographic and population abundance data for the macquarie island population now span approximately five elephant seal generations  <cit> , so these datasets consequently represent an invaluable source of information to determine long-term trends in this region. elephant seal populations throughout the southern ocean have declined substantially over the last  <dig> years, although some populations are demonstrating recent stability or even recovery  <cit> . our results highlight the sensitivity of the species to long-term environmental fluctuations and argue for continued monitoring to determine the extent to which deterministic or oscillatory dynamics are affecting the region's higher predator guild.

CONCLUSIONS
our study quantified the degree to which the likely drivers of variation in abundance interact in a single population of a wide-ranging oceanic predator. the population and demographic models that were constructed provided a quantitative assessment of the complex interactions of extrinsic and intrinsic factors regulating the population, and the processes described provide a comprehensive overview of large mammal dynamics when they are exposed to highly variable environments. understanding the complex nexus that emerges between these two major forces is a vital precursor for predictions of the influence of rapid climate change on animal populations worldwide. as such, species amenable to long-term monitoring within highly stochastic environments such as the southern ocean can act as climatic 'canaries' that chronicle catastrophic ecosystem degradation resulting from human-mediated climate change.

