BACKGROUND
positioning of the nucleosomes on specific locations with respect to factor binding sites can control the accessibility of underlying dna and allow the transcription machinery to work effectively in a chromatin environment  <cit> . genome-wide maps of nucleosomes in a number of eukaryotes have established that rna polymerase ii promoters are nucleosome- depleted but coding regions may have a regular array of statistically arranged nucleosomes  <cit> . the nucleosome-free region  just upstream of transcription start site , results from sequence preferences as well as actions of chromatin remodelers  <cit> .

rna polymerase  iii transcribes a heterogeneous set of small non-coding rna genes with majority constituted of trna genes . earlier, active transcription of a trna gene was reported to exclude nucleosome from the gene in vivo <cit> . pol iii-transcribed genes are found in comparatively nucleosome-depleted intergenic regions  <cit> , which gives the general impression that chromatin may not have much to do with their transcription. activation of pol iii transcription from several sites after global nucleosome depletion in yeast cells, suggests otherwise  <cit> . presence of chromatin remodelers rsc and isw <dig> on pol iii-transcribed genes has also been reported  <cit> . rsc shows different remodeling activity on pol ii and pol iii-transcribed genes  <cit>  and regulates pol iii-transcribed snr <dig> and sup <dig> genes  <cit> . recent studies with human pol iii-transcribed genes have reported that the presence of pol ii and pol ii-specific chromatin marks near pol iii-transcribed genes generates an active chromatin milieu for them  <cit> .

this study shows that nucleosome depletion mechanisms at nfr on tdnas and 5’ nfr on pol ii-transcribed genes are fundamentally different. a stronger upstream  nucleosome positioning, persistence of nfr under repression on most of the genes, sequence-independence of nfr and requirement of remodeler activities to maintain the chromatin structure in active state, are some of the observations which suggest tdna nfrs are different from the 5’ nfr on pol ii-transcribed genes. an array of isw2-dependent, regularly spaced nucleosomes especially in gene upstream region reflects stronger us nucleosome barrier as compared to downstream of the gene terminator. we identify isw <dig> as the new remodeler for pol iii genes, which along with rsc maintains the tdna nfr. finally, pol iii communication with rsc regulates the downstream nucleosome mobility. this downstream nucleosome dynamics can regulate the terminator-dependent pol iii recycling and hence the rate of transcription.

RESULTS
chromatin structure of tdnas in active and repressed states
we used high-resolution tiling microarray to map nucleosome positions around budding yeast tdnas in a 2 kb window. a large number of positioned as well as fuzzy or delocalized nucleosomes  were seen, which give similar profiles on alignment of the whole data with respect to tss or tts  of all the trna genes, probably due to short transcribed length. conforming to earlier reports  <cit> , all tdnas except three reside within a nucleosome-depleted region from − <dig> to + <dig> bp with respect to tss . however, some unique and interesting features associated with the gene-flanking nucleosomes can be noticed. most tdnas  show a strongly positioned upstream  nucleosome, centered at − <dig> bp position with respect to tss while position of the downstream  nucleosome varies across the genes . nucleosomes in the further upstream regions are more regularly spaced compared to those in downstream of the genes. similar nfr is seen on two other pol iii-transcribed genes, rna <dig> and zod <dig> . we had earlier reported a similar arrangement on snr <dig> with nfr spanning over its tata box and a box regions  <cit> . such a common scheme of arrangement on rest of the non-trna genes or any special arrangement with reference to upstream tata box or introns found in some of tdnas is not seen.

interestingly, nucleosomal arrangement is different on trnamet family members. while emt  genes show the general nfr-based arrangement of nucleosomes, three genes belonging to imt  family show a fuzzy nucleosome covering the 5’ gene ends . this may be of functional significance, with a specialized role of chromatin in their regulation, as discussed later. we analyzed nucleosome positions on tdnas in fission yeast and human cd4+ cells also from published datasets  <cit> . as depicted in additional file 1: figures s1b and c, tdna chromatin in these organisms differs from the budding yeast. with a higher nucleosome density, ~50% of the genes in both species are embedded in nucleosomes and do not show clear nfr, strong us nucleosome or phased array . the tdnas in human and mouse show tissue specific expression  <cit> . non-uniform nucleosomal arrangement across all the genes could give differential expression of the genes in a tissue-specific manner.

pol iii transcription is repressed under stress conditions  <cit> . in order to see relevance of the tdna chromatin structure to transcription, we used the same micro-array to find nucleosomal changes, if any near tdnas, after prolonged nutrient deprivation. after  <dig> hr of starvation, nucleosomal changes are seen on  <dig> genes, within a window of  <dig> bp upstream and downstream of the gene body . an increase in average occupancy of both us and ds nucleosomes along with a small decrease in occupancy of − <dig> and + <dig> nucleosomes on both the sides can be noticed . the average us nucleosome position is not disturbed while the gene terminator is encroached by the ds nucleosome, resulting in shrinkage of average nfr. this observation suggests that the ds nucleosome on the tdnas either regulates their transcription or high transcription in active state keeps it away from the genes. however, nfr on rest of the genes is not disturbed under repression; suggesting nucleosome-depletion on active tdnas is not a result of their high transcription rate.

tdna nfr is not sequence-directed
the 5’ nfr at pol ii-transcribed genes is established with a significant contribution of sequence-preferences of nucleosome positions  <cit> . we asked whether nfr seen at tdnas is directed because of sequence preferences of flanking nucleosomes. sequence-based average nucleosome occupancy profile, as predicted  by kaplan et al. around tdnas  <cit> , is opposite of the in vivo nucleosome profile found in this study , indicating that nucleosome depletion on tdnas is not because of underlying dna sequences. nucleosome density data from genome wide in vitro nucleosome assembly  <cit>  also supports this observation and negates the possibility that variable positions of ds nucleosome are because of positioning signals . these observations suggest that nucleosome arrangement around tdnas in vivo is maintained by active mechanisms, such as atp-dependent chromatin remodeling, which help over-ride the sequence-directed nucleosome positioning information.

isw <dig> targets tdnas and maintains tdna chromatin in collaboration with isw2
isw <dig> chromatin remodeler is recruited in upstream regions of trna genes by bdp <dig> subunit of transcription factor iiib  <cit> . we mapped nucleosomes in isw1∆2∆ cells and used the published data  <cit>  on remodelers as well as nucleosomes occupancy on trna genes in single deletion mutants  to find their effect on these genes. a total of  <dig> genes show nucleosome gain  or loss  within  <dig> bp around the gene ends . moreover, most of the genes show perturbation in upstream nucleosome array in isw1∆2∆ cells , probably because of isw <dig> absence, since isw <dig> mutation has been reported to disrupt chromatin structure in upstream regions of few trna genes  <cit>  and in isw2∆ cells, a disturbance in nucleosome array on trna genes is seen only in the upstream region . we found that majority of isw2-occupied tdnas are also enriched for isw <dig>  but on different gene regions . only ~60% of  <dig> isw2-occupied genes show nucleosome gain or loss in isw1∆2∆ . in contrast, most  of the isw1-occupied genes show nucleosome gain over gene body in isw1∆ cells, without disruption of flanking nucleosomal periodicity . this observation indicates that isw <dig> may be the major remodeler responsible for nucleosome-free status of tdnas in wild type cells. it is intriguiging that when both isw <dig> and isw <dig> are deleted, the double deletion mutant shows nucleosome gain on far less number of genes . this suggests that individual effects of deleting the remodelers are nullified on many genes probably due to the opposite directionality of remodelers’ actions. isw <dig> aligns and pushes nucleosome from upstream towards tss while isw <dig> opposes its action by pushing the nucleosome away from the gene body. as a result of combined but antagonistic actions of isw <dig> and isw <dig>  a nucleosome free region is created on the gene body along with strong positioning of the us nucleosome.

rsc-pol iii communication maintains the active state chromatin structure
rsc is enriched on many trna genes  <cit>  and compromising its catalytic activity was shown to cause increase in nucleosome density on these genes  <cit> . a mutation in the rsc <dig> subunit of rsc is reported to abolish its interaction with pol iii  <cit> . we had earlier shown that single nucleosomes near snr <dig> and sup <dig> are affected in localized manner in rsc4-∆ <dig> mutant  <cit> . nucleosome mapping in this mutant revealed a large number of nucleosomal shifts  on tdnas . nucleosome in the mutant covers even the gene body in several cases , as seen in the example of tad, validated by the chip-real time pcr measurement . on the average, the us nucleosome position is not disturbed and most of the shifts are seen in the downstream region, where ds nucleosome encroaches the gene region while nfr shrinks . unlike isw1∆2∆ mutant, periodicity in flanking regions is largely unaffected but nucleosomes show lower average occupancy on both sides of the nfr . a similar gain in density of nucleosomes near pol iii-transcribed genes upon loss of sth <dig>  the catalytic subunit of rsc was previously reported  <cit> . pol iii is not lost from the genes in this mutant as exemplified by three of the affected genes . similarly, the catalytic subunit sth <dig> continues to occupy the genes in the rsc4-∆ <dig> mutant , as reported even earlier  <cit> . this data indicates that the dynamics of the ds nucleosome seen in this mutant is guided by a cross-talk between rsc and pol iii while bound to the genes.

tdna chromatin is required for optimum transcription
we enquired whether nucleosomal perturbations seen in different conditions affect transcription by measuring cellular trna levels using real time qpcr analysis. based on anti-codon sequence, budding yeast trna genes are grouped into  <dig> families, with highly similar sequences of multiple isogenes. quantification of trna levels for  <dig> families in wild type cells  shows different intra-cellular trna levels across the families, which match with the codon usage of yeast cells  <cit> , giving trnaglu at the highest level, followed by trnagly . as compared to trna levels for these families  for wild type cells, the corresponding levels show gross perturbations under repressed or remodeler mutation conditions, like isw1∆2∆ and rsc4-∆ <dig> cells . some families show higher levels in mutants probably because both gain and loss of nucleosomes on genes are observed in these mutants. transcription of tdnas is not affected due to isw <dig> loss  <cit>  probably because isw <dig> on tdnas maintains mainly upstream nucleosome periodicity . this indicates that the trna changes seen in isw1∆2∆ cells are because of isw <dig> absence, which targets the gene body. on the other hand, transcriptional changes in rsc4-∆ <dig> mutant could be due to changes in downstream nucleosome dynamics. this data shows nucleosome dynamics has profound influence on trna production.

pol iii shows differential enrichment on isogenes
for the intra-cellular levels of trna species to be according to the copy number of the coding trna gene  <cit> ; every gene copy within a family should be transcribed and occupied by pol iii similarly. different strengths of a and b-boxes may also result in different pol iii levels on tdnas. we used chip-seq method to measure the pol iii level on different genes. despite the sequence redundancy within and across the families, chip-seq data analysis with or without reallocation of non-unique reads  <cit>  does not give significantly different results , probably because the average chip fragment size  is longer than the trna gene length in our experiment. no pol iii on pseudo trna genes and high but differential pol iii enrichment on all trna genes  is found. pol iii factors, tfiiib and tfiiic persist on genes after starvation  <cit>  but a drastic loss of pol iii is seen on all the genes . surprisingly, total pol iii levels do not match with the relative rna levels from the gene pools covered by each primer set . moreover, different pol iii levels on identical gene copies within a family  indicate different transcriptional activity on different isogenes. from these data, it appears that trna abundance , is probably achieved by high transcription from few isogenes and not by equal transcription from all isogenes of a family.

nucleosome and pol iii occupancy levels on tdnas are inversely correlated
pol iii initiation factor tfiiib binds at − <dig> bp from tss and recruits pol iii  <cit> . differential pol iii levels on isogenes could be because of different 5’ flanking sequences which affect tfiiib binding  <cit> . therefore, high nucleosome occupancy in this region would interfere with tfiiib binding and as a result, pol iii recruitment could be affected. conversely, pol iii presence on the genes could exclude nucleosomes. hence, we compared nucleosome occupancy in upstream region  with pol iii enrichment over gene region for tdnas within each family. an inverse relationship  for  <dig> families covering  <dig> genes  was found. for example, the scatter plot for one of these families, tprougg with  <dig> isogenes present on different chromosomes and pearson correlation of − <dig> , shows greater enrichment of pol iii near tss of isogenes and lower nucleosome occupancy upstream . in another example of the tglyucc family with only three members and pearson correlation of − <dig> , highest pol iii levels are found on tgn. the gene has lowest us but similar ds nucleosome occupancy when compared to tgg and tgo, which show comparatively lower pol iii levels . thus, pol iii occupancy  on most of the target genes has an inverse relationship with nucleosome occupancy in immediate upstream, which is not visible if average plots for individual familes are compared. it gets revealed better in studies of individual examples.

ds nucleosome interferes with transcription from individual genes
nucleosome mapping results show that under different conditions, the us nucleosome is generally not disturbed. in comparison, the ds nucleosome shows greater dynamism , suggesting it may have regulatory influence on gene transcription. five more examples were studied, for which we could design unique primer sets for rna estimation . five of them are found on different chromosomes and belong to different families. rna yield from tpo <dig> is lowest of the five . among the rest four, trl and tsc rna levels are higher than trj and ttk rna levels. the us nucleosome occupancy on all of them is found to be similar but pol iii levels still show differences. the ds nucleosome occupancy on tsc giving higher rna yield, is lower than on trj with lower rna yield . similarly, trl yields higher rna and has lower ds nucleosome occupancy than ttk . in comparison to these, on tpo <dig>  pol iii levels are comparatively low with both us and ds nucleosomes showing high occupancy , which may be the reason for lowest rna yield from this gene. a direct negative correlation of the ds nucleosome occupancy and pol iii occupancy/rna yield from other gene cases could not be made due to sequence redundancy problems associated with isogenes as mentioned above, but the differences in relative rna levels from genes with mostly similar pol iii occupancy can most probably be correlated with the ds nucleosome occupancy, as discussed later. it may be noticed in this context that on many genes, the ds nucleosome shows mobility towards the gene under repressed state .

different nucleosomal arrangement on initiator and elongator methionyl trna genes presents another interesting example of pol iii gene regulation by nucleosome dynamics. initiator trnamet  with four identified isogenes is found at levels higher than the elongator counterpart . being initiator, high but regulated levels of this trna may be required by the cell for normal protein synthesis. it is interesting that out of four initiator trna  genes, those with a nucleosome covering the gene region show lower pol iii enrichment compared to two other sequence identical copies . nucleosomes are generally repressive for transcription. accordingly, lower pol iii levels seen on the two initiator family members j <dig> and tmo1), both of which have a fuzzy nucleosome covering their 5’ end and a very short nfr ; suggest either no or very low transcription from the two isogenes. the other two family members, tme and tmp; which have higher pol iii levels  and more clear gene regions  can probably meet the normal cellular requirements. at the same time, losing the nucleosome from the repressed copies provides a possibility of enhanced yield required under conditions of higher demand.

above examples imply that the nucleosome occupancy and dynamics influence the pol iii level and transcription from the trna gene loci. different chromatin remodelers target different gene regions. isw  <dig> maintains nucleosome arrangements in upstream region of tdnas and isw <dig> keeps the gene body nucleosome-depleted. rsc action is seen mostly in the downstream region, although the role of other remodelers can not be excluded at this stage. the ds nucleosome mobility towards the gene may inhibit the transcription by restricting the access of pol iii to the gene terminator. therefore, rsc activity keeps the ds nucleosome away from the tts of the gene.

discussion
sequence-directed nucleosome positions can be further modulated by dna binding proteins and chromatin remodelers  <cit> . nucleosome arrangement at tdnas follows the same principles. short pol iii genes with intra-genic factor binding sites are mostly a size of single nucleosomal dna. transcription machinery of pol iii has to compete with nucleosomes for access to the trna gene sequence, which favors nucleosome formation  <cit> . protection of complete gene region by its transcription factors and high transcription rate have been implied as cause of nucleosome depletion at tdnas. persistence of tdna nfr even after prolonged repression suggests that high transcription rate is not required for nucleosome depletion. nucleosomes are rather actively excluded from the gene body by employing chromatin remodelers. the nfr at tdnas is an elegant example where nucleosome-favoring sequences are depleted of nucleosomes in vivo by employing chromatin remodelers to facilitate transcription.

in yeast, several atp-dependent chromatin remodelers are shown to direct the positions of most of the nucleosomes  <cit> . this study has shown the importance and novelty of the roles of two chromatin remodelers in tdna regulation. nevertheless, the nucleosome-depleted status of several gene bodies even in the iswi double deletion mutant suggests the involvement of some other remodelers as well. we extracted and analysed the data on chd <dig> and nucleosome occupancy on tdnas from published studies  <cit> . chd <dig> showed strong association with tdnas but nucleosome profiles in wild type and chd1∆ cells did not show discernible differences making the analysis results inconclusive. isw <dig> activity in upstream region of tdnas has been reported earlier  <cit> , where it is found enriched  <cit> . our study with double deletion mutant helped us find that isw <dig> and isw <dig> work in opposite manner on tdna chromatin and it is the isw <dig> action, which makes tdnas nucleosome-depleted. the opposing actions of isw <dig> and isw <dig> position the us nucleosome strongly in most cases, which strongly supports the isw2-dependent nucleosome periodicity in the further upstream region. the strong positioning of us nucleosome restricts the 3’ boundary of the upstream nucleosomal array to − <dig> bp, which could keep the − <dig> bp position nucleosome-depleted. this would facilitate tfiiib binding and promote transcription in turn. rsc activity on the other hand, is seen in the gene downstream region. the earlier reported effects of rsc on tdnas as judged by transcription of few genes, have been found in a condition where its catalytic subunit is lost  <cit> . we have used a rsc mutant in which rsc and its catalytic activity remain intact yet remodeling activity is lost due to its deficiency in interaction with pol iii. nucleosome positions and transcription output change across most of the genes in this mutant. this links rsc directly with pol iii transcription and gives evidence in support of the mechanism by which rsc controls the tdna activity and chromatin structure via modulating downstream nucleosome dynamics.

regulation via nucleosome dynamics is apt for genes that are transcribed at very high rate since it can allow a quick regulatory response in adverse conditions and transcription can resume as soon as repressive condition is over. the interaction of pol iii with rsc plays an important role in this by negotiating with the downstream nucleosome. occluding the whole gene body and ds nucleosome dynamics offer novel regulatory mechanisms, adopted by a majority of pol iii-transcribed genes in yeast. transcription terminator facilitates the recycling of pol iii on the same template giving faster re-initiation and hence transcription rate in vitro  <cit> . blocking the gene terminator with a nucleosome can reduce the transcription by inhibiting the terminator-dependent recycling of pol iii. in the absence of any known classical activation route available for these genes, facilitated re-initiation could be a very important mode of enhancing transcript yield in vivo. ds nucleosome mobility was shown to control the accessibility of tts and transcription on the sup <dig> gene in vivo  <cit> . thus, a differential dynamics of ds nucleosome on different tdnas and their isogenes can lead to different transcript yields from and within a family, as observed in this study. such a mechanism of gene regulation from downstream is not known for other classes of genes and could be a mechanism specially adapted by and evolved at pol iii-transcribed loci. a ds nucleosome covering almost half of the gene body for most of trna genes in s. pombe may be significant in this connection .

the presence of a strong upstream nucleosome and nfr on tdnas, which are found scattered across the genome may play a significant role in barrier functions attributed to trna genes  <cit>  as nucleosome-free regions have been shown to serve as boundary elements  <cit> . replication forks are reported to stall with high frequency near trna genes  <cit> , probably due to the well-positioned us nucleosome on tdnas seen in this study. the study enhances our perception about how nucleosome dynamics participates in pol iii transcription regulation and how their arrangements on different gene classes have evolved to match the requirements.

CONCLUSIONS
it is fully evident from this data that a strongly positioned upstream  nucleosome, the nfr on tdnas and nucleosome downstream of the gene are not sequence-directed, rather the result of a fine balance between specific activities of the chromatin remodelers rsc and iswi. disturbance in this arrangement interferes with transcript yield but nfr on most of the genes is not lost under repression, suggesting the cause of nucleosome depletion is not the high transcriptional activity of trna genes. collaboration between polymerase and atp-dependent chromatin remodelers is important for optimum transcription from pol iii-transcribed genes too. involvement of other chromatin modifiers and histone modifications remains implicit. the strongly positioned us nucleosome and nfr on tdnas can form the basis of the barrier functions reported for trna genes.

