BACKGROUND
every gram-negative bacterium in the order chlamydiales is an obligate intracellular pathogen  <cit> . the organisms are dimorphic, and alternate between free-living, infectious "elementary bodies"  endocytosed by mucosal cells into vesicular inclusions, and metabolically active, intracellular "reticulate bodies" . rbs replicate and redifferentiate into ebs before being released to infect neighboring cells, and infections  are often complicated by a damaging immune response and chronic inflammation. human genital c. trachomatis infections are associated with ectopic pregnancy and infertility, and serovars that target ocular membranes can lead to trachoma and blindness. chlamydophila pneumoniae  causes pneumonia in the elderly, and colonization of the placenta by ch. abortus causes abortion in ewes .

uniquely among bacteria, the chlamydial outer membrane  is reinforced by a network of disulphide bonds  <cit> . treatment of ebs with sarkosyl produces "chlamydial om complexes"   <cit>  containing three relatively detergent-resistant, cysteine-rich proteins: the major outer membrane protein , encoded by ompa, and omcb and omca, encoded by omp <dig> and omp <dig>  respectively. momp  is expressed in both ebs and rbs  <cit> . it contains extensive β-sheet secondary structure and forms large pores  <cit> , similar to β-barrel porins found in other outer bacterial membranes . the momps encoded by different c. trachomatis serovars share five well-conserved regions and four "variable sequence"  domains  <cit> . c. trachomatis vs domains, and homologous regions in momps from other species, could correspond to cysteine-rich surface-exposed loops in a porin β-barrel, and eb momp is oxidised and highly cross-linked, making the om very stable. rbs in contrast are osmotically active with reduced, mainly monomeric, momp  <cit> . momp's pore-forming ability is enhanced by reduction  <cit> , compatible with a link between reversible disulphide bond formation and the developmental stage of the bacteria. supporting this idea, dtt-reduced ebs tend to resemble rbs  <cit> , and native momp is monomeric when solubilised in sds under reducing conditions, but forms monomers, dimers, trimers, tetramers and even larger complexes  under oxidising conditions.

c. trachomatis momp is highly immunogenic. antibodies to the protein neutralised eb infectivity  <cit> , and triggered approaches to generate momp-based vaccines . however, as implied earlier, the immunopathology of chlamydial infections is complicated  <cit> , with th <dig> type immune responses as well as specific antibodies . momp is not equally immunogenic in all spp., and it also stimulates t-cell division, including cd4+ and cd8+ t-cells, enhancing ifn-γ secretion  <cit> . c. trachomatis momp will probably need to be modified to form a safe and effective subunit vaccine, emphasizing the importance of understanding its structure in more detail.

omca and omcb  are present as approximately  <dig> omcb: <dig> omca: <dig> momp  <cit> . ch. psittaci  omca is a  <dig> kda lipid-anchored protein with  <dig> cysteine residues  <cit> , while omcb  contains  <dig> cysteines  <cit> . the omc proteins may not be integral membrane proteins. reduced omcb is water-soluble, and although omca remains membrane-associated, it can be readily solubilised when reduced  <cit> , and neither protein was detected on the surface of intact ebs by immunogold labeling  <cit> . regardless of their membrane association, omcb appears to be extensively cross-linked in the periplasm of ebs, forming disulphide bonds with both momp and omca. appropriately, both omc proteins are expressed late in the developmental cycle , as rbs are reorganized into ebs  <cit> , consistent with the idea that rb momp is functional and exchanges nutrients and other factors  with the host cell. extensive disulphide cross-linking in ebs may inactivate the porin, and prevent expansion of the growing bacterial cell wall.

although momp is of major biological and clinical interest, chlamydia only grow in eukaryotic cells, and momp is difficult to isolate and purify because it can aggregate when oxidized, or interact with other cysteine-rich chlamydial proteins. as a result, many groups have expressed recombinant momp in e. coli using full-length ompa genes that include the signal sequence to target the translated protein to the om. although leadered momp can be expressed in a heterologous system  <cit> , this approach has proved to be highly problematic, because the protein tends to misfold and aggregate. koehler et al.  <cit>  demonstrated surface-exposure, but with a dramatic reduction in cell viability, including om disruption and substantial cell lysis . jones et al.  <cit>  co-reconstituted recombinant momp with endogenous e. coli porins, and showed altered solute permeabilities in liposome-swelling assays. although attributed to novel porin activity, this could have reflected modification of endogenous porins. wyllie et al.  <cit>  pursued an alternative approach with truncated versions of ch. abortus and ch. pneumoniae momp, and obtained small amounts of folded proteins without prior denaturation and refolding, sufficient for incorporation into planar bilayers and single-channel recording. other expression systems, pioneered because of their potential for vaccine delivery, include mammalian cos cells  <cit>  and vibrio cholerae  <cit> .

porb , a second putative porin, is also surface-exposed in chlamydia  <cit> . recombinant porb specifically transported dicarboxylates in liposome-swelling assays  <cit> , although. it was used with a c-terminal his tag. the terminal residues of porins normally meet to complete a transmembrane β-strand, and may even be linked by a salt bridge. being integral to the protein fold, additional terminal residues might affect the conformation and, therefore, the specific function of a porin. we expressed porb as well as momp to help determine the factors affecting chlamydial porin expression, but because of these theoretical concerns concerning porin folding and function, we avoided tagged proteins in the present study, and built on previous work with leadered constructs.

we developed improved conditions for the surface expression of momp in e. coli cells, and demonstrated unambiguously by single-channel recording that recombinant c. trachomatis momp folded and formed a functional protein in the absence of many endogenous porins. we showed that momp can insert into the outer membrane of e. coli cells and form sds-sensitive oligomers in the absence of cysteine residues, and generated a "working model" of the topology of momp to provide structural hypotheses that could be tested by engineering the recombinant protein.

RESULTS
optimised momp expression in e. coli cells
our first objective was to obtain properly folded recombinant chlamydial porins in the outer membranes of e. coli cells. building on previous work , bl <dig> cells were transformed with pet-ompa or pet-porb constructs, and expression was induced by  <dig> mm iptg at 37°c after growth to an od <dig> of  <dig> . compared to the expression of non-leadered proteins , cells expressing leadered porins must transport the immature full-length porin across the inner membrane, cleave the leader sequence in the periplasmic space, and fold and insert the mature protein into the om. expression of mature, leaderless c. trachomatis momp did not inhibit growth compared to non-transformed cells, in contrast to substantial inhibition with full length momp . to investigate whether different leader sequences could improve processing, c. trachomatis momp was expressed with the ompt leader rather than its native leader. initial growth rates were comparable to those shown by non-transformed cells, and similar to cells expressing mature momp , although the cultures again showed a reduced final cell density.

we next investigated the expression of momps from other chlamydial spp. to determine whether the observed effects were specific to c. trachomatis momp, and we also expressed c. muridarum porb to exclude a universal problem with the expression of all putative chlamydial porins in e. coli. the constructs had different effects on cell viability . bacteria expressing c. muridarum momp grew more slowly than bacteria expressing c. trachomatis momp, although the bacteria continued to grow slowly throughout the entire period of induction. the growth of bacteria expressing ch. abortus momp or c. muridarum porb was markedly reduced, and the density decreased after  <dig> min. the "recovery" at later stages reflected multiplication of non-expressing cells in the presence of β-lactamase released from dead or dying cells . we then changed the leader sequences. the growth of cells expressing c. trachomatis momp and c. muridarum porb was improved by replacing the native chlamydial leader with the e. coli ompt leader, and the decrease in optical density occurred later in the induction and continued more slowly. in contrast, no significant improvement was seen when ch. abortus momp was expressed with the ompt leader .

we also expressed full-length constructs in e. coli bl21omp <dig> cells lacking expression of the endogenous porins lamb, ompa, ompc and ompf  <cit> . toxicity was more pronounced than in unmodified bl <dig> cells, and after establishing conditions for detergent extraction of recombinant momp , expression conditions were further optimised to improve the yield of processed, recombinant protein. native and ompt-leadered c. trachomatis momp constructs were induced rapidly at 37°c with  <dig> mm iptg or slowly at 16°c with  <dig>  mm iptg . at 37°c both versions of momp were expressed, and by  <dig> hours about half the protein was processed, as shown by the doublet band of om-associated momp with and without its signal sequence . the ~ <dig> kda difference between the cleaved and non-cleaved protein bands , is similar to the difference seen when leadered versions of e. coli ompf are expressed). there was a slight decrease in total protein when momp was expressed with its native leader at 16°c, but the proportion of processed protein was unchanged. although protein decreased following slow induction of momp containing the ompt leader, most of the protein was processed. based on these observations, slow induction of native-leadered momp was carried out in different growth media for prolonged periods. after growing for  <dig> hours, cultures in lb medium plateaued at an od <dig> ~ <dig> , after which the cells began to lyse. in contrast, cells cultured in more supportive soc medium continued to grow steadily, and began to plateau about  <dig> hours after induction .

processing and surface expression of mutagenised and engineered momps
given the known difficulties associated with protein misfolding and aggregation , a particular problem for chlamydial momps compared to other bacterial porins, our next objective was to determine whether momp was actually inserted into the e. coli outer membrane. although recombinant momp was associated with the om fraction following subcellular fractionation, the observation that its leader sequence was not always cleaved  suggested that some leadered protein co-fractionated with oms, possibly as a peripheral membrane protein. this raised the possibility that even cleaved recombinant proteins might not be fully integrated into the om. to determine whether processed momp was actually inserted into  the om, we carried out whole cell immunoblots to probe for the presence of momp epitopes on the surface of intact e. coli bl <dig> cells. because of the importance of reduced temperature , we carried out inductions for whole cell immunoblotting at 37°c, 16°c and an intermediate temperature of 25°c. momp was incorporated into the om at both 25°c and 16°c, when induced in the presence of either  <dig> mm or  <dig>  mm iptg, respectively. expression and processing were more rapid at 25°c, and because the presence of some unprocessed protein was irrelevant in this experiment, we induced the cells at 25°c for  <dig> hrs. non-transformed bl <dig> cells, or cells transformed with an empty plasmid, and bl <dig> cells transformed with constructs encoding mature, leaderless c. trachomatis momp, or with ompt-leadered momp and native leadered-momp, were applied to a nitrocellulose membrane , and probed with anti-momp pab .

the absence of a signal from control cells and cells expressing momp in its non-leadered, mature form confirmed the incubation and blotting conditions did not cause cell lysis and expose unincorporated protein. both ompt- and native-leadered momp were detected on the cell surface , confirming they were inserted into the om. unfortunately, bl21omp <dig> cells were too fragile to survive the same blotting procedure. sds-page analysis of og-solubilised om fractions  confirmed momp expression and processing, although parallel immunoblots  showed faint additional bands of ~ <dig> kda for the leadered proteins, indicating that processing was incomplete, as expected. parallel immunofluorescence data  showed momp was confined to cytoplasmic inclusion bodies containing the mature protein when the appropriate cells were fixed and permeabilised before staining . as expected, staining was absent when the antibody was applied before permeabilisation . however, om staining was seen for momp expressed with both the ompt leader and the native leader . when these cells were permeabilised before staining , immunoreactive protein was also noted internally, as expected , although reduced or absent in bl21omp <dig> cells induced for  <dig> hrs at 16°c in more supportive soc medium .

we concluded that momp constructs encoding appropriate leaders could be expressed in e. coli, cross the inner membrane, and be processed in the periplasm. furthermore, under modified incubation and induction conditions , momp could be folded and incorporated into the outer membrane.

membrane topology of momp
having confirmed that c. trachomatis momp was inserted into the om of e. coli cells, we set out to investigate how the protein was organized in the membrane. while noting that predictive algorithms must always be deployed with care, and with reference to established findings for a given protein, we first analyzed momp's primary sequence for membrane crossings using a neural network trained with om proteins of known structure  <cit> . the analysis  showed  <dig> membrane crossings. as expected, the vs domains of c. trachomatis momp generally corresponded to regions of the protein predicted to be extracellular.

we then reanalyzed the sequence using two β-strand prediction programs . the combined analysis revealed a total of  <dig> strands, corresponding numerically to the initial "membrane crossing" prediction . we discarded the strand coinciding with vs <dig> in b2tmpred  because vs domains are likely to be extracellular loops, and inserted an extra strand between g <dig> and s <dig> to bring the chain back across the membrane, so that all  <dig> vs domains remained external. minor adjustments were made to accommodate known constraints on β-strand organization and porin structures  <cit> . the final working model  provided testable hypotheses concerning the pattern of transmembrane folding. all the cysteine residues were predicted to be accessible for inter- or intrasubunit disulphide bond formation or cross-linking with other proteins. most were predicted to be external, but two were periplasmic. although one thiol group was in a predicted transmembrane domain, it faced the central water-filled pore rather than the lipid bilayer, where it could potentially interact with a cysteine thiol on a pore-confined loop.

we designed four c. trachomatis momp constructs  in which substantial regions of vs domains  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or  <dig>  were deleted, to test the prediction that these domains are surface-exposed loops that can be shortened without compromising the main β-barrel fold and membrane insertion. the region removed from vs <dig> was g <dig> to y87; from vs <dig>  e <dig> to f156; from vs <dig>  y <dig> to g238; and from vs <dig>  d <dig> to t <dig>  our strategy  resulted in some mutations. most were conservative changes , apart from g219d in vs <dig>  however, our topology prediction placed this residue in an external loop, where the additional charge was unlikely to be significant. we also generated another pair of constructs with deletions of either one or two of the predicted β-strands between vs domain  <dig> and vs domain  <dig> , in an attempt to disrupt the formation of om-inserting β-barrels. these constructs were designated: Δβ <dig>  with removal of e <dig> to f <dig>  and Δβ <dig> , with removal of f <dig> to a <dig> .

before expressing the cdnas encoding putative loop or strand deletions, we re-examined the expression and om insertion of full-length c. trachomatis momp using a construct in which all  <dig> cysteine residues  were replaced by alanine. the results  were similar to those for the non-mutagenised protein, showing that folding and membrane insertion could proceed without cysteine residues and without the controlled formation of disulphide bonds . we then expressed each of the "loop-deleted" momp proteins in bl <dig> cells. all four were detected on the cell surface , demonstrating incorporation into the om. in contrast, recombinant proteins expressed from constructs with putative β-stand deletions were not detectable on the surface of e. coli cells . we considered the unusual possibility that all the epitopes in the "strand-deleted" proteins might have been unreactive in the e. coli membrane, due to masking or oligomerisation, but suspension of the cells in tris  buffer , or the addition of  <dig> mm edta, failed to "unmask" any immunoreactivity .

momp forms oligomers in the e. coli outer membrane
native momps are difficult to purify free from other chlamydial proteins  <cit> , precluding firm conclusions about native subunit structure, especially in the absence of protein  oxidation. in preliminary investigations of the subunit organisation of recombinant momp, we noted that the recombinant protein did not form sds-resistant oligomers . however, unlike trimeric e. coli porins  <cit> , oligomers of isolated momp, away from their normal membrane environment  <cit> , may be unstable in the presence of sds, so we subjected detergent-solubilised om extracts to large-scale non-denaturing ge chromatography in milder detergents. for these and all subsequent experiments, momp was expressed in bl21omp <dig> cells with the ompt leader , to exclude heterooligomers containing endogenous e. coli porins, and minimize uninserted periplasmic protein, respectively.

we carried out ge chromatography in ldao or zwittergent 3– <dig> , with excess  dtt in the presence of momp cysteine residues . under these conditions, momp appeared to form oligomers containing 2– <dig> subunits, although some recombinant momp always formed higher-order oligomers . similar results were obtained after repeating each experiment at least twice. the apparent subunit stoichiometry of recombinant momp depended on the detergent, with putative dimers in ldao, and trimers or tetramers in zwittergent 3– <dig>  depending on the presence or absence of cysteine residues, respectively. however, it should be emphasized that only the major quaternary species was identified in each case. the presence of oligomers in ldao or zwittergent 3– <dig> contrasted with the absence of sds-resistant oligomers during sds-page, and oligomer formation even in the absence of cysteine residues argued against an essential role for disulphide bonds.

we also investigated the subunit organization of momp by covalent cross-linking following expression and insertion into bl21omp <dig> oms, by removing dtt to allow in situ cysteine oxidation by dissolved oxygen. om proteins were then incubated in sds sample buffer with or without reducing agent at room temperature for  <dig> mins, separated by sds-page, and detected by western blotting . reduced momp appeared as a single band of ~ <dig> kda, but non-reduced momp occupied several distinct bands. sds-denatured, monomeric momp appeared as a band of ~ <dig> kda , corresponding to the reduced sample. however, monomeric momp also formed a band of ~ <dig> kda, running "ahead" of its normal apparent molecular mass, as previously seen with "folded" porin monomers  <cit> . additional, fainter bands at higher molecular masses corresponded to dimers, tetramers and possible trimers , similar to the findings following ge chromatography, with an upper band of aggregated protein that failed to enter the gel.

surface-expressed momp is functional
fully processed and correctly folded momp should function as a porin-like ion channel  <cit> . we tested this crucial prediction by expressing "wild-type" full-length recombinant c. trachomatis momp in bl21omp <dig> cells which express only a small subset of native e. coli porins, and not ompf or ompc  <cit> . we then functionally reconstituted solubilised bl21omp <dig> om protein ge fractions in voltage-clamped planar lipid bilayers. fractions containing "oligomeric" momp complexes gave rise to large-conductance, porin-like ion channels . similar channels were recorded irrespective of whether the detergent was ldao or zwittergent 3– <dig> . the channels were voltage-dependent, closing at relatively high holding potentials , but remaining open around  <dig> mv. the single-channel conductance in symmetric  <dig> mm kcl was  <dig> ±  <dig> ps , and the reversal potential in  <dig> mm vs  <dig> mm kcl  was - <dig> ±  <dig>  mv . this corresponded to a relative cation vs anion selectivity of  <dig>  under these specific ionic conditions. control preparations , including membrane proteins from control bl21omp <dig> cells subjected to the same experimental conditions, where om proteins were solubilised and subjected to ge chromatography in exactly the same way, did not give rise to similar channel activity .

discussion
functional reconstitution of recombinant c. trachomatis momp at the single-channel  level from cells lacking many endogenous porins provides very strong evidence that momp adopted its native fold when expressed in e. coli under suitable conditions. although a leadered version of recombinant chlamydial momp was expressed and functionally analysed previously  <cit> , membranes containing the protein were co-reconstituted with endogenous e. coli porins for liposome-swelling studies. although momp may have contributed additional porin-like activity, functional modification of endogenous porins could not be ruled out.

interestingly, the successful expression and processing of recombinant chlamydial porins in e. coli cells depends on the precise leader sequence, as well as on the specific protein. porb is less "toxic" with its native leader, in contrast to momp, which is less "toxic" with the e. coli ompt leader, and native-leadered c. muridarum momp is less deleterious to e. coli than ch. abortus momp. although a full investigation of the role of leader sequences could not be undertaken here, it is known that successful om insertion, as well as prior transport across the inner membrane and processing, is also signal sequence-dependent. for example, a large proportion of e. coli lamb porins with signal sequence mutations remained "tethered" to the inner membrane , even though the protein was also closely associated with the om  <cit> . for c. trachomatis momp, use of the omp-t leader and induction at 16°c , in either "wild-type" cells or "porin knockout" cells in a supportive medium , provides improved processing and om insertion, and there is also significant insertion at 25°c in "wild-type" e. coli.

the single-channel properties of c. trachomatis momp are consistent with previous data on bacterial  <cit>  and putative chlamydial  <cit>  porins. in particular, the channels show "bell-shaped" voltage-dependent gating and are mainly open around ~ <dig> mv, with very high conductances  and poor ionic selectivity, showing only a slight preference  for cations over anions . the channels often appeared in groups of three, as might be expected for a trimeric "triple-barrelled" porin . however, unless the channels were randomly incorporated into the bilayer , these complexes may represent a selected sub-population.

despite the lack of sequence similarity to known bacterial porins, a combination of different predictive approaches , set in the context of elegant and pioneering work from many laboratories on the properties of vs domains, predicted that c. trachomatis momp, like putative porins in the intracellular pathogens burkholderia thailandensis and b. pseudomallei  <cit> , could be a 16-stranded β-barrel. our working model pays due attention to the construction principles for β-barrels  <cit> . the n and c termini complete final strand  <dig>  the periplasmic turns are short, and most external loops are long and include the immunogenic vs domains. the barrel surface in contact with the bilayer consists largely  of hydrophobic side chains, and all  <dig> strand residues with charged side chains project into the pore to line the central water-filled central channel.  <dig> cysteines lie in extracellular loops, and  <dig> periplasmic cysteines lie on opposite sides of the barrel where they are unlikely to form an intrasubunit disulphide bond, although they could form intersubunit bonds, or bonds with other proteins. a single membrane thiol projects into the barrel pore, where it could be involved in disulphide bond formation if a loop  were to fold into the barrel.

our working model for the membrane topology of c. trachomatis momp differs in some significant respects from the recent prediction for c. muridarum momp  <cit>  . although both studies predict that momps are 16-stranded β-barrels with an average strand length of ~ <dig> residues, periplasmic thiols are absent from the c. muridarum prediction. this would preclude the significant interactions with omcb and omca, described in the background. we also assigned l <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> as c. trachomatis vs domains, not l <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  the homologous regions in c. muridarum momp. experimental tests of the predicted membrane topology of c. trachomatis momp are consistent with our model, because individual vs domains can be substantially truncated without preventing incorporation of the protein into the bacterial om. if momp is a β-barrel porin, as suggested, and vs domains are confined to specific extracellular loops, it is conceivable that momp can continue to fold into a β-barrel in the absence of one of these domains. on the other hand, the removal of β-strands would disrupt folding. removal of a single strand, bringing periplasmic residues into direct contact with external residues, is predicted to be particularly destructive to the global fold. removal of more than one strand might be better tolerated, provided the β-barrel can form with a significantly reduced diameter. in practice, it appears that c. trachomatis momp cannot accommodate either type of strand modification.

ge chromatography suggested that momp forms oligomers in the presence of zwittergent or ldao, and in line with these findings, in situ cysteine cross-linking of recombinant momp in e. coli oms revealed oligomeric momp complexes, together with a species of folded or partially-folded momp monomers containing at least one intramolecular disulphide bond. this species contrasts with reduced, denatured momp monomers seen when chlamydial momp is solubilised directly from oms . however, the exact stoichiometry of momp oligomers in the e. coli om remains uncertain because our size estimates for the oligomers, and thus their stoichiometries, may be too high because of uncorrected bound detergent. also, it is clear that the stability of momp oligomers is detergent-dependent.

native ch. abortus momp forms sds-resistant oligomers of ~ <dig> k  <cit> , unlike the sds-unstable momp oligomers isolated from e. coli oms. we speculate that this may be because native momp oligomers are stabilised by interactions with other chlamydial components , and possibly also by disulphide bonds. disulphide bond formation  does not appear to be essential during protein folding and om insertion, because a cysteine-free mutant can be fully processed  and can also form oligomers. overall, our results show that the subunit stoichiometry of detergent-solubilised momps expressed and processed in e. coli is detergent-dependent, that momp subunits can be cross-linked by disulphide bridges, and that folded monomers contain at least one intrasubunit disulphide bond .

CONCLUSIONS
c. trachomatis momp, an immunodominant, cysteine-rich, chlamydial surface protein of crucial importance in the immune response to infection, is a major subunit vaccine target. however, unlike many other bacterial porins, it has been difficult to refold from inclusion bodies or to achieve and demonstrate functional surface expression. this study is the first to report unambiguous functional analysis, by single-channel recording, of recombinant chlamydial momp recovered from bacterial outer membranes. the modified expression system described in the present study provided a means to test specific hypotheses provided by a working model for the c. trachomatis protein. however, although our results are consistent with a working model of momp as a 16-stranded β-barrel, more mutations or other approaches are needed before a specific model can be accepted. the protein also formed oligomers, even in the complete absence of cysteine residues. the surface display of modified, functional momp in e. coli cells , together with a working topological model, could guide the removal of unwanted or harmful epitopes from engineered proteins, and it might also be possible to display external loops containing specific momp epitopes on other porin "scaffolds" in living cells. however, it is important to note that such approaches will be limited if essential disulphide bonds in the native chlamydial envelope, including bonds involving non-momp cysteines, stabilise the conformation of key immunogenic vs domains.

