BACKGROUND
carnivora  represent a medium-sized order within mammalia. it is noteworthy for the charismatic appeal of many of its members as well as the large diversity harbored within it. with its inclusion of both terrestrial and aquatic species, carnivora is one of few mammalian orders to occur naturally on all the continents. it also presents one of the largest size ranges of any mammalian order among its extant representatives at some five to six orders of magnitude between the least weasel  and the southern elephant seal .

with its publication, the carnivore supertree of bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  provided the first complete species-level phylogeny of this diverse mammalian order that was based on a robust, repeatable methodology. in the intervening  <dig> years, the carnivore supertree has formed the basis for numerous studies illuminating the biology of this group, including its macroevolution and conservation biology ; morphological, molecular and behavioral evolution ; and disease and parasite risk . although the method used to construct the tree, supertree construction , was controversial at the time and arguably remains so to this day, the same cannot be said for the phylogenetic relationships presented in the supertree, which largely mirrored the current opinion of the day accurately . that being said, the pattern of relationships pictured in the carnivore supertree are now out-of-date in several places due to three main factors: taxonomic changes within carnivora leading to a different set of accepted species; information from additional data sources, primarily dna sequence data; and methodological limitations in the original analysis.

the original carnivore supertree was based on the  <dig> species recognized by wozencraft  <cit> . in the meantime, however, the number of recognized species has increased to at least  <dig>  <cit> , in part due to new discoveries, but largely due to changes in taxonomic opinion resulting in both the splitting and lumping together of previous species .

at the time that data collection for the initial carnivore supertree was concluded , the molecular revolution was still in its infancy. the amount of dna sequence data for the group available in genbank amounted to only  <dig> sequences for  <dig> species  <cit> . by march  <dig>  the data set had increased to  <dig> , <dig> sequences for  <dig> species  <cit>  and by december  <dig> it had increased further to cover a total  <dig> species.  although molecular data have largely reaffirmed phylogenetic relationships within carnivora obtained using phenotypic data, they have also toppled some long-held traditional groupings and sets of relationships. particularly noteworthy changes include mephitidae being elevated out of mustelidae  <cit> ; nandinia forming the sister group to all remaining feliform carnivores  <cit> ; prionodon being more closely related to felidae than to viverridae  <cit> ; and the monophyly of the malagasy viverridae and herpestidae as eupleridae  <cit> . of these now widely accepted hypotheses, robust evidence was only available for the first two in  <dig> , and only starting to gain acceptance among carnivore systematists.

finally, the analyses for the carnivore supertree were also hindered by several methodological limitations. first, a number of assumptions of monophyly were made, in part for computational reasons. because an analysis of  <dig> species simultaneously was impractical at the time, a compartmentalized approach  was taken instead, such that the supertree was a composite formed from a family-level supertree to which individual supertrees for each of the families  were grafted. thus, the monophyly of these groups could not be contradicted, even if some evidence to the contrary existed at the time . in addition, where a source tree contained a higher-level taxon as a terminal taxon, the tree was coded as if all constituent species of that taxon were present as an unresolved node. although this assumption of monophyly could still be contradicted, the monophyly of the higher-level taxon was nonetheless artificially up-weighted through this procedure. both sets of assumptions now represent avoidable 'appeals to authority' . second, as correctly pointed out by gatesy et al.  <cit> , there was no attempt to correct for potential data duplication between the source trees, meaning that more commonly used data sources were effectively up-weighted. finally, the paucity of available sequence data meant that the molecular divergence time estimates were derived by mapping relative branch lengths from the source publications on to the topology of the supertree, even when the two topologies conflicted. although these shortcomings are real, they fortunately appear to have had little negative impact empirically; as mentioned, both the topology of the tree as well as the estimated divergence time estimates were uncontroversial.

the goal of this study is to produce an updated version of the carnivore supertree that accounts for both current taxonomic opinion and additional data sources  as well as corrects for the shortcomings present in the original analysis by using the best available methodology and analytical methods. as with the original analysis, supertree construction still represents the only robust methodology able to include as much of the phylogenetic database as possible so as to provide a complete phylogenetic estimate for all extant carnivora species. we are confident that the updated carnivore supertree will form an important foundation for understanding the biology of this order for some time to come.

RESULTS
data availability
the supertree  contains all  <dig> carnivore species listed in wozencraft  <cit> . dna sequence data from genbank were only available for  <dig> of these species . for a handful of species , information about their phylogenetic placement was limited to that present in wozencraft  <cit> . often these species were newly recognized compared to wozencraft  <cit>  and the usable phylogenetic information was limited to their generic membership. where additional information was found in wozencraft  <cit>  for these species , this information was included to prevent the poorly known species from collapsing resolution within the genus completely.

although individual species were present more often in source trees obtained from the literature as opposed to from genbank , this result derived more from the unequal numbers of trees in each category . correcting the values for this imbalance results in individual species being overrepresented in the genbank-derived trees . even so, the histograms for both data sources are similar and right-skewed, indicating that most species are present in only a limited number of source trees, with only a few species being broadly sampled ; the same general pattern is true when both data sources are combined. the genbank-derived trees are also larger than those from the literature . indeed the average size for the molecular trees is larger than the largest literature tree  and the smallest molecular tree  is larger than the average size for the literature trees. the increasing ease with which sequence data can be obtained means that this trend will likely become even more strongly expressed in the future.

general structure of the supertree
summary statistics for the carnivore supertree  can be found in additional file  <dig>  overall, the tree is much better resolved than the original supertree, with only nine polytomies in total for a greater total number of species . in addition, the overall topology of the supertree demonstrated good support with respect to the set of  <dig> source trees . across the entire tree, the average reduced qualitative support index  was  <dig>  , indicating that most nodes were supported by more source trees than they were contradicted by. there were no novel clades, either in the sense that a given clade was contradicted by all source trees  or not supported by any source trees . finally,  <dig> of the  <dig> ingroup nodes were not contradicted by any source trees and were supported by an rqs of  <dig> . these latter clades tended to be small, containing  <dig>  species on average; however, herpestidae with its  <dig> species also fell into this category.

at the family level , the current supertree presents a number of relationships that conflict with those from the supertree of bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  but are identical with those in the recent family-level supermatrix study of meredith et al.  <cit> . these include the polyphyly of the traditional mustelidae into mephitidae and mustelidae sensu stricto; the polyphyly of traditional viverridae into eupleridae , nandinia, prionodon and viverridae sensu stricto; and the paraphyly of traditional herpestidae with inclusion of former viverrid-assigned members of eupleridae . in all cases, these relationships were previously prohibited through the assumptions of  monophyly made in the original analysis. however, they accurately reflect current opinion regarding a separate family-level status for eupleridae, mephitidae, nandiniidae  <cit>  and possibly prionodontidae  <cit>  . these changes notwithstanding, higher-level relationships within caniformia are otherwise identical to those presented in the original carnivore supertree. the positioning of mephitidae as the sister group to the remaining musteloidea, with the red panda, ailurus fulgens, being the sister group to the resulting clade matches that obtained by flynn et al.  <cit> . the relationships within feliformia have changed to now place felidae as the sister group to ) instead of to hyaenidae alone as in the original version. however, the relationships among, if not the identities and composition of, the major feliform taxa have historically been contentious and difficult.

the base of the carnivore radiation occurred shortly after the cretaceous-paleogene  boundary  <dig>  million years  ago ,  <dig>  to  <dig>  ma). these dates would indicate that the upper constraint of  <dig> ma ago used by springer et al.  <cit>   for the root of crown-group carnivora might be slightly too young, although the fit between the molecular and fossil data in this case is quite good. our inferred value for the root also corresponds closely with that of bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>   and is only slightly older than those inferred by either eizirik et al.  <cit>   or springer et al.  <cit>  . in total, a post-k-pg radiation of crown-group carnivora seems reasonably certain. the origins of the lineage leading to carnivora are older, at most  <dig>  ma  and probably younger given that our analyses did not include the putative sister group of carnivora . the general compression of the divergence times in this area of the supertree lends more evidence to an apparent adaptive radiation near the base of the laurasiatheria, with the dates inferred here reflecting those indicated by bininda-emonds et al.  <cit> .

unless otherwise indicated, point estimates were also taken to be minimum age constraints. for date ranges, the initial calibration point was the midpoint of the range.

within carnivora, most families have relatively deep roots, especially in relation to the basal split within the crown groups . the oldest crown family is mustelidae , with the crown groups of eight of the  <dig> remaining families initially radiating between  <dig> to  <dig> ma ago. the only exceptions to the latter are herpestidae , otariidae , and the small families hyaenidae  and prionodontidae . although there is a tendency for older family crown groups to also possess more extant species , no significant associations existed between the size of the family crown group and either the time of origin of the lineage  or the relative amount of lag time between the origin of the lineage and the radiation of the crown group . the dates inferred in this study for the carnivoran families are generally significantly older than those in eizirik et al.  <cit> , although estimates for the basal radiations of eupleridae, mephitidae and phocidae agree strongly between the studies.

complete information for all nodes in the tree can be found in additional file  <dig> 

ci: confidence interval; pd: phylogenetic diversity

for canidae and felidae, the long lag times between the origins of both families and their basal radiations reflect the pattern of competitive subclade replacement, with each of the crown groups being the latest in a series of radiations along each lineage . by contrast, the small and recent radiation for hyaenidae disguises that this family was much more successful in the past ; the same holds true for the monotypic odobenidae . of the remaining monotypic families, ailuridae and especially nandiniidae represent the last relics of ancient lineages that originated  <dig>  ma ago  and  <dig>  ma ago , respectively; the age for ailuridae is slightly older than that inferred in the original supertree .

relationships and divergence times within the higher carnivore taxa
canidae 
the family is broadly divided into dog-like and fox-like clades . of the three genera that have been difficult to place historically, nyctereutes, otocyon and urocyon, the former two form successive sister taxa to the remaining vulpini, whereas the latter forms the sister group to all remaining canids . however, all the genera represent long-branch taxa  that together with canini and vulpini diverge at the base of the canids in an exceedingly short time span . these facts help explain the historical difficulty in determining the phylogenetic affinities of these taxa as well as throw caution on the placements inferred herein. indeed, except for the placement of urocyon, all relevant nodes in this region of the tree are characterized by highly negative rqs values, indicating substantial disagreement among the source trees. the placement of these taxa, however, does agree with those recovered by lindblad-toh et al.  <cit> , among others.

within each of canini and vulpini, the recovered relationships agree strongly with those recovered by a variety of other authors. this includes the paraphyly of canis due to the inclusion of cuon alpinus  and the polyphyly of the jackals, with canis aureus being more closely related to canis latrans than to the remaining jackals  . unusual here, however, is that canis latrans and canis lupus do not form sister taxa as is commonly recovered. otherwise, the only other major differences within canini compared to lindblad-toh et al.  <cit>  and zrzavy and ricankova  <cit>  are that lycaon pictus and speothos venaticus form a clade that is the sister group to all remaining canini instead of clustering within canis  and the south american foxes , respectively, the latter typically being sister to chrysocyon brachyurus. the relationships we recovered within vulpini are identical to those found by lindblad-toh et al.  <cit>  after accounting for differences in species sampling. an unexpected result, however, is that vulpes velox and vulpes macrotis are not sister species, given the long-standing question as to whether or not they are indeed separate species . instead, the latter forms a clade with vulpes lagopus.

one obvious inaccuracy in the tree is the clustering of vulpes ferrilata with dusicyon australis within the south american fox clade, a placement that derives from the paucity of phylogenetic information for the former species. at the time of our analyses, no usable sequence data for vulpes ferrilata were present in genbank  and the phylogenetic relationships of the species were specified in only one tree in the literature, that of clutton-brock et al.  <cit> . this latter study represents a phenetic analysis of  <dig> morphological characters that postulates what many would view as non-conventional relationships within canidae. however, it represents the only more-or-less rigorous study to include this species  and the placement of vulpes ferrilata in the supertree accurately reflects its placement in this study.

pinnipedia 
phylogenetic relationships within phocidae reflect the more-or-less long-standing consensus picture for this group , with the true seals being divided into the northern phocinae and southern monachinae. the only substantial difference with the original supertree involves slight alterations within lobodontini . however, nearly all variations within this tribe have been proposed at some point , indicating a lack of resolution. halichoerus grypus remains problematic, at least taxonomically. our inferred placement of halichoerus as the sister species of pusa caspica agrees with several recent studies  and reflects historical arguments that halichoerus clusters within phoca   <cit> . yet, in spite of the long-standing, overwhelming evidence and calls to the contrary, halichoerus has somehow always managed to retain its distinct generic status. the resolution to this problem depends to some degree on what should be done with phoca , which varies regularly between being recognized as a single genus , as four separate genera  or some intermediate solution . given the relative divergence times inferred in this and other studies , we would argue that histriophoca and pagophilus should remain as distinct genera, with both halichoerus and pusa being subsumed with phoca. in the latter case, the designation of subgenera within phoca is difficult due to the paraphyly of pusa, unless one is willing to subsume halichoerus within the subgenus pusa.

odobenus is placed as the sister taxon to otariidae, in agreement with the majority of morphological and molecular evidence . as mentioned, otariidae represent a recent radiation and display a distinct lag time between their origin and initial diversification . callorhinus occupies its traditional position as the sister group of all remaining species. thus, a clear distinction between sea lions  and fur seals  remains missing, reflecting the weak evidence upon which it was originally proposed . moreover, otariinae and the remaining arctocephalinae themselves are also paraphyletic, with several genera  being more closely related to arctocephalus than to the remaining sea lion genera . reflecting numerous molecular studies  <cit> , arctocephalus is not monophyletic, with arctocephalus pusillus and otaria flavescens forming a clade and the clade of neophoca + phocarctos forming the sister group to the remaining species of arctocephalus. all species are well sampled, which, together with similar results in other studies, reduces the likelihood that the result is artifactual. however, because no clear consensus yet exists as to relationships among arctocephalus and otariinae , taxonomic changes for the arctocephalus species  seem premature. much of the uncertainty here might derive from the group  representing a very recent radiation that is not more than  <dig>  ma old . several very recent speciation events are also inferred within the group  as well as between zalophus californianus and zalophus wollebaeki.

mephitidae 
the taxonomic status of mephitidae as a separate family is supported, with the clade containing the old world stink badgers  as the sister group to the remaining new world skunks . the split between these two groups is inferred at  <dig>  ma ago . within the new world skunks, the monophyly of each genus is supported and phylogenetic relationships also roughly follow biogeographical patterns, with the more largely south american genus conepatus forming the sister group to the clade of mephitis + spilogale, with its more central and north american distribution. the age of the split between these two groups  as well as of the radiation of conepatus  would indicate a re-invasion of south america by the lineage leading to conepatus well before the establishment of the panamanian land bridge about  <dig> ma ago.

procyonidae 
procyonidae, and the genus procyon in particular, have undergone some of the largest alpha taxonomic changes since the publication of the original supertree, with four previously recognized species of procyon  being subsumed into procyon lotor. relationships among the remaining three procyon species, however, remain unresolved and represent a very recent radiation .

resolution within procyonidae is poor and worse than in the original version of the supertree, where only the intrageneric relationships were unresolved. apart from potos flavus being inferred as the sister group to the remaining species and a sister-group relationship between nasua and nasuella, little structure is to be found. much of the lack of resolution probably derives from bassaricyon, which was not reconstructed as monophyletic. only two species show reasonable sampling coverage for this genus, bassaricyon alleni and bassaricyon gabbii. the remaining three species  are therefore less constrained in their positioning, leading to possible losses of resolution.

mustelidae 
the subtree for mustelidae displays the greatest concentration of non-monophyletic taxa across the carnivores. some of these instances represent areas of continuing dispute  or growing consensus pointing to the need for future revision . badgers  in particular are confirmed as polyphyletic. as in the original supertree, most species of badger appear close to the base of the family. together with the separation of mydaus into mephitidae, this positioning hints that the diagnostic badger characters may represent plesiomorphic traits for musteloid-like carnivores.

other instances of non-monophyly may derive from limitations in the underlying data set. thus, melogale is probably polyphyletic because the two main species with the greatest data coverage, melogale moschata and melogale personata, only co-occur on the heavily down-weighted seed tree. the same is true of the two species of ictonyx, causing in part the polyphyly of galictinae. lutrinae may be non-monophyletic, with 62% of the equally most parsimonious trees from the matrix representation parsimony  analysis speaking against the monophyly of the group. interestingly, the sequence data are responsible for this result. most relevant literature trees place pteronura brasiliensis either within otters or as part of a polytomy with other otter species. by contrast, four of the six individual genes trees , and mt-tt ) cluster pteronura brasiliensis with non-otters, a result that is also reflected in the supermatrix analysis of the sequence data . of these four genes, only the mt-cyb accession is potentially problematic, with all the top blast hits being non-otters. it is difficult to envisage a case of taxonomic misidentification in this instance, especially given the source of the data  <cit> , although an accidental mix up among the samples cannot be ruled out. this same sequence, however, was also used in a later analysis by the same authors  <cit> , with no ill effects.

otherwise, the relationships reconstructed for mustelidae generally agree with those found by koepfli et al.  <cit>  apart from the indicated polyphyly of galictinae. our analyses, however, generally reconstructed older divergence times across the group than those inferred by koepfli et al.  <cit> .

ursidae 
as in the original supertree, ailuropoda melanoleuca forms the sister group to the remaining species of ursidae, with the long branch upon which it sits being somewhat shorter than inferred previously . tremarctos ornatus is firmly placed as the sister group to a monophyletic ursinae. relationships within the latter remain problematic and our inferred topology, which does not support the monophyly of ursus, reflects merely another in a long line of conflicting hypotheses . the difficulties here undoubtedly stem from an inferred adaptive radiation for the group some  <dig> ma ago  <cit> , a result and value close to that recovered here . because even the application of ever increasing amounts of molecular sequence data do not seem to be providing a consensus topology for ursinae, an alternative approach involving meta-genomic data  might be needed instead to bring resolution to this problem.

hyaenidae 
hyaenidae display one of the longer lag times between their origin and the diversification of the crown group , reflecting that the modern species represent the relict of a much larger, historical radiation. both of these date estimates are up to  <dig> ma younger than those found by koepfli et al.  <cit>  or eizirik et al.  <cit> . the inferred relationships reflect current opinion for the group, with proteles cristata and crocuta crocuta forming successive sister species to the remaining species  <cit> , which alternate between being placed in the same  or different genera .

eupleridae 
the dispersal of eupleridae to madagascar is inferred to have occurred sometime between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ma ago . these dates agree with the estimates of yoder et al.  <cit>  and gaubert and veron  <cit>  and therefore support their hypothesis of a single invasion from the african continent as the most likely biogeographic hypothesis for this family .

our analyses reconstruct those euplerid genera formerly associated with herpestidae  as a monophyletic group about  <dig>  ma old ; the recovered relationships generally agree with those of yoder et al.  <cit> . by contrast, the remaining genera that were associated previously with viverridae  are not monophyletic. this result also agrees with the few others that include all these species  <cit> , although the inter-relationships differ among the studies and therefore remain poorly resolved .

the apparent monophyly of eupleridae would necessitate the convergent derivation of a herpestid-like auditory bulla in galidinae, the viverrid-like bulla of 'eupleridae' being most parsimoniously reconstructed as a symplesiomorphy. this is unexpected given that the morphology of the auditory bulla is commonly held to be highly conserved and taxon-specific among carnivores. however, other extreme instances of morphological convergence are well documented among feliform carnivores in particular .

herpestidae 
relationships within herpestidae are much better resolved compared to the original supertree, the only remaining areas of poor resolution involving five species of herpestes and two of crossarchus. this improved state of affairs derives from the availability, even if meager, of molecular sequence data for liberiictis kuhni, rhynchogale melleri and several species of herpestes, species for which virtually no phylogenetic information was available in  <dig>  dologale dybowskii, however, remains problematic, with no recent available data other than the statement in wozencraft  <cit>  that it is believed by most to be the sister group to helogale.

a clear split between the social  and solitary mongooses  as found by veron et al.  <cit>  and patou et al.  <cit>  is recovered. we reconstructed the clade of solitary mongooses, however, as significantly younger than do patou et al.  <cit>   and also as having undergone a large adaptive radiation at the base of the clade.

with one exception , all genera within the family were recovered as monophyletic. that herpestes is split among three independent clades and is therefore polyphyletic is perhaps not surprising , given that species of numerous other genera have been assigned to it, even if only in the distant past . however, should this general result, which was also found by patou et al.  <cit>  and agnarsson et al.  <cit> , be confirmed, it would necessitate large-scale taxonomic changes for the genus. in particular, herpestes could go from being one of the most species-rich genera within carnivores to a monotypic one given that the type species for the genus  alone forms the sister taxon of galerella such that, following the suggestion of patou et al.  <cit> , new genus names would need to be found or resurrected for the remaining species.

viverridae 
viverridae are among the oldest of the carnivore families, radiating about  <dig>  ma ago . the ci includes the value found in the original supertree  despite the large taxonomic differences in viverridae between the two studies . the date also agrees with those obtained by koepfli et al.  <cit>   and patou et al.  <cit>  , both of which are much younger than the best estimate of either gaubert and cordeiro-estrela  <cit>   or eizirik et al.  <cit>  .

viverridae split rapidly  into three major clades, in which the crown groups are well separated from one another temporally. the first  corresponds to the traditional subfamilies paradoxurinae and hemigalinae , with paradoxurinae being rendered as paraphyletic . the second and third clades, which are sister to one another, together comprise the traditional viverrinae, but now correspond, respectively, to viverrinae  and genettinae  as defined by gaubert and cordeiro-estrela  <cit> . all the latter species are african in distribution except for the genera viverra and viverricula, which again are indian and/or southeast asian. as postulated by gaubert and cordeiro-estrela  <cit> , an asian origin for extant viverrids is the most parsimonious solution, with civettictis civetta and genettinae independently invading africa.

felidae 
compared to the original supertree, relationships within the felidae have been turned inside out, with the large cats  now appearing as the sister group of all remaining felids rather than being deeply nested within the clade. numerous other differences with the original supertree exist for the inter-relationships of the major felid lineages recognized by o'brien et al.  <cit>  . the topology of the supertree, however, agrees strongly with that of johnson et al.  <cit>  with respect to the major field lineages, including supporting the monophyly of all of them. the only differences between the two studies are the reversed positions of the bay cat and caracal lineages as well as felis manul forming the sister group to the combined domestic cat and leopard cat lineages in the supertree, instead of being a member of the latter. a key difference, however, lies in the inferred divergence times, with those in this study for the major felid nodes being substantially older than those in johnson et al.  <cit> .

within the felid lineages, only minor differences with respect to johnson et al.  <cit>  are observed. many of the differences involve groups of species inferred in both studies to have undergone rapid diversifications . two important differences, however, are that felis silvestris and felis catus do not form a clade in the supertree and that leopardus jacobitus constitutes the sister species to all remaining members of the ocelot lineage rather than being nested within it.

comparison with supermatrix and other supertree analyses
the topology of the supertree is determined primarily by the molecular data set. comparison of the supertree topology with the supertree obtained only from the molecular gene trees reveals a difference of only  <dig> %  as measured by a normalized partition metric  <cit>  . this stands in sharp contrast to the value of  <dig> %  in comparison to the supertree derived from the literature trees only. at least some of these differences, however, derive from the slightly more poorly resolved nature of the latter tree . it is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that the new supertree is also strongly different from that published in  <dig> , which, in addition to the methodological constraints listed in the introduction, is more poorly resolved  and literature trees contributed more to the underlying database. many of the important differences between the two versions of the supertree have been detailed above.

differences were quantified by the normalized partition metric  <cit> . number of shared taxa and partition metric values appear above and below the diagonal, respectively.

a supertree constructed from literature and gene trees; b supertree constructed from literature, nuclear dna genes, and mitochondrial dna supermatrix tree; c supertree constructed from literature and molecular supermatrix trees; d supertree constructed from gene trees only; e supertree constructed from literature trees only; f supertree from bininda-emonds et al.  <cit> ; g supermatrix tree.

the supertree is also moderately different from a tree derived from a supermatrix analysis of the molecular sequence data . many of the differences occur within the different families, with the higher-level relationships of both trees being largely identical . the degree of difference is deceptive, however, with much of the apparent conflict deriving from the supermatrix analysis failing to reconstruct a number of reasonably uncontroversial relationships. for instance, it indicates a paraphyletic  procyonidae due to the inclusion of ailurus fulgens, a polyphyletic mephitidae with the separation of conepatus semistriatus, and a non-monophyletic canini and vulpini with the inclusion of a paraphyletic vulpes within canini . the latter result in particular throws all of canidae in complete disarray. it also does not appear to be an analysis artifact , given that the likelihood score of the supermatrix tree with the topology of the canid subtree substituted for that in figure  <dig> is worse than that of the unconstrained supermatrix tree . the very low bootstrap values for this part of the supermatrix tree  indicate a surprising lack of signal within and/or a high degree of conflict among the sequence data. interestingly, a weighted supertree analysis of the supermatrix data set as individual gene trees does reconstruct all these relationships properly , again highlighting the different levels on which the supertree and supermatrix approaches operate  as well as the positive effect of weighting mrp analyses according to some measure of evidential support from the source trees  <cit> .

beyond these differences, a key advantage of the supertree approach remains its ability to use more of the global phylogenetic database for a group and therefore to provide a more complete phylogenetic estimate. despite the tremendous increase in the amount of available sequence data for the carnivores , most species remain characterized for few genes  and it is only with the inclusion of literature information that a complete estimate is possible. much of the latter information could be included in a supermatrix framework; however, it would involve extracting the individual character data from each study and assessing the global data set for homology and redundancy, an exceedingly time-consuming process that is probably unrealistic in most instances . our solution of down-weighting non-independent data sets does not optimally account for any redundancy, but does represent a conservative solution insofar as it assumes complete redundancy among all studies within a data partition. finally, inclusion of the literature data within a supermatrix context also presents analytical problems in that molecular sequence data are arguably best analyzed within a likelihood framework whereas maximum parsimony is better suited for non-molecular data . thus, at least one of the two partitions will be analyzed suboptimally through the use of a common optimization criterion needed under a supermatrix framework.

macroevolutionary trends
all analyses indicate the presence of significant variation in diversification rate across carnivores. this result contrasts with that for the original supertree, where the lineages-through-time plot was virtually straight  <cit>  and only a handful of lineages possessed more extant descendants than expected for their age  <cit> . in particular, the general additive model  analyses show a highly significant temporal variation in rate  with a model in which the diversification rates trends receiving more support than one in which it steps suddenly . although the value is not significant, the pybus and harvey γ statistic is positive for the current supertree , indicating a tendency to more numerous recent speciation events than expected under a pure-birth model.

segmented least squares linear regression indicates three clear phases in the lineages-through-time plot of the carnivores, with two periods of slightly higher rates of net diversification flanking an intermediate period ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  ma ago , with a minimum rate at  <dig>  ma ago . the intervening period of comparatively low net diversification rates reflects the often extended lag times between the origins of the different families and the basal radiations within the crown groups, and could possibly be the signature of the pattern of competitive subclade replacement known for at least canids and felids. the reality of the breakpoint at  <dig>  ma ago might be undetermined to some degree by the higher stochastic variation present at this time  resulting from the low number of lineages . thus, it could represent a time when the lineages-through-time plot is essentially 'warming up'. however, it is weakly indicated by the gam-based diversification analyses, which similarly reflect that many lineages are quickly coming into existence at the base of the carnivore tree , meaning that a true adaptive radiation at this time cannot be discounted absolutely.

the shift at  <dig>  ma ago corresponds roughly to the period when most of the different families began radiating , leading to a peak in the net diversification rate at about  <dig>  ma ago . it does not appear to be driven by the obvious hump in the plot at  <dig>  ma ago, which appears to be an artifact traceable to the large basal polytomy within procyonidae mimicking an adaptation radiation at this time. .) by contrast, the treepar analyses indicate four significant shifts at p <  <dig> , with three of these shifts  clearly being artifacts deriving from the procyonid polytomy .

however, the treepar analyses also indicate a significant shift at  <dig>  ma ago when the lineages-through-time plot flattens out. this shift, which is in fact the most significant of the four, does not derive from any terminal polytomies . it is probably too recent to be an artifact arising from recent cladogenetic events not being recognized as separate species , a supposition supported by the combination of the latter part of the lineages-through-time plot for the original supertree also being flat  <cit>  with there having been several subspecies elevated to full species status in the meantime. instead, the slowdown could be a result of density-dependent speciation  or the signature of a recent mass extinction from which carnivores have yet to bounce back .

these global analyses, however, disguise a diversity in macroevolutionary patterns across the major carnivore lineages . whereas eupleridae, mephitidae, procyonidae and ursidae each present a constant net speciation rate over their entire history, the remaining, generally larger, lineages display at least one inflection point in their lineages-through-time plots. all patterns of change are presented for the latter groups, including general slowdowns  or speedups  in the diversification rate moving towards the present, and higher intermediate rates than in the flanking periods  or the reverse . many of the lineages display conspicuous jumps in the plots, particularly shortly after the origins of the families, pointing to adaptive radiations. overall, however, the lack of a consistent pattern of change as well as the inflection points failing to fall into a narrow time window indicate that there were apparently no factors influencing carnivore diversity globally. this is perhaps not unexpected given the worldwide distribution of the order. instead, explanations for changes in diversification rate need be sought on a group-by-group basis.

that being said, three sets of interesting parallels are observable from the lineages-through-time plots of the individual families. first, all families except ursidae present negative values of the pybus and harvey γ statistic, with the values being significant for herpestidae  and, at least not corrected for multiple comparisons, for procyonidae . this is in stark contrast for the positive value observed over the entire order. second, canidae, felidae and otariidae show nearly identical net diversification rates  for the last phases in their plots, despite the different times at which the breakpoints occur as well as the disparity among the groups in general . third, the timings of the last breakpoints are identical between canidae and mustelidae  and between felidae and herpestidae . in the former case, both families display an increase in rate, whereas in the latter case only felidae show an increase, with herpestidae undergoing a marked decrease. it remains an open question as to whether these parallels are merely coincidental or are somehow correlated, either directly  or indirectly .

similarly, all but one of the seven whole-tree measures implemented in symmetree  indicated significant variation in diversification rates across all carnivores . application of the shift statistics localized five sister groups with significant  and eight others with marginally significant  rate variation in at least one shift statistic . among the former five, notable shifts involve ailurus fulgens and nandinia binotata and their much larger sister groups, but not the relic hyaenidae and odobenidae as might have been expected. most of the remaining shifts were localized within individual families and within mustelidae in particular. in noting that the timings of the shifts often do not accord with the changes in net diversification rate found in the lineages-through-time plots, it must be remembered that symmetree essentially examines for shifts horizontally across sister groups, whereas lineage-through-time plots function vertically through time.

shifts were inferred using symmetree  <cit> . all nodes that presented significant  or marginally significant  shifts for any of the three statistics are listed.

conservation biology
phylogenetic diversity  across the entire carnivora amounts to  <dig>  ma in total or an average of  <dig>  ma for each of the  <dig> species. the pd, at least on a per species basis, is divided relatively equally among feliformia  and caniformia . among the families, per species pd values range from a minimum of  <dig>  ma for the recent otariidae radiation to a maximum of  <dig>  ma for procyonidae. this last value excludes the very small, generally monotypic families from consideration , which generally have much higher values , and is itself an overestimate given the large polytomy involving bassaricyon, thereby resulting in overestimated divergence time estimates for most of the species in this genus. otherwise, the maximum value of  <dig>  ma per species is achieved by eupleridae. the remaining families have values ranging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ma per species.

there is high overlap in those species showing the highest amounts of pd and evolutionary distinctiveness  , with seven species being in the top  <dig> for both statistics: ailuropoda melanoleuca, ailurus fulgens, arctogalidia trivirgata, nandinia binotata, odobenus rosmarus, potos flavus and taxidea taxus. most of these species sit isolated at the ends of very long branches . species generally showed higher ed scores than higher-level taxa. only prionodontidae would be included in the top  <dig> of all taxa and/or clades  by virtue of both its constituent species, prionodon linsang and prionodon pardicolor, also ranking among the top  <dig> ed species. otherwise, the next highest placed clade is that comprising lyncodon patagonicus and mellivora capensis  followed by the genus urocyon .

cr: critically endangered; dd: data deficient; ed: evolutionary distinctiveness; edge: evolutionarily distinct and globally endangered; en: endangered; lc: least concern; pd: phylogenetic diversity; vu: vulnerable.

the top  <dig> evolutionarily distinct and globally endangered  taxa  <cit>   contain all six carnivore species listed as critically endangered under the  <dig> international union for conservation of nature red list. five of these top  <dig> species also fall under the top  <dig> edge mammals  <cit> : ailuropoda melanoleuca, ailurus fulgens, monachus monachus, monachus schauinslandi and viverra civettina. indeed, the two pandas were also the only species to rank among the top  <dig> for all three statistics, highlighting both their evolutionary novelty and precarious conservation position. the new phylogenetic perspective provided here means that two species, urocyon littoralis and procyon pygmaeus, both of which are critically endangered, have higher edge values than some of these five and so should be deserving of additional conservation attention and effort.

CONCLUSIONS
although the carnivore supertree of bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  was a reasonably accurate reflection of phylogenetic opinion at the time, the results were still influenced by several methodological limitations. some of the latter  were severe enough to predestine the results. the current study removes all these limitations, thereby enabling an unconstrained estimate of phylogenetic relationships and divergence times within carnivora. moreover, compared to the previous study, our analyses make better use of the wealth of molecular sequence data that have been compiled for the order in the meantime. the end result is a nearly fully resolved phylogeny, complete with divergence times.

to the best of our knowledge, both carnivore supertrees remain the only complete phylogenetic estimates for all extant species in the group  using as much of the global phylogenetic database as possible . thus, just as the previous version formed an important foundation for a myriad of studies investigating carnivore ecology, biology and evolution, the same will be true of the new supertree. we briefly provide examples of this in terms of conservation biology as well as macroevolutionary patterns across the group as a whole and within its major lineages. many other applications are possible and the new version of the carnivore supertree should prove to be as indispensable as the previous one.

