BACKGROUND
in gram-negative bacteria, the cytoplasm is surrounded by inner membrane  and outer membrane , which are separated by an inter-membrane space, called the periplasm. most of the newly synthesized proteome remains in the cytoplasm, but in addition, different machineries are involved in the translocation of non-cytoplasmic proteins to different subcellular localizations, including the inner or outer membrane, the periplasmic space, or the extracellular space. some of these machineries recognize their substrate proteins by an n-terminal signal peptide  for the translocation process, while other machineries are sp-independent. the im, which is a phospholipid lipid bilayer, is mostly occupied by transmembrane α-helical proteins, by inner membrane lipoproteins on its periplasmic side, and by other membrane associated proteins on both sides of the membrane. in contrast, the asymmetric om, which consists of phospholipids only in the inner leaflet of the membrane and lipopolysaccharides in the outer leaflet, is mostly occupied by transmembrane  β-barrel proteins, and by outer membrane lipoproteins on its periplasmic side 
 <cit> .

the biogenesis of an outer membrane β-barrel protein  begins with the translocation of the newly synthesized, unfolded protein across the im into the periplasm via the sec translocation machinery, which requires a cleavable general sp. once the unfolded omp reaches the periplasm, it uses the sura or skp-degp pathway to reach the om. sura, skp and degp are periplasmic chaperones, which interact with unfolded omps by protecting them from aggregation and thus help them to reach the om 
 <cit> . it has been shown that the sura pathway and the skp/degp pathway can work in parallel, but that the sura pathway plays an important role when the cell is under normal growth conditions, while under stress conditions, the skp-degp pathway plays the major role 
 <cit> .

once periplasmic chaperones deliver the omps to the om, the folding and insertion of the protein into the membrane is mediated by the β-barrel assembly machinery , without an external energy source 
 <cit>  such as atp or ion gradients. this machinery involves an essential multi-domain protein, bama , which consists of a 16-stranded transmembrane β-barrel domain, and of a large periplasmic part that consists of five potra  domains. bama is highly conserved in gram-negative bacteria and also has homologues in mitochondria  and chloroplasts  
 <cit> . in addition, the bam complex, at least in e. coli, consists of four lipoproteins, bamb, bamc, bamd and bame, among which only bamd is essential and conserved in most gram-negative bacteria 
 <cit> . recent hmm-based sequence analysis by anwari et al.  <cit>  showed that bamb and bame are mainly present in α-, β- and γ-proteobacteria, while bamc is present only in β- and γ-proteobacteria. they also found a new lipoprotein subunit in the bam complex, named bamf, which is present exclusively in α-proteobacteria.the bam complex recognizes omps as its substrates via binding to an amphipathic c-terminal β-strand of the unfolded β-barrel 
 <cit> , but the exact binding mode is still not clear. it was suggested that c-terminal β-strand binds to bamd 
 <cit> , once the unfolded omps are delivered to the bam complex by periplasmic chaperones. but a recent bamc and bamd subcomplex crystal structure shows that the unstructured n-terminus of bamc binds to the proposed substrate binding site of bamd 
 <cit> . the c-terminal β-strand of an omp β-barrel domain typically contains an aromatic residue at its c-terminus. it has been reported that deletion or substitution of this c-terminal residue negatively affects the biogenesis of omps 
 <cit> . also, in vitro studies showed that the e. coli om porin phoe, when lacking its c-terminal phe residue, fails to open the omp85/bama channel 
 <cit> . in both studies, overexpression of the mutant omp was lethal to the cells. at lower concentration, the mutant protein was tolerated and got inserted into the membrane. this leads to the suggestion that a weak insertion signal other than the c-terminal residue or β-strand is present 
 <cit> .

robert et al. <cit>  observed that the n. meningitidis om porin pora or its c-terminal β-strand did not open the e. coli omp85/bama channel, and the comparison of the c-terminal β-strands from n. meningitidis and e. coli omps showed a high preference of positive amino acids at the penultimate  position in neisserial omps. when they mutated e. coli phoe or its c-terminal β-strand, changing gln for lys at the + <dig> position, it did not open the channel any more; in contrast, a neisseria pora peptide with gln instead of lys increased the channel activity considerably. these studies and the fact that high concentrations of neisserial omps were lethal in e. coli cells, lead to the conclusion that the c-terminal insertion signal is species-specific and that the residues at the + <dig> position were important for this phenomenon. the number of peptides/proteins used in the comparison in the study 
 <cit>  was very low, compared to the total number of omps present in the e. coli or n. meningitidis genomes; moreover, the phenomenon was only compared between two organisms, one β- and one γ-proteobacterial species. since neisserial omps could be expressed in e. coli at low expression rates, either the neisserial c-terminal insertion signal is weakly recognized by e. coli bam complex, or other β-strands in the full length protein might act as a weak insertion signal.

thus, there seems to be at least some overlap in the peptide recognition. the intention of this study was to use computational methods to quantify this overlap, and to find out whether the observed  species specificity of the insertion signal is exhibited by all gram-negative bacterial organisms.

RESULTS
we identified  <dig>  omps from  <dig> gram-negative bacteria using psortb 
 <cit> , cello 
 <cit>  and hhomp 
 <cit>  as described in the methods section. these omps can be classified into different outer membrane protein  classes/families based on their function and the number of β-strands present in them, as these two features are usually coupled 
 <cit> . we used hhomp 
 <cit>  to classify the proteins into different omp families. a brief summary of the omp classification obtained from hhomp 
 <cit>  for our data set is shown in table 
 <dig>  we then used proftmb 
 <cit>  and psipred 
 <cit>  annotations to identify and extract the c-terminal β-strands from the omps. to evaluate the phenomenon of species specificity, we initially tried to cluster the c-terminal β-strands using different methods, such as sequence based clustering in clans 
 <cit>  and organism-specific pssm profile-based hierarchical clustering. since the sequences were highly similar and very short, the results obtained from these methods were not helpful to our analysis. we then used chemical descriptors and represented each amino acid in the peptides by five-dimensional vectors, thus representing each 10-residue peptide as a 50-dimensional vector. next, we used dimensionality reduction techniques  to reduce the dimensions to  <dig> . we then used all peptide vectors from an organism to derive a multivariate gaussian distribution, which we describe as the ‘peptide sequence space’ of the organism. the overlap between these multidimensional peptide sequence spaces  was calculated using a statistical theory method, the hellinger distance. as described in the methods section, the pairwise overlaps between organism sequence spaces were used to cluster them in clans 
 <cit> .

the omp class of a protein was predicted by hhomp 
 <cit> . hhomp defines the class based on the similarity to a closely related omp structure. when hhomp cannot find a related structure, it classifies the proteins in omp.nn. omp.hypo proteins are hypothetical proteins 
 <cit> .

clustering of organisms based on c-terminal β-strands
the pairwise comparison of the overlap between sequence spaces should help us to predict the similarity between the c-terminal insertion signal peptides, and how high the probability is that the protein of one organism can be recognized by the insertion machinery of another organism. when there is a complete overlap of sequence space between two organisms, we assume that all c-terminal insertion signals from one organism will be recognized and functionally expressed by another organism’s bam complex and vice-versa. when there is only little overlap between the sequence spaces of two organisms, we assume that only a small number of c-terminal insertion signals from one organism will be recognized by another organism’s bam complex. when there is no overlap, we assume that there is a general incompatibility.

as described in the methods section, we examined the overlap of peptide sequence spaces between  <dig> gram-negative bacterial organisms and used the pairwise overlap measurement to cluster the organisms. since the c-terminal β-strands are highly conserved between all omps 
 <cit> , it was very difficult to select a particular cut-off for the distance measure. thus, the clustering was carried out using all the distance measures obtained from the calculations. in the resulting 2d cluster map , each node is one out of the  <dig> organisms, and they are colored based on the taxonomic classes . during clustering with default clustering parameters in clans 
 <cit> , the organisms tended to collapse into a single point, which illustrates that there is large overlap between the peptide sequence spaces. thus, we introduced very high repulsion values and minimum attraction values in clans 
 <cit>  during clustering. with these settings the organisms formed a central big cluster, but separated crudely according to their taxonomic classes. we repeated the clustering multiple times to ensure that this separation is reproducible. in the cluster map , β- and γ-proteobacteria form two sub-clusters, separated by the α-proteobacteria. the very few δ-proteobacteria in our data set cluster in the periphery of the γ-proteobacterial cluster. in the cluster map, e. coli strains cluster along with other γ-proteobacteria. even though neisseria species cluster along with other β-proteobacteria, they form a sub-cluster and are found in the periphery of the β-proteobacterial cluster. note also that in this map, helicobacter species form a distinct cluster well separated from the rest of the organisms. this core cluster includes h. pylori strains, h. acinonychis and h. felis, but not h. hepaticus and h. mustelae species. the remaining ε-proteobacteria species are scattered in the periphery of the cluster map. the distinct cluster formed by most helicobacter species demonstrates that the sequence spaces of helicobacter species are significantly different from rest of the organisms. the neisserial cluster had only very few strong connections even with other β-proteobacterial organisms, which means the overlap or similarity of peptide sequence space between neisseriales with rest of the β-proteobacteria is comparatively low. when we used stringent thresholds for the distance measure, we noticed that the neisseria and helicobacter clusters started to move even further away from the center of the cluster map.

control experiments for clustering: randomly shuffled peptide sequences lose the signal for clustering
we noticed that the organisms seen at the periphery of the cluster map had a lower overall number of peptides, while organisms with more peptides are typically seen at the center of the circle. the cluster map in figure 
1b is colored based on the number of extracted peptides per organism. in figure 
1b, there are  <dig> organisms which have ≤  <dig> peptides ,  <dig> organisms with  <dig> to  <dig> peptides ,  <dig> organisms with  <dig> to  <dig> peptides ,  <dig> organisms with  <dig> to  <dig> peptides , and  <dig> organisms with more than  <dig> peptides . even though h. pylori strains have a comparably high number of peptides , they still form a separate cluster in the periphery of the cluster map; therefore there must be an underlying organism-specific signal from the contributing peptides at least in this case.

to confirm the presence of the organism-specific signal, we took peptides from all the organisms and shuffled the positions of their amino acids randomly, and derived a new similarity matrix as mentioned in the method section which we clustered in clans 
 <cit> . figure 
2a shows the results from this test, where one can notice the taxonomic specific separations were completely lost. the cluster map in figure 
2b, colored based on the abundance of omps in an organism, shows that organisms with more peptides are in the center, and organisms with fewer peptides move to the outer rim of the cluster map. this test confirms that the there is a species-specific signal for which the position of the individual amino acids is important; this is lost when the residues in the peptides are shuffled randomly.
 <dig> 

high preference of positively charged residues at the + <dig> position in neisseria species
the comparison of the c-terminal peptide sequences in the β-barrel of selected omps of e. coli and n. meningitidis peptides by robert el al  <cit>  showed a strong preference for positively charged amino acids  at the + <dig> position in neisserial omps, which led to the suggestion of a distinct species specificity of the c-terminal β-strand recognition. since the comparison was made from  <dig> and  <dig> omps from e. coli and n.meningitidis, respectively, we wanted to confirm this with a larger set of omps from the same bacterial species. the frequency plots in figure 
3a and b were created from  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique c-terminal β-strands. comparison between these plots demonstrates the high preference of arg and lys at the + <dig> position in neisserial omps. when we checked the frequency of amino acids at the + <dig> position for  <dig>  peptides from all  <dig> organisms, we noticed that in the complete dataset, arg and lys are the top two preferred residues at the + <dig> position, and that they are present in  <dig> %  of the peptides. a similar frequency of arg and lys ) is observed when only taking unique peptides into account . figure 
 <dig> shows the percentage of arg and lys at the + <dig> position in  <dig> organisms; in this plot, neisseria strains stand apart even from other β-proteobacterial organisms, and also from all other proteobacterial organisms. neisseria strains  have more than 60% of peptides with positively charged residues at the + <dig> position. note, though, that also in all other organisms, positive charges are abundant there; for example, different escherichia strains also have 25-40% of peptides with arg and lys at the + <dig> position. thus, when these proteins are expressed, the escherichia bam complex should be able to recognize proteins with positively charged residues at + <dig> positions. as a matter of fact, there is experimental evidence for the functional expression of omps with positively charged residues at the + <dig> position in e. coli  <cit> .

high preference of histidine at the + <dig> position in porins  from β-proteobacteria
in the frequency plots  generated for each taxonomic class of proteobacteria, we observed that the frequency of amino acids in the + <dig> positions were comparable, with the possible exception of the neisseriae. in contrast to that, we observed a prevalence  of his at the + <dig> position for β-proteobacteria, while the other taxonomic classes shared a similar, low  frequency of his in that position . 80% of the peptides with his at the + <dig> position belong to the β-proteobacteria and more than 92% of these peptides stem from 16-stranded β-barrel proteins . none of the escherichia c-terminal β-strands in our database have his at the + <dig> position, and experiments by robert et al. were done with a neisseria pora peptide with a his at the + <dig> position. this might be the true reason why e. coli bama didn’t recognize neisserial peptides. when we further examined the available structures of porins from neisseria, and we found the his at the + <dig> position to be present in the trimerization interface of the porins. since the vast majority of the his residues at the + <dig> position of the c-terminal motifs were from 16-stranded porins that typically trimerize, this position might be relevant for trimerization in neisserial porins.

high preference of tyrosine at the + <dig> position in helicobacter species
the separate cluster formed by helicobacter species was an interesting observation for us, because it forms a more distinct cluster than neisseria. this means that the peptide sequence space of helicobacter species is more different from the rest of the organisms than even the one of neisseriales. but the frequency plots , generated from unique peptides of all helicobacter species and h. pylori strains respectively, did not show a strong preference for any amino acid at either the + <dig> position and the strong preference of tyr at + <dig> position is common among the c-terminal insertion signals. but, we noticed an uncommon strong preference of tyr at the + <dig> position. the presence of a hydrophobic residue is common at + <dig> positions, but the presence of aromatic hydrophobic amino acids  at the + <dig> position are highly preferred in h. pylori strains compared to other organisms . since the peptide sequence space depends upon the entire sequence, we cannot confirm that the separate cluster formed by the h. pylori is exclusively due to the residues at this one particular position. there is experimental evidence that the expression of various h. pylori omps in e. coli is problematic 
 <cit> . fisher et al. noticed that as long as the expressed h. pylori omp remains in the cytoplasm of e. coli, it is not lethal, but that once it is secreted to the periplasm by the sec machinery, it becomes lethal to e. coli. they also mentioned - without showing data - that removal of the c-terminal β-barrel region resulted in toleration of the proteins in the periplasmic space. this probably means that the e. coli bam complex didn’t recognize the c-terminal β-strands of the h. pylori omps, and the subsequent aggregation of the omps in the periplasm and the blockage of the bam complex lead to the lethality. the authors concluded that the difference in om lipid composition of helicobacter, which contains cholesteryl glycosides 
 <cit> , might have imposed some structural constraints on the omp structure, and that this structural change is not tolerated by other organisms resulting in the observed lethality of such constructs.

omp class-specific and taxonomy class-specific signals
we noticed that in some organisms, certain omp classes of proteins are over-represented . examples are the prevalence of 16-stranded β-barrels in the genomes of some β-proteobacteria and 22-stranded β-barrels in the genomes of some α-proteobacteria . moreover, of the  <dig>  sequences in the data set,  <dig> %  sequences were annotated as omp.nn by hhomp 
 <cit> , which means there was no closely related homolog of known structure found for these proteins and thus, the number of β-strands in them is unknown. thus, it is not possible to filter the dataset based on omp class alone. but, as a control, we removed one omp class at a time from the dataset and checked for differences in the clustering. when removing omp. <dig>  and omp. <dig> , two omp classes that are not overrepresented in any of the taxonomy classes; this did not visibly affect the clustering. but when we removed the omp. <dig>  or the omp. <dig>  class, which have a high prevalence in β-proteobacteria and α-proteobacteria, respectively, this changed the clustering behavior of the respective taxonomic classes significantly; the organisms got scattered away from their position in the cluster compared to the situation in figure 
1a. this shows that the over-representation of certain omp classes can influence the peptide sequence space, but since the proteins from over-represented omp classes still contribute to the real sequence space of the organisms, we decided not to correct for this effect and used all peptides from the organisms in our experiments.
1a.

we also examined whether there is a more general signal from omp classes, other than the signal from the over-representation of an individual omp class that would influence the observed organism-specific signal. for this, we separated the peptides from an organism based on the omp classification and selected the entities which had more than five unique peptides for further analysis. from this, we created two data sets of entities; one data set containing organisms from all taxonomic classes, but with c-terminal insertion signals only from 22-stranded omps, and a second data set containing organisms only from γ-proteobacteria, but in which individual organisms were split into multiple entities, each representing an omp class that contained more than five unique c-terminal insertion signals. we clustered these data sets separately and the resulting cluster maps are shown in figure 
10a and b. in the cluster map in figure 
10a, each node is an organism, but only the c-terminal insertion signals from 22-stranded omp class were considered for the clustering. in this cluster map, all the organisms clustered based on their taxonomic classes. in the cluster map in figure 
10b, all organisms are from γ-proteobacteria, but organisms with multiple omp classes with more than five unique c-terminal insertion signals per class will result in multiple representative nodes. these nodes which belong to different omp classes clustered based on the omp classes. this confirms that there are independent contributions to the overall signal, from both the omp classes and from taxonomy. within one omp class, there still is divergence in accordance with different taxonomic classes; but overrepresentation of a single omp class in an organism influences the average motif of an organism.

CONCLUSIONS
in our study, we were able to reproduce the difference between e. coli and neisseria c-terminal β-strands as found by robert et al., which suggests a species-specific insertion signal for omps. but in contrast to the earlier report, we show that positively charged amino acids at the + <dig> position can not be the reason for the experimentally observed species specificity between these organisms, as escherichia also contains c-terminal β-strands with positively charged amino acids at the + <dig> position. moreover, there is experimental evidence which shows the functional expression of a heterologous omp, yada of yersinia enterocolitica, with a positively charged amino acids at the + <dig> position, in e. coli <cit> . the neisserial pora protein and the neisserial c-terminal β-strands used by robert et al. contained his at the + <dig> position, which is common for many omp. <dig> proteins from β-proteobacteria and is not found in escherichia omps; this might be the true difference in the recognition of c-terminal β-strands by the escherichia bam complex. furthermore we found that helicobacter strains form a distinct cluster in the cluster map, which is due to their very different composition of c-terminal β-strands. there is experimental evidence showing that expression of h. pylori omps in e. coli is lethal, and that this lethality can be suppressed by removing the c-terminal strand. when we looked at the frequency motifs from helicobacter strains we did not notice a strong preference of any amino acid at the + <dig> or the + <dig> position, however we observed a strong preference of tyr at the + <dig> position, which is not common in escherichia or other proteobacteria. we assume that this position may play an important role in the rejection of these c-terminal β-strands by the e. coli bam complex. the examples of neisseria and helicobacter show that different positions in the c-terminal recognition motif can be relevant for heterologous expression of omps. we predict that in certain group of species the highly preferred residues in certain positions of the c-terminal insertion signals are responsible for the inadequate recognition of the c-terminal insertion signals by the e. coli bam complex. in the future, mutation studies will have to be performed to prove the importance of these residues in the recognition step in the omps biogenesis.

as a result of our study, we have shown that there is a large overlap between the signals from c-terminal insertion peptides of different organisms, which suggests that in most cases, heterologous expression should be possible. omps can fold in vitro even without the help of any other proteins 
 <cit> . the bam complex is an enzyme that makes the folding of omps into the outer membrane more efficient by increasing the reaction rate of a natural process. enzymes modify reaction rates by changing the reaction route to lower the activation energy, and binding/recognition is part of this changed route. thus, it is also important to consider expression rates: poor recognition might still lead to properly folded omps in the outer membrane of a heterologous host at low expression rates. but under overexpression conditions, the bam machinery can probably not cope with poorly recognized signals that would lead to lower overall folding rates . different classes of omps have different folding rates, where small omps fold faster and more efficiently  than larger ones, which might explain why large omps seem to depend more heavily on an intact bam machinery than small ones 
 <cit> .

since there are two different signals that contribute to the observed average motifs, from omp class and from taxonomy, it is problematic to use averaged motifs or sequence logos to determine the compatibility of a given protein-organism pair. the main problem here is the overrepresentation of certain omp classes in some organism groups; this overrepresentation shifts the average signals. it is more useful to determine for an individual c-terminal motif form a protein to be expressed, whether it is also present in any of the omps of the host organism.

the taxonomy-based specificity we observed here based on sequence space depends upon the entire peptide sequence, but at the functional level, these peptides are recognized based on the interacting residue positions in the c-terminal insertion signal peptide. the pdz domain of the bacterial periplasmic stress sensor, degs, also recognizes the c-terminal yxf motif in the last β strand of misfolded omps. this leads to the activation of the proteolytic pathway and the expression of degp, which degrades misfolded omps 
 <cit> . since the c-terminal β-strand is recognized by both the pdz domain of the degs protein and by the bam complex, studying the co-evolution of interacting residues in both cases would help in understanding the divergence of the c-terminal β-strands between different gram-negative bacterial organisms. unfortunately, co-crystal structures of the bam complex with its substrates are not available yet. with more experimental evidence about the substrate recognition sites for the c-terminal insertion signal peptide in the bam complex, the co-evolution of the interacting amino acids can hopefully be studied in the future, which may shed more light on into the evolution of the bam machinery in different proteobacteria, and on its ability to recognize heterologous substrates for biotechnology applications.

