BACKGROUND
reproductive isolation between populations may arise rapidly when male mating signals and female mating preferences are subject to divergent selection. the sensory drive hypothesis predicts that females mate more often with the male phenotypes that they detect more easily, and may evolve to prefer signals that are conspicuous and easy to detect in their environments  <cit> . divergent sensory adaptation in different habitats could then lead to premating isolation upon secondary contact between populations. speciation by sensory drive has traditionally been treated as a special case of speciation as a byproduct of adaptation to divergent environments in geographically isolated populations  <cit> . however, we were interested in exploring whether, if habitats are heterogeneous, local adaptation in the sensory systems may cause the emergence of reproductively isolated species even from a single unstructured population.

in many animals, visual signals, their environmental transduction, their perception, and the ambient light are important in courtship and other social interactions, as well as in predation. in guppies, orange spots are a visual cue in female mate choice and the conspicuousness of the spots can be affected by environmental light . visual sensitivities of guppies might have evolved to detect food, which consequently led to a female preference for orange males as a byproduct  <cit> . in sticklebacks, male nuptial color varies with light environment  <cit> . females prefer males with a larger area of red in environments where red is conspicuous  <cit> , whereas red nuptial color is replaced by black in populations that nest in habitats where red is inconspicuous  <cit> . such phenotypes can coexist as sympatric pairs of species where the environment is heterogeneous and both types of habitat exist  <cit> . in experiments with lake victoria cichlids, females of two closely related species preferred conspecific males in light environments where male color differences between species could be perceived, but showed no preferences where color variation could not be perceived  <cit> . in turbid waters, where color signals are week, males of lake victoria cichlids are far less brightly colored than in clear waters, and sympatric species often hybridize  <cit> . within a species, females prefer males with more conspicuous bright nuptial coloration even under laboratory conditions where each male could easily be seen  <cit> . these observations indicate that females may actively prefer males with colors which the females perceive as intense or conspicuous.

color perception is determined by several different components  <cit> . one important component is sensitivity at a given wavelength of light. individuals with a given spectral sensitivity can detect lights of a certain range of wavelengths better or less well than individuals with other spectral sensitivities. in fish living in the optically dense medium water, the absorption spectra of visual pigments have been shown to correlate with spectral qualities of the environmental light. for instance, snappers  that live in the clear, blue water of outer shelf reefs have rhodopsins with sensitivity shifted to the blue end of the spectrum, while snappers that live in yellow-green inshore water have their sensitivity shifted to the green part of the spectrum  <cit> . similarly, the retinas of cichlid fish inhabiting relatively blue-shifted environments are more sensitive to blue light than the retinas of those from red-shifted environments  <cit> , and they differ in their behaviorally measured detection thresholds for blue and red light  <cit> . similar observations have been made in sticklebacks  <cit> . both positive and negative correlations between visual sensitivity at a given wavelength of light with the ambient abundance of that wavelength have been reported  <cit> .

closely related species of cichlid fish in lake victoria differ in their retinal absorption spectra  <cit> . because the same species also differ in male breeding coloration, and because the most common breeding colors match the major peaks in the retinal absorption spectra, this led to the hypothesis that the evolution of the visual system might play a key role in the speciation process  <cit> . spectral sensitivity is determined by visual pigments in the photoreceptor cells of the retina. visual pigments consist of a chromophore and an opsin protein. in some species, environmental variation can induce differences in spectral sensitivity  <cit> , but in other species such as sympatric species of cichlid fish, variation in sensitivity to light of different wavelengths correlates with heritable variation in the absorption spectra of opsins  <cit> .

one mechanism of color vision tuning, is changing the amino acid sequence of opsin genes , which causes changes in peak absorption spectra of the visual pigments. fixed genetic differences were found at the long wavelength-sensitive  opsin locus between some closely related populations of lake victoria cichlid fish  <cit> . terai et al.  <cit> suggested that interspecific variation in the amino acid sequence of opsin proteins might be related to variation in mate choice signals and food acquisition strategies.

another way of changing color vision is by changing the relative amount of expression of different opsin genes. for instance, when a larger amount of lws opsin is expressed in the retina than of medium and short wavelength-sensitive opsins , the individual could be more sensitive to light of longer wavelengths. cichlids have  <dig> or  <dig> cone opsins but express only  <dig> of them as adults. some species of lake malawi cichlids that inhabit different light environments express complimentary subsets of opsin genes  <cit> . when local environments differ such that they exert selection on visual sensitivity in different directions, evolutionary adaptation of the visual system by either of these mechanisms could lead to divergence between populations in female preference for male nuptial color. upon secondary contact such divergence may cause premating isolation. the interaction between natural and sexual selection would have led to ecological by-product speciation  <cit> .

in several groups of fishes with bright colors and mating preferences for bright colors, closely related species with different breeding color are commonly found in full sympatry, and have been suggested to have diverged at least partly in sympatry  <cit> . for instance, in rock-dwelling cichlids of african lakes victoria and malawi, many pairs of closely related sympatric species differ in their nuptial coloration  <cit> . at the same time, the feeding ecologies and associated morphologies of the sympatric species are sometimes hardly differentiated  <cit> . thus, the early stage of sympatric speciation in these cases could be driven by divergent sexual selection on male nuptial coloration.

sympatric speciation had long been considered improbable from a theoretical point of view  <cit> . more recently several simulation models suggested that ecology-driven sympatric speciation can occur more easily than previously thought  <cit>  . simultaneously, simulation models of sympatric speciation by sexual selection  <cit> , and at least one mathematical model  <cit>  have been proposed. gavrilets  <cit>  reexamined previous simulation models and developed mathematical models for sympatric speciation. he concluded that conditions for sympatric speciation are restrictive, and that some numerical simulations of resource competition-driven speciation  <cit>  used unrealistic assumptions. correspondingly, recent studies  <cit>  that reexamined simulation models for sympatric speciation by sexual selection concluded that sympatric speciation is unlikely to occur unless initial genetic variation for female preference is large and symmetrically distributed.

the problem with most of the models for sympatric speciation though is that it is at best unknown and at worst unlikely that the assumptions and parameters used to generate disruptive selection and to allow for the emergence of stable polymorphisms in response to disruptive selection, are realistic  <cit> . thus, the question how likely speciation through divergence of female mating preferences within a single population really is remains to be theoretically solved. therefore, further development of the theory was needed to explain the sympatric occurrence of only weakly ecologically differentiated sister species with strongly divergent female mating preferences and male nuptial coloration  <cit> . especially, it seemed important to investigate the likelihood of little ecologically differentiated speciation using more realistic models based on explicit genetic mechanisms of female choice and male secondary sexual traits.

in this paper, we investigate the possibility of speciation by sensory drive as a byproduct of divergent visual adaptation within a single initially unstructured population. we made the following assumptions:  spectral sensitivity evolves as an adaptation to environmental  light regimes.  a female prefers to mate with a male the nuptial color of which reflects at the wavelength that she most intensely perceives.  the female's sensitivity to light of a given wavelength depends on the absorption spectra of her visual pigments. we then conducted individual-based simulations to examine the probability of speciation by sexual selection as a byproduct of local adaptation of the visual system in a heterogeneous light environment. by explicitly modeling the evolution of visual pigments and visual perception, we wish to examine if, and under which conditions, speciation within a continuous population can occur when no other causes of divergent selection are invoked.

RESULTS
outline of simulations
we conducted individual-based simulations in which the adaptive evolution of visual pigments and color perception were explicitly modeled to examine whether local adaptation and sensory drive can promote speciation along a short selection gradient within a continuous habitat and population. the simulated individuals are diploid and reproduce sexually. males display nuptial colors, and females mate with a male and produce offspring . the environmental light color in water varies with water depth . we assumed that individuals that can see light of the predominant ambient light color better have higher fitness. the ease with which an individual detects light of a given wavelength depends on the spectral sensitivity of its visual system . individual variation in spectral sensitivity was assumed to be controlled by  <dig> opsin genes with different absorption spectra and the relative extent of their expression. we modeled the mechanism by which an individual with a given set of opsin genes perceives male nuptial colors and predominant environmental lights. individual fitness is determined by local population density and an individual's sensitivity to the predominant light color in the local environment . male nuptial color is under polygenic control; spectral sensitivity is controlled by allelic variation at the opsin genes and polygenes that control the relative extent of expression of the opsin genes . mutations in the opsin genes can cause changes in the absorption spectrum and hence, spectral sensitivity . females search for mates within their mating area, and they actively prefer males whose nuptial color reflects at wavelengths that they can detect most easily . females produce offspring depending on their fitness, and the offspring disperse from their birth sites . the simulation procedures used have been reported in simulation sequence, and the parameters used have been reported in parameters examined and table  <dig> 

observed speciation
speciation within  <dig> generations occurred within a large range of parameter combinations. when it happened, male nuptial color diverged into two different colors  and there were no or only a few males remaining with intermediate color . the absorption spectra of one or two opsin genes shifted towards blue or red generating two groups of females preferring to mate with males of either one of the two different colors . thus, a population in which females preferred males with the peak reflectance of their nuptial coloration at short wavelengths became reproductively isolated from a population in which females preferred males with the peak reflectance of their nuptial coloration at long wavelengths. upon completion of reproductive isolation, the depth distributions of the two groups were adjacent with large overlap . in rare cases, speciation resulted in three species with three different male nuptial colors, female preference classes and adjacent but overlapping depth distributions.

effects of environmental gradient, dispersal distance and mating area on speciation
for exploration of parameter space permissive of speciation, we modified each parameter, starting from a combination of parameters in which speciation was frequently observed : habitat size  =  <dig>  k  =  <dig>  d  =  <dig>  m  =  <dig>  ge  =  <dig> , μ , k  controlled by  <dig> additive loci, α  =  <dig>  male nuptial color controlled by  <dig> additive loci. fig. 2a reports the probabilities of speciation for different combinations of the steepness of the environmental gradient of predominant light color ,  and the dispersal distance of offspring . speciation occurred most frequently when dispersal distance was small  and ge was intermediate . similar to dispersal distance, increasing the mating area  decreased the probability of speciation although the speciation probability for the smallest mating area modeled  was smaller than those for m =  <dig> and  <dig> . with mating areas of a diameter of  <dig> % and more of the length of the environmental gradient, no speciation was observed. similarly, speciation became rare when the standard deviation of dispersal distance exceeded  <dig> % of the length of the environmental gradient . hence, within the above detailed parameter set, frequent speciation required that standard deviation of dispersal distance and diameter of the mating area do not exceed 22% of the length of the environmental gradient.

effects of carrying capacity and habitat size on speciation
increasing carrying capacity  or habitat size  and hence population size, increased speciation rates considerably . varying carrying capacity  had larger effects than varying habitat size . thus, even with low mutation rates  in opsin genes causing changes in absorbance spectra, speciation occurred when the habitat size was large . decreasing mutation rates reduced the probability of speciation , but the relative strength of female preference  also affected it . with the "five sites mutation" mode for opsin gene evolution, the probability of speciation increased with increasing mutation rate . when the mutation mode was "step-wise" , speciation never occurred even with high mutation rates.

effects of genetic control and spectral width of male nuptial color on speciation
the probability of speciation was similar when male nuptial color was controlled by  <dig> loci with additive effects of  <dig> nm and when it was controlled by one major epistatic locus plus additive effects of  <dig> nm or  <dig> nm at four loci . the probability in both models was somewhat higher than when male nuptial color was controlled by a major recessive locus , or only by  <dig> additive loci . the probability of speciation was higher when the phenotypic effect of individual alleles at the additive loci was  <dig> or  <dig> nm, than when individual alleles had a larger effect .

the width of the reflectance spectra of male nuptial coloration did not affect the results when it was about  <dig> nm  or narrower. above  <dig> nm spectral width, the probability of speciation decreases with increasing width. however, speciation occurred quite frequently even when the reflectance spectrum was  <dig> nm  wide . we find that the relationship between the probability of speciation and the width of the ambient light spectrum  is similar to the relationship with the width of the reflectance spectra of male nuptial coloration. speciation is frequently observed even with an ambient light spectral width of  <dig> nm.

effects of genetic control of visual sensitivity on speciation
the probability of speciation did not differ much among models with different numbers of loci controlling differential opsin gene expression . however, in the model with completely fixed expression, speciation probabilities were lower than in others. the ''no peak shift model'', in which the wavelength of peak absorbance of individual opsin genes could not evolve, but differential expression could, was not permissive of speciation. the  <dig> opsin genes model yielded the same probabilities of speciation as the  <dig> opsin genes models .

when the minimum distances between the absorption peaks of lws, mws and sws opsin proteins were constrained to  <dig> nm, the results were not different to those of the unconstrained model. when the minimum distances were constrained to  <dig> nm, the probability of speciation decreased slightly from  <dig>   to  <dig>  in parameter combination of g =  <dig>  and dispersal distance =  <dig> in fig. 2a. however, if we changed α  from  <dig> to  <dig>  the probability of speciation did not differ between constrained and unconstrained models of spectral tuning.

effects of the cost for female choice on speciaton
increasing the cost for female choice reduced the probability of speciation . however, even if the cost of choice for the most distant males was  <dig>  , the strength of the preference decreased by 20%), the probability of speciation was not much different from simulations without costs.

no effects of starting conditions
importantly, the probability of speciation was not different whether initial male nuptial color and perception sensitivity were intermediate or shifted to long or short-wave color .

discussion
speciation outcomes and their mechanisms
several modeling studies have suggested that sympatric speciation through divergence of female mating preferences and associated male ornaments is theoretically possible, but it is unknown whether the assumptions and parameters used for these models are realistic. in our model, the evolution of visual pigments and color perception in a heterogeneous environment were explicitly modeled using an environmental gradient of realistic length and steepness. in this model sexual selection can, through sensory drive, promote speciation within a continuous and initially unstructured population as a result of local adaptation of the sensory system. when the light environment was spatially homogeneous or if adaptation of the visual system to local light environments was not possible, speciation never occurred in our models . in addition, relatively small to moderate dispersal distance  of offspring was required for speciation. hence, speciation within a single population may occur when environmental heterogeneity requires divergent local adaptation in a sensory modality that is used in mate choice, a situation that may not be uncommon in nature  <cit> .

speciation in our model is parapatric by theoretical definition  <cit> , but the short environmental gradient and the weak spatial population structure that is sufficient for speciation , reflected by 25–40% spatial overlap after speciation, make our model entirely applicable to most cases of speciation referred to as "sympatric" in the empirical literature. these include cichlid fish species flocks in cameroonian and nicaraguan crater lakes, the red and blue sister species of lake victoria cichlids, e.g. in the genus pundamilia, sympatric pairs of limnetic and benthic chars, whitefish and sticklebacks in postglacial lakes, and sympatric incipient species of coral reef fish such as hamlets. in most of these cases, sympatric species differ slightly in the modal depths of their breeding sites along sloping lake bottoms  <cit> , or differ otherwise in the background color of breeding sites  <cit> . mating areas and dispersal ranges of ≤ 22% of the environmental gradient  are in these cases not unrealistic.

the mechanism of speciation in a spatially distributed population experiencing spatially heterogeneous stabilizing selection with a linearly varying optimum has been controversial. doebeli and dieckmann  <cit>  argued that ecological competition causes branching of populations, but gavrilets  <cit>  questioned this interpretation. bridle, butlin, and kawata  simulated a spatially heterogeneous habitat with a linearly varying optimum without assuming mate choice. migration loads  were the highest at the center of the habitat since the populations at the center receive migrants from both directions along the ecological gradients. thus, such migration loads might lead to disruptive selection and simultaneously reduced mating success of the intermediate phenotype that in turn might have caused speciation in our sensory drive model.

boundary effects may cause the separation of  <dig> groups when there is no immigration from the outside into the habitat  <cit> . speciation is more likely to occur at the edges of the habitats since the peripheral demes are subject to one-sided immigration, which distances them from neighboring demes. with regard to our results, however, boundary effects were unlikely to play a role in speciation since the spatial distribution of the emerging species was such that they could not have arisen from boundary effects  <cit> .

empirical support for the assumptions of the model
we assumed that individuals that can see the predominant spectrum of the ambient light better have higher fitness. both positive and negative correlations between visual sensitivity at a given wavelength of light and the abundance of that wavelength in the ambient light have been reported  <cit> . we assumed that the visual system evolves such that peak sensitivity tracks the ambient light spectrum  <cit> . this assumption is reasonable even if evolutionary adaptation of visual systems maximizes contrast vision and background matching simultaneously, as in trichromatic fish  <cit> , because in such cases typically the extreme visual proteins are selected to track the shoulders of the mode in the ambient spectrum.

in our model, we assume that females prefer to mate with males whose nuptial coloration they can see better, and that differences in mating preferences among females depend on differences in their perception of colors. this might be a reasonable assumption since several studies  <cit>  suggested that females of sexually dichromatic fish tend to prefer to mate with males, the nuptial colors of which they perceive most intensely. studies on sympatric lake victoria cichlids showed that sister species that differ in their female mating preferences for male nuptial coloration  <cit> , also differ in the peak absorption spectra of their opsin genes  <cit> , and differ indeed in their visual sensitivity to red and blue light  <cit> . our model may hence well apply to these sympatric species.

we assumed that the causes of individual variation in spectral sensitivity involve variation in the absorption spectra of visual pigments  and the expression patterns of different opsin genes in the photoreceptor. endler et al.  <cit>  showed that light sensitivity changed in response to artificial selection in guppies. recent studies on cone visual pigments of lake malawi cichlids  <cit>  and zebra fish  <cit>  indicated that the relative expression levels of different opsin genes reflect spectral sensitivity of the fish. also for lake victoria cichlids of the genus pundamilia, variation in the amounts of expression of three cone opsin genes  <cit>  is related to variation in color vision  <cit>  and the differences in expression between species might have a genetic basis  <cit> . thus, in the present model, individual variation in spectral sensitivity was assumed to be controlled by absorption spectra of three opsin genes  and the relative amount of expression of these genes.

we simulated the evolution of three photoreceptors expressing three different opsins to model the system of lake victoria cichlid  <cit> . in many perch-like fishes, such as cichlids and many coral reef fishes, there are five or six different opsin genes, but often only three are expressed in the cones  <cit> . many fishes have more than three opsin genes. however, we did some simulations with four opsin genes too, and observed similar or slightly higher speciation probabilities. a larger number of opsin genes might facilitate speciation because the probability of occurrence of mutations that shift peak absorption spectra is higher.

the mechanisms of genetic control of female mating preferences are poorly understood. mate preferences of female guppies might be controlled by several genes  <cit> , and that of female lake victoria cichlid fish perhaps by more than one gene too  <cit> . in our model, we assume that variation among females in their perception of light of different wavelengths translates into variation in mating preferences. several studies  <cit>  suggested that females tend to mate with those males the nuptial colors of which are most intensely perceived by them. maan et al.  <cit>  showed that in pundamilia, females of a species with blue male nuptial coloration detected light of shorter wavelengths  more easily than females of a species with red male nuptial coloration, and vice versa. this perception difference coincides with differences in absorption spectra of lws opsin alleles and differences in the relative amounts of expression of different opsin genes  <cit> . thus, our assumptions may not be unrealistic.

in our model, female's relative liking for male color of a given wavelength increased nonlinearly with increasing visual sensitivity to male color. with increasing α , females are more likely to mate with males with the nuptial color that is most intensely perceived. this assumption might be supported by psychophysical experiments on the relationship between visual perception and decisions. assume that animals choose between two objects according to their relative perception of these objects. the probability of choosing the more strongly perceived object increases nonlinearly with increasing difference in perceptual sensitivity to the two objects . thus, it is reasonably assumed that if a female encounters two males with different nuptial colors, she tends to choose the male perceived as more bright with higher probability than expected from the difference in perception intensity.

some of the assumptions that we made to model visual perception and female preference may be overly simplistic. first, it is generally unknown how opsin gene expression is genetically controlled. in the bluefin killifish, there is both heritable and environmental variation in opsin gene expression  <cit> . in lake victoria cichlids of the genus pundamilia, different species and populations show different ratios of lws/sws expression which correlate with variation in light environment  <cit> . these expression patterns were examined using laboratory fishes bred and kept under identical light conditions. it is hence likely that the differences in opsin expression patterns are heritable. in our model framework, a wide range of possible gene control modes were permissive of speciation. even if expression patterns could not evolve, speciation was possible. on the other hand, speciation was impossible if the wavelength of peak absorption could not evolve. this may suggest that spectral tuning by changes in the peak absorption of opsin genes is more important for sensory drive speciation than that by changes in the relative extent of the expression of different opsin genes. this might be because mutations causing a change in the peak absorbance might be more likely to cause divergent changes in the peak spectral sensitivity. however, this result may change if trade-offs between the expression of different opsin genes are assumed.

second, at present, selection intensity for adaptation to environmental light regime is unknown. in our model, increasing the strength of selection intensity  led to an increased probability of speciation. in the simulations with the core set of parameter values, v was set to  <dig>  in our model, v =  <dig> means that individuals suffer a 25% fitness reduction if they are 25% less effective at perceiving the predominant environmental light than individuals with the optimum perception. we also simulated with v =  <dig> and otherwise the core set of parameter values. the probability of speciation was the same as in the simulations with v =  <dig>  for v =  <dig>  individuals suffer only a 6% fitness reduction if they are 25% less effective than individuals with the optimum perception. thus, the assumed strength of selection might not be unrealistically large  <cit> .

finally, we considered background light as identical with environmental color. this is a simplification that we think is justified if the background that females see courting males against is the water column, or has a color similar to that of the water column.

conditions for speciation
we observed that in a large part of the parameter space the probability of speciation increased with decreasing dispersal distance and size of the mating area, and with increasing local carrying capacity, population size and relative strength of female preference . small genetic neighborhood size  promotes the buildup of associations between mating loci  and fitness related loci . increased densities increase the speciation rates probably because increasing the number of candidate males within the mating area of a female increases the effectiveness of female choice  <cit> . in our model, with k =  <dig>  about  <dig> individuals  were maintained in the  <dig> ×  <dig> cells habitat. if we assume that the length of the slope between the surface and the deepest end of the habitable area  is about 40– <dig> m and male territory size is about  <dig> m <dig> , the number of territorial males would be about  <dig> to  <dig> within the  <dig> ×  <dig> cells habitat. thus, local carrying capacity used in the model was not unrealistic.

increasing population size by increasing habitat size along the horizontal axis caused an increased probability of speciation. this might be because selection becomes more effective in larger populations. importantly, the increase in the speciation rate with increasing habitat size is not due to an increased opportunity for isolation by distance because the axis of increased opportunity for isolation by distance was perpendicular to the selection gradient along which incipient species diverged. in this aspect our model differs fundamentally from classical models of clinal speciation, in which selection and isolation by distance reinforce each other  <cit> .

for mutation rates , we usually assumed 10- <dig> for loci for male nuptial coloration and loci controlling the amount of opsin gene expression. these might be reasonable values. on the other hand, the rates of mutations causing change in absorption spectra of opsin genes might be 10- <dig> or lower. in our simulations, the probability of speciation was 40% for μ = 10- <dig>  and 5% for μ = 10- <dig> when population size was about  <dig>  however, increasing the population size increased the probability of speciation, and speciation occurred even with mutation rates as low as 10- <dig> when the population size was sufficiently large . in addition, in most of our models, we simulated  <dig>  generations, but when simulations ran for  <dig>  generations, the probability of speciation increased  <dig> -fold . thus, lower mutation rates caused both decreasing the probability of speciation and delaying speciation.

speciation was slightly more likely with the ''100-additive-loci model'' and with a ''one major epistatic locus model'' for male nuptial color, than with the ''5-additive-loci model''. empirical observations on the genetic control of color patterns in cichlid fishes suggest that major dominant gene effects may not be uncommon  <cit> . however, compared to that of female mating preference, genetic control of male ornamentation had only a minor effect on the probability of speciation.

the width of the reflectance spectra of male nuptial coloration  did not affect the results when σm was  <dig> or smaller . above  <dig> nm spectral width, the probability of speciation decreased with increasing spectral width. however, speciation frequently occurred even when σm was  <dig>  . a spectral width of  <dig> nm  corresponds to the highest 10% of actual reflection spectra of male nuptial colors in lake victoria cichlid fish  <cit> . a spectral width of  <dig> nm corresponds to the sections of the reflectance spectra the intensities of which do not overlap between red and blue species  <cit> .

we find that the relationship between the probability of speciation and the width of the predominant light spectrum  is similar to its relationship with the width of the reflectance spectrum of male nuptial coloration . speciation is frequently observed even with a spectral width of  <dig> nm . the width of aquatic light spectra depends on the clarity of the water. in the clear waters of lake victoria, the widths of ambient light spectra at  <dig> and  <dig> m under the surface are approximately  <dig> and  <dig> nm, respectively. a width of the predominant light spectrum of  <dig> nm corresponds to the highest 10% of the ambient light spectra at  <dig> m under the surface and to the highest 90% of ambient light spectra at  <dig> m under the surface  <cit> . in less clear water,  <dig> nm can correspond to 90% or more of the width of the ambient spectrum even at only  <dig> m under the surface  <cit> . it may be interesting to note that in sticklebacks, different visual sensitivities have evolved even where the difference in the peak wavelength of the water color was only  <dig> nm  <cit> .

recently several authors have concluded, based on simulation studies, that sympatric speciation can more easily occur than previously thought  <cit> . gavrilets  <cit>  indicated that these simulations may have been unrealistic because the authors assumed high genetic variation for all traits, and/or high mutation rates. in our simulations, female preference was initially invariable, and only one or two of up to  <dig> loci for male nuptial coloration were polymorphic. in addition, we also did simulations starting from no initial genetic variation for male nuptial coloration at all , which yielded similar speciation probabilities as our other models. hence our simulation results are robust to, and independent of, variation in standing genetic variation.

implications and predictions of the models
our results provide several new and testable predictions for when sensory drive is likely or unlikely to cause speciation within a continuous population. in our simulations speciation occurred most frequently when environmental light gradients were of intermediate steepness and dispersal distance of offspring was relatively small. because we kept the length of the environmental light gradient  constant, the variation in steepness of ge was synonymous with variation in the magnitude of the selection differential between the ends of the cline . lack of speciation at ge <  <dig>  was likely due to a too small selection differential. lack of speciation at larger dispersal distances is due to the breakdown of local adaptation . the steeper the selection gradient the smaller the dispersal distance that is sufficient to break down local adaptation. this may explain the counterintuitive result that speciation is not common when the selection gradient is very steep. in addition, small dispersal distances cause spatial clumping of related genotypes, which may promote the establishment of linkage disequilibrium between mating preferences and male secondary sexual traits and hence speciation  <cit> .

values of ge, that were permissive of speciation, are not unrealistic: when the environmental light gradient  was  <dig> , the difference in the mean environmental light color between upper and lower end of the habitat was  <dig> nm. in lake victoria, the mean environmental light color can range from  <dig> nm near the surface to  <dig> at between  <dig> and  <dig> m water depth, depending on the turbidity  <cit> . interestingly, sympatric species are better differentiated where this gradient is less steep, and differentiation breaks down where the gradient is extremely steep, e.g. in highly turbid waters  <cit> , consistent with the results of our simulations.

possibly one of the most interesting results of our simulations is that speciation never occurred when we assumed a stepwise mutation model for the opsin genes , whereas speciation was frequent when we used a  <dig> sites mutation model designed after yokoyama and radlwimmer's empirical "five-site rule" for the molecular basis of visual tuning  <cit> . this indicates that mutations causing major changes in female preference promote speciation. if individual mutations cause only minor changes in phenotypes, gene flow and recombination might prevent adaptation to local environments  <cit> . in our model, female mating preferences were determined by differences in the peak absorbance of the  <dig> opsin proteins. in many previous speciation models, the relationships between genotypes and phenotypes assumed additive effects. the genetic system modeled by us might not apply to organisms in which the sensory drive is associated with non-visual sensory modalities. however, polygene control with small additive effects might not be the general genetic architecture of ecologically important phenotypes , and the role of major gene effects in speciation may be of more widespread importance. this should be tested in future studies. thus, our results on explicitly modeled speciation through vision-mediated sensory drive indicate that detailed information about the genetic control of traits is required to predict the probability of speciation via a given hypothetical mechanism.

comparison with previous models
that environmental clines may result in parapatric speciation is a classical scenario  <cit> . our models are similar to the model of doebeli and dieckmann  <cit> , in which a spatial gradient was assumed, along which the relative fitness of competing genotypes varies. our model differs in that the environmental gradient is a lot shorter relative to dispersal distances, and is perpendicular to the axis of maximum opportunity for isolation by distance, making our model applicable to empirically characterized cases of speciation within single habitat patches, referred to as sympatric. in their models, a spatial selection gradient coupled with non-random mating with regard to ecological traits, created conditions favorable for speciation without geographical barriers. however, like in the sympatric models, the authors had to assume much higher mutation rates than we did  and high initial genetic variation  <cit> , both of which might be unrealistic.

in our genetically explicit sensory drive speciation model, individual sensory properties are associated with both environmental adaptation and female mating preference. such association between two traits facilitates speciation  <cit> . in some earlier models, the cost of mate choice prevented speciation in such scenarios  <cit> . in our model, a female chooses the male among all males within her mating area whose nuptial color signal she is most sensitive to. females easily find and compare mates since they are conspicuous and occur at high density. in this situation, there might be little or no cost of female choice. we assumed female choice incurs a searching cost that is proportional to the distance that a female has to travel to make her choice. our results suggest that the probability for speciation, given otherwise our core parameter set, was  <dig>  and  <dig>  even when these costs depressed female preference for males near the edges of a female's mating area by  <dig> % and 30%, respectively. this compares to a probability of  <dig> when costs were zero. thus, search costs did not significantly affect the results of this study.

several studies  <cit>  proposed that  <dig> simultaneous runaway processes can cause sympatric speciation by sexual selection. in the same population, if some females prefer red males and others prefer blue males, then runaway sexual selection may be triggered, and it may create a pair of species – one with red-preferring females and red males and another with blue-preferring females and blue males. recent studies  <cit>  indicated that sympatric speciation only through female choice sexual selection is unlikely, unless the initial genetic variance in female preference is large and also symmetric. the probability of speciation in our model was neither significantly affected by the initial mean opsin protein absorption spectrum and associated female mating preference nor by their variance, unless the initial sensitivity curve  was prominently bimodal or multimodal, which enhanced the probability of speciation. hence, speciation in our model did not require symmetric distributions of genetic variances as the starting condition. on the other hand, when the light environment was spatially homogeneous or when adaptation to light environments was not allowed, speciation did not occur. in addition, when no selection for spectral sensitivity 2/v =  <dig> in the fitness formulation) was assumed in our model, speciation did not occur. in the simulation runs without assumed selection for spectral sensitivity, some variations in male colors  and female preference  were maintained across  <dig> generations; however, speciation was not observed, even if the mutation rates were set high . these results indicate that visual runaway sexual selection alone is unlikely to drive sympatric speciation in situations without or with low genetic variations.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed for the first time that in simulations in which the adaptive evolution of visual pigments and color perception are explicitly modeled, sensory drive can promote speciation along a short selection gradient within a continuous habitat and population. we conclude, in a homogenous environment, speciation by female choice sexual selection alone is unlikely unless other mechanisms are in place  <cit> . on the other hand, it may not be unlikely where environmental gradients create divergent selection on sensory modalities that are used in mate choice. evidence for such exists from several animal groups  <cit> . the probability of speciation in a continuous population under such conditions may then critically depend on the relationship between size and steepness of the selection gradient and dispersal distance on the one hand, and on the genetic architecture of adaptation in the sensory system and female mate choice on the other hand.

