BACKGROUND
extravagant phenotypic traits are widespread in males and largely assumed to be selected by female preferences. indeed, decades of work suggest that males in good condition indicate their genetic quality through the production of costly ornaments . as a result, choosy females may gain indirect fitness benefits by transmitting "good genes" to their offspring .

in contrast, the evolution of female ornaments is poorly understood, especially in species displaying conventional sex roles   <cit> . recent evidence suggests that exaggerated phenotypic traits in females could be selected by male mate choice . indeed, theory predicts that mutual mate choice can evolve in species with conventional sex roles whenever males invest in offspring, pay high costs to breed  or low costs to find a mate, or when female quality is highly variable  <cit> .

however, the nature of the benefits obtained by choosy males remains unclear. although females that invest in costly ornaments might be less able to invest in reproduction  <cit> , some studies suggest that female ornaments can reliably indicate direct benefits in the form of fecundity . nevertheless, the possibility that female signals further advertise indirect benefits such as good genes remains poorly explored from an empirical perspective .

theoretical and empirical arguments suggest that genes of the major histocompatibility complex  may influence ornament expression  <cit> . mhc molecules play a crucial role in the vertebrate immune system by presenting specific antigens to immunocompetent cells. the hypothesised mechanism linking mhc genes to the expression of condition-dependent ornaments follows the original framework proposed by hamilton and zuk  <cit> : particular mhc genes can provide resistance to severe pathogenic pressures, enabling individuals possessing such genes to afford the production of costly ornaments. in line with this, associations between the expression of condition-dependent male ornaments and specific mhc genotypes have already been reported . similarly, individuals possessing a high mhc diversity  may be more efficient at fighting a wider range of pathogens  <cit> . it is therefore also possible that mhc diversity positively influences ornament expression, although there is no direct evidence to support this hypothesis.

the present study investigates the links between a female sexual signal, mhc genotype, and body condition in a species characterized by conventional sex roles. our focus is on sexual swellings in a wild population of desert baboons . female baboons, like many primates, show cyclical changes in the size, shape, and colour of the anogenital skin . these perineal swellings, which are associated with sexual receptivity  <cit> , reach maximal size around ovulation  <cit>  and attract males independently of olfactory or behavioural cues  <cit> . although sexual swellings have been proposed to reliably indicate female quality  <cit> , this has long proven difficult to demonstrate  <cit> . nevertheless, recent work suggests that in this population, at least, sexual swellings may indicate quality: high-condition females produce larger swellings, and these are preferred by males  <cit> . we have also found that inter-individual differences in the size as well as in the shape of sexual swellings are maintained across consecutive cycles  <cit> . here we ask  whether the size or shape of sexual swellings might advertise genetic quality, indexed by both mhc genotype and diversity, and  whether the effect of mhc on sexual swellings might be mediated by physical condition. our results suggest that sexual swelling size and shape reflect mhc genotype, and that mhc-associated variation in these swelling components may be partially mediated by body condition.

methods
individual data
data were collected from wild chacma baboons living at tsaobis leopard park, namibia . fifteen females from two habituated troops  were followed over 1- <dig> oestrous cycles during two consecutive field seasons , producing a total of  <dig> cycles. fourteen of these females  were captured once or twice during the study period , to gather biological samples and morphological measurements. these  <dig> females  constitute the focus of this study. briefly, troops were captured using individual cages baited with maize and set-up at dusk. the baboons were captured at dawn, anaesthetized using tiletamine-zolazepam, and all processed within a day, in order to be released together the following morning when fully awake.

during capture, age was estimated by dental eruption and wear  <cit>  and body size was measured as the crown-rump length. body condition was indexed by the standard anthropometric measure of cross-sectional subcutaneous fat, the mid-upper arm cross-sectional fat , obtained by combining the arm circumference c with the triceps skinfold s using  <cit> . muaf indices were available for all  <dig> females, including repeated measures for four females from different years , to test for mhc-associated variation in condition. we tested for mhc-associated variation in swelling characteristics using only those females for which muaf indices were available within four months of cycling . the remaining female was captured more than a year after cycling. in this subsample, the time elapsed between our quantification of swelling size and shape  and the measurement of muaf  was on average  <dig>  days . because the upper range of the time elapsed between our muaf measurements and sexual swelling quantification is long, we investigated the temporal variation in muaf scores in ten females that had been captured on at least two occasions . muaf measurements taken in october  <dig> show a mean  of  <dig>  ±  <dig> % difference compared to those taken in july  <dig>  so the time elapsed between muaf scores and sexual swelling quantification does represent a source of error in our analysis. however, muaf measurements were also significantly correlated across years within females , suggesting that females consistently differed in their body condition over time .

dominance ranks were calculated from behavioural interactions across the study period  <cit> . in order to control for differences in troop size, a female's rank was expressed as the percentage of adult females ranking below her.

swelling size and shape
sexual swellings were measured according to two characteristics, their size and shape, at the maximally swollen period for each female cycle. this period was assessed visually by comparing high-resolution digital photographs taken throughout the cycle  from behind the female  and from her side. an average of  <dig> posterior photographs was taken per female cycle  using a wide range of distances . three to five suitable photos  per cycle were selected for subsequent analysis. the contour  of the swelling was manually extracted using a semi-automatic image processor implemented in matlab  <dig> . to estimate size and shape.

the size of the sexual swelling was measured as the area of the swelling contour, scaled either by telemetry  or by using direct measurements of tail width and ischial callosities taken during capture . maximal swelling area was then estimated for each cycle of each female by averaging across contours. swelling size estimates showed considerable variability across females . the swelling size estimates obtained through telemetry and relative measurements respectively ranged within 4% and 7% of direct swelling measurements .

the shape of the sexual swelling was quantitatively measured using a method based on elliptic fourier descriptors. briefly, coordinate information describing the swelling contour was transformed into fourier coefficients using the shape software  <cit> . fourier coefficients were subsequently normalized to be invariant with respect to the size and rotation of the contour. principal component analysis  was then carried out on these coefficients. the score of a swelling contour on the first component was used as a quantitative shape estimator for each sexual swelling contour and averaged across pictures taken during the same cycle of the same female. the resulting swelling shape scores were variable across females  but not significantly correlated with swelling area . full details regarding swelling shape estimation are provided in huchard et al.  <cit> .

mhc typing and supertype classification
baboons across six troops , including the  <dig> females under study, were genotyped at the highly polymorphic mhc-drb exon  <dig>  including the entire antigen-binding region, using tissue samples collected during capture. twenty-three distinct mhc-drb sequences  were identified. these were non-randomly associated within individuals, defining haplotypes. fifteen haplotype configurations were identified, each carried by  <dig>  to  <dig>  individuals and comprising 1- <dig> mhc-drb sequences so that each individual carried 2- <dig> mhc-drb sequences . details regarding genotyping are provided elsewhere  <cit> . mhc molecules binding similar antigens can be grouped into a supertype  <cit> . the biological relevance of such classification is supported by a growing body of evidence . we classified baboon mhc-drb sequences into  <dig> discrete supertypes on the basis of the physico-chemical amino-acid properties of these nucleotides that were positively selected, and thus assumed to be involved in antigen processing by the mhc molecule. full details regarding supertype classification are provided in huchard et al.  <cit> . mhc individual diversity is calculated here as the total number of distinct mhc-drb supertypes, which is highly correlated to the total number of mhc-drb sequences . the choice of using mhc-drb supertypes  is here justified by both statistical and biological arguments:

 our small sample size precludes the analysis of sequence- or haplotype-specific effects because most of them are possessed by only a few females: a specific sequence is possessed by an average of  <dig>  females , and a specific haplotype is possessed by an average of  <dig>  females  in our sample. in contrast, a specific supertype is possessed by  <dig>  females on average .

 the detection of sequence-specific effects in such conditions is further complicated by linkage disequilibrium . reciprocally, haplotype-specific effects may be hardly detectable due to specific, possibly conflicting effects of the linked sequences which constitute the haplotype.

 in contrast, pathogen-driven selective pressures should act similarly on mhc sequences possessing similar binding affinities. the detection of supertype-specific effects on phenotypic traits might thus be possible if some supertypes confer protection or susceptibility to a current pathogenic pressure.

the females involved in this study possessed 2- <dig>  mhc supertypes.

statistical analyses
we analysed the effects of mhc genotype and body condition on the size and shape of maximal swellings using linear mixed models . we also considered the effects of female age, dominance rank, group membership, and body size on sexual swellings  <cit> . age and body size are correlated in this sample  and so were not introduced together in the same model. all lmms explaining swelling size and shape therefore included three control variables fitted as fixed factors: dominance rank, group membership, and age. including body size instead of age in the models did not affect the significance of the results . female identity was fitted as a random factor, to control for repeated measures of swelling size and shape  and body condition  within females.

the possession of an mhc supertype was coded as a binary factor . the association between an mhc supertype and swelling components was tested for seven  supertypes  which were possessed by more than three females, to avoid statistical inferences based on a minimal number of individuals. the possession of these supertypes was not always statistically independent from the possession of the others . in particular, the possession of s <dig> was systematically associated with the possession of s <dig>  so that only s <dig> was used in our analyses. the effect of each genetic parameter  on swelling size and shape was thus first tested by introducing this parameter individually  as a fixed factor into a model containing the control variables described above. as a result, each model contained a maximum of four fixed factors  and one random factor.

to analyse the effect of body condition on swelling size and shape, the muaf index was similarly introduced as a fixed factor into a model containing the control variables described above . the muaf score for each female was always taken within four months of a given cycle.

we further investigated the effect of genetic parameters on body condition using the same procedures. muaf was modelled as a function of female age, dominance rank, and group membership plus the considered genetic parameter. female identity was fitted as a random factor to account for repeated measures of condition within females.

after identifying a genetic parameter with a significant effect on both swelling characteristics and body condition , we introduced it together with the muaf scores in two models respectively explaining swelling size and shape  to determine whether the effect of mhc supertype s <dig> on swelling components could be entirely or partially mediated by muaf scores .

finally, because all our study subjects possess several supertypes with potentially contradicting effects on phenotypic traits, we investigated whether the apparently deleterious effect of s <dig> was still detectable in the presence of other supertype effects .

the significance of the fixed factors was evaluated using f-tests calculated according to the principle of marginality, testing each term after all others   <cit> . inferences were drawn from the full models   <cit>  and also after model simplification to confirm the stability of the models. model simplification was performed using a classical backward selection procedure, by removing the variable showing the highest p value  from the model to select a best-fit set of explanatory variables  <cit> . the full and simplified models gave the same results, which are only reported for the full models in the main text . all statistical analyses were carried out using software r  <dig> . <dig> .

RESULTS
individual mhc diversity  was not related to swelling size or shape . nevertheless, one mhc supertype  was associated negatively with swelling size and positively with the swelling shape score . as a result, females carrying s <dig> had smaller swellings with higher scoring shapes  than other females .

 <dig> parameters and tests for control variables  are calculated here in the absence of the test variables. see additional file  <dig> for the parameters and tests calculated from the full models including either s <dig> or muaf.

 <dig> reference category: smaller troop.

 <dig> each of the test variables was tested independently , such that the results presented here are a summary of eight different models . the individual models testing the influence of mhc supertype s <dig> are presented in additional file  <dig> , as well as the models testing the influence of muaf on swelling characteristics .

 <dig> phenotypic effects of s <dig> on swelling components remain significant after bonferroni corrections for multiple tests, with a significance threshold α =  <dig>  for a total of four independent tests involving mhc supertypes s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> . in contrast, the effects of mhc supertype s <dig> on body condition is reduced to a trend  after correction for multiple testing.

 <dig> supertypes s <dig> and s <dig> are always possessed together.

we then explored the interconnections between swelling components, supertype s <dig>  and body condition. body condition was linked to swelling size by a positive relationship and to swelling shape by a negative relationship . according to these results, females in good condition tend to produce large swellings with a low scoring shape. in addition, s <dig> was negatively associated with body condition . females possessing s <dig> were thus in lower condition  than other females . when s <dig> and body condition are introduced together in a model explaining either swelling size or shape, the influence of condition disappears , suggesting that condition at least partially mediates the genetic effects on this ornament.

we further explored whether the relationships between supertype s <dig> and phenotype may be confounded by the fact that individuals have multiple supertypes. we introduced s <dig> together with other  supertypes in three models explaining each of the three phenotypic traits of interest  to check for the consistency in the direction and strength of s <dig> effects in the presence of other supertypes. the phenotypic variations associated with the possession of s <dig> appear largely maintained in the presence of other supertypes: the directionality and strength of the s <dig> effects is consistent, and significance is reached in most models despite their overparameterisation . this suggests that the apparently deleterious effect of s <dig> remains detectable despite the potentially conflicting effects of the other supertypes possessed by individuals.

finally, since s <dig> currently appears disadvantageous, we investigated circumstantial evidence for counter selection. across the last two generations, the frequency of s <dig> has declined from 34% in adult baboons  to 24% in juveniles  . this represents the greatest decrease recorded among the  <dig> supertypes, although it should be noted that at least one supertype showed a frequency increase of similar amplitude . these fluctuations in supertype frequencies should thus be interpreted with caution.

discussion
our study reports an association between a specific mhc genotype and the expression of a female sexual signal. mhc supertype s <dig> is associated with poor female body condition, as well as small sexual swellings with a particular shape, in a wild primate population. here we consider in more detail the relationship between body condition and signal expression, the advertisement of mhc genes, and the evolution of female signalling in conventional sex roles.

female condition and signal expression
two components of the signal under study, namely swelling size and swelling shape, were found to reflect female body condition, indexed by the mid-upper arm cross-sectional fat muaf. this result is consistent with the hypothesis that sexual swellings advertise female quality  <cit> , a pattern also reported for male sexual signals in a variety of species . this relationship is further supported by the finding that swelling size is significantly associated with another measure of female body condition in this population, namely residual body mass   <cit> . however, a third body condition measure, the body mass index  was found to have no effect on baboon swelling shape  <cit> . while it is reassuring to find that different measures of condition can show the same pattern with signal expression, we should not be surprised when they do not. this is for two reasons. first, and most importantly, different indices reflect different aspects of condition, either individually or in combination, such as fat reserves, muscle mass, and skeletal weight. a signaller will only advertise that element of condition that is important to the receiver, so an effect of 'condition' will only be detected when it is appropriately measured. second, in this particular instance, it is well-known that ratio measures of condition such as bmi have poor statistical properties and are weak measures of condition . in contrast, mid-upper arm circumference measurements have previously been shown to reflect the body condition of wild baboons  <cit> , and muaf has been found to predict nutritional status more sensitively than either of its constituent components, i.e. upper arm circumference or triceps skinfold thickness, alone  <cit> .

while we are confident that the associations described between female condition and signal expression are robust, we would still emphasise caution in the interpretation of the results regarding swelling shape. although we have previously found a male preference for large swellings  <cit> , it is unknown whether males show a comparable preference for swelling shape. nevertheless, it is notable that female age is associated with shape in the same way as female condition . male primates consistently express preferences for mature females  <cit> , who typically display higher fertility  and infant survival  than younger females. a male preference for females with negative scoring swelling shapes would thus provide them with fertility benefits in addition to good genes for their offspring .

mhc, good genes, and bad genes
although no association between mhc diversity and the expression of sexual swellings could be detected, the possession of one mhc supertype  is linked with a small and 'unshapely' swelling, together with low body condition. these results suggest a pathway from immunity genes to sexual signals via physical condition. as a result, male baboons may choose mates by scrutiny of condition-dependent ornaments because these signals reveal advantageous, or disadvantageous, mhc genotypes. a similar argument has been made for female choice on the basis of male signals in ring-necked pheasants  <cit>  and white-tailed deer  <cit> . since the fitness advantages provided by specific mhc genotypes can depend on fluctuations in pathogen communities and host-parasite coadaptational cycles , these results support the hamilton and zuk hypothesis  <cit> : exaggerated ornaments constantly reveal the most successful genotype*environment combinations. according to this hypothesis, sexual selection reinforces natural selection in favouring advantageous alleles or counter-selecting disadvantageous alleles. this may explain the apparent decline observed in the frequency of the supertype s <dig> in our population.

interestingly, the association between supertype s <dig> on swelling components and body condition is negative, suggesting that sexual signals may advertise bad genes. while this may appear surprising at first sight, mhc-associated susceptibility to immune or infectious diseases has been reported as often as mhc-associated resistance in natural populations  <cit> . the possession of specific mhc supertypes has for instance been associated with high viral loads in hiv in humans  <cit> , or with higher susceptibility to particular gut parasites in lemurs  <cit> , although the immunological mechanism underlying such associations is poorly understood. pathogen evasion models predict that the recent escape of a pathogen to a given mhc allele or supertype may result in susceptibility to this pathogen by the individuals possessing this genotype  <cit> . this could occur if individual haplotypes contain non-random combinations of mhc supertypes   <cit>  that complement each other to maximise immune coverage against the set of pathogenic pressures encountered in the environment. the recent escape of a pathogen to a given supertype could thus create a "gap" in any individual immune repertoire that includes this supertype, until selection pressures favour the emergence of new haplotypes through recombination. the negative association reported here, which is apparently not diluted by the possession of other supertypes, might similarly be mediated by an increased susceptibility to a dominant pathogen.

one may wonder whether bad genes would be expected to be advertised in the context of the current "good genes" paradigm. the handicap theory of sexual signalling predicts that the costs of signal production increase for low-condition animals, thus maintaining honesty in signalling . consequently, animals in poor condition are unable to signal their quality through vigorous display because of the costs associated with producing or maintaining such extravagance. under this hypothesis, the possession of a deleterious allele might be expected to translate into lower condition leading to proportionally higher costs of signal production and an associated poorer signalling performance. our finding of bad gene advertisement is therefore consistent with the existing framework of honest-signalling models.

female sexual signals in conventional sex roles
finally, and perhaps most importantly, our findings indicate that female sexual signals can advertise heritable aspects of quality just as male ornaments do . although these results may challenge traditional theories regarding sex roles and sexual signalling, there is growing evidence that the selective pressures favouring the evolution of ornamentation may be of similar nature in both sexes  <cit> . in the case of primates, females may be expected to be choosy because they provide most parental care. however, several other aspects of the mating system of primates living in multimale-multifemale groups can explain the evolution of mutual mate choice. in the case of males, there are potentially high costs associated with reproduction. first, males frequently incur injuries through competition for access to fertile females  <cit> . second, once a male has obtained access to a female, mate-guarding 'consortships' place severe constraints on foraging activity , and also prevent males from mating with other females. third, male ability to mate at high rates  may be limited by physiological constraints, for instance by sperm depletion  <cit> , which may also encourage choosiness. finally, it appears increasingly plausible that male baboons care for their offspring  and this probably incurs further costs. in addition to these costs, the potential for male choice is enhanced by the fact that male baboons can freely sample potential mates  and female quality is likely to vary extensively, at least in the form of fertility or infant survival that can be socially-mediated or age-related  <cit> , and also possibly in the form of heritable quality .

reciprocally, females may benefit from signalling if they compete for mates, which may be the case even in multimale groups of non-seasonally breeding species   <cit> . females from multimale primate groups are thought to mate multiply to limit the risk of infanticide by non-mated males  <cit>  or to predispose multiple males to protect their infants from infanticide by immigrant males  <cit> . in this context, highly ornamented females would benefit from attracting more partners, or from attracting "key" partners such as the alpha male of the group. indeed, failure to mate with this male would not only lead to the loss of several possible direct and indirect benefits  but also increase the risk of subsequent infanticidal attacks on the offspring he has not sired.

finally, it might appear difficult to understand why males would choose females who invest resources into costly signals of genetic quality rather than directly into offspring . this apparent paradox may be resolved in at least two ways. first, variation in swelling size within and between cycles of the same female are linked to hormonal variation that is believed to reflect fertility . as a result, males choosing females with large swellings may be rewarded by direct benefits  in addition to indirect benefits   <cit> . second, the costs of production and maintenance of sexual swellings are temporally separated from maternity costs, due to the ephemeral nature of swellings. the investment of current resources in swelling production may therefore have minimal impact on the resources available for future gestation and lactation. it is even possible that some of the metabolites necessary for swelling production, such as structural macromolecules , are "stored" in swellings and subsequently re-used in other metabolic tasks. the expression of costly ornaments may thus reliably indicate the amount of resources that females are able to secure for future reproduction.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate, for the first time, mhc-associated variation in the expression of female ornaments, the sexual swellings of wild baboons. females are not necessarily expected to reveal their genetic quality through costly condition-dependent ornaments in species that display conventional sex roles. yet, the evolution of male preferences for females signalling good genes might, like in baboons, be favoured by particular aspects of a mating system, and this may affect a broad range of group-living species. overall, these results do not undermine our global understanding of the evolutionary mechanisms involved in sexual selection, but clearly indicate that the distribution of sex differences is more complex than traditionally proposed  <cit> .

authors' contributions
eh designed the study, collected the field data, carried out the molecular genetic studies, performed the statistical analyses and drafted the manuscript. jb analysed the swelling pictures. hm calculated the body condition indices. lak participated in the design of the study and provided help and logistical support to carry out the molecular genetics. mr and gc participated in the design of the study, provided help and logistical support with data collection and analyses, and helped to draft the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplementary tables detailing supporting analyses.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
many thanks to a. king, h. kelstrup, l. de raad, r. fleming, n. camara, j. kamps and h. peck for invaluable assistance in the field, m. weill for her assistance in the lab, and a. courtiol for helpful discussions, especially regarding statistics. we thank four anonymous reviewers for their helpful feedback on a previous version of this manuscript. we are also grateful to the swart family  and the ministry of lands and resettlement  for permission to work at tsaobis leopard park, the gobabeb training and research centre for affiliation, and the ministry of environment and tourism for research permission in namibia. we confirm that we have adhered to the guidelines for the use of animals in behavioural research and teaching  and the legal requirements of the country  in which the work was carried out. this work was funded by a natural environment research council  advanced fellowship awarded to gc, a ministère de l'education et de la recherche  studentship, and a royal society travel grant awarded to both gc and eh. this paper is a publication of the zsl institute of zoology's tsaobis baboon project. contribution isem 2010- <dig> 
