BACKGROUND
streptomycetes are abundant and ubiquitous soil bacteria that are prolific producers of more than two-thirds of natural antibiotics used in the pharmaceutical industry. they have complex regulatory systems for morphological differentiation in response to environmental or nutritional conditions. genome sequences of this genus also support the existence of complex regulatory networks for sensing and signal transduction to adapt to such conditions  <cit> .

for instance, s. coelicolor is the most thoroughly studied model organism among this genus that produces antibiotics, including the red-pigmented tripyrrole undecylprodigiosin , the lipopeptide calcium-dependent antibiotic , and the deep blue-pigmented polyketide actinorhodin . its genome size has been revealed as  <dig> ,507 bp, encoding  <dig> proteins  predicted to have regulatory functions, including sigma factors, two-component regulatory systems, and many transcription factor families such as lysr, laci, rok, gntr, tetr, iclr, arac, asnc, and merr  <cit> . the numbers of its regulatory proteins are much larger than those of e. coli, reflecting its differential regulatory networks under changing stress environments.

members of the iclr family of transcriptional regulatory proteins are composed of approximately  <dig> amino acid residues  <cit> . the iclr family has an effector-binding domain at the c-terminus, which is supported by structural data and by studies using mutants  <cit> . the iclr proteins bind their cognate promoters as dimers or as a dimer of dimers with a helix-turn-helix dna binding motif in the n-terminal domain. the members of this family are known to do repression, activation, or serve as dual-function regulators  <cit> . members of the iclr family control a diverse array of genes whose products are involved in glyoxylate shunt in enterobacteriaceae  <cit> , multidrug resistance  <cit> , degradation of aromatics  <cit> , inactivation of quorum-sensing signals  <cit> , and determinants of plant pathogenicity and sporulation  <cit> .

in s. coelicolor,  <dig> genes are annotated as members of the iclr family of regulators  <cit> . among them, ndgr is highly conserved among streptomyces species as well as other actinomycetes such as mycobacterium and corynebacterium  <cit> . ndgr and its orthologs are located adjacent to leucd, which encodes isopropylmalate dehydratase, and have been identified as its transcriptional regulator. in addition, the last step of methionine biosynthesis has been identified as a regulatory target of ndgr  <cit> . regulation by ndgr orthologs in other bacteria has also been revealed. for example, areb in streptomyces clavuligerus controls the biosynthesis of leucine and secondary metabolites  <cit> . in corynebacterium glutamicum, ltbr has been characterized as a regulator involved in leucine and tryptophan biosynthesis  <cit> .

meanwhile, it was revealed that sigr, an oxidative stress response sigma factor, binds to the upstream region of ndgr  <cit> . sigr is activated via dissociation of the rsra anti-sigma factor in response to thiol oxidation  <cit> . this information suggests a physiological role of ndgr as an oxidative stress response regulator.

previously, we developed a versatile pcr-based tandem epitope tagging tool for the identification of direct binding targets of dna-binding proteins of streptomyces  <cit> . using this tool, we constructed a s. coelicolor harboring a 6× myc-tagged ndgr that was successfully utilized for the immunoprecipitation of ndgr-dna complexes. this experiment revealed that ndgr regulates not only leucd but also most of genes involved in leucine biosynthesis in s. coelicolor. despite the previous studies, the dna-binding locations of ndgr under physiologically relevant conditions have not been described at a high resolution, and on a genome-wide scale. here, we further investigate the ndgr regulon in vivo using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing  and further explore the responses of the ndgr regulatory network to thiol oxidative stress. we also discuss the regulatory roles of ndgr in s. coelicolor.

RESULTS
identification of in vivo ndgr-binding regions by chip-seq
ndgr and its orthologs have been characterized in vitro by dna-binding experiments  <cit> . however, in vivo analysis of direct interaction between ndgr and its cognate dna has not been described. to study the binding characteristics of ndgr to the s. coelicolor chromosome, we exploited a chip-seq method that has been used for genome-wide determination of in vivo binding locations of regulatory proteins. we constructed a 6× myc-tagged ndgr strain using homologous recombination for the immunoprecipitation  using a specific anti-c-myc antibody  <cit> . for cell growth, specific nutrient conditions have often been used to elucidate the function of unknown regulators if the phenotypic differences between wild-type  and deletion mutants were undetectable when the cells were grown in complex media  <cit> . thus, we used solid minimal media supplemented with n-acetylglucosamine and l-asparagine for the perturbation of phenotypes  <cit> . to determine the ndgr-binding regions at the genome scale, we constructed a sequencing library using ip-dna and performed next-generation sequencing. sequencing of the library yielded short sequence reads of  <dig> nucleotides that were uniquely mapped onto the s. coelicolor genome . using the macs program,  <dig> ndgr-binding loci were detected with stringent cut-off conditions  . the peaks were distributed across the entire s. coelicolor genome .table  <dig> 
genome-scale identification of ndgr binding regions



peak position
summit
p
-value
a
fold enrichment
motif position
consensus sequence

a-10log <dig> 
genome-wide distributions of ndgr binding regions.  an overview of ndgr binding profiles across the s. coelicolor genome when grown on solid minimal media supplemented with n-acetylglucosamine and l-asparagine. black and white dots indicate previously known and newly found ndgr binding regions, respectively.  examples of binding profiles of previously known targets of ndgr. red lines indicate the locations of putative binding motifs derived from fimo and the values are the scores for the match of a position. black arrows indicate the target genes within the transcription units that are directly regulated by ndgr.  meme logo representation of the ndgr-dna binding profile. this motif is present in  <dig> out of  <dig> enriched regions identified by chip-seq.



we annotated target genes according to the location of peak summits. if a peak summit was located in ≤ 500 bp upstream or ≤ 100 bp downstream of an annotated start codon, ndgr was considered to regulate the corresponding gene. when the summit was located in an intragenic region between ≥ 100 bp from the start codon of a relevant gene and ≥ 500 bp upstream from the start codon of a downstream gene, this binding state was annotated as an intragenic regulation. locations of  <dig> out of  <dig> peaks were assigned as the intergenic region upstream of transcription units . meanwhile, the peak summits of  <dig> genes  were located to intragenic regions. with these criteria, we identified  <dig> genes in the ndgr regulon .table  <dig> 
the ndgr regulon genes



sco no.
name
function
category
a
note
b
cysg
pyrg
metf
cysm
gdhb
ilvd
cysa
moeb
ilvb
ilvn
ilvc
leub
ilve
ndgr
leuc
leud
thil
thid
cysn
cysd
cysc
cysh
cysi

acategories are defined by functional classification of s. coelicolor genes in the sanger institute database .


bgenes with direct binding by ndgr are marked with asterisks . binding of the intragenic regions is denoted as i. binding of the upstream region between two divergent genes is denoted as d.



five genes, metf , ilvd , ilvb , leub , and ndgr-leuc intergenic region  were previously annotated as direct regulatory targets of ndgr by in vitro experiments such as electrophoretic mobility shift assay and dna affinity capture assay  <cit> . the results of the current study show highly enriched profiles of these genes in the chip-seq data . however, scbr , which is a gene directly regulated by ndgr  <cit> , was not detected as a target in this experiment. this discrepancy might be due to the differences between in vivo and in vitro experimental conditions. in addition, we observed low levels of ndgr binding at the promoters of meth  and leua  relative to the other binding peaks. taken together, these results show that binding locations of ndgr were successfully detected in vivo.

sequence analysis of ndgr-binding regions
although the putative dna-binding motifs of ndgr and its orthologs were previously predicted using the known binding sequences of other iclr-type regulators in different strains  <cit> , clear consensus sequences remain undefined. to determine the putative ndgr binding motif from our validated chip-seq data,  <dig> nucleotides surrounding the peak summits of  <dig> binding regions were analyzed by meme, a bioinformatics tool that identifies overrepresented motifs in multiple unaligned sequences. a 15-bp imperfect palindromic motif  was detected with an e-value of  <dig> e- <dig> . this motif was present in  <dig> out of  <dig> binding loci, and  <dig> of them were located within 50 bp of each peak summit. although the sequence is dissimilar to any known motifs of iclr-type regulators, palindromic sequences of 15 bp have been identified as binding sequences for other iclr-type regulators, and are consistent with a helix-turn-helix interaction  <cit> .

we identified the putative binding motif from previously known targets of ndgr as revealed by in vitro experiments such as electrophoretic mobility shift assay and dna affinity capture assay  <cit> . this motif was detected in upstream regions of metf, ilvb, ilvd, leub, and the intergenic region between ndgr and leucd. the putative motif from genome-wide prediction using fimo was found in the promoters of known targets, meth and leua. this result further supports that their low intensity in chip-seq profiles represents the subtle differences between in vivo and in vitro experimental conditions.

functional classification of the ndgr regulon
genes in the ndgr regulon were further classified into functional categories according to gene classifications defined by the sanger institute database  . the metabolism of small molecule category is highly dominant . among the genes in this category, 43% and 33% were assigned to amino acid biosynthesis  and central intermediary metabolism , respectively, and 14%  were included in biosynthesis of cofactors and carriers.figure  <dig> 
functional classification of genes in the ndgr regulon. hierarchical functional class is defined by the sanger institute database. genes in this chart are described in table  <dig> 



ndgr directly regulates eight genes in the biosynthetic pathways of branched chain amino acids  . for instance, the first step in bcaa biosynthesis is catalyzed by acetohydroxy acid synthase/acetolactate synthase encoded by ilvbn. this enzyme catalyzes the condensation of two pyruvate molecules to acetolactate and 2-acetohydroxybutyrate from pyruvate and 2-ketobutyrate. the following reaction is catalyzed by ketol-acid reductoisomerase and dihydroxy-acid dehydratase encoded by ilvc and ilvd, respectively. the final transamination step, as well as the first step in the degradation pathways, is catalyzed by bcaa aminotransferases encoded by ilve. leucine is synthesized from α-ketoisovalerate, an intermediate in the valine pathway, through three enzymatic steps. the relevant enzymes are α-isopropylmalate synthase , β-isopropylmalate dehydratase , and β-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase . despite the scattered locations of those genes along the chromosome, ndgr directly bound their upstream regions. interestingly, the ndgr mutant  exhibited methionine auxotrophy, but not leucine auxotrophy  <cit> . notwithstanding its direct binding at the promoters of genes in the bcaa biosynthetic pathway, ndgr was not essential for bcaa biosynthesis under the growth conditions used here. thus, it is expected that ndgr plays a role in the fine-tuning of bcaa biosynthesis with the assistance of feedback regulation and translational attenuation common in amino acid biosynthetic pathways in bacteria  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
metabolic pathways directly regulated by ndgr. the proteins identified by chip-seq are depicted by red characters.  ndgr directly regulates genes in most steps of the bcaa biosynthesis pathways. though leua was not annotated as a member of ndgr regulon, the putative motif from genome-wide prediction using fimo and low binding signal in chip-seq data was observed in its upstream region.  the sulfur assimilation into the cysteine biosynthesis pathways.



next, we observed that ndgr directly bound the upstream region of three transcription units including seven genes  that are involved in sulfur-assimilation metabolism . the pathway of sulfur assimilation into cysteine biosynthesis in s. coelicolor has been suggested in previous reports  <cit> . the genes, including cysn , cysd , and cysc , participate in 3′-phosphoadenylyl sulfate  formation from sulfate. paps reductase encoded by cysh  converts paps to sulfite. the serial reactions are followed by two pathways that result in thiosulfate production by a thiosulfate sulfurtransferase and sulfide production by a sulfite reductase encoded by cysa  and cysi , respectively. the two metabolites  are sulfur donors for the sulfur assimilation into o-acetyl-l-serine by cysteine synthase encoded by cysm   <cit> .

moreover, ndgr bound to the promoter region of putative siroheme synthase encoded by cysg . siroheme is a prosthetic group that participates in six-electron reduction reactions catalyzed by both sulfite and nitrite reductases. cysg converts uroporphyrinogen iii, which is a precursor of heme and cobalamin , to siroheme using multifunctional activities such as sam-dependent methylase, dehydrogenase and ferrochelatase  <cit> . biosynthesis of sulfur-containing thiamine was also regulated by ndgr. as the active form of thiamine, thiamine pyrophosphate  is an essential cofactor for particular metabolic processes such as bcaa biosynthesis. the thiamine category includes thiamine monophosphate kinase and sulfurylase encoded by thil  and moeb , respectively. in addition, phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase encoded by thid  in the polyamine biosynthesis category is likely involved in thiamine metabolism.

in s. clavuligerus, areb, an ortholog of ndgr, bound to the upstream region of the pathway-specific regulator of clavulanic acid and cephamycin c, and the areb deletion mutant increased their production. moreover, the ndgr mutant showed overproduction of actinorhodin in our experimental conditions  <cit> . interestingly, though some effects of secondary metabolites have been observed in the mutants of ndgr and its ortholog  <cit> , none of the secondary metabolite genes were detected as ndgr targets. this observation indicates that ndgr indirectly regulates the genes involved in secondary metabolism. taken together, the data suggest that ndgr mainly regulates primary metabolism of small molecules, especially bcaa and several sulfur-containing molecules.

role of ndgr under thiol oxidative stress
to ascertain the physiological role of the iclr family of regulators in the cell, identification of the interaction between the ligand and the substrate-recognition domain of the regulator would provide valuable insight. the effector molecule of ndgr has not been identified despite several attempts  <cit> . instead, we explored a higher level of the ndgr regulatory network. previous chip-chip experiments revealed ndgr as one of the targets of the oxidative stress response sigma factor sigr  <cit> . we measured mrna expression level to validate the transcription of ndgr by sigr in response to thiol oxidative stress. ndgr was transiently induced by diamide treatment in the presence of sigr ; hence, ndgr is expected to regulate its target genes in response to thiol oxidative stress. however, ndgr was expressed constitutively in the absence of sigr, suggesting that there are additional transcriptional regulators in addition to the sigr.figure  <dig> 
sigr-dependent transcription activation of the
ndgr
gene in
s. coelicolor.
 quantitation of ndgr transcripts using quantitative realtime-pcr analysis  from diamide-treated cells reveals that the ndgr gene is induced using the sigr promoter. mrna level of ndgr in wt  was induced under diamide treatment compared to the level of ndgr in sigrrsra deletion mutant . all levels are normalized by the levels of each sample at 0 min.  sensitivity test of wt, ndgr deletion mutant  and complemented mutant  under thiol oxidative stress. serially diluted spores of wt, bg <dig> and bg <dig> were spotted on r <dig> agar plates with or without added diamide . plates were incubated at 30°c for 5 days.



next, we sought to examine whether the ndgr mutant strain is sensitive to this thiol-reactive compound using a plate assay. we used complex media for the sensitivity test because ndgr mutant hardly grows in minimal media  <cit> . when wt, ndgr mutant  and complemented mutant  spores were spotted on the r5- agar plates containing  <dig>  mm diamide, bg <dig> cells were found to be sensitive to diamide even in the complex media . these results show that ndgr is necessary for the response to oxidative stress conditions.

the role of bcaas in response to stress conditions has not been completely elucidated in bacteria; however, leucd induction in response to thiol-specific oxidative stress was reported in mycobacterium bovis bcg  <cit> . in plants, there have been many reports regarding the accumulation of bcaas in abiotic stress conditions  <cit> . it has been suggested that bcaas function as compatible osmolytes since the level of bcaas is elevated under drought stress in various plant tissues  <cit> . another possible role for bcaas under stress conditions that has been suggested is that they function as alternative electron donors for the mitochondrial electron transport chain via the electron transfer flavoprotein  complex to produce atp  <cit> . isovaleryl-coa from the degradation of bcaas provides electrons to the etf complex via the action of isovaleryl-coa dehydrogenase. in addition, we observed that the ndgr mutant exhibited defective membrane formation in minimal media . this result is likely due to the fact that 70% of total fatty acids in the membrane are branched-chain fatty acids, which are synthesized from the precursors derived from bcaa degradation  <cit> .

sulfur-related reactions are well known as anti-oxidation reactions in actinomycetes  <cit> . expression levels of cysihcdn, cysm, and cysa are significantly increased by sigb under osmotic and oxidative stresses  <cit> , leading to an increase in cysteine levels. as a component of mycothiol, a major thiol buffer found in many actinomycetes, cysteine would protect the cell against osmotic and oxidative stresses. because oxidation-labile s-containing factors such as tpp and iron-sulfur clusters are involved in many physiological reactions, ndgr would contribute to replenishing these factors. thus, we speculate that ndgr maintains the intracellular redox balance and the structural integrity of the membrane in response to external thiol oxidative stress by orchestrating the genes in its regulon.

elucidation of ndgr regulatory logic
the members of the iclr family of regulators have been demonstrated to be activators, repressors, and dual-role proteins in many cases  <cit> . however, to ascertain the physiological role of a regulator, a comprehensive understanding of its regulatory modes, including higher and lower levels of regulation, would be helpful. in order to elucidate how ndgr regulates target gene expression in response to oxidative stress, we quantified mrna levels of the relevant genes using qrt-pcr . we selected sulfur assimilation into the cysteine biosynthesis pathway as a target due to its significance in the stress response  <cit> . the selected genes were cysi in cysihcdn operon, cysa and cysm in cysteine biosynthesis, and ndgr. first, we confirmed that the transcriptional level of ndgr is induced by diamide. all of the target genes were also induced by diamide regardless of the presence of ndgr. this result indicates that other transcription factors related to oxidative stress could also exist for the regulation of them. next, we observed two regulatory modes based on the measurement of expression levels affected by ndgr under diamide treatment. cysa and cysi were induced by ndgr regardless of diamide. meanwhile, cysm seems to be hardly expressed without diamide treatment regardless of the presence of ndgr. although ndgr may bind to the promoter of cysm in absence of diamide treatment, the expression level may not be decreased because cysm is not expressed originally. however, ndgr repressed the expression of cysm in the presence of diamide; thus, the role of ndgr as a dual regulator was confirmed.figure  <dig> 
the regulatory modes of ndgr.  measurement of expression levels of ndgr target genes in the sulfate assimilation pathway in various combinations of input signals. d, n and t denote diamide treatment, ndgr gene and target genes of ndgr, respectively. d =  <dig> or  <dig> indicates nontreatment or treatment of diamide, respectively. the absence or presence of the ndgr gene is denoted as  <dig> or  <dig>  respectively. expression of target genes above threshold are denoted as  <dig>  or  <dig>  of output signals. expression levels were normalized relative to the expression levels of controls . all the values are represented with standard deviations.  the logic gates of ndgr regulatory networks. ndgr regulates the sulfate assimilation pathway using coherent and incoherent ffl.



we further explored the physiological roles of these two regulatory modes by ndgr using network motif theory  <cit> . the two regulatory modes of ndgr were coherent type- <dig> feed-forward loop  with or-gate, and incoherent type- <dig> feed-forward loop  . a c1-ffl is a regulatory pattern in which an activator  controls a target gene  and also activates another activator  of that target gene. c1-ffl with or-gate shows a delayed response to off steps of d and a rapid response to on steps  <cit> . because sulfur assimilation governed by cysi and cysa is controlled by c1-ffl with or-gates, cells can maintain sulfur assimilation activity after the signal is off. meanwhile, an i1-ffl is a regulatory pattern in which an activator  controls a target gene  and also activates a repressor  of that target gene. this motif is a pulse generator and a response accelerator  <cit> . in addition, i1-ffl provides fold-change detection that responds only to the fold-change  of the input signal  <cit> . cysm has an i1-ffl network motif; thus, it may be expressed in a rapid response that is proportional to the fold-change in the stimulus relative to the background.

we revealed that ndgr controls sulfur assimilation into the cysteine biosynthesis pathway through two regulatory modes. using c1-ffl with or-gate, ndgr can initiate a reduction in sulfate immediately in response to the stress and stably protect assimilation systems against transient loss of signal. at the final step, ndgr acts as a memory of stress intensity by using the i1-ffl motif. thus, it mediates a continual temporal comparison between the present and past levels of stresses. during the stress condition, the memory is adjusted to the new level of stress intensity, and cysteine synthesis by cysm returns to its basal level. thus, this modulation prevents excess synthesis of cysteine, which is energetically wasteful and avoids potential osmotic imbalances. using these regulatory modes, ndgr likely provides an advantage for s. coelicolor to maintain homeostasis in stress conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
we identified genome-wide binding sites of ndgr in s. coelicolor using chip-seq and revealed its physiological role under oxidative stress conditions. in our growth condition, we found that ndgr directly regulates  <dig> genes that are involved in the synthesis of bcaas and cysteine using  <dig> regulatory binding sites. we confirmed that sigr, an oxidative stress response sigma factor, induces ndgr in response to thiol oxidative stress induced by diamide treatment. interestingly, this implied physiological roles of the ndgr regulon in s. coelicolor. degradation of bcaas is known to produce major coa precursors of branched-chain fatty acids, which are the major components of bacterial cell membranes; thus, their production enhances the robustness of the cell. furthermore, bcaas can serve as an alternative electron transport donor for energy production under various stress conditions, similarly to that which occurs in plants. because the induction of biosynthesis of bcaa under stress conditions has also been reported in other bacteria, the exact roles of bcaas in stress conditions require further investigation. in addition, many bcaa biosynthesis genes require sulfur-containing cofactors such as thiamine and iron-sulfur clusters, which are vulnerable to thiol oxidative stress; these cofactors can be replenished by sulfur-related pathways such as cysteine biosynthesis, which is also regulated by ndgr. furthermore, cysteine is one of the precursors of mycothiol, a major redox buffer in s. coelicolor that helps maintain redox balance in the cell. the cysteine biosynthesis pathway is regulated by ndgr under thiol oxidative stress using coherent and incoherent ffl, which enables cells to adapt to the environmental conditions by maintaining homeostasis. this study provides a deeper understanding the mechanisms by which ndgr regulates amino acid biosynthesis in response to stress in s. coelicolor. in addition, this model system shows a possibility such that revealing the global regulatory network of transcription factors using chip-seq technique will enable in depth understanding of their physiological roles in s. coelicolor.

