BACKGROUND
the cicadas of new zealand  present an example of rapid ecological radiation in response to landscape and climate changes, mainly of the pliocene  and pleistocene  epochs  <cit> . approximately  <dig> nz species form two monophyletic groups, each derived from an overwater colonization event  <cit> . most belong to a large clade containing three genera: kikihia dugdale , maoricicada dugdale , and rhodopsalta dugdale , which are related to new caledonian cicadas  <cit> . species of this clade are distributed across all three main islands  and several outer islands, and together they inhabit a variety of low- and mid-elevation habitats  <cit> . the diversification of maoricicada, in particular, is an extraordinary case for the family cicadidae because its species are largely alpine in distribution. molecular-clock studies suggest that diversification in both kikihia and maoricicada began around 6– <dig> ma and accelerated through the pliocene as mountain-building increased temperature and moisture contrasts throughout nz and isolated populations geographically  <cit> .

the remaining nz cicada species  belong to the same tribe  but form a separate monophyletic clade related to australian taxa  <cit> . this clade is also widely distributed across nz and includes the familiar wing-clapping amphipsalta fleming species. however, these species have received comparatively little study. amphipsalta zelandica  inhabits low- to mid-elevation forests throughout mainland nz and nearby islands, while a. cingulata  is found only on north island , mainly in trees of coastal scrub habitats  <cit>  . a. strepitans  utilizes shrubs  in dry, open habitat, and it sings on both vegetation and rocks  <cit>  from southern ni to southeastern south island . notopsalta sericea  sings from vegetation, volcanic rocks, and clay banks in steep, open country  <cit>  throughout ni. the small size of the amphipsaltanotopsalta radiation is remarkable because its ancestor arrived in nz at approximately the same time as the kikihiamaoricicadarhodopsalta ancestor, and because it likely experienced similar miocene and pleistocene landscape and climate changes  <cit> .

in this study we use multi-gene molecular-phylogenetic methods, divergence-time analysis, intraspecific sampling, and ecological niche models  to examine the evolution of amphipsalta-notopsalta. we find that few extant lineages in the clade originated during the late miocene and pliocene, either because speciation rates were then low or because most lineages appearing during that time later went extinct. in addition, we find evidence of pleistocene-age intraspecific diversification with contrasting phylogeographic histories across the species. species’ modeled geographic ranges at the lgm  varied from distributions similar to at present to entirely absent at the lgm refugia.

RESULTS
maximum-likelihood phylogenetic and phylogeographic relationships
all sequences were submitted to genbank under accession numbers jx <dig> - jx <dig> , jx <dig> - jx <dig> , and jx <dig> - jx675448Â . character profiles and partition-specific models selected are shown in table  <dig>  the two nuclear loci were characterized by low numbers of parsimony-informative sites among ingroup taxa. the absence of a gamma parameter in the modeltest output for those genes indicates either a simple pattern of among-site rate variation, or insufficient data for estimation of a more complex model. partitionfinder identified support for a three-partition mtdna model .

coi sequences of the four species formed strongly supported monophyletic groups, and amphipsalta was recovered as a monophyletic group , but a. zelandica and a. cingulata were only weakly supported as sister-taxa . coi patristic genetic distances between the four species ranged from  <dig> - <dig>  substitutions/site . the nuclear-gene trees agreed with each other and with the coi topology, and they also supported a monophyletic amphipsalta . a. cingulata and a. zelandica were supported as sister-species with >70% ml bootstrap support in both nuclear gene trees .

phylogeographic structure was evident within all species, but with considerable differences in levels of divergence. little intraspecific divergence  in coi was detected for either a. cingulata or a. zelandica. maximum patristic genetic distances between haplotypes from the partitioned ml analysis  were  <dig>  substitutions/site  in a. cingulata  and  <dig>  s/s  in a. zelandica. for both species, haplotype patterns suggested a north–south phylogeographic break within ni, especially in a. zelandica, where a distinctive haplotype cluster was limited to northern ni .

ml patristic distances within a. strepitans and n. sericea were 3– <dig> times greater, with obvious geographical patterning . within a. strepitans, haplotypes from southern si differed by up to  <dig>  s/s  from haplotypes in central nz. the lone n. sericea haplotype from southwestern ni differed from other n. sericea haplotypes by  <dig>  s/s in coi . n. sericea haplotypes along the eastern coast formed geographically coherent sister-clades, and haplotypes from the northern ni were nearly genetically identical . otherwise, the phylogenetic relationships between regional haplotype clusters were poorly resolved in both n. sericea and a. strepitans.

the comparatively limited ef-1α dataset mirrored some intraspecific patterns observed in coi. ef-1α sequences for a. zelandica and a. cingulata were nearly identical within species, as for coi. within a. strepitans, the central otago sequence was divergent from the rest, and the wellington  and marlborough  samples were sister to one another. the n. sericea ef-1α sequences yielded the same three-way split observed between southwestern, eastern, and northern ni.

intraspecific relationships observed in the calmodulin dataset generally did not match those found in coi and ef-1α. notably, no sequence divergence was observed between the four n. sericea specimens even though these individuals were highly divergent at the other two loci. two divergent haplotypes  were found for a. cingulata, but little genetic divergence for coi or ef-1α was observed for individuals possessing those haplotypes. differences in phylogenetic signal between calmodulin and ef-1α/mtdna have been detected in other nz cicada species, with calmodulin divergence rates much higher for some species than for their congeners  <cit> .

intraspecific diversification
the gmyc algorithm identified independent lineages within each of the four described species  – six in amphipsalta zelandica, two in a. cingulata, seven in a. strepitans, and four in notopsalta sericea; the null hypothesis was rejected by a likelihood-ratio test . however, results were dependent on the dataset used. when a. zelandica and a. cingulata haplotypes were removed to see if their low intraspecific divergence was pulling the between/within-species threshold closer to the present, the gmyc algorithm diagnosed nearly every haplotype of the remaining species as an independent population lineage, although the results were only marginally significant . amova results  indicated considerable geographic-genetic structure, with greater than 30% of the genetic variance explained at the regional level in each species. amphipsalta strepitans and n. sericea exhibited the highest levels of genetic variance between regions.

 <dig> regions were defined by a six-way, north-to-south partition of the nz mainland. asterisks indicate statistically significant tests .

pairwise genetic divergence plots
the relationships between corrected  and uncorrected mtdna distances for amphipsalta-notopsalta  and for kikihia coi + coii sequences  <cit>  were similar only at low genetic distances . for both datasets, this relationship was curved upward only slightly at low uncorrected genetic distances. at greater distances, the relationships diverged. despite the fact that maximum uncorrected divergence levels were similar for the two datasets , the maximum patristic distances were  <dig>  s/s in kikihia and  <dig>  s/s in amphipsalta-notopsalta . the amphipsalta-notopsalta curve was notably ragged at high genetic distances, with substantially different patristic distances reconstructed for some taxa with uncorrected distances greater than 6%.

divergence-time analysis
the beast analyses under different tree models showed a strong effect of the prior on interspecific divergence times, but comparatively little effect on intraspecific haplotype divergences and species’ mrca ages . the birth-death model resulted in a mean root age of  <dig>  ma, compared to only  <dig>  ma for the yule and approximately  <dig> ma for each of the two coalescent models. intraspecific divergences were dated to the pleistocene in all cases. analyses run with no data in order to estimate the prior returned divergence times close to zero for all nodes.

estimates of interspecific divergence times were strongly influenced by the tree prior, while ages of species’ mrcas and intraspecific divergences varied much less.

while the estimated marginal likelihoods were similar for the birth-death, constant-size coalescent, and expansion-growth coalescent models, the  <dig> ln bayes factor score indicated support for the birth-death model . under this model, the amphipsalta + notopsalta ancestor diverged from the outgroup approximately  <dig> ma, and notopsalta split from the amphipsalta common ancestor at around  <dig>  ma. the remaining interspecific divergences were dated to ca.  <dig> ma  and  <dig> ma  . the earliest splits within a. strepitans and n. sericea dated to the mid-pleistocene , while splits within a. zelandica and a. cingulata dated to the late pleistocene . credible intervals for the intraspecific coalescences were similar in magnitude  to those observed for the interspecific splits . the meanrate estimate , reflecting the mean clock rate across the tree, remained close to the fixed ucld.mean rate, as expected because no calibrations other than the fixed values for ucld.mean and ucld.stdev were used in the analysis. because we fixed ucld.stdev, we could not use this statistic to test for clocklike evolution, but because clocklike data can be accommodated by a relaxed clock model our approach is conservative.

strong support for the birth-death model was indicated, according to the criterion  <dig> ln bayes factor >  <dig> 

the maximum clade compatibility tree from the beast analysis  found different intraspecific root positions for n. sericea and a. strepitans, compared to the ml results. as a result, some geographically coherent haplotype clades that appeared paraphyletic in the ml tree were found to be monophyletic with strong support  in the beast analysis.

ecological niche models
bioclimatic models of the distribution of amphipsalta zelandica yielded an average auc of  <dig>   in the 10-fold cross-validation runs and performed significantly better than random  in the binomial omission tests across all thresholds and runs. heuristic estimation of relative contributions of the environmental variables indicated that annual temperature  and february temperature  were the top predictors of the distribution of a. zelandica. effects of clamping during lgm projection were minor and restricted to montane areas. under current climate conditions, a. zelandica was projected to be widely distributed throughout ni and northern si in lowland regions . during the lgm, most of nz was projected as less suitable for a. zelandica, with the exception of the coromandel peninsula and east cape in northern ni and karamea, central nelson and kaikoura in northern si .

models for the distribution of a. strepitans also performed significantly better than random in the binomial omission tests in all but one run and yielded an average auc of  <dig>   . the top predictor of the distribution of a. strepitans was october vapor pressure deficit , with february temperature a distant second . effects from clamping during lgm projection were largely restricted to the central southern alps. the species’ projected distribution centered on the northeastern si, particularly the coastal kaikoura ranges , under both climate scenarios, and the projected lgm distribution was slightly larger  than that for current conditions. notably, the model failed to capture the southern extent of the species’ range – several sampled populations fall within the region of 0-10% probability predicted by maxent. as this may have been due to the high number of localities from the northern si, resulting in over-fitting of regional conditions, input localities for a. strepitans were thinned to a minimum distance of  <dig> km apart  and modeled again as above. the resulting models were no better at capturing the southern extent of the species’ distribution , which is represented by only  <dig> localities south of central canterbury.

results for notopsalta sericea were also significantly better than random, with only one threshold for one run yielding p >  <dig>  in the binomial omission tests, and an average auc of  <dig>  . top climatic predictors were february temperature  and minimum temperature , and no effects from clamping were detected during projection. under modern conditions, northern and coastal ni were projected as climatically suitable, but none of nz was projected to contain suitable conditions during the lgm .

models for a. cingulata yielded similar geographic projections, with much of lowland ni projected as climatically suitable under modern conditions, and no refugia projected for the lgm . results from the binomial omission tests were significantly different from random except for one data partition which yielded multiple thresholds with p >  <dig> . the average auc across ten runs was  <dig>  , and annual temperature  and minimum temperature  were the top predictors of the distribution of a. cingulata.

when model calibration for n. sericea and a. cingulata was restricted to environmental conditions from ni, performance markedly declined, yielding average aucs of  <dig>   and  <dig>  , respectively, and multiple binomial omission tests for multiple runs yielded p >  <dig> . areas of uncertainty  appeared when projecting onto the full lgm surface, and once these areas were removed, no likely refugia were detected, although some regions had climatic suitability above zero .

discussion
molecular clocks and divergence-time estimation for the amphipsalta-notopsalta radiation
molecular clock calibration and substitution models
insect molecular-clock studies often apply a mtdna calibration of  <dig> % pairwise distance per my, or  <dig>  substitutions/site/my/lineage, derived by brower  <cit> . however, two estimates used by brower were revised downward during re-analysis  <cit> , and the remaining data were derived from rrna, dna-dna hybridization, or rflp datasets, so their applicability to mtdna protein coding genes such as coi is unclear. in addition, none of the data used in the brower study were corrected for multiple hits with data partitioning or the use of gamma-distributed rates, as most data are today  <cit> . if studies that calibrate molecular clocks do not correct for multiple hits as thoroughly as the analyses that employ them, the date estimates will be biased  <cit> .

the bayesian relaxed-clock approach in beast allows the investigator to conservatively accommodate a range of plausible coi clock values with a single prior probability distribution in each analysis. we calibrated our analyses with fixed values for the mean branch rate and the standard deviation of that mean across the tree , set such that the 95% credible intervals included the published rates cited in table  <dig> 

although these distances were reported as percentages in the papers referenced, a common practice, this is not ideal for corrected distances since the values can exceed 100%.

the divergence-time and ml analyses in this study may have suffered from poor branch-length estimation , perhaps related to the limited number of deep splits in the tree. results from the beast analyses, specifically the ages of the interspecific splits, were strongly influenced by the choice of tree prior . plots of corrected vs. patristic distances in the amphipsalta-notopsalta and published kikihia datasets showed that corrected distances were considerably greater for amphipsalta-notopsalta at the deepest levels examined, although both plots initially followed similar trajectories . although the two datasets may have evolved under different mechanisms, the magnitude of the difference and the ragged nature of the amphipsalta-notopsalta plot are causes for concern. further examination of the relationships between tree shape, dataset information, and branch lengths in maximum-likelihood and divergence-time analyses would likely prove useful. notably, the confidence intervals on the intraspecific data estimates from beast were much narrower and largely unaffected by the tree prior.

interspecific vs. intraspecific divergence timing
unlike the nz kikihia-maoricicada-rhodopsalta cicada radiation, the amphipsalta-notopsalta radiation contains no described species with pleistocene origins. an earlier genus-level phylogenetic analysis including a. cingulata and n. sericea demonstrated a high level of genetic divergence between these species, consistent with a late miocene to early pliocene split   <cit> . we find here that all interspecific divergences in the clade predate the pleistocene , although these dates are uncertain. in addition, the low number of species in the amphipsaltanotopsalta radiation is not due to more recent diversification, since the earliest divergences of both clades appear to have occurred in the mid-miocene  <cit> . 

although species-level diversification apparently preceded the pleistocene, the genetic data suggest that several independently evolving, morphologically cryptic populations have formed during that period. all four species contain mtdna phylogeographic structure, i.e., unique haplotypes or haplotype clusters occupying exclusive geographic ranges, with uncorrected genetic distances between clades approaching  <dig> %. the nuclear data show some concordant patterns, but they do not confirm all of the mtdna clades, and there is conflict in some cases . nuclear genes tend to evolve much more slowly than mtdna, so considerable structure can appear in mitochondrial genes before concurrent changes occur in ndna. furthermore, the larger effective population sizes of nuclear genes mean that more time is needed for lineage sorting to become complete  <cit> , so the lack of detailed structure in calmodulin and ef-1α does not necessarily mean that the mtdna clades are freely exchanging such genes. however, nuclear genes can also reveal sex-specific gene flow patterns that a uniparental marker like mtdna can miss. the phylogeographic evidence of intraspecific diversification helps to alleviate the potential concern that, by sampling extensively “within species” for the beast analyses, we may be overestimating intraspecific sequence divergence and therefore the mrca ages of the four species  <cit> .

in nz kikihia and maoricicada <cit> , mtdna phylogeography and song patterns indicate pleistocene-age allopatric diversification within currently recognized species. populations with greater than  <dig> % uncorrected mtdna divergence frequently, although not always, exhibit discrete differences in song  <cit>  – and in some cases conflicting patterns in ef-1α. the largest intraspecific mtdna genetic distances within a. strepitans and n. sericea approach this threshold. we have not observed regional differences in the songs of amphipsalta and notopsalta during field collection and observation, but detailed examination might uncover minor variation concordant with the mtdna tree.

the gmyc analysis , which was intended to identify the shift from between- to within-population branching patterns  <cit> , yielded results consistent with the inference that some of the geographically coherent mtdna phylogroups are independently evolving populations. however, the large number of clades inferred for a. zelandica is surprising give the low sequence divergence within that species, and the gmyc results changed substantially when only n. sericea and a. strepitans haplotypes were examined. it is possible that the marginal statistical significance observed in the latter test is a sign of too little data for effective estimation of branching-rate shifts despite the likely existence of several independently evolving populations within these taxa.

if the mtdna clades represent independently evolving subspecific populations, then at least 2– <dig> allopatric population-lineages per species have formed in amphipsaltanotopsalta during the pleistocene, a rapid rate compared to the late miocene and pliocene. this contrasts with the results from kikihia, where the rate of population-lineage formation has remained approximately constant since the early pliocene  <cit> .

potential drivers of intraspecific divergence in amphipsalta-notopsalta
limited phylogeographic structure in forest taxa
the low level of intraspecific genetic divergence characterizing amphipsalta cingulata and a. zelandica is consistent with their dependence on temperate forest habitat. nz forests progressively declined in extent throughout the pleistocene, especially during the last million years. during the lgm , the principal forest refugia were located in northern ni and/or northwestern si  <cit> , with smaller fragments located farther south  <cit> . roughly similar regions were predicted for a. zelandica refugia . both a. cingulata and a. zelandica contain haplotype clusters consistent with survival during the lgm in as few as two locations, one more northern and one more southern  <cit> . however, the phylogeographic structure observed within a. zelandica is insufficiently detailed to confirm the enm predictions of two major refugia in ni and 2– <dig> in si, although the genetic data are consistent with the absence of refugia in central or southern si.

the lack of structure within a. zelandica is remarkable when compared with phylogenetic patterns observed in other forest species believed to have survived in si  <cit> . while nz forest taxa often show evidence of geographic restriction during the lgm, different species exhibit phylogeographic variation that likely relates to differences in life-history parameters or habitat specialization. for example, forest taxa including beetles  <cit>  and a fern  <cit>  appear to have survived glacial cold phases in small forest fragments in southern nz and retained considerable phylogeographic structure there. in contrast, the only other widespread nz forest cicada, kikihia subalpina, retains considerable geographic structure on ni , but limited structure on si where it inhabits lowland forest  <cit> . greater pleistocene stability of ni habitats has been linked to persistence of beetle species . it is possible that, for cicadas, additional factors are needed to explain why the forest taxa have been unable to survive in southern nz during colder climate phases .

because the intraspecific lineages within a. zelandica and a. cingulata were inferred to coalesce around  <dig> ky and  <dig> ky, respectively, both species were likely limited to a single refugium during the late pleistocene. some support for this idea is observed in climate proxies that suggest, around  <dig> ky, a glacial cold period that may have been more severe than the lgm  <cit> . coalescence of regional clades around  <dig> ky was also observed in maoricicada campbelli <cit> . this hypothesis could be tested more effectively by multi-gene datasets allowing more sensitive estimates of divergence times.

dispersal ability may also have influenced population genetic structure in the amphipsaltanotopsalta species, contributing to lower genetic differentiation in the forest taxa a. zelandica and a. cingulata. lineage-specific differences in traits affecting dispersal and gene flow should influence relative rates of allopatric divergence, especially in neutral genetic characters  <cit> . the two forest taxa are the largest-bodied cicadas in new zealand , and they are likely the strongest fliers, suggesting that greater dispersal ability leads to greater gene flow among populations and reduced rates of allopatric differentiation in these species. however, the mtdna data show that dispersal in a. cingulata and a. zelandica has not completely prevented the formation of intraspecific phylogeographic structure . all cicadas spend multiple years as juveniles underground, a life-history feature that must reduce population vagility compared to similarly sized insects  <cit> .

mid-pleistocene diversification of open-habitat species
in notopsalta sericea and amphipsalta strepitans, more intraspecific lineages are evident than in the two forest taxa, and multiple lineages apparently persisted through the hypothesized pleistocene minimum of  <dig> ky. in both cases, the credible intervals on mtdna coalescence include the period from about  <dig> - <dig>  ma  .

multiple geological and climatic changes are known to have occurred around  <dig> ma that could have affected diversification of these open-habitat species  <cit> . pleistocene climates became progressively colder and drier, suggesting the continued replacement of forests by shrub and grassland habitats. large sections of ni and northern si began a period of accelerated uplift that has continued to the present  <cit> , increasing rain shadow effects across eastern provinces and expanding the dry slope habitats used by a. strepitans and n. sericea. the puzzling mtdna homogeneity of n. sericea populations across the northern third of ni, a reversal of the “northern richness, southern purity” pattern frequently observed in nz  <cit> , could be explained by very recent acceleration of uplift in that area  <cit>  leading to northward dispersal from source populations in central ni.

unlike a. zelandica and other forest insects whose lgm distributions have been modeled  <cit> , for a. strepitans the hypothesized lgm range was not smaller than the present-day range . a higher degree of phylogeographic structuring relative to the other cicadas was also detected, consistent with survival of multiple distinct populations over a longer period, as has been detected in other non-forest invertebrates . a. strepitans was the only cicada for which temperature explained less than 15% of model fit, suggesting its wider lgm distribution may have been related to success in cooler temperatures, although tolerance of aridity could also be involved. greater success in drier climates was offered to explain a larger lgm distribution implied by microsatellite data for the nz tree species pseudopanax ferox <cit> . the enm failed to capture the southern extent of a. strepitans’ current distribution, possibly because of the low number of localities from south canterbury and otago relative to the well-sampled northeastern si, limiting the inferences we can make about the lgm projection. however, the low sample numbers in the south likely indicate genuine scarcity in this region, and the discovery of additional southern localities would likely expand, rather than contract, the projected climatic distribution of this species.

ecological niche models and lgm refugia
no lgm refugia were projected for n. sericea or a. cingulata, despite apparently successful model performance, implying that no counterpart of either species’ current realized niche existed during the lgm. yet genetic patterns suggest that both species survived on ni during that period, and n. sericea contains considerable mtdna phylogeographic structure on ni. three hypotheses  can explain these surprising results: 1) the species have only recently occupied their current climatic niche , 2) they survived in isolated microrefugia undetectable using these methods, or 3) their current realized niches inadequately represent the fundamental niche of each species . the first hypothesis is less likely; existing evidence for insects, while largely based on beetles, offers little evidence of post-lgm shifts in climate exploitation  <cit> .

the second and third hypotheses are both plausible, but difficult to disentangle. amphipsalta cingulata and notopsalta sericea survived somewhere in nz, and it is likely that local habitat attributes created small refugia undetectable using our elevation-scaled meteorological data  <cit> . past climates may have had different combinations of environmental variables than exist today, yielding predictions of past ranges that are under- or overestimates  <cit> . in addition, enms as applied here are a representation of each species’ climatic niche, but if a species is restricted from exploiting its full climatic niche due to other factors, projections onto past climates may exclude potentially habitable areas  <cit> . several cicada species are present in the southernmost ni but are absent from si , indicating that cook strait is an important dispersal barrier even for flighted species  <cit> , and the absence of a. cingulata and n. sericea from cooler and wetter conditions in si would result in underrepresentation of suitable lgm refugia. excluding these potentially habitable, unoccupied regions from the training data reduces the risk of over-fitting but increases model uncertainty  and thus, transferability of the model  <cit> , and for both species, restricting the training data resulted in clamping  where none was previously detected. interestingly, neither species has extended its range into the cooler mid- or high elevations of ni, and restricting the training data failed to yield additional refugia, suggesting that spurious over-fitting of the climate data was not the key driver of this absence, although it cannot be conclusively ruled out. projections of enms onto past climates must be interpreted with caution, particularly where their congruence with external data  is low.

CONCLUSIONS
this study and others  show that closely related and regionally co-occurring organisms can experience dramatically different diversification rates over a substantial period , a conclusion presaged by earlier literature on species distributions . because the two nz cicada lineages colonized the landscape independently, the difference in the number of extant species is not simply a side-effect of the geography of initial diversification, as is possible with sister-clades  <cit> . apparently, many physiological, ecological, and historical factors interact to influence diversification. in the case of the two nz cicada radiations, we speculate that differences in climatic tolerances/preferences of the two ancestors could have persistently influenced the geographic ranges of the two radiating lineages. climatic refugia were not detected for two of the four species, suggesting that pleistocene survival and lineage diversification were moderated by factors other than broad regional climatic conditions. this study also adds to a growing number of phylogeographic analyses implicating mountain-building and pleistocene habitat fragmentation as drivers of diversification in nz insects.

