BACKGROUND
formation of persister cells by bacteria is a phenomenon that, amongst others, contributes to tolerance of a bacterial subpopulation to antimicrobial agents. notably, this antibiotic tolerance of persister cells is distinct from genetically inherited resistance. the persister cell subpopulation has been firstly described and named nearly 70 years ago  <cit>  and research on persister cells has identified a number of typical characteristics as debated recently  <cit> . bacterial persister cells seem to represent a stage of dormancy that protects them from killing by antimicrobial substances, even in the presence of concentrations which vastly exceed the minimal inhibitory concentration . persister cells are genetically identical to antibiotic sensitive bacteria within a population, but have a distinct phenotype in that they are tolerant to certain antibiotics  <cit> . since most antibiotics target bacterial components or pathways involved in replication, the dormancy stage in persister cells is thought to be the underlying mechanism of antibiotic tolerance  <cit> . nevertheless, persister celis can switch from the dormant into a replicating stage. this ‘bet-hedging’ strategy is thought to be a survival strategy of microbial populations  <cit> .

two different types of persister cells have been postulated. type i persister cells are formed in response to environmental stimuli, for instance during the initiation of the stationary growth phase, whereas type ii persister cells arise stochastically within a dividing population  <cit> .

a recent report proposed a ‘persistence-if-stuff-happens’ hypothesis, i.e. persister cell formation is an inevitable process due to cellular errors that produce transient states of reduced replication and/or metabolic activity in a single bacterium  <cit> . nevertheless, in the last years many attempts have been made to identify molecular factors involved in the development of a persister cell subpopulation. there is increasing evidence that toxin-antitoxin modules, quorum-sensing molecules, global transcriptional regulators, and molecules of the stringent response like ppgpp are involved in persister cell formation  <cit> .

since the first report by bigger in  <dig>  <cit> , bacterial persister cells have been described for a number of different species, including escherichia coli <cit> , staphylococcus aureus <cit> , pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> , and mycobacterium tuberculosis <cit> . for most of these bacterial species persister cells have also been found in biofilms, which contribute to recalcitrant and/or recurrent infections after antibiotic therapy  <cit> .

little is known about persister cell formation in streptococci  <cit> . within pathogenic streptococci, the zoonosis streptococcus suis  is of particular interest since it can cause very severe diseases, such as sepsis, meningitis and streptococcal toxic shock like syndrome in humans who are in close contact to pigs or pig products  <cit> . notably, s. suis has been shown to be one of the most frequent causes of adult bacterial meningitis in asian countries including vietnam and thailand  <cit> . s. suis infections are widely distributed in pigs, but can also occur in wildlife animals such as wild rabbits or wild boars  <cit> . in pigs s. suis is a frequent early colonizer of the upper respiratory tract. in young pigs s. suis is also a major cause of meningitis, arthritis, and septicemia. thus, s. suis infections are a major concern in the swine producing industry as they lead to high financial losses  <cit> .

since antibiotics are widely used to control s. suis infections , we examined the ability of s. suis to produce antibiotic tolerant persister cells. we analyzed the effects of the initial bacterial growth phase on persister cell formation, the tolerance of these cells to different types of antibiotics, as well as persister cell levels of different s. suis strains and other human pathogenic streptococci. our results show for the first time that s. suis forms high levels of persister cells that confer tolerance to a variety of antimicrobial compounds. we also present evidence that persister cell formation is not only found in s. suis but also in other streptococcal species.

RESULTS
identification of a multi-drug tolerant persister cell subpopulation in s. suis
since persister cell formation is important for antibiotic tolerance and recurrent infections, we studied the occurrence of persister cells in the zoonotic pathogen s. suis using a highly virulent serotype  <dig> strain, strain  <dig>  first we determined the minimal inhibitory concentration  of six antibiotics with different modes of action for exponential grown s. suis strain  <dig> by the standard microdilution assay , because one main characteristic of persister cells is the ability to tolerate concentrations of different antimicrobial compounds above the mic. following, to test whether s. suis is capable of producing persister cells that tolerate antibiotic treatment, we performed antibiotic killing experiments with a 100-fold mic of each antimicrobial compound. antibiotic challenge was performed with cultures grown either to exponential or stationary phase. since a 100-fold mic should inactivate antibiotic-sensitive normal growing bacteria, we assumed that this treatment would result in characteristic biphasic-killing characterized by an initial rapid killing of the bulk of the bacterial population followed by a distinct plateau of surviving drug tolerant persister cells  <cit> . as depicted in figure 1a, gentamicin treatment of exponential grown s. suis resulted in decrease of bacterial cfu by three orders of magnitude within the first hour and a subsequent plateau phase in the following hours. when we applied β-lactam antibiotics and ciprofloxacin the killing was not as pronounced as observed for gentamicin, nevertheless a slow decrease of life counts was seen over time. nearly no killing was observed after treatment with rifampicin. in contrast, daptomycin was able to completely kill the bacterial population without detectable survival of persister cells. these data indicate that within an exponential grown s. suis culture a subpopulation of antibiotic tolerant persister cells exists, which show different degrees of tolerance depending on the class of antibiotic.

next we studied the persister cell levels of stationary grown s. suis since for several other bacterial species a drastic increase in persister levels has been reported at the onset of stationary growth phase  <cit> . antibiotic treatment of stationary cultures of s. suis with 100-fold mic resulted in a substantial drug tolerance, i.e. a distinct biphasic killing pattern such as seen with exponential cultures was not observed . only a slight decrease in numbers of cfu was detected over time after treatment with β-lactams, ciprofloxacin and gentamicin. in the case of gentamicin a relative difference of approximately three logarithmic orders in cfu was recorded after the first hour of antibiotic treatment, when comparing populations of exponential and stationary grown s. suis. notably, growth to the stationary growth phase did not enhance the tolerance of s. suis to the cyclic lipopeptide daptomycin which completely killed the s. suis population after only one hour of treatment. taken together, the killing kinetics revealed that under the conditions tested s. suis develops a growth phase dependent subpopulation showing antibiotic tolerance to a variety of antimicrobial compounds except daptomycin.

the persister cell phenotype of s. suis is not inherited and dominated by type i persisters
in contrast to genetically encoded antimicrobial resistance, multidrug tolerance of persister cells is a transient and non-heritable phenotype  <cit> . to test heritability of antimicrobial tolerance, exponential grown s. suis was treated with 100-fold mic of gentamicin and the surviving population was used to repeat a new cycle. four consecutive cycles were tested. gentamicin was selected for these experiments since this treatment resulted in pronounced biphasic killing curves in the first hours after antibiotic treatment. as depicted in figure 2a, tolerance to gentamicin of the initial population was not transferred to following s. suis generations. the characteristic biphasic killing curve upon antibiotic treatment was observed irrespective of the number of passages. these results suggest that the formation of a s. suis persister cell subpopulation and antimicrobial tolerance is not inherited and of transient nature.

in order to dissect whether type i or type ii persisters are responsible for gentamicin tolerance, we performed a persister cell elimination assay. in this assay the formation of type i persisters is suppressed by sequential re-inoculation of an early exponential culture. this procedure leads to dilution of type i persisters whilst stochastically build type ii persister cell levels should remain constant. as depicted in figure 2b the percentage of antibiotic tolerant persisters decreased sequentially after 100-fold mic gentamicin challenge when the bacterial culture was kept in the early growth phase for three cycles. this data indicate that gentamicin tolerant persisters are not or only rarely produced in the early exponential growth phase and that most of the tolerant bacteria represented type i persisters. these were probably ‘left overs’ from the overnight culture and became diluted within repeated cycles of exponential growth.

s. suis persister cells also tolerate combinations of different antibiotics
antibiotics like penicillin are frequently used to treat s. suis infections, sometimes in combination with other antibiotics like aminoglycosides. however, relapses of s. suis infections in pigs and humans have been reported  <cit> . furthermore, penicillin and gentamicin are widely used in standard antibiotic protection assays to quantify intracellular bacteria in in vitro cell culture experiments. therefore, we investigated s. suis tolerance against a combination of penicillin  and gentamicin  that correspond to the concentrations applied in these antibiotic protection experiments. after simultaneous treatment of exponential grown s. suis with penicillin and gentamicin we observed a biphasic killing curve characterized by a rapid decrease of cfu numbers within the first hour and a subsequent plateau of surviving bacteria persisting for more than 8 hours . the killing kinetics of stationary grown bacteria treated similarly resembled treatment with gentamicin alone, as depicted in figure 1b. similar to what we observed after treatment with a single antibiotic, the tolerance to a combination of penicillin and gentamicin was not inherited, as revealed from heritability tests . these data suggest that s. suis persister cells are capable of tolerating not only single antibiotics, but also a combination of penicillin and aminoglycosides.

persister cell formation in s. suis is affected by the global transcriptional regulator ccpa and the catabolic arginine deiminase system
several genes and gene products have been implicated in antibiotic tolerance, like toxin-antitoxin  modules, quorum-sensing molecules and global transcriptional regulators  <cit> . in previous studies we have shown that ccpa is a pleiotropic regulator of s. suis carbon metabolism, virulence gene expression and the expression of the arginine deiminase  system  <cit> . the latter is crucial for bacterial survival in acidic environments and is most likely required for alternative atp generation. hence, we tested respective s. suis mutant strains 10Δccpa and 10Δad for gentamicin tolerant persister cells. cfu of bacterial strains grown to the exponential growth phase were determined over time after treatment with 100-fold mic gentamicin. the gentamicin mic values of the mutant strains did not differ from those of the wild type strain. no change in persister levels was observed for exponential grown strain 10Δccpa, whereas the ad mutant strain 10Δad showed an approximately two log-fold higher persister cell level over time compared to the wild type . this difference was abrogated when stationary growth phase cultures were challenged by gentamicin . interestingly, during the later growth phase the persister level of strain 10Δccpa decreased as compared to the wild type and strain 10Δad.

persister cell formation occurs in different s. suis strains and streptococcal species
next, we tested antibiotic tolerance and persister cell formation in other s. suis strains and streptococcal species. for this, we analyzed a human serotype  <dig> isolate  originating from a s. suis outbreak in china and a serotype  <dig> strain  isolated from a pig with meningitis  <cit> . the mic values of gentamicin for strain 05zyh <dig> and strain a3286/ <dig> are given in additional file 1: table s <dig>  in all strains, treatment with 100-fold mic of gentamicin induced the characteristic biphasic killing curve and resulted in a complete killing of bacteria after 24 hours. no substantial differences could be observed between strains in the exponential growth phase . on the other hand, using stationary cultures strain  <dig> showed the highest degree of drug tolerance. strains a3286/ <dig> and 05zyh <dig> were killed more efficiently, especially during the first hour of antibiotic treatment, with persister cell differences of up to two log-fold cfu. after 24 hours of gentamicin treatment viable bacteria could only be recovered in strain  <dig>  but not in strains a3286/ <dig> and 05zyh <dig>  respectively . these data indicate that various s. suis strains and serotypes form persisters with different frequencies and antibiotic tolerance characteristics.

since antibiotic tolerance has been reported for other streptococcal species  <cit>  we studied persister cell formation in selected strains of other streptococci, including s. pyogenes, s. agalactiae, and s. gordonii after treatment with 100-fold mic gentamicin. the determined mic values for each strain are listed in additional file 1: table s <dig>  interestingly, in contrast to s. suis neither exponential nor stationary grown streptococci of the tested strains displayed a gentamicin tolerant subpopulation . notably, we could not detect any gentamicin tolerant subpopulation for s. pyogenes, s. gordonii, and s. agalactiae overnight cultures as shown in figure 6a. on the other hand, treatment with 100-fold mic of ciprofloxacin resulted in a drug-specific tolerance for at least 8 hours . the proportion of ciprofloxacin tolerant bacteria was higher for s. suis strain  <dig> and s. pyogenes strain a <dig> as compared to the other streptococcal species. these data indicate that drug tolerant subpopulations might also occur in other streptococcal species, but the extent of tolerance seems to vary between different antibiotics.

discussion
generation of bacterial persister cells is important not only with respect to the understanding of population dynamics but also concerning antibiotic tolerance in respective therapy of infections  <cit> . accordingly, there is growing evidence that bacterial persisters are involved in relapses of refractory bacterial infections and in the establishment of resistance mechanisms in bacteria  <cit> . owing to this it seems not surprising that persister cells have been described for numerous pathogenic bacteria. in this study we have shown for the first time that s. suis forms multi-drug tolerant persister cells. even though 100-fold mic is unlikely to be achieved in therapy of natural infections, we assumed that this treatment would be a method of choice to identify highly drug-tolerant persister cells of s. suis in accordance to results reported for s. aureus <cit> . by this we identified persister cell formation in three different s. suis strains, suggesting that this phenomenon may be a general trait among this species. though this has to be further confirmed by testing more s. suis strains and antibiotics that are of higher clinical relevance to treat s. suis infections in pigs and humans, persister cells should be considered in the future in cases of ineffective antibiotic treatments or when studying antibiotic tolerance of s. suis.

in line with several previous studies  <cit>  the number of persisters observed was higher during stationary growth of s. suis when compared to exponential grown bacteria. type i persisters were found to be the main source of antibiotic tolerance in our experiments. among other stress signals, nutrient limitation in stationary growth is thought to be a trigger inducing down-regulation of the metabolic activity and bacterial dormancy in energy-deprived cells which can protect the bacteria from antibiotic killing. we found some hints for involvement of the catabolic enzyme system ads, since approximately two log-fold higher levels of persister cells were found in the exponential growth phase of an arginine deiminase knock-out strain  as compared to its wild type strain. in s. suis the arginine deiminase system metabolizes arginine as a substrate to produce energy in form of atp  <cit> . the diminished atp levels may lead to reduced general metabolic activity of strain 10Δad that might explain the slower growth rate  and enhanced number of antibiotic tolerant persister cells. furthermore, the ccpa deficient strain exhibited lower numbers of persister cells in the stationary growth phase when compared to the wild type. this is in agreement with studies in s. gordonii showing that a ccpa knock-out resulted in an increased sensitivity of the bacteria to penicillin treatment  <cit> . since ccpa is a pleiotropic regulator that is important for a balanced metabolic flux in the central carbon metabolism, the alteration of central metabolic processes may influence persister cell formation of s. suis. accordingly, an interplay between carbohydrate consumption and formation of persisters has recently been demonstrated for e. coli <cit> . further studies are needed to clarify the mechanisms involved in ccpa and/or arginine deiminase dependent changes in antibiotic tolerance of s. suis.

when using antibiotics with varying modes of action, resulting killing profiles were quite different, ranging from pronounced biphasic killing patterns to nearly plane curves, at least for exponential grown s. suis. these findings seem to be highly dependent on the type of antibiotic used, which is also emphasized by the fact that treatment with the β-lactam antibiotics amoxicillin and penicillin resulted in similar killing curves. thus we speculated a common mechanism of tolerance for certain antibiotics and tested the gentamicin tolerance in other streptococcal species. s. suis strain  <dig> highly tolerated 100-fold mic of gentamicin, whereas the other streptococcal strains were completely killed after one hour. these data suggest that a specific mechanism for gentamicin tolerance of s. suis persisters may have evolved and that this is, most likely, not due to a shared genetic background within the genus streptococcus. interestingly, after gentamicin treatment of s. suis we also observed a small-colony-variant  like phenotype  that has also been reported for s. aureus upon aminoglycoside treatment  <cit> . although it reverted to the typical large-colony phenotype after subcultivation, it remains to be elucidated if this phenotype will change to a stable phenotype after longer exposure times and altered antibiotic tolerance to aminoglycosides. however, at the stationary growth phase the investigated s. suis strain  <dig> highly tolerated several antimicrobials targeting different bacterial components over time. given the high rate of multi-drug tolerant cells produced by s. suis strain  <dig> during stationary growth, it was remarkable that the cyclic lipopeptide daptomycin efficiently eradicated this subpopulation. this is in contrast to observations that in s. aureus 100-fold mic of daptomycin failed to eradicate stationary phase cultures  <cit> . even though the mic for daptomycin is rather high when compared to that of other streptococcal species  <cit>  this treatment eradicated s. suis persister cells in vitro.

in the last years bacterial persistence and enhanced antibiotic tolerance was intensively discussed in the context of recurrent infections caused by bacterial pathogens. interestingly, a human case of recurrent septic shock due to a s. suis serotype  <dig> infection has previously been reported  <cit> . together with our present study this suggests a clinical relevance of s. suis persisters. although experimental evidence for s. suis persister cell and biofilm formation in vivo is yet missing, s. suis is able to produce biofilms in vitro that tolerate antibiotic challenge  <cit> . given the fact that the s. suis colonization rate of pigs is nearly 100%  <cit>  and that antibiotic treatment with penicillin, ampicillin, or ceftiofur failed to eliminate the tonsillar carrier state of s. suis in swine  <cit> , it is plausible to speculate that persister cells, possibly also as part of biofilm structures, may contribute to the observed problems in antibiotic treatments. indeed, p. aeruginosa persister cells have been described as the dominant population responsible for drug tolerance in biofilms  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study showed that the zoonotic pathogen s. suis is able to form a multi-drug tolerant persister cell subpopulation. s. suis persister cells tolerated a variety of antimicrobial compounds that were applied at 100-fold of mic and could be detected in different s. suis strains. thus, our study provides a basis for future studies on the role of s. suis persister cells in bacterial colonization of host tissues, general antibiotic tolerance, and recurrent infections.

