BACKGROUND
clostridium tetani and clostridium perfringens are among the medically important clostridial pathogens causing diseases in man and animals. clostridium tetani is an anaerobic pathogen possessing a wide arsenal of virulence factors and is the causative agent for tetanus disease. tetanus disease, and in particular maternal and neonatal tetanus, is still an important cause of death due to insufficient immunization  <cit> . neonatal tetanus is considered endemic to  <dig> developing countries and resulted in  <dig> deaths in  <dig> . tetanus continues to cause ~ <dig>  deaths worldwide each year, predominantly in low- and middle-income countries. tetanus is characterized by muscle rigidity and painful muscle spasms caused by tetanus toxin's blockade of inhibitory neurons that normally oppose and modulate the action of excitatory motor neurons.

on the other hand, c. perfringens is an obligate anaerobic rod shaped bacterium commonly found in the gastrointestinal tracts of both animals and humans and widely distributed in soil and sewage. it is an etiological agent, causing several diseases in humans and animals; the former includes gas gangrene, food poisoning, necrotizing enterocolitis of infants and enteritis necroticans  <cit> . the incidence of disease ranged from 1% or less of wounded personnel during world war ii to 10% of wounded personnel during world war i. hundreds of thousands of soldiers died of gas gangrene as a result of battlefield injuries, and c. perfringens was widely recognised as being the most important causal organism of the disease.

many vaccines have been developed from live attenuated forms of bacterial pathogens or from killed bacterial cells  <cit> . however, an increased awareness of the potential for transient side effects following vaccination has prompted an increased emphasis on the use of subunit vaccines. despite the fact that a high-level antibody response does not always correlate with protection, presence of antibodies in a host surviving infection can offer clues towards identification of protective antigens of a pathogen.

several striking findings have emerged from the complete genome sequencing data of these clostridial pathogens  <cit> . many homologous orfs have been identified in the genomes of c. tetani and c. perfringens by comparative genomic analysis of the two genomes. of the total  <dig> orfs observed in c. tetani e <dig>   <dig> orfs had a close homologue in c. perfringens genome showing significant sequence similarity  <cit> . this suggested a likelihood of extensive sharing of common epitopes between homologous proteins of these two medically important pathogens. to examine this hypothesis, we probed the total cellular proteins of c. tetani with antisera raised against whole cells of c. perfringens atcc <dig>  cross-reactive proteins have been identified and protection against challenge with c. tetani to animals actively immunized with c. perfringens whole cell has been reported.

RESULTS
immunization against heat killed c. perfringens organisms produced a high titer of antibodies  recognizing several proteins as revealed by western blot analysis of one dimensional sds-page separated proteins from c. perfringens whole cell lysate . in contrast serum obtained from sham immunized animals was devoid of such antibody.

mouse c. perfringens whole cell  polyclonal antibody reacted with several proteins of c. tetani as revealed by 2-de blot . c. tetani whole cell lysate  was also probed with serum from sham-immunized animals; no spots were detected . eight predominant cross-reactive spots were identified in the parallel-run coomassie-stained gels by use of the coordinates of molecular weight markers and pi values on linear ipg strips on the 2de gel. the spots were excised and identified by mass spectrometry . all the spots had a match in c. tetani e <dig> proteome with significant mowse score using the protein prospector search tool and the same hits were observed using mascot search engine with significant protein score. eight to nineteen peptides were identified in the peptide mass fingerprint and the % coverage for the identified proteins ranged between  <dig> – 55% except for spot ct <dig> which remained a little low . on most occasions there was a good correlation between the observed and theoretical molecular mass and pi values. the results suggest unambiguous identification of cross-reactive proteins of c. tetani by peptide mass fingerprinting. extensive epitope mapping would be required to identify precise antibody recognition regions of the cross-reactive proteins.

the cross-reactive proteins of c. tetani shared  <dig> – 78% sequence similarity with their closest homologues in c. perfringens atcc <dig>  except for methylaspartate ammonialyase  which showed 30% sequence identity . most of the dominant cross-reactive proteins belonged to the cog functional category, either of posttranslational modification, protein turnover, and chaperones  or energy production and conversion  . electron transfer flavoprotein beta-subunit  was the most abundant protein  followed by methylaspartate ammonia-lyase  and 2-phosphoglycerate dehydratase . all the proteins were predicted to be cytoplasmic by psort protein localization algorithm.

spot ct <dig> belonged to the family of hsp <dig> chaperones that are known to assist folding of many proteins. it is interesting to note that the hsp <dig> has been shown to play an important role in imparting adaptive features which allow helicobacter pylori to survive and establish chronic gastroduodenal infections  <cit> . the two cytoplasmic heat shock proteins , dnak and groel, have been shown to be among the major targets of the humoral immune response to a chlamydia trachomatis infection  <cit> . antibodies to c. tetani dnak and groel  may have an impact on other infections because hsps are highly conserved in evolution. curiously, groel has also been implicated in the adherence of c. difficile and found to be predominantly cytoplasmic and membrane bound, consistent with surface localization of this protein in clostridia  <cit> . the  <dig> kda form of chaperonin  is also the immunodominant antigen of patients with legionnaire's disease, and is thought to play a role in the protection of the legionella bacteria from oxygen radicals within macrophages  <cit> . this hypothesis is based on the finding that the cpn <dig> gene is up-regulated in response to hydrogen peroxide, a source of oxygen radicals. a similar role for protection against oxygen radicals for these clostridial species needs to be explored as generation of anaerobic environment for proliferation of anaerobic clostridial pathogens like c. perfringens and c. tetani is the first step in colonization of the bacteria.

two cross-reactive c. tetani proteins  were identified as methylaspartate ammonialyase having clpb proteins as a homolog in the c. perfringens atcc <dig> proteome. clp amino terminal domain is found in one or two copies at the amino terminus of clpa and clpb proteins from bacteria and eukaryotes. the function of these domains is uncertain but they have been postulated to form a protein binding site. the proteins are thought to be subunits of atp-dependent proteases which act as chaperones to target the proteases to substrates  <cit> . these proteins are part of the complex program that bacteria undergo in order to survive adverse environmental conditions. interestingly, the proteins under the control of the regulatory two-component system virr/virs in c. perfringens have been analyzed by using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of the culture supernatant from the wild type and the virr mutant. based on maldi-tof mass spectrometry, seven positively regulated proteins and eight negatively regulated proteins were identified that included clpb protein  <cit> .

enolase  and butyrate kinase  have been observed as cross-reactive protein of c. tetani . streptococcal enolase has been implicated in gas adherence to and invasion of human pharyngeal cells and is a highly immunogenic autoantigen with a possible role in the initiation of post-streptococcal sequelae  <cit> . curiously, butyrate kinase pathway among butyrate-producing bacteria from the human colon has been shown to have restricted distribution. butyryl-coa:acetate coa-transferase activity was detected in all  <dig> strains examined, suggesting that it, rather than butyrate kinase, provides the dominant route for butyrate formation in the human colonic ecosystem that contains a constantly high concentration of acetate  <cit> .

survival of animals that were immunized against heat killed c. perfringens organism and were challenged with c. tetani viable cells has been shown in table  <dig> in additional file  <dig>  except for the lowest dose of challenge , most of the deaths were recorded within  <dig> h of challenge and survival did not decrease further during the remaining  <dig> days of study. in most of the cases, paralysis of limbs preceded death. immunization with c. perfringens did not result in protection against a direct tetanus toxin challenge when tested with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> mld of crude tetanus toxin preparations, indicating a non-tetanus-toxin based process of protection, inhibiting colonization of the bacterium. we did not observe any binding of antibodies from polyclonal serum with tetanus toxin when tested on a western blot using  <dig> μg of recombinant tent. the complete orf of tent was previously cloned and expressed in pqe <dig> vector and the recombinant protein purified using ni-nta column .

ability of the mice c. perfringens whole cell  polyclonal antibody to bind on the surface of the c. perfringens and c. tetani cells was tested using anti-igg fitc conjugate as described in the methods. a bright yellow green fluorescence was observed, with whole cells of both c. perfringens and c. tetani  indicating a surface binding of the mouse polyclonal antibody, raised against heat-killed c. perfringens cells. the corresponding slide where un-immunised serum was used, did not exhibit a detectable fluorescence.

despite a predicted cytoplasmic localization of the identified proteins, their exact location needs to be experimentally verified. as immuno-fluorescence microscopy indicated binding of the polyclonal cpwc antibody to the surface of both c. perfringens and c. tetani , we do not rule out the possibility of at least some of the cross-reactive proteins identified in the present investigation, to be actually surface localized. this could be a possible explanation for the cross-protection observed against c. tetani cells. however, other low abundance cross-reactive proteins not identified here, remains another possibility. a more detailed study, using monoclonal antibodies and identification of additional cross-reactive proteins is required to ascertain the exact basis of the cross-protection. it is also possible that some antibodies, presumably protective in nature and recognize other proteins, has not been detected in our study. the proteomic approach used in this study identified only cross-reactive proteins shared between c. perfringens and c. tetani. it remains possible that other  antigens are also shared between these two bacteria and that those shared antigens contribute to the protection observed when c. perfringens-immunized mice are challenged with c. tetani.

only little is known about protein secretory systems in clostridia. in a previous study, the culture supernatant of c. perfringens at the late exponential growth phase was shown to contain intracellular proteins that had no putative signal sequences, such as ribokinase, β-hydroxybutyryl-coenzyme a dehydrogenase, fructosebisphosphate aldolase, and elongation factor g  <cit> . in other studies also, a significant number of cytoplasmic proteins have been identified as cell-wall associated proteins/immunogens  <cit> . the normally cytoplasmic chaperonins dnak and groel have been identified as immunoreactive surface antigens of s. pyogenes  <cit> . in another report,  <dig> predicted cytoplasmic proteins were detected on the surface of s. pyogenes  <cit> . though authors did not address the mechanism by which proteins localize to the cell surface, several lines of evidence suggested that no measurable lysis occurred during the treatment of the cells with trypsin. since a signal peptide and lpxtg motif were absent, it was suggested that these proteins are either passively released during autolysis or that an alternative secretory pathway may exist for many secreted gas proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
most of the dominant cross-reactive proteins of c. tetani belonged to the cog functional category, either of posttranslational modification, protein turnover, and chaperones  or energy production and conversion . the homologs of the identified proteins have been shown to play a role in pathogenesis in other gram-positive pathogenic bacteria. our findings provide basis for the search of potential vaccine candidates with broader coverage, encompassing more than one pathogenic clostridial species. they also generate curiosity to explore any correlation of these results with the general immunity and success of immunization programmes against c. tetani; in developed countries, tetanus is little more than a medical curiosity. it has to be borne in mind that the primary habitat of c. tetani is soil and unlike c. perfringens, is not commonly found in the gastrointestinal tracts of animals and humans. the cross-protective nature of c. perfringens could be a possible reason as to why neonatal tetanus is more prevalent than tetanus disease in adults having extensive colonization of and exposure to c. perfringens.

