BACKGROUND
cyanine- <dig>  and cyanine- <dig>  are popular dyes in use for microarray experiments. the destructive effect of ozone on the cy <dig> dye, in particular, has been discussed  <cit> , and a mechanism for the effect reported . the consequence of this phenomenon is that for two-channel microarray experiments, conducted without protection in a high-ozone environment, one channel of information may be partially or completely corrupted.

while this relationship may not have been accepted universally  <cit> , the fact that arrays with a defective cy <dig> channel exist is not disputed. the advice from a producer of microarray systems  <cit>  is either to avoid high ozone levels when conducting experiments , or to use one of a number of cy <dig> stabilizing solutions that have been shown to prevent a good deal of the degradation.

it is indeed ideal to avoid this problem, however it remains the case that some experiments have suffered and will suffer in this way. the task is then to conduct a valid and informative analysis. options include discarding the arrays that have problems in their cy <dig> data, or discarding the cy <dig> data from all arrays and performing a single channel analysis. further options are to ignore the problem , or to abandon the data entirely and repeat the experiment. one can imagine circumstances where all of these approaches might suffice, however one can also see that there are drawbacks to each.

in this paper we are motivated by a dataset where the cy <dig> channel has been corrupted for a number of arrays. we comment initially on whether this may have been due to ozone, but focus on an approach to their analysis regardless of the cause of the problem . we further show that this approach produces sensible and consistent results, without incurring the problems of the approaches described above. these results will be substantiated by a large simulation experiment that we also present.

the motivating dataset consists of  <dig> microarrays from two experiments. one was conducted at times of generally high ozone and the other at times of generally low ozone. the arrays represent samples from  <dig> individuals and have a common reference in the cy <dig> channel, which also appears in the cy <dig> channel for two of the arrays. details are given in table  <dig> 

detailing the number of normal and cancer tissue arrays used in the study, the numbers of patients who have provided normal or cancer arrays , and the number of patients that feature on more than one array. recall that all arrays have the reference in the cy <dig> channel.

evidence of the effects of ozone can be illustrated both by examination of an affected array at an individual spot level and across the array in its entirety . affected spots appear less homogenous in colour, with many showing 'phases of the moon' while others exhibit a doughnut-like pattern. the 'visible' gradient of the red signal away from an edge or corner, as visible in a number of arrays, suggests an environmental factor. the difference in gradients between affected and unaffected arrays allows for fair discrimination  between ozone-affected and unaffected arrays. although direct ozone measurements are not available, the principal ozone monitoring site for cambridgeshire is a little over ten miles from the site of the microarray experiment and should give some indication of the relative levels of ozone.

the profiles of intensities of the red channel are clearly more variable  for the duration of the earlier ozone-affected arrays. the greater variability is emphasized in figure  <dig>  where even after normalization, greater variation in log-intensities is apparent. that figure also demonstrates the greater problem facing the ozone damaged data. the effects of the ozone are not something systematic, rather they can leave data that have no hope of being normalized as the message is lost. indeed, within sub-regions of the arrays, the inter-array spearman  correlations can even achieve negative values. six approaches to analysis are considered in this paper. three of these are referred to as the 'unaffected data' analysis , the inclusive analysis , and the self-explanatory 'single channel' analysis of the cy <dig> channels. the three new approaches are a combined analysis with the active estimation of a key parameter k  analysis), and two combined analyses with k fixed to be  <dig>  or  <dig>   and combined respectively), the details of which are given in the methods section. further materials, including the r computer code to perform these analyses, will be available to download  <cit> .

in addition, for some specific comparisons, results are presented of a single channel analysis applied only to the cy <dig> channel of arrays that have been affected by ozone. we would not suggest that this would ever be a sensible approach, but the approach provides a limit to the combined family of distributions as will be clarified at the appropriate juncture.

we focus on the task of distinguishing cancerous samples from normal  samples through modelling of gene-expression levels. this is a well-understood problem, and allows for a comparison of the performance of the methods without distraction. we readily acknowledge that this may not be the most important biological comparison, but reaffirm that the purpose of this exercise is to compare the methods of analysis.

RESULTS
simulation experiment
from the  <dig> simulated datasets and analyses, summarized in table  <dig>  it is apparent that under these conditions the method presented in this paper shows an improvement on the other approaches in terms of identifying differentially expressed genes . most of the trends are as would be expected; the single channel analysis is consistent across the four levels of damage to the data and the other methods show a decline in performance as the percentage of damaged arrays increases. moreover, the differences between methods decrease as the level of damage decreases. again this is a perfectly reasonable property. we should though note that the simulation study will be biased in two ways. firstly, the spatial effects of the ozone damage have not been included, so the inclusive approach will probably appear to do better than it should. secondly, the values of k have been homogenized  in the simulation as compared to the real data, thus the benefits of the combined may be being downplayed.

presented are the numbers of differentially expressed genes that would be identified by taking a list of the top  <dig>  genes in each case. recall that there are indeed  <dig>  differentially expressed genes, so the numbers are out of  <dig>   for the sub experiments and out of  <dig>   overall.

at all levels of damage, the combined method presented within this paper performed best for detecting differentially expressed genes, while the combined approaches were generally close seconds. as an example of the advantage of the active estimation of k, when 80% of the arrays are damaged, the combined approach correctly identifies  <dig> differentially expressed genes that are missed by the combined approach, while only  <dig> are discordant in the other manner . with these values, mcnemar's test returns a p-value of less than  <dig> . at high levels of damage, the single channel analysis approaches this level of performance, whilst at low levels the unaffected data analysis performs relatively well.

the inclusive analysis surprisingly outperforms the single channel analysis when only 20% of arrays are damaged and outperforms the unaffected data analysis when 80% of the arrays are damaged, but loses out in every other comparison . in both of the cases when it shows superiority it has available  <dig> channels of undamaged information that the inferior method does not. that this is enough to overcome the  <dig> damaged arrays included in the victorious comparison with the single channel method is understandable, that it overcomes the  <dig> damaged arrays included in the victorious comparison with the unaffected data approach is less so, and may reflect our failure to simulate spatial structure in the ozone damage, allowing the damage to average out over such a number of arrays. the unaffected analysis outperforms the single channel approach at damage levels of 20% and 40% but is outperformed at the 60% and 80% levels . the combined approach outperforms the combined approach at all levels of damage.

when the magnitude of the simulated effect size  is greater than  <dig> , the stronger methods consistently correctly return 95% of the differentially expressed genes. the greatest interest for differentiation between methods then lies in those genes where the effect was simulated to be less than  <dig> . here, the single channel and inclusive approaches perform far more poorly, with the unaffected data approach doing very well at low damage levels, but not performing to the same standard at other damage levels.

full details of the pairwise comparisons are presented in additional file  <dig> 

application to example data
the rankings of the top genes exhibiting differential expression between normal and cancer samples are listed in additional file  <dig>  broadly speaking, the same genes are appearing towards the top of all of the lists. there are though distinctions to be made. the table was ordered by the results from the combined analysis, and taking this as a reference one can see that the combined and single channel analyses perform most similarly.

for every pair of analyses: presented in the upper right corner is the spearman's rank correlation comparing for all genes the two sets of log-odds of being differentially expressed. in the bottom left is given the number of genes common to the top  <dig>  returned by the two methods.

it is apparent from figure  <dig> that the results from the combined and combined approaches are the most similar, as might be expected; in particular the combined method. the single channel approach produces results that are closer to those from the combined method than they are to those from the combined analysis, or indeed than the combined analysis is to the unaffected data analysis. one constant is that the inclusive results are vastly different to all of the other methods, with only the single channel and unaffected data results showing a difference of similar magnitude. it is interesting to note that the lines are not uniformly ordered as the position in the reference list increases, but can converge, diverge and cross. for example when the reference is one of the combined approaches  method), the single channel  and inclusive approaches start off remarkably similarly before diverging at some point. taking the single channel as the reference, the inclusive analysis outperforms the unaffected data analysis until well after position  <dig> in the reference gene list, at which point it deteriorates in relative performance rapidly. the reason for the distinct nature of the inclusive results may be apparent upon consideration of the spatial location on the array of returned genes. the locations of the top  <dig>  genes from each method are depicted in figure  <dig> coloured according to whether the detected change was up or down in the cancer samples. the locations from the combined, combined, single channel and unaffected analyses appear random, whereas there is a clear spatial effect in the results of the inclusive analysis.

a check that the combined method is producing sensible results is given in the clustering and heatmap shown in figure  <dig>  here fifty genes that showed most evidence of differential expression are plotted. there is then limited surprise that good discrimination is seen between the normal and cancer samples. however also indicated is whether each sample was from an ozone-affected array or not, and crucially pairs  of arrays are indicated that are heterogeneous with respect to ozone damage but originate from the same biological sample.

it can be seen that there is no obvious tendency for the arrays to divide into ozone-affected and ozone-unaffected clusters. some low-level grouping of the same ozone-effect type will occur by chance of course, and some further will be driven by pairs that are homogeneous and originate from the same sample . so there really is no evidence of a noticeable effect here. moreover, the replicates cluster together well, demonstrating that the loss of the cy <dig> channel data is being overcome in a satisfactory manner.

estimation of k
in figure  <dig> are illustrated the values of k estimated when applying the combined  method to the example data. the distribution of the logarithm of k is also presented, as it is in the log-space that k is shrunk. while a normal approximation for log is not fantastic, it is certainly better than that for k. the fixed estimates of  <dig>  and  <dig>  are appropriate for a k that has a mean of  <dig> , geometric mean of  <dig> , median of  <dig> , and mode of  <dig> .

looking at figure  <dig>  if we note that the unaffected data analysis is essentially a combined approach, and the single channel analysis applied only to the damaged arrays is essentially a combined approach then we can see that, for example when the reference is unaffected, the order of k =  <dig>  k =  <dig> , k =  <dig> , k = ∞ is preserved in the ordering of the lines. the combined approach slots in a little after the combined method in this ordering. this might be taken as weak evidence in favour of a combined approach, but observation of figure  <dig> makes such a choice hard to countenance.

the values of log produced from the simulation experiment are also presented in figure  <dig>  as might be anticipated, the mixing of components of the data to generate new datasets leads to some homogenization of the estimates of k. this is apparent despite the fact that the simulated datasets are smaller than the motivating dataset meaning that the individual estimates of k might be expected to be less precise and thus lead to a heavier-tailed distribution. nevertheless, the distribution of log estimated from the simulated data is recognisably of the form demonstrated by the example data, albeit that the two modes have somewhat converged.

discussion
there is a distinct spatial aspect to the damaged data. this is clear both from the initial presentation of the data  and the results from the inclusive analysis. the simulated data did not include a spatial effect in the damage inflicted. nevertheless, they , demonstrated that the inclusion of those damaged data would be detrimental to the analysis.

it is no surprise either that the single channel analysis performs well regardless of the percentage of damaged arrays in the experiment as it does not use the channel that is being damaged. the other methods naturally improve as more arrays survive intact, because they have more reliable information available. therefore it is inevitable that there will be a proportion of missing channels above which the single channel approach will do better than the unaffected data analysis and below which it will perform worse. that it appears to be at about the 50% mark in our simulations is a little more surprising. it is worthy of note that in those cases when the single channel approach does outperform the unaffected data analysis, the margin is somewhat greater than when the reverse is true.

the unaffected data analysis could be regarded as a combined analysis with k set to zero. from this viewpoint, it is not surprising that the combined approach lies between the unaffected data analysis and the combined approaches in the results that it produces. if the unaffected data analysis has available about half of the arrays , and the variance of the log-ratio is approximately half of the variance of the log-expression levels used in the single channel analysis, then we might anticipate that the precision of the estimates from the two approaches  would be approximately equal to each other.

that the single channel and unaffected data approaches therefore differ so markedly in their results for the example data, despite our anticipating that their overall performances might be broadly similar, is evidence that a unifying approach such as the combined analysis really does have something to offer. the results of the simulation experiment suggest that the increase in information that the combined approach has available more than makes up for the extra complexity of the model. the successful pairing of replicates in the clustering shown in figure  <dig> gives additional evidence of the value of this approach. in the simulation experiment, all of the methods are guaranteed high specificity due to the ratio of differentially expressed to non-differentially expressed genes. with  <dig>  out of  <dig>  simulated genes being non-differentially expressed, the formula for specificity will be at worst / <dig>  where x is the number of genes nominated as being differentially expressed. so we would have to take a list of  <dig>  genes as being differentially expressed before even the least specific of methods could drop below 90% specificity.

complementary to this is the problem that differentially expressed genes differ in their level of differential expression. there will be some genes that, due to their large associated effect, even the least discriminatory methods of analysis would struggle to miss. a method of analysis may then appear to be competent in the roc curve merely by harvesting the low-hanging fruit. results that are so self-evident though are unlikely to be of great interest. it is in the detection of genes with a small differential expression that the improvements offered by the combined approach are most apparent.

our motivating example, and thus our simulated data, originates from an experiment where the affected channel was a common reference. this is clearly not always the case, and we can speculate on the effect that relaxing this condition might have. we will assume that we still have a situation where there are three groups , and we are only primarily interested in a comparison between the normal and cancer groups. in such circumstances, a single channel analysis will not make use of the reference data in the comparison of interest, save for using it to help model the residual variances.

it may be desirable to ignore entirely arrays providing only reference data in a single channel analysis, unless one is confident that the minimal extra information provided will outweigh the strong modelling assumptions being made both in the single channel normalization and the linear modelling itself when those arrays are included. a combined analysis method on the other hand will actively use arrays providing information only on the reference group, provided there exist undamaged arrays within which a reference-to-normal or reference-to-cancer comparison is being made. additionally of course, the combined analysis is able to make use of normal and cancer samples on the unaffected channels of damaged arrays. thus we would anticipate that the current experimental design is one where the single channel would perform at its best relative to the other methods, and that in other designs the advantages offered by a combined approach would be even more convincing.

the values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  were obtained from experimental observations of two-channel cdna microarrays produced at the peter maccallum cancer institute and the university of california berkeley respectively. that the agilent arrays appear to produce values of k that are not dissimilar is evidence towards some commonality across platforms. however, that k =  <dig>  seems to perform better than k =  <dig>  implies that the single channels contain more information relative to the log-ratios than anticipated from the cdna microarrays. this is in keeping with the agilent technologies' reputation for being particularly robust, and suggests that in fact there may be scope for a platform-dependent improved bayesian shrinkage step in the active estimation of k.

CONCLUSIONS
ignoring the issue of damage to one of the channels results in poor results if such damage exists. moreover the more damaged arrays there are, the worse the performance of such an approach. the problems are not only due to an increased variance resulting from the loss of information , but also a spatial bias that is evident in the results. a single channel approach on the other hand may perform very well in suitable conditions , but is outperformed when only a small number of arrays are damaged, by an approach based on simply discarding those arrays. a complementary result is that an analysis of unaffected arrays performs better the more undamaged arrays there are, but is less reliable than a single channel analysis if there are few undamaged arrays.

a combined analysis has been shown here to offer improvements over the other analyses considered. it could be regarded as producing results that are a compromise between those from a single channel analysis and those from an unaffected data analysis, and in objective tests it outperforms both. the additional modelling assumptions and complexity are handsomely compensated for by the additional information obtained when including all of the available data. indeed, if one is using a prescribed value of k in the analysis, then many of the rewards are obtained for a minimum of additional computational effort.

