BACKGROUND
artificial neural networks  have been widely used in both modern industries and scientific research to perform diverse and sophisticated tasks, such as data processing, pattern recognition, system controls and medical diagnosis  <cit> . in the field of medical diagnosis, anns have been widely applied in different areas of medical diagnosis, including cardiology, oncology, radiology and ophthalmology  <cit> . because of the prediction capability of anns, they can be used to diagnose diseased subjects in clinical practice. the basic idea is to compare the measured target features with the predicted target features using a trained ann that was specifically designed for a particular type of patient group. the results from comparisons using one criterion could determine whether the questionable subjects have a disease or not. with multiple criteria, anns could classify the questionable subjects according to differences in disease type or disease stage. in general, criteria are defined as statistically determined values or ranges that represent typical disease characteristics. the prediction and classification performed by anns could save doctors and patients time by determining the diagnosis of the questionable subjects in advance of treatments. the use of anns could improve overall positive predictive performance and reduce diagnostic time and medical costs as well as to increase the quality and accessibility of preventive care for individuals with diabetes. however, it should be noted that the costs of medical devices used in the implementation of anns should be taken into account as a potential limiting factor to their accessibility.

in ophthalmology, the detection of functional vision abnormalities plays a fundamental role in the diagnosis of eye diseases. such a task depends not only on the use of a variety of precise optical instruments but also on technicians who are well trained in accurate ophthalmic techniques. the use of multiple instruments and technicians could decrease measurement precision, whereas the implementation of anns could improve it, in addition to reducing waiting times and medical costs. currently, most ann mapping of the eye structure and function involves training with measurements of retinal structure and visual function. for example, zhu et al. developed an ann using a bayesian radial basis function to map the structure-function relationship between the retinal nerve fiber layer and visual function in glaucoma. the results demonstrated that anns using a bayesian radial basis function could effectively improve the agreement between predicted visual function and measured visual function compared with results obtained using linear regression  <cit> . furthermore, zhu et al. quantitatively evaluated the discordance between the visual function predicted by a trained ann and the measured visual function in glaucoma. specifically, 39% of the predicted visual function showed significant discordance with the measured visual function  <cit> .

aside from the prediction of visual function, these anns have also been used to classify eye diseases, such as diabetic retinopathy. diabetic retinopathy  is a severe and widely spread eye disease increasing in incidence as the worldwide number of patients with diabetes grows  <cit> . retinopathy is not common during the first 5 years’ duration of type  <dig> diabetes and at least some form of dr is present after 20 years of the onset of type  <dig> diabetes  <cit> . thus, an objective test for the early diagnosis and evaluation of treatment in dr is certainly needed in order to identify the individuals at high risk for vision-threatening problems. the role of optical coherence tomography  in the assessment and management of the diabetic retina has become significant in understanding the vitreoretinal relationships and the internal architecture of the retinal structure  <cit> .

previous work of ann applications in dr has demonstrated that the input feature is no longer restricted to the thickness of the retina; it can be expanded to different types of features such as the diameter of blood vessels, the radius of the corneal surface curvature and the cross-sectional area of blood vessels  <cit> . for example, yun et al. classified the different stages of diabetic retinopathy  and differentiated them from the healthy retina using a three-layer backpropagation  ann. in their method, the perimeter and area of the veins, hemorrhages and microaneurysms were extracted from retinal fundus images and used as input to the classifier. the ann was trained with  <dig> subjects  and was tested with  <dig> subjects . their system achieved a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 100% for the  <dig> test subjects  <cit> . sinthanayothin et al. proposed an automated screening system to detect blood vessels in fundus images with a three-layer ann that had  <dig> input neurons,  <dig> hidden neurons and  <dig> output neurons. they achieved a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> % for  <dig> healthy retina images and  <dig> diabetic retinopathy images  <cit> . gardner et al. developed an ann to differentiate diabetic retinopathy patients from healthy subjects by extracting the blood vessels, exudates and hemorrhages from images captured by a fundus camera. they achieved a sensitivity of  <dig> % and a specificity of  <dig> % for the detection of diabetic retinopathy when  <dig> diabetic and  <dig> healthy images were used to train the backpropagation and  <dig> diabetic and  <dig> healthy images were used for testing  <cit> .

most current research has used blood vessels and related features extracted from fundus images to train different types of anns to identify diseased eyes  <cit> .

taking into account the underlying relationship between structural and optical measurements of the retinal tissue, it is possible that test measurements from oct images based on the integration of structural and optical properties could provide more significant information and thus superior diagnostic performance for classification methods when used as input data. to the best of our knowledge, only a few studies have used the thickness measurements extracted from oct images to train anns. for example, the retinal nerve fiber layer thickness was extracted from oct images to train a relevance vector machine to predict visual function in glaucoma  <cit> . in addition, the structural and optical features of various intraretinal layers extracted from oct images have been used as discriminators to differentiate diabetic eyes with and with no mild retinopathy from healthy eyes  <cit> . in this study, we evaluate the capability of several structural and optical features of various intraretinal layers extracted from oct data to train an ann to discriminate between healthy eyes and diabetic eyes with and with no mild retinopathy.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> oct images obtained from  <dig> eligible eyes of  <dig> participants were analyzed. the demographic and clinical characteristics of the study population are summarized in table  <dig> 

abbreviations: sd standard deviation, na not applicable, dm diabetic eyes without retinopathy, mdr diabetic eye with mild diabetic retinopathy.

the performance of the proposed methodology is measured using sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive values as figures of merit. results for true positive , false negative , true negative , false positive , positive predictive value , sensitivity and specificity in test  <dig> were calculated to evaluate the classifications . in this classification test, we explored the probability as to whether the subject’s eye was healthy . table  <dig> shows the sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and positive predictive values obtained when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the thickness  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features of the retinal layers, respectively. our results indicated that the tp test for the healthy eyes was in the  range when  <dig> healthy eyes were mixed with  <dig> diabetic eyes with mild retinopathy  in this test. particularly, tp achieved high values  for oct parameters of the gcl + ipl complex, os and rpe. as indicated by the positive predictive values, a high probability was achieved for the gcl + ipl complex and opl parameters  indicating that the subject really has a healthy eye. the tn test was in the  range and high tn values  were achieved for the gcl + ipl complex and opl features used in this particular tests. moreover, high values for sensitivity, specificity and ppv  were only obtained for the gcl + ipl complex and opl parameters.

*denotes the intraretinal layer for which the sensitivity, specificity and ppv are greater than 80%.

sensitivity, specificity, predictive values  and positive predictive values  obtained when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the thickness  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features of the given retinal layers, respectively.

*denotes the intraretinal layer for which the sensitivity, specificity and ppv are greater than 80%.

sensitivity, specificity, predictive values  and positive predictive values  obtained when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the total reflectance  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features, respectively.

table  <dig> shows the sensitivity, specificity, predictive values and positive predictive values obtained when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the total reflectance and fractal dimension as the input and target features, respectively. our results indicated that the tp and tn tests for healthy eyes were in the  and  ranges; respectively. as indicated by the positive predictive values, a high probability was achieved for the features of the gcl + ipl complex and opl  indicating that the subject really has a healthy eye. specifically, high tn values  were achieved for the parameters of the gcl + ipl complex and opl. moreover, high values for sensitivity, specificity and ppv  were only obtained for the features of the gcl + ipl complex and opl. therefore, there is high probability  the subject will have a healthy gcl + ipl complex and opl structure.

tables  <dig> and  <dig> show results obtained after using different sizes of training data sets  in test  <dig>  when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the thickness  and fractal dimension as the input and target features, our results demonstrated that the fn and fp values remaining at a given sensitivity of ≥ 80% for the gcl + ipl complex’s parameters were stable despite the amount of healthy eyes used in the training task, whereas the values of fn remaining for the opl were slightly reduced with the increased number of healthy eyes used to train the ann. additionally, the tn value for the parameters of the gcl + ipl complex was stable. our results showed relatively high ppv, as well as high sensitivity and specificity  in both the gcl + ipl complex and opl’s parameters. our results showed that ppv had a slight decreasing trend for both the gcl + ipl complex and opl’s parameters when the number of healthy subjects increased from  <dig> to  <dig> in the training task, which was due to a decrease in test subjects .

results of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, predictive values and positive predictive values obtained for the gcl + ipl complex and opl when training the bayesian radial base function network with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> healthy eyes with the thickness  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features, respectively.

results of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, predictive values and positive predictive values obtained for the gcl + ipl complex and opl when training the bayesian radial basis function network with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> healthy eyes with the total reflectance  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features, respectively.

results obtained in test  <dig> after training the bayesian radial basis function network with the thickness measurement and fractal dimension as the input and target features are shown in table  <dig>  in this classification test, we explored the probability as to whether a diabetic eye had mdr . our results indicated high tp values for features of the rnfl, gcl + ipl complex, os and rpe. additionally, the sensitivity, specificity and positive predicted values were greater or close to  <dig>  in the rnfl, os and rpe. interestingly, the gcl + ipl complex’s features didn’t show a ppv greater than 80%.

*denotes the intraretinal layer for which the sensitivity, specificity and ppv are greater than 80%.

sensitivity, specificity, predictive values  and positive predictive values  obtained when training the bayesian radial basis function network using the thickness  and fractal dimension  as the input and target features, respectively.

in general, the overall results indicate that the classifier is effective to about  <dig> per cent  in making the correct prediction of the unknown class  when differentiating healthy from mdr eyes by using the features of the gcl + ipl complex and opl in the diagnostic test . however, the classifier was not effective  in making the correct prediction of the unknown class  when discriminating between dm and mdr eyes using the same intraretinal layer’s features . interestingly, the classifier was more effective  in making the correct prediction of the unknown class  when differentiating dm and mdr eyes by using the features of the rnfl, os and rpe in the diagnostic test . table  <dig> shows the percentage of correct classifications for the gcl + ipl complex and opl features in tests  <dig> and  <dig> 

discussion
in this study, we presented and evaluated a nonlinear prediction method for early retinopathy detection on oct retinal images. the proposed system consisted of three phases: preprocessing and image segmentation, candidate mdr feature detection, and feature set formulation and classification. we have used sensitivity, specificity, predictive values  and ppv parameters to measure the classification performance of the ann ensemble and the diagnostic ability of the integrated oct parameters. quantitative tools for measuring thickness information of the retinal tissue using oct devices are in common clinical use, but to our knowledge there have been no algorithms available to analyze the optical properties of the retinal tissue and further combine them with structural information to assess the integrity and better predict the lack of integrity of the retinal layers in diabetic eyes. the use of the predictability of retinal layer integrity’s loss from structural and optical features by the bayesian radial basis function network played a key role in the neural loss assessment in diabetic eyes. in our proposed method, the stable trend of the fn values  validated the reliability of the methodology. our results demonstrate that the gcl + ipl complex and opl parameters could be predicted and used to discriminate between mdr and healthy eyes by using either the th/fd or tr/fd pairs as the input/target features in the bayesian radial basis function network. the high sensitivity and specificity values obtained when using structural and optical parameters of the gcl + ipl complex and opl suggest that the bayesian radial basis function network can be used to discriminate between mdr and healthy eyes with the selected input and target features extracted from oct images. in particular, the fractal dimension, which represents the roughness of the intraretinal layer structure, could certainly be used to differentiate mdr from healthy eyes. our results suggest that the gcl + ipl complex and opl are more susceptible to early damage in mdr eyes. the low rnfl specificity and ppv values indicated that rnfl parameters were not good input/output targets for use in anns to differentiate between mdr and healthy eyes. interestingly, the features of the rnfl, os and rpe better predicted the lack of integrity of the retinal structure when discriminating between mdr and dm eyes. this particular result is in agreement with previous studies reporting changes in the outer retinal segment when comparing the macular thickness in diabetic subjects with mild retinopathy and healthy eyes  <cit> . the above finding may prove to be useful for the better detection of mild diabetic retinopathy by using optical coherence tomography imaging.

there were some limitations in this study. first, comparisons across studies were not possible, because no studies have been conducted to investigate thickness and optical properties of the retinal tissue together, using anns. second, larger sample sizes would provide more accurate and robust estimations of the classification test performance. however, our results can be used as the basis for further improving the diagnostic accuracy of early dr detection in the near future. third, the specific automated classification method that we chose is likely not to be the only one that could be applied. comparisons among other automated classification methods should be made to obtain the best models for improving the discriminant power of oct integrated data for parameter tests in decision support systems.

as already established, a bayesian radial basis function network can accommodate uncertainty in the dimension of the model by adjusting the sizes to the complexity of the data  <cit> . in this study, the tn, tp and the ppv values remained stable despite the different sizes of training data sets. however, training the bayesian radial basis function network may require more test subjects, which would improve the precision of the differentiation between healthy eyes and diabetic eyes with and without mild retinopathy. future studies should also evaluate the methodology with data based on the new generation of oct devices that provide higher spatial resolution for analyzing the retinal structure.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have employed for the first time a method that uses a bayesian ann with four pairs of input and target features extracted from oct data to discriminate among mdr, healthy and dm eyes. the input features used were the intraretinal layer thickness measurement and total reflectance extracted from oct images. the fractal dimension of the gcl + ipl complex and opl predicted by the bayesian radial basis function network positively discriminated between mdr and healthy eyes. moreover, the thickness and fractal dimension parameters of the rnfl, os and rpe show promise for diagnostic classification between mdr and dm eyes. the results demonstrated that the proposed bayesian radial basis function network’s classification can be used in a computer-aided diagnostic system for discriminating between healthy eyes and diabetic eyes with early retinopathy as it identified and detected retinal features with high probability for the proportion of patients with positive test results who were correctly diagnosed. our study showed that the combination of structural and optical information from oct data has the potential to improve parameter tests that better reflect the diabetic retinal changes that occur during the progression of the disease, providing more relevant information to dr diagnostic routines. such improvements could facilitate the practical implementation of anns as decision support systems in dr diagnostics.

