BACKGROUND
homosporous ferns are renowned for their high chromosome numbers, e.g. ophioglossum reticulatum has the highest chromosome number  so far reported for any eukaryote  <cit> . moreover, the mean chromosome number for homosporous ferns  is far higher than any other plant group   <cit> . the reason for this disparity between land plant groups remains enigmatic and is a major focus of ongoing research in this field .

the application of novel genome-wide analytical methods, including genome size analysis, is providing significant insight into the processes that shape homosporous fern genomes  <cit> . although our knowledge of genome sizes in ferns is limited , available data suggest that patterns of genome size evolution, which include  polyploidisation;  paleopolyploidsation; and,  changes in chromosome size, are not operating uniformly across all fern lineages  <cit> .

in contrast to the extreme diversity of genome sizes encountered in angiosperms, which range c.  <dig> -fold  <cit> , genome sizes in ferns  are less variable, ranging just c. 94-fold  <cit> . in fact, if we focus within homosporous ferns, this variation in nuclear dna content only spans c. 25-fold, from 1c =  <dig>  pg in athyrium filix-femina <cit>  to 1c =  <dig>  pg in psilotum nudum var. rubra <cit> . while some of this diversity arises from polyploidy , genome size changes can also arise within the same ploidy level in some genera. for example, the  <dig> -fold range of genome sizes encountered in davallia have taken place at the diploid level  with the different genome sizes between species reflected in contrasting chromosome sizes  <cit> . such diversity may be attributed to arise through different balances between the amplification of repetitive dna such as transposable elements   leading to genome and chromosome size increases and dna elimination, as frequently observed in angiosperms  <cit> .

available cytogenetic data indicates that apart from a few examples  <cit> , most homosporous ferns are characterized by possessing small and rather conserved chromosome sizes with little evidence of retrotransposon activity  <cit> . these studies would indicate that genome size variation in homosporous ferns is largely driven by polyploidy. this hypothesis is supported by the relatively small variation  reported in the monoploid genome size  and the correlation between 2c-value  and chromosome numbers  <cit> . the monoploid genome size  is the dna content of one un-replicated chromosome set, whilst the holoploid genome size  is the dna content per haploid chromosome complement .

in ferns, studies on closely related species in dryopteris <cit>  and polypodium <cit>  have shown that genome size can be a powerful marker for taxonomic delimitations. however, as far as we are aware, no study to date has investigated the evolution of genome size in a closely related group of fern species, or determined whether it is correlated with breeding system or any morphological traits. studies in angiosperms have demonstrated that genome size is correlated with several ecological and morphological traits such as seed mass and stomatal density . similar studies would be highly informative in ferns, as traits such as spore size and stomatal cell size are often used to infer changes in ploidy levels among closely related species  <cit> . this is based on the implicit assumption that species with higher ploidy levels  will have larger spores, although this has never been systematically tested for genome size within a phylogenetically well defined group.

in this study we investigate the evolution of genome size and spore size within the asplenium monanthes complex . the complex includes a group of closely related species whose phylogenetic relationships have been recovered, showing evidence of reticulate evolution and multiple apomictic lineages  <cit> . in addition, polyploidy is known to occur based on previously reported chromosome counts in some taxa .

our work had three aims: first, we investigated the validity of using c-value measurements obtained from silica dried material. here, we report the extent of differences in c-value estimates obtained from measurements of fresh and silica dried material . second, we tested the widely held assumption that dna amount and spore size are correlated. for this, we conducted comparative analyses between dna content and spore length for multiple taxa within the a.monanthes complex. third, we examined genome size evolution and determined to what extent genome size variation reflected changes in chromosome size or ploidy levels within this group of ferns. to do this, genome size estimations were made for taxa with known ploidy levels  to infer dna ploidies for those species without reported chromosome counts. the data were then analysed within the phylogenetic framework of dyer et al.  <cit>  to provide insights into genome size dynamics.

RESULTS
shifts in genome size associated with the preservation of plant material
since fresh material was not available for all the specimens studied, the impact of silica drying on the relative fluorescence of nuclei and hence genome size estimates was investigated. genome size estimates were very similar between fresh leaf material and material that had been stored in silica for 6 months. this was shown for a.formosum where genome size estimates for rd <dig> and rd <dig>  were very similar to those obtained from the 6 month old silica dried samples of a.formosum rd <dig>  rd <dig>  rd <dig> and rd <dig>  . we therefore inferred no meaningful shift in the genome size measurements for specimens stored in silica for six months and thus genome size estimates obtained from four 6 month old silica samples , were used in all analyses as no fresh material was available.

cv% indicates the coefficient of variation of the 2c dna peak in the flow histogram. percentage increase indicates the percentage difference between fresh 2c dna content and silica-dried 2c dna content.

*range of 2c-values obtained from the analysis of fresh leaf material of the same species but different accessions.

in contrast, samples processed using 2 year old silica material showed that 2c-values were on average,  <dig> % higher , compared with estimates made from fresh material . furthermore, the quality of the measurements made on 2 year old silica samples was notably lower compared with both fresh samples and samples 6 months in age, based on the mean cv% of the peaks in the flow histograms . data from 2 year old material were therefore excluded from further analysis.

variation in genome size and spore size
within the a.formosum and a.resiliens clades, 2c-values were highly conserved , as were the spore lengths  . all accessions of a.resiliens formed a well supported monophyletic lineage , with accessions of a.aff.heterochroum occupying a sister position . of the two specimens investigated of a.aff.heterochroum, one  had a similar 2c dna content to a.resiliens , while the other was distinctly higher . in contrast to this genome size variability, both specimens showed very similar spore lengths , which were smaller compared with the mean value for the four a.resiliens specimens analysed .

within the a.monanthes clade, the smallest genome size was found in the diploid spec.nov. <dig>  which has been shown to be sister to the rest of the clade . diploid sexual, spec.nov. <dig> showed a distinctly larger genome size . the specimens of a.hallbergii and a.aff.hallbergii, which form a sister clade to the main clades of a.monanthes , showed very little variation in nuclear dna contents , but a relatively large variation in spore length . within the a.monanthes mo <dig> lineage, three sub-clades with similar, but distinct 2c value ranges could be identified: mo <dig> ,  <dig> - <dig>  pg; mo <dig> ,  <dig> - <dig>  pg; and mo <dig> ,  <dig> - <dig>  pg. spore size across these three sub-clades varied from  <dig>  μm to  <dig>  μm. the nuclear dna content of individuals within the a.monanthes  clade was found to be similar , with the exception of a single specimen , which had a significantly smaller genome size  . spore size varied from  <dig> - <dig>  μm, and the value for specimen rd <dig> also fell within this range .

voucher numbers are linked to accession numbers for sequences deposited at genbank  <cit> . in cases where alternate voucher numbers appear in brackets, these accessions were used for phylogenetic analysis. cv% indicates the mean coefficient of variation of the 2c dna peak for each specimen. reproductive mode was determined from spore number per sporangia, and some prothalli observations  <cit> . mo <dig> and mo <dig> refer to the two clades within the a.monanthes complex identified by the phylogenetic analysis of dyer et al.  <cit> .

*data for these species  were not considered to be reliable as they were estimated from 2 year old silica dried material and were therefore not included in analysis.

†data for these species were estimated from 6 month old silica dried material.

asplenium fibrillosum, a.soleirolioides, and a.polyphyllum, which together comprise the a.castaneum clade, were observed to have the highest 2c values in the complex  , but since these estimates were made from material that had been stored on silica for 2 years their reliability is questioned . interestingly, the mean spore length of the a.fibrillosum specimen was also very large , although those for a.soleirolioides and a.polyphyllum were distinctly smaller .

correlation between dna amount and spore size
regression analysis of the raw data showed a strong positive correlation  between dna amount and spore length . however, phylogenetically independent contrasts analysis indicated no significant relationship between contrasts  . this indicated that divergences in dna amount are not associated with divergences in spore length, and therefore there is no correlated evolution between dna amount and spore length.

κ
p
κ
p
p
p
dna amount values were log transformed prior to analysis. gs = genome size, and sl = spore length. 1c or 2c dna values were used depending on the reproductive mode: 2c-values are used for apomictic taxa, and 1c-values are used for sexual taxa. results are given for four branch length transformation methods, as discussed in the materials and methods. significant p values are given in bold.

genome size and ploidy level
monoploid genome size  and ploidy levels were not inferred for a.fibrillosum, a.soleirolioides and a.polyphyllum, due to the shifts observed in the 2c dna contents of these species, as a consequence of their storage for 2 years in silica . ploidy levels and 1cx-values were inferred for all other subclades analysed .

2
2
mean 2c dna content  and mean spore length  were only calculated for sub-clades distinguished by low genome size variation . this resulted in separate inferences of genome size and ploidy for the two a.aff.heterochroum specimens , and a.monanthes subclades: mo <dig> ; mo <dig> ; mo <dig> ; mo <dig> , and mo <dig>  . published chromosome counts  were used to estimate ploidy and hence calculate monoploid genome size . for lineages with unknown ploidy levels, monoploid genome size and ploidy level were estimated according related species. estimates of ploidy underlined in bold are based on the spore number and spore measurements  <cit> .

within the a.resiliens clade, different ploidy levels were inferred for the two a.aff.heterochroum specimens. one specimen of a.aff.heterochroum  had a similar 2c-value to a.resiliens , a species reported to be triploid, suggesting that rd <dig> could also be a triploid. in contrast, the other a.aff.heterochroum specimen analysed  had a significantly higher 2c-value  and a 1cx-value approximately four times that inferred for rd <dig>  which lead to the inference that this specimen was a tetraploid.

the suggestion that most a.monanthes specimens are triploid is based on the observation that, with the exception of one report of a tetraploid count, all counts for this species have been 2n = 3x =  <dig>  under this assumption, the mean 1cx-values for mo <dig> sub-clades i, ii and iii are  <dig>  pg,  <dig>  g, and  <dig>  pg, respectively . a triploid level is also assumed for mo <dig> , based on the 2c-values, resulting in a mean 1cx-value of  <dig>  pg. the a.monanthes mo <dig>  sub-clade, which comprised a single specimen , had a significantly lower 2c-value of  <dig>  pg, and we infer that this specimen is likely to be a diploid cytotype. this would result in a 1cx value of  <dig>  pg, which is in broad agreement with the monoploid genome sizes calculated for the remaining a.monanthes sub-clades . nevertheless, it is noted that the mean spore size of rd <dig>  conflicts with this finding, suggesting that this specimen is a polyploid.

in a.hallbergii, the similarity of its mean 2c-value  and mean spore size  to that of the triploid a.monanthes lineages  suggests this species is also a triploid. as for the two new species, spec.nov. <dig> and spec.nov. <dig>  they differ in 2c-values  but have similarly small spore sizes. they are currently inferred to be diploid although further data are needed to confirm or refute this.

overall, the results show that monoploid genome size varies  <dig> -fold , with little variation in 1cx-values within clades, but considerable variation between some of them . for example, compared with the small 1cx-values in the a.resiliens clade , the mean 1cx-value for diploid a.formosum  was markedly higher. a larger monoploid genome size was also noted in the a.monanthes clade compared with the a.resiliens clade. indeed, the largest monoploid genome sizes were encountered within the a.monanthes clade , with spec.nov. <dig> having the highest 1cx-value  of all, which is more than double the mean monoploid genome size of the a.resiliens clade.

discussion
considerations for the use of silica dried material for genome size estimation
the question as to whether it is possible to use silica preserved material to measure genome size in absolute units has recently become the focus of intense debate  <cit> . in order to avoid ambiguous interpretations, some authors only advocate the use of fresh material to estimate genome size  <cit> , and restrict the use of silica-dried material to estimating dna ploidy levels . however, recent studies have started to explore the use of silica dried material for genome size measurements . this would help overcome some of the constraints imposed by the need for fresh material, especially when the quality of measurements is not compromised .

in the current analysis some of the accessions were only available as silica dried material , so the reliability of the genome size estimates obtained from such material was investigated. we were able to compare fresh and silica-dried tissues belonging to the same accession, for three separate species . we found a significant increase in fluorescence intensity in all silica-dried samples of 2 years in age, relative to the fresh material, which resulted in genome size estimates up to c. 30% larger compared with those estimated on fresh material . in addition, as previously reported, %cv was also seen to increase, and in most cases these exceeded acceptable values . we therefore conclude that for asplenium, the use of 2 year old silica dried material is unsuitable for obtaining accurate genome size estimations.

in contrast, samples of two accessions of a.formosum stored for 6 months in silica gave very similar results to those obtained from fresh material . in addition, there was no evidence of any reduction in the quality of the flow histogram with the cvs for both fresh and silica samples being similar. nevertheless, while these results suggest that the short term storage of asplenium samples in silica is suitable for genome size estimations, the extent to which these findings can be extrapolated to other plant genera, including other ferns remains unknown.

relationship between dna amount and spore size
numerous studies in angiosperms have shown a positive correlation between genome size and a number of morphological traits, including seed mass, cell size and stomatal density . beyond the angiosperms, such studies are relatively rare , and while spore size is often used as a proxy for inferring ploidy level , there have been no empirical studies to date that test these inferences using genome size. in this study we investigated the relationship between genome size and spore size to determine the extent to which such an assumption is valid.

we found a significant and positive correlation between nuclear dna amount and spore length using the raw data. however, when evolutionary relationships were considered, using phylogenetically independent contrasts , no significant correlation was found. the discrepancy between analyses is interesting, and although the significance of the raw data should not be discounted it does highlight the importance of using pics to determine the evolutionary association of statistically non-independent traits  <cit> .

the insignificant relationship observed between dna amount and spore size calls into question the use of spore size for inferences of ploidy level within homosporous ferns. previous authors have pointed out that this inference should be restricted to very close relatives, and the distinction between diploids and their autoploid offspring  <cit> . our findings are consistent with these suggestions. in addition, our study sample is mainly comprised of apomictic accessions, and due to a low sample number of sexually reproducing species we are unable to test for the effect of reproductive mode on the relationship between traits.

considerable variation was found in spore length, both within and between specimens of the apomictic lineages. in part this variation may be a consequence of the non-globulose shape of the monolete spores found in this complex, making precise measurements difficult. however, the variation may also be due to the variable nature of döpp manton sporogenesis in triploid apomicts of homosporous ferns  <cit> . the variation in spore size within and between these taxa is reflected by the inability to determine ploidy level  from spore size measurements in this complex  <cit> .

overall, our findings challenge the utility of spore size for inferring ploidy level within ferns. nevertheless, further investigations are needed to test our findings for spore size in a greater number of lineages, and also determine the effect, if any, of reproductive mode on the relationship between dna amount and spore size.

the evolution of genome size in the asplenium monanthes complex
the high chromosome numbers, and conserved chromosome sizes reported for many homosporous ferns has contributed to the hypothesis that the evolution of fern genomes is less dynamic than the evolution of angiosperm genomes  <cit> . this has been suggested to be due to a higher retention rate of chromosomes and the possible suppression of transposable elements  in homosporous ferns  <cit> . the inferred constancy of chromosome size is based on physical measurements  <cit> , the low number of reported retrotransposons  <cit> , and the reported correlation between chromosome number and genome size  <cit> . bainard et al.  <cit>  suggest that these observations show that genome size expansion is mainly driven by polyploidy, and that stepwise increases observed in 1cx-values across monilophytes might be indicative of paleopolyploidy.

indeed, in the asplenium monanthes complex studied here some of the 1c-value variation within clades clearly arises from polyploidisation, with ploidy levels ranging from 2x to 4x , as inferred by comparing the genome size data with previously published chromosome counts . this is consistent with the hypothesis that genomes size variation in homosporous ferns is driven by polyploidisation. however, contrary to this hypothesis, we also report variation in the monoploid genome size , indicating chromosome size variation between species . our study provides evidence that both processes of genome evolution are occurring in this complex, both are discussed below.

polyploidy is known to occur in several species of this complex based on previously reported chromosome counts . the genome size data obtained in this study proved useful in identifying putative cryptic species  and in inferring ploidy levels for taxa without reported chromosome numbers. inferences of ploidy were carried out with caution as even closely related taxa with different ploidy levels can display similar genome sizes, potentially leading to incorrect ploidy determinations  <cit> . a.formosum and the apomict a.resiliens clearly illustrated this situation as both taxa have very similar 2c-values  . without additional information it might be tempting to assume they had the same ploidy level. yet complementary information from published chromosome counts strongly supported the presence of different ploidy levels, with a.formosum being a sexual diploid and a.resiliens a triploid apomict. different ploidy levels were also identified among a.aff.heterochroum specimens , when compared to the genome size of the sister species a.resiliens.

in the a.monanthes complex moderate variation in 1c-values was noted between the accessions identified as a.monanthes . however, in all but one case , these specimens were inferred to be triploid. it is suggested that such variation has most likely arisen from differences in the dna contents of the progenitor species that gave rise to the triploids, a claim supported by the different 1c-values reported for the putative diploid progenitor species, spec.nov. <dig> and spec.nov. <dig>  <cit> . the exception noted in specimen rd <dig>  which belonged to the mo <dig> ii lineage of a.monanthes, was inferred to be a diploid apomict, due to a significantly smaller 2c-value  than the mean 2c of the remaining triploid taxa . this suggestion is consistent with the occurrence of diploid apomicts in other ferns, including taxa of the dryopteris affinis complex  <cit>  and the pteris cretica complex  <cit> .

chromosome size expansion/reduction is indicated in this complex by the observed differences in the monoploid genome size of the study species. this finding would suggest that chromosome size may not be as conserved as widely reported in homosporous ferns . in our study, the 1cx-values of specimens within the a.resiliens clade  are similar to more distantly related asplenium species including a.trichomanes ssp. quadrivalens   <cit> . this indicates that a.formosum and species within the a.monanthes clade have undergone up to a two-fold expansion in monoploid genome size.

an expansion of the chromosome/ monoploid genome size could arise via retrotransposon-driven changes, as suggested for equisetum and pstilotum <cit> . retrotransposon proliferation and elimination is linked with genomic and environmental factors such as effective population size, environmental stress, hybridisation and polyploidy  <cit> . given that the apomictic a.monanthes clade and related lineages show strong patterns of reticulate evolution, it is possible that these processes may be acting as triggers for retrotransposon activity leading to the range of 1cx-values observed. indeed, given the extent of hybridization and reticulate evolution reported in homosporous ferns in general  <cit> , it seems likely that retrotransposon driven changes in genome size are probably more widespread across ferns but may have been largely overlooked due to the low level of sampling.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings indicate that the evolution of genome size and spore size are not correlated within the a.monanthes complex. these findings challenge the utility of spore size for inferences of ploidy level within ferns. however, the prevalence of apomixis within this complex may be the cause of these findings, and the effect, if any, of reproductive mode on the relationship between dna amount and spore size is currently unclear.

our study also provides important insight into the dynamism of the fern genome. previous studies have suggested that chromosome size expansion plays only a minor role in the evolution of the fern genome; with most genome size variation generated by polyploidisation. these findings were based on a broad taxonomic sample but included a very low coverage  of homosporous fern species. in our analysis of genome size in a polyploid species complex, we have found evidence to suggest that genome size variation is not explained by polyploidy alone, but also by mechanisms inducing changes in the amount of dna per chromosome , without altering the number of chromosomes per genome. this finding indicates the potential for retrotransposon-driven chromosome/genome size expansion within homosporous ferns. this would have large implications for our understanding of the evolution of homosporous fern genomes in general, and it highlights the need for a substantial increase in genome size sampling, in order to determine the full extent to which these processes operate across the diversity of ferns.

