BACKGROUND
apoptosis is a cellular program essential for maintaining homeostasis in multicellular organisms. it represents the most common form of physiological cell death  <cit> . tight control of apoptotic signaling is essential, as its downregulation may lead to cancer or autoimmune diseases  <cit> . contrarily, atrophy, as in ischemic damage or neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimer's, huntington's, and parkinson's diseases, is characterized by excessive apoptotic activity  <cit> . apoptosis can be induced by intrinsic and extrinsic signaling pathways that are highly regulated and interconnected and can be counteracted by anti-apoptotic signal pathways  <cit> . thus, obtaining insights into the complex regulatory network related to apoptosis is important, yet challenging. here we use a global sensitivity analysis on an experimentally validated cell ensemble model to illuminate apoptosis signaling.

an important extrinsic mediator of apoptosis is the cytokine tumor necrosis factor . tnf exhibits potent antitumoral activity, but also represents a major activator of innate immune responses with strong pro-inflammatory and pathophysiological activities  <cit> . soluble tnf interacts with and activates the membrane receptors tnf receptor type  <dig> , whose activation triggers different cellular responses, including two seemingly contradictory ones. on the one hand, tnf-r <dig> induces cell proliferation by activating the transcription factor nf-κb  <cit> . on the other hand, internalized tnf-r <dig> initiates programmed cell death through the activation of initiator caspases  <cit> . there exists a second cell membrane receptor specific for tnf, called tnf-r <dig> , but this receptor can be activated only by the membrane integrated preform of tnf  <cit>  and is not taken into account here.

the present study was performed with kym- <dig> cells, a human rhabdomyosarcoma derived cell line, not affected in tnf sensitivity by overexpression of either bcl- <dig> or bcl-xl  <cit> . therefore, apoptosis occurs independently of the mitochondrial pathway, and thus kym- <dig> represents a model for tnf-induced apoptosis in so-called type  <dig> cells  <cit> . another advantageous property of kym- <dig> cells, in contrast to most other cell lines, is their high sensitivity to the apoptotic effects of tnf, even in the absence of a metabolic or dna synthesis inhibitor  <cit> . as a consequence, apoptosis develops rapidly in these cells.

the reaction network considered here is schematically depicted in figure  <dig> and consists of three modules: the tnf-r <dig> receptor signaling complex , the nf-κb pathway  and the caspase activation pathway . the pro- and anti-apoptotic tnf-r <dig> signaling pathways are internally and mutually regulated via feedback loops leading to a highly complex and dynamic behavior. obviously, the fine-tuning of the intracellular signaling pathways' regulatory circuits dictates the resulting cellular response  in the end.

a key feature of the apoptotic program is its switch-like behavior, where the transition from life to death is rapid and not synchronized within a population of clonal cells  <cit> . cell-to-cell variability is a hallmark of many biological phenomena, not only in induction of apoptosis  <cit> , but also in adaptivity  <cit> , immune response  <cit> , stress response  <cit> , differentiation and development  <cit>  and cancer cell drug resistance  <cit> . cell-to-cell variability can lead to different qualitative behavior at the single cell level but also in cell populations, in particular in systems showing bistability  or oscillatory behavior  <cit> . causes for the intercellular heterogeneity can be stochastic fluctuations or deterministic, such as genetic/epigenetic differences or differential cell cycle phases. for human cells, protein levels of most signaling networks remain constant over several days  <cit>  as they are tightly regulated  <cit> . therefore, it seems reasonable to assume that life-death decisions of individual cells are executed on a deterministic basis.

investigation of the complex, dynamic and highly regulated integration of tnf-induced pro and anti-apoptotic signals is facilitated by mathematical modeling based on the combination of quantitative and dynamic experimental data with mathematical modeling  <cit> . this abstraction helps testing hypotheses and provides insight into the governing mechanisms and their quantitative and dynamic features  <cit> , which can be particularly intricate in apoptosis signaling  <cit> . also see  <cit>  for a review of apoptosis modeling.

a modeling framework for cell-to-cell variability is the cell ensemble modeling approach. this combines a large number of individual  models that differ in some key parameters. this approach is particularly suitable for the description of unsynchronized cell cultures as it allows for the reproduction of the behavior of both single cells as well as whole cell populations. successful application examples in the literature focus on heterogeneous cultures of e. coli growth  <cit> , yeast metabolic oscillations  <cit>  as well as trail-induced apoptosis  <cit> .

this study analyzes the competing pro and anti-apoptotic tnf signaling pathways with their crosstalk mechanisms within a heterogeneous cell population. the experimentally validated cell population model enables us to analyze the dynamics of tnf-r <dig> responses in more detail than would be possible by experiments alone. results from this study underline the importance of the stimulus duration for the resulting cellular phenotype and the particular importance of the receptor concentration for the time of death development, as well as of nf-κb for cell-to-cell heterogeneity regarding the time of death. the analysis required defining a novel global sensitivity measure for heterogeneous populations: the linearized dependency of the time of death versus each population parameter. the sensitivity analysis of the cell population revealed that the nominal cell is much more sensitive than the cell population. the performed model analyses highlight the necessity, for a heterogeneous population, of quantifying the sensitivity on the population level, and not just of the nominal cell, even though this is much more convenient, computationally speaking.

RESULTS
the result section is structured as follows. first, experimental data on the time and dose dependency of tnf-r1-mediated signaling are shown. this led to the development of a cell ensemble model. then, we present a model-based sensitivity analysis of the time of death, before concluding with an analysis of the nf-κb module on the heterogeneity within the population using in-silico knockout cells.

time and dose dependency of tnf-r1-mediated cellular responses
two important outputs of tnf-r <dig> signaling are the concentration of nuclear nf-κb and caspase- <dig> activity. as nf-κb induces the expression of the caspase inhibitors xiap and flip, it serves as a marker of the anti-apoptotic cell response. the experimental data on the concentration of active nuclear nf-κb indicated a rapid activation after stimulation with  <dig> ng/ml tnf . for pulse stimulations, the nf-κb activity decreased after  <dig> hour, while it remained at a high level for continuous stimulations. the experiment shown in figure 2a is representative for  <dig> different experiments, where cells had been stimulated with  <dig> ,  <dig> or  <dig> ng/ml tnf given either as a  <dig> minute pulse or continuously. these experiments consisted of 12- <dig> measurements each, with a total of  <dig> data points.

caspase- <dig> activity increased over a time window of several hours . similarly, the quantification of cell viability over time revealed that the apoptotic response developed significantly later, occurring no earlier than  <dig> hours post stimulus . a sigmoid correlation between tnf stimulus strength and viability could be observed: higher tnf concentrations resulted in earlier cell death and higher cell death rates . differences between pulse and continuous tnf stimulation were most visible at intermediate concentrations , where a tnf pulse did not induce significant apoptosis, whereas continuous stimulation did . however, even for nearly saturating tnf concentrations , continuous tnf stimulation led to a faster response and higher death rate as compared to a respective tnf pulse . for very low tnf concentrations , neither a continuous nor a pulse tnf treatment induced significant apoptosis.

the sigmoidal dose response and the different time scales highlighted the complexity of the tnf-induced signaling. to gain further insight into the regulatory mechanisms of this system, we first developed a mechanistic single cell model of tnf induced pro and anti-apoptotic signaling describing the signal transduction within a median cell. the model structure corresponds to the pathway shown in figure  <dig>  see additional file  <dig> for a detailed description of the model and additional file  <dig> for its sbml code.

to illustrate the model behavior, we performed time course simulations of the nominal cell model over  <dig> hours post stimulus with tnf concentrations ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> ng/ml, both for continuous  and  <dig> minute pulse stimulations . nf-κb was rapidly activated even at low tnf concentrations, and converged to a higher activation level in the case of a continuous tnf stimulation . for both types of stimuli, caspase- <dig> activation occurred after a delay of a few hours with a switching duration of only a few minutes. tnf pulse stimulations resulted in later responses of caspase- <dig> activation, and no activation at all was observed for the lowest concentration range. interestingly, a higher tnf stimulus led to a higher and an earlier nf-κb translocation as well as earlier caspase- <dig> activation.

the experimental data presented in figure  <dig> were based on averaging measurements of a population of cells. to reproduce this data, we established a mathematical model of a cell population in the form of a cell ensemble model, in which all production rates were lognormally distributed within the cell population, see additional file  <dig>  for a specific stimulus, the qualitative response varied between individual cells of the cell population: some cells survived, some died with a time of death from  <dig> hours post stimulus onwards, where cell death is defined as the time point of 50% cleavage of the caspase- <dig> substrate parp. the cell ensemble model was validated using cytotoxicity assays at various concentrations of tnf as well as using western blotting, caspase activity assays and microinjection experiments, see additional file  <dig> 

sensitivity of the time of death
to gain a deeper understanding of the importance of the different parameters, we studied the sensitivity of the time of death with respect to the population parameters. as a global sensitivity measure, we defined the slope of the linear approximation of time of death versus each population parameter on a log-log plot. figure  <dig> depicts the projection of the time of death of individual cells with respect to three of the population parameters . the linear approximation obtained using robust linear regression is shown as solid black lines. its slope is our global sensitivity measure. as tnfr had a negative slope, the more tnfr was produced the earlier the cells died. xiap, on the other hand, had a positive slope, thus more xiap delayed cell death. for iκbα, no clear trend was visible.

analyzing the cell population sensitivity revealed that the parameters can be divided into three groups. in the first one, an increase of the parameter resulted in later death. members of this group are the caspase inhibitors xiap and bar. members of the second group caused the opposite effect: a larger parameter value correlated with earlier death. this group includes the tnf receptor and its adaptor proteins rip, traf <dig>  as well as the procaspases- <dig> and - <dig>  the remaining parameters had little impact on the time of death. most parameters exhibited similar sensitivities for continuous and pulse stimulation, even though cell death was delayed in the nominal case by approximatively  <dig> hours for a  <dig> minute pulse compared to the respective continuous stimulation. different sensitivities for pulse and continuous stimulation were only visible for tnfr, rip, traf <dig> a <dig>  bar and xiap. for all of them, the magnitude of the sensitivity was smaller for pulse stimulation compared to continuous stimulation.

nf-κb module enhances heterogeneity
the sensitivity analysis suggested that the nf-κb module was irrelevant for the timing of death, see figure 4c and 4d. to confirm or refute this hypothesis, we studied the importance of the nf-κb pathway by comparing "wild type" cells to cells manipulated in silico to show no tnf induced nf-κb activation. mathematically, nf-κb knockout cells were modeled by setting the rate of the irreversible reaction release and degradation of bound iκbα ikka + iκbα:nf-κb → ikka + nf-κb + piκbα to zero.

for continuous stimulation, a higher dose led to earlier death and the nf-κb knockout cells died earlier than the wild type ones, especially for low dosage concentrations . the reduced standard deviation, in particular, revealed much more homogeneous behavior for the knockout cells than for the wild type cells . for pulse stimulation, the survival rate was significantly dosage dependent  and wild type cells were more protected from death .

comparison of nf-κb knockout cells and wild type cells for different stimulations . death rate, median time of death and standard deviation normalized by the median  are shown here for the knockout cells normalized by the corresponding wild type cell value.

discussion
the dose-response relationship of tnf induced signaling follows an intricate pattern. low tnf concentrations barely induce any system response. for high tnf concentrations, the system is insensitive to stimulus changes due to receptor saturation. in between, especially in the range of 1- <dig> ng/ml tnf, small stimulus changes can lead to different phenotypes, or at least have a significant impact on timing and amplitude of the signaling processes. the precise knowledge of this window of high cellular sensitivity to changes in stimulus strength is of particular interest for the development of therapeutic strategies.

heterogeneity within a clonal cell population is an essential property of many biological signaling mechanisms, as is also the case for apoptosis signaling. after an extracellular stimulus, the final decision of cellular death versus survival deterministically depends on each particular cell's epigenetic state. while some cells quickly undergo apoptosis, others only slowly develop the final destructive program and therefore the time of death within the whole population is spread over many hours. one particular group of cells even survives the stimulus that is lethal to other cells. this corresponds to the observed partial tnf resistance, where the level of resistance is dependent on time and stimulus dosage. this observed cell to cell heterogeneity can well be described by cell ensemble models as demonstrated with the proposed model as well as by others.

global sensitivity analysis revealed that out of all protein production rates those of bar and xiap had, by far, the highest positive correlation with the time of death, i.e. overexpressing these caspase inhibitors delayed cell death significantly. procaspase- <dig>  tnf-receptor, traf <dig>  rip and procaspase- <dig> were the most sensitive parameters showing a negative correlation, thus their increase advances cell death.

a comparison of the sensitivities of the cell population with the nominal cell reveals a much lower sensitivity to parametric variations of the cell population. the sensitivity is also enhanced in nf-κb knockout cells even though the model shows that the time of death is insensitive to the parameters of the nf-κb module. thus, our analysis reveals a hidden advantage of heterogeneous populations resulting in a lower sensitivity to parameter variations.

CONCLUSIONS
this paper highlights the complexity of analyzing the sensitivity of cell population models. the proposed global sensitivity analysis method allowed for a quantification of the importance of the population parameters within the heterogeneous cell population. the analysis results were dependent on the input signal, i.e. its intensity and duration. the heterogeneity within a cell population was shown to reduce the sensitivity as determined by a global sensitivity analysis of the time of death. even though the nf-κb module seemed unimportant from a sensitivity analysis point of view, it not only increases the expression of anti-apoptotic proteins, but also enhances the heterogeneity.

in summary, the higher computational effort of calculating the sensitivity for a cell population, as opposed to a single cell, is necessary in order to understand the importance of the different parameters.

