BACKGROUND
lice  are obligate, permanent ectoparasites of birds and mammals, entirely dependent upon their vertebrate hosts for survival. four phthirapteran suborders are recognized: the chewing louse suborders amblycera, ischnocera, and rhynchophthirina, and the sucking louse suborder anoplura  <cit> . as a group, chewing lice parasitize birds and mammals, and all have chewing mouthparts that they use to feed upon the skin  and sometimes the blood of their hosts  <cit> . sucking lice, in contrast, parasitize only eutherian mammals and they are morphologically adapted for life on their mammal hosts: they are wingless, dorso-ventrally flattened, possess adaptive tibio-tarsal claws that are used to cling to host hair, and have modified piercing mouthparts for feeding. these ectoparasitic insects are one of only a handful of haematophagous arthropod groups that use their highly derived mouthparts to feed directly from host blood vessels  <cit> .

the blood-feeding habits of sucking lice and the close association they have with their mammalian hosts are hypothesized to have evolved via a particular sequence of events  <cit> . early in their evolutionary history, sucking louse ancestors had simple chewing mouthparts and were free-living associates of the nests and burrows of vertebrates. these nests and burrows served as protective habitats as well as a source of unlimited food supplies such as fungi, dung, and organic debris, specifically sloughed skin, fur, and feathers  <cit> . over time, some of these nest associates became more directly dependent on their hosts and transitioned from opportunistic associates to obligate parasites. these parasitic species fed directly from their hosts, ingesting more nutritious and easier to digest blood  and subsequently developed specialized mouthparts modified to obtain blood meals  <cit> . this succession of events from free-living nest associates to obligate parasites can be seen by examining the closest living relatives of the anoplura, members of other phthirapteran suborders, and the bark and book lice . the psocoptera are closely related to the phthiraptera , and these non-parasitic insects often interact with vertebrate taxa, living in the nests, burrows, or among the fur and feathers of mammals and birds and use their chewing mouthparts to feed on fungi or organic matter  <cit> . within the phthiraptera, phylogenetic studies have shown sucking lice to be monophyletic and derived, nested within the chewing lice and sister to the rhynchophthirina, a small suborder of chewing lice  parasitic on warthogs, bush pigs, and elephants  <cit> . rhynchophthirina species have modified chewing mouthparts attached to the end of a long proboscis that are used to break through the skin of their hosts allowing pools of blood to form. these chewing lice then use their mouthparts to feed on the blood collected in these pools. thus, it is likely that sucking lice evolved from a blood-feeding rhynchophthirina-like ancestor with the highly modified anopluran mouthparts derived from the ancestral chewing mouthparts found in all other lice  <cit> .

when sucking lice began their associations with mammals is uncertain because fossil evidence within the phthiraptera is generally lacking  <cit> . psocopteran groups are hypothesized to have originated in the mesozoic era  <cit> , with dates ranging from the cretaceous  as far back to the permian  for the origin of the phthiraptera  <cit> . however, the recent discovery of two important fossils has shed light on the age of lice. the first is an exceptionally preserved  <dig> ma bird louse fossil  <cit> , and the second is a  <dig> ma fossil of the book-louse family liposcelididae  <cit> , which is the closest free-living relative of parasitic lice  <cit> . these two fossils imply a rather ancient origin of lice and therefore it is reasonable to assume that given their restricted host associations, parasitic lice originated on their vertebrate hosts  <cit> . most placental mammalian orders had originated by the end of the cretaceous, 85- <dig> ma  <cit> , thus providing suitable habitats for sucking lice to colonize. since their origination, sucking lice have successfully diversified and there now are more than  <dig> described species of anoplura worldwide that can be assigned to  <dig> genera in  <dig> families  <cit> . sucking lice parasitize members of  <dig> of the  <dig> recognized mammalian orders, and are generally host-specific with families, genera, and species of lice parasitizing closely related hosts . of the non-parasitized potential host taxa,  <dig> mammalian orders are not known to be parasitized by any louse species, whereas representatives of the remaining six orders  are parasitized only by chewing lice. although cospeciation is perceived to be common between parasitic organisms and their hosts, given the current host associations of sucking lice  it is unlikely that parallel evolution has been the dominant process shaping the radiation of this assemblage. rather, it is probable that the associations between sucking lice and their eutherian hosts involves a complex history of multiple colonization events and small bouts of cospeciation, colonization failures, extinction events, and host switches across eutherian lineages  <cit> .

*host associations and number of louse species are based on durden and musser  <cit>  and recent publications.

to date, there have been only two studies that have attempted to reconstruct phylogenetic relationships among anopluran families  <cit> . kim and ludwig  <cit>  studied  <dig> taxa based on  <dig> morphological characters whereas kim  <cit>  examined  <dig> taxa with  <dig> morphological characters. both studies were based on small morphological datasets with few characters, the phylogenetic utility of which has been questioned  <cit> . while there have been multiple studies examining anopluran relationships within genera and among apparently closely related genera and families  <cit> , a higher-level phylogeny of sucking lice is lacking. this study is the first to use molecular data and estimates of divergence times to elucidate the evolutionary history of this unique haematophagous group in relation to their mammalian hosts.

RESULTS
taxon sampling, data collection, and phylogenetic analyses
lice were obtained from  <dig> of the  <dig> sucking louse families . unfortunately, louse data from the remaining  <dig> families could not be obtained due to specimen rarity  or failure to amplify specimens in the laboratory. because of pcr failure as well as availability of data from genbank, some molecular data could not be collected. the genes 18s, ef-1α, and coi were not collected from  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> specimens, respectively, and, except for one sample of pedicinus pictus , none of the specimens analyzed were missing data from more than one molecular marker .

for each gene examined, phylogenetic analyses  yielded similar topologies, although nodal support and placement of outgroup taxa varied depending on the gene . previous studies have noted that the third codon positions of the mitochondrial coi gene tend to be saturated and homoplasious  <cit> . saturation plots supported slight saturation of third positions in the coi data analyzed herein; however, phylogenetic analyses including and excluding third codon positions did not result in significant differences to tree topologies or branch lengths with the exception of placement of some of the outgroup taxa . the three genes used in this study were phylogenetically informative at different areas of the phylogeny, similar to previous findings  <cit> . with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> parsimony informative sites for 18s, ef-1α, and coi, respectively, the nuclear genes  provided slightly more resolution basally whereas the mitochondrial marker, coi, provided more resolution at terminal nodes . although basal resolution was generally lacking and there were overall differences in resolution for each gene, topologies resulting from phylogenetic analyses of individual genes were not in strong conflict.

analysis of the 3-gene data set using mp, ml, or bayesian approaches  resulted in similar topologies, nodal support, and branch lengths . analyses of the 3-gene data sets seemed to merge different levels of phylogenetic information from each gene resulting in a more resolved phylogeny overall. bayes factors indicated that partitioning by gene and by codon within each protein coding gene was preferred over a more simple or non-partitioned scheme. although highly partitioned data sets tend to be preferred according to bayes factors  <cit> , partitioned and non-partitioned analyses yielded similar topologies and support values. the species tree constructed with best lacked resolution but did not conflict with individual gene trees or trees resulting from concatenated and partitioned phylogenetic analyses. although there were some topological differences depending on the analysis and partitioning scheme, these differences always involved clades that were not strongly supported. one topological difference that appeared in some phylogenetic analyses was the placement of the mouse louse polyplax serrata. depending on the data set examined  and phylogenetic method, topological placement of p. serrata varied from being closely related to primate lice  to located near the base of the tree . however, the phylogenetic position of p. serrata never received substantial support, and exclusion of this taxon from phylogenetic analyses resulted in topologies that were not in conflict with the phylogeny shown in figure  <dig> 

all phylogenetic trees reconstructed in our analyses support a monophyletic anoplura, sister to the chewing louse suborder rhychophthirina . several anopluran families , genera , and species  were not monophyletic. phylogenetic constraints forcing the families and genera to be monophyletic were significantly worse than the best tree . the remaining louse families were all monophyletic, although it is important to note that taxon sampling for many of these groups was low . notably, primate lice  belonging to the anopluran families pedicinidae, pediculidae, and pthiridae formed a highly supported monophyletic group .

for the most part, lice did not form monophyletic groups according to host associations. there are two clades of lice parasitizing artiodactyl mammals , probably resulting from two independent colonization events of the hosts . lice parasitizing rodents were far from monophyletic, and instead were scattered throughout the phylogeny in five distinct clades . one rodent-louse clade containing the polyplacid genus neohaematopinus also included the lice haemodipsus and sathrax. these two louse genera do not parasitize rodents and instead are associated with rabbits and hares, and tree shrews, respectively. within rodentia, lice parasitizing the families cricetidae, muridae, and sciuridae also were not monophyletic . sciurid lice  are distributed among three clades and cricetid  and murid  lice are each distributed across two clades. some host lineages, however, were parasitized by monophyletic lineages of lice. these host groups include heteromyid rodents , carnivores , and primates .

estimates of divergence times
the molecular clock was rejected in the combined 3-gene data set; thus, the most appropriate divergence dating techniques are those that relax a molecular clock  <cit> . similar to phylogenetic analyses, bayes factors indicated that partitioned data sets are the preferred partitioning scheme, although analyses of partitioned and non-partitioned data sets produced similar results. partitioned analyses  using all three calibrations resulted in a late cretaceous origin of the anoplura, and a time of basal diversification approximately  <dig> ma . upon initially parasitizing their eutherian hosts, the anoplura segregated into two clades and then diversified rapidly soon after the cretaceous-paleogene  boundary approximately  <dig> ma . in one clade , sucking lice radiated to parasitize carnivores, artiodactyls, rodents, rabbits, and tree shrews, and in the other clade , anoplurans diverged to colonize artiodactyls, shrews, rodents, and primates. there appears to be no evidence for parallel cladogenesis between sucking lice and their hosts early in their evolutionary history. rather, it seems that these parasitic insects independently colonized diverse mammal groups possibly as these host lineages were radiating.

discussion
anoplura phylogeny
this study represents the first phylogenetic hypothesis of sucking louse relationships using molecular data. the genes selected for use in this study  have proven phylogenetically informative for lice in other studies  <cit> . however, even when used in combination, these genes fail to completely resolve relationships at a higher level across anoplura, which is not unexpected given the relatively small number of species sampled in this study. there is good support for many of the louse lineages, but it is unclear how these major lineages are related because some branches are short and lack support . future studies will need to increase taxon sampling as well as include additional molecular markers to better resolve phylogenetic relationships among sucking louse species.

the mitochondrial gene coi has been a staple in louse phylogenetic work ; however, rapid rates of evolution and data saturation in this marker are a concern especially for higher-level studies  <cit> . sequence divergence within a louse morpho-species can be rather high, upwards to 15% uncorrected p-distances  <cit> , and we found similar results in this study. for example, the two ancistroplax crocidurae specimens were  <dig> % divergent, the lemurpediculus verruculosus specimens were  <dig> % divergent, and the linognathoides marmotae specimens were  <dig> % divergent . while these divergences may be indicative of cryptic species, it is more likely that these high numbers for the coi gene are typical for louse lineages because sequences for the nuclear markers were identical. while coi saturation was not an obvious problem in the current study, the phylogenetic placement of polyplax serrata appears to be the result of elevated rates of evolution in this mitochondrial marker . future studies may encounter similar problems; therefore, inclusion of other data would be helpful when attempting to resolve higher-level relationships among lice. these additional data could be molecular or morphological ; however, finding appropriate molecular markers for use within phthiraptera has often been difficult  <cit>  and it is likely that novel approaches will be necessary to resolve phylogenetic relationships in this insect group.

unfortunately, not all anopluran families could be included in this study, resulting in an incomplete picture of phylogenetic relationships in this louse lineage. to better elucidate the evolutionary history of sucking lice, it is imperative that future studies increase the diversity of taxon sampling . even with incomplete taxonomic sampling, a few aspects of anopluran systematics are apparent, specifically the lack of monophyly of the families hoplopleuridae and polyplacidae . this lack of monophyly is not surprising; hoplopleuridae and polyplacidae are the two largest sucking louse families, with  <dig> and  <dig> described species, respectively . representing such a large number of species, it is likely that these two louse families are taxonomic hodgepodges in need of additional examination and substantial revision. revision of these two families  will not be possible without more complete taxon sampling. at a lower taxonomic level, the results presented in the current study are in agreement with previous research that focused on smaller anopluran groups  <cit> .

currently, the morphology-based classification of anoplura detailed by kim and ludwig  <cit>  and with modifications by durden and musser  <cit>  is followed by most researchers studying sucking lice. the molecular phylogeny reported here  agrees with aspects of this morphology-based classification such as the distinct familial lineages of anoplura associated with pinnipeds , bovids , bovids and suids , hominids  and cercopithecids . the differences between the two phylogenies  are intriguing; however, it is possible that morphological features may support some of the molecular-based relationships proposed here. for example, the molecular phylogeny places the hoplopleurid genus pterophthirus within the genus hoplopleura . morphologically, the only difference between these two genera is the extension, to varying degrees, of the second pair of paratergal plates on the abdomen. perhaps the varying extensions of the second pair or paratergal plates evolved more than once within hoplopleura and, as such, it may not warrant the recognition of pterophthirus as a distinct genus  <cit> . the wide separation between hoplopleurid genera hoplopleura  and ancistroplax in the molecular phylogeny  also has morphological ramifications. kim and ludwig  <cit>  recognized two subfamilies within the hoplopleuridae, the only anopluran family for which they recognized subfamilies. members of the subfamily hoplopleurinae  have a large continuous sternite on abdomonal segment  <dig> that physically connects with the corresponding paratergal plates, situated laterally. however, in members of the subfamily haematopinoidinae , the abdominal segment two sternite is clearly divided medially resulting in two separate plates. it is feasible that this morphological difference actually defines two distinct families rather than subfamilies as supported by the large separation between the two clades in figure  <dig>  as such, it would be beneficial for future researchers to include other relevant hoplopleurid genera in their molecular phylogenetic reconstructions of anoplura evolutionary history to determine if the two hoplopleura subfamilies remain genetically distinct.

the most obvious differences between the morphological  and molecular  anopluran phylogenies involve the family polyplacidae, which is monophyletic based on morphological data but paraphyletic based on molecular data. interestingly, the morphological definition of the polyplacidae is quite variable. notwithstanding the features they share with all other anopluran families, the only morphological characters that are common to all members of the polyplacidae, as currently recognized, are the presence of  <dig> antennal segments,  <dig> pairs of spiracles on the abdomen, small forelegs, and the absence of a notal pit on the thorax  <cit> . however, none of these characters are synapomorphies for polyplacidae. statements reflecting the morphological variability of polyplacidae in current descriptions include: "antennae...usually sexually dimorphic," "thorax with mesothoracic phragma usually present," "abdomen with paratergites usually highly developed...and occasionally represented by small sclerites or completely lacking," "tergal and sternal plates usually highly developed and at times reduced or lacking," "male...with variously shaped basal apodeme, parameres and pseudopenis," and "female with...spermatheca usually indistinct"  <cit> . this extreme morphological variability within the polyplacidae may actually encompass more than one family as suggested by the separate polyplacid lineages shown in figure  <dig>  the molecular data suggest that rigorous taxonomic reassessment of what is currently treated as polyplacidae is warranted. in fact, all five of the separate polyplacid lineages shown in figure  <dig> correspond with distinct morphological characters that could be used to define separate families and other suprageneric taxa if future taxonomic reevaluation supports such action.

without complete taxonomic sampling at the family level, it is difficult to compare kim's  <cit>  morphological hypothesis of anopluran relationships  to the molecular phylogeny . a few additional differences, however, are apparent. for one, morphological data support a sister relationships between pedicinidae and pthiridae, and these two louse families are closely related to pecaroecidae, haematopinidae, and hybophthiridae, all to the exclusion of pediculidae  <cit> . molecular data, however, support monophyly of all non-polyplacid primate lice  with a relatively distant relationship to the haematopinidae . monophyly of these three primate louse families has been found in previous molecular studies  <cit> ; however, molecular data from the families hybophthiridae, and pecaroecidae will be needed for a more rigorous comparison to the morphological study of kim  <cit> . interestingly, kim  <cit>  noted a relatively close relationship among the families hoplopleuridae, linognathidae, and polyplacidae . the molecular data presented herein also support a close relationship among these three families  and it will be interesting to see if these relationships hold with additional investigations. although a more comprehensive morphological study is currently underway , additional molecular data and better taxon sampling will be necessary to properly compare morphology and molecules and it is likely that these data will both agree that substantial taxonomic revision of anoplura will be necessary.

host associations and the origin of anoplura
using a bayesian approach implemented in the program beast v <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , we estimated a late cretaceous diversification of sucking lice . in this analysis, we utilized the 3-gene data set and three calibration points, and we allowed substitution and clock models to be unlinked. divergence time estimates varied, however, if clock models or clock and substitution models were linked across the three data partitions, and when calibration points were not used concurrently or used as hard bounds. when clock models or clock and substitution models were linked across the three data partitions, estimates of divergence times tended to be much more recent, with an eocene or paleocene origin of the anoplura, approximately  <dig> ma. however, linking substitution or clock models across partitioned data sets is the equivalent of performing analyses on concatenated data sets . since bayes factors comparisons performed herein support partitioned analyses, we concentrate our discussion below on the estimates obtained with unlinked model parameters.

of our three calibration points, one was located basally whereas the other two were located more terminally on the louse phylogeny . previous studies have found that the use of single calibration points, especially when placed either basally or terminally, can result in erroneous estimations of divergence times  <cit> . similarly, our analyses using only the basal calibration resulted in overestimates of ages at terminal nodes and analyses using only the terminal primate-louse calibrations resulted in underestimates of the ages at basal nodes. in fact, these over- and underestimates were extreme,  <dig> ma for the split between old world and hominoid-associated lice, and  <dig> ma for the age of anoplura, respectively. other studies have found that use of hard bounds is often ill-advised  and that fossils provide poor hard maximum bounds  <cit> . analyses using only upper bounds also resulted in underestimates for the age of anoplura, thus providing additional support for the simultaneous use of the three calibration points. further analyses incorporating increased taxon sampling and additional calibrations  will be necessary to test the hypotheses presented here.

because the fossil record for lice is so poor  <cit> , our calibrations were based on well-documented cospeciation events between these parasites and their mammalian hosts. the primate-louse calibrations have been used in several previous studies  <cit>  and have generally proven useful to better understand louse evolutionary history. for a basal calibration representing the split between rhynchophthirina and anoplura, we chose the time of basal diversification in placental mammals from bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  because we believed it reasonable that sucking lice could not have diversified until they had appropriate hosts  to colonize  <cit> . additionally, the recent discovery of two louse fossils at  <dig> ma  <cit>  and  <dig> ma  <cit>  adds further weight to support an ancient origin of lice, as does results of a recent study examining diversification times across all suborders of lice utilizing these fossils. this study found that sucking lice diversified approximately  <dig> ma . this result is similar to our own findings, further supporting use of a basal calibration point of 94- <dig> ma. it is important to note that because some of the outgroup taxa used in this study  also parasitize eutherian mammals, the bininda-emonds et al.  <cit>  calibration could have been placed at the root of the phylogeny. however, these chewing lice are recently derived lineages within ischnocera and likely radiated as a result of a recent host switch to eutherian mammals  <cit> .

soon after colonizing their hosts, sucking lice appear to have diversified rapidly, parasitizing multiple mammalian orders and families soon after the cretaceous-paleogene  boundary, approximately  <dig> ma . two major louse clades formed relatively early in anopluran evolutionary history, and these two clades parasitize members of a diverse assortment of mammal orders: one louse clade parasitizes artiodactyla, carnivora, lagomorpha, rodentia, and scandentia, whereas the other clade parasitizes artiodactyla, primates, rodentia, and soricomorpha . these host groups are often distantly related, and thus the louse phylogeny bears little similarity to the host tree . furthermore, several mammal groups, specifically artiodactyls, rodents, and primates, are parasitized by multiple, distantly related louse lineages . in fact, the majority of anoplura parasitize these host groups . thus, it is likely that the associations between sucking lice and eutherian mammals are the result of a complex history of host switching and extinction events both early and late during their evolutionary history. host switching has been documented in the literature for sucking lice  <cit>  as well as other ectoparasites  <cit> . in this study, clear instances of recent host switching include lemurpediculus parasitizing mouse lemurs and ancistroplax parasitizing shrews. these two louse genera originated 5- <dig> ma and their hosts, in contrast, diverged  <dig> ma  and  <dig> ma  <cit> , respectively. cospeciation, however, also has played a significant role in shaping associations between sucking lice and their mammalian hosts, especially at lower taxonomic levels. examples include squirrels and their lice  <cit> , primates and lice belonging to the families pedicinidae, pediculidae, and pthirdae  <cit> , and heteromyid rodents and fahrenholzia lice  <cit> . interestingly, this study finds that fahrenholzia lice diverged approximately  <dig>  ma , a range that encompasses the divergence of their heteromyid hosts  <cit> , further supporting cospeciation in this rodent-louse assemblage  <cit> . it is likely that additional instances of cospeciation will be revealed as more anopluran groups are examined. given the lack of concordance between host and parasite trees , it is possible that anoplurans may have colonized their hosts and diversified after the initial radiation of eutherian mammals. additional data and analyses will be necessary to test this possibility as all current data  indicate a relatively old diversification of sucking lice.

CONCLUSIONS
anoplurans are one of only a handful of haematophagous arthropod groups, and as a result of their blood-feeding habits these ectoparastic insects can have severe effects on their hosts. heavy infestations of sucking lice can cause host anemia, weight loss, damage to hides and fur , and general irritability, costing some livestock industries millions of dollars each year  <cit> . sucking lice can also serve as vectors of pathogenic organisms, transmitting the causative agents for wildlife and livestock diseases such as swine pox, anaplasmosis, dermatomycosis, lebombo virus, and seal heartworm  <cit> . some anopluran species play important roles in their associations with humans. head, body, and pubic lice  parasitize millions of people each year and pediculus species are important in human epidemiology, serving as vectors of the causative agents of epidemic diseases such as trench fever , relapsing fever , and louse-borne typhus . despite the potential economical and medical implications of sucking louse infestations, this study represents the first attempt to examine higher-level anopluran relationships using molecular data. although this study produces novel findings regarding anopluran relationships, future studies with more extensive taxon sampling will be necessary to provide a better view of the evolutionary history of sucking lice.

our analyses indicate that sucking lice diversified in the late cretaceous, approximately  <dig> ma, and soon after the cretaceous-paleogene boundary approximately  <dig> ma, these lice proliferated rapidly to parasitize multiple mammalian orders and families . these dates are in agreement with mammalian evolutionary history: all modern mammal orders are hypothesized to have diverged by  <dig> ma  <cit>  thus providing suitable habitat for the colonization and radiation of sucking lice. despite the concordant timing of diversification events early in the association between anoplurans and mammals, there is substantial conflict between the host and parasite phylogenies . this conflict may be because the free-living psocopteran ancestors of lice colonized and began feeding on the blood of their vertebrate hosts several times as host orders were diverging before the k-pg boundary  <cit> . additionally, host and parasite topological differences may be the result of a complex history of host switching and extinction events that occurred throughout the evolutionary association between sucking lice and their mammalian hosts. for example, multiple mammal lineages that radiated during the early tertiary  are now extinct as are their ectoparasitic lice . furthermore, many of the modern mammal families did not diversify until recently, during the late eocene to the miocene , thus providing ample new habitats for lice to colonize.

it is unlikely that there are any ectoparasite groups  that tracked the early and rapid radiation of eutherian mammals . this is in some ways unfortunate because ectoparasites could potentially be used as independent data points to infer host evolutionary history, something that could have been valuable to help elucidate remaining questions regarding the mammal phylogenetic tree  <cit> . given the multiple host radiations and host extinction events  <cit> , a combination of historical events such as extinction, host switching, and cospeciation likely dominated the evolutionary association between ectoparasites and their mammalian hosts. the sucking louse data presented herein support this scenario, and we expect that additional data from this group as well as other parasite lineages to further elucidate the complicated evolutionary history shared between parasites and their mammalian hosts.

