BACKGROUND
e2a, encoded by the tcfe2a gene and a member of the e-protein family, is a basic helix-loop-helix  transcription factor critical for regulating gene expression in several developmental systems  <cit> . originally identified as an immunoglobulin  enhancer binding factor, e2a has since largely been studied for its roles during the development of b and t lymphocytes  <cit> . e2a participates in various aspects of lymphocyte development including lineage commitment, initiation of lineage specific gene expression, rearrangement of b and t cell receptor genes, and differentiation through multiple developmental stages. in addition to roles in lineage commitment and cell differentiation, e2a has also been shown to regulate cell cycle, proliferation, and survival.

e-proteins, including e2a, heb, and e2- <dig> in mammals, function as dimers to bind dna and regulate gene expression. e2a homodimers are the primary e-protein dimers functioning in b cells, whereas e2a-heb heterodimers are the primary dimers functioning in t cells  <cit> . recent data suggests that e2- <dig> homodimers are critical for plasmacytoid dendritic cell development  <cit> . e2a also serves as an important dimerization partner for tissue specific hlh transcription factors outside of the lymphoid system. for example, e2a forms dimers with neurod and myod, key regulators of neuronal and skeletal muscle development, respectively  <cit> . since e2a is the common factor for multiple lineage specific hlh transcription factor dimers, novel tools for targeting and manipulating e2a function can benefit a range of developmental biology research areas.

here we have developed a new genetic model to examine e2a function. we have established an inducible e2a mouse model by inserting a tamoxifen-responsive region of the estrogen receptor  ligand binding domain at the carboxyl end of tcfe2a, resulting in the production of e2aer fusion proteins. the use of tamoxifen inducible er fusion proteins in mouse genetics has already been established as a valuable tool, especially with the vast use of the cre recombinase-er fusion protein for inducible gene knockout in mice  <cit> . in addition, er fusion with a variety of transcription factors has also been successfully employed for analysis of gene expression. for example, myod-er fusion proteins have been expressed by viral transduction in mouse embryonic fibroblasts for in vitro study of myod gene regulation  <cit>  and in mouse fibroblasts for analysis of myod activation in vivo post transplantation of transduced cells into recipient animals  <cit> . however, we do not know how useful the er system will be in live animals when targeting an endogenous locus. our e2aer system now introduces an er fusion with a bhlh transcription factor into the mouse genome for analysis of an endogenously expressed protein.

e2aer/+ and e2aer/er mice, along with e2aer protein function, are analyzed here in the context of b cell development. a block in b cell development at the pre-prob cell stage, prior to b lineage commitment, has been characterized by previous e2a-deficient mouse models  <cit> . a rescue in b cell development from e2aer/er pre-prob cells upon tamoxifen treatment would be a stringent test to verify inducible e2aer function.

in this study, we provide the initial characterization of the e2aer system. e2aer protein activity was rapidly induced upon tamoxifen treatment and reversibly regulated by tamoxifen withdrawal. even though we show effective induction of e2aer dna binding activity, tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er mice did not efficiently restore b cells in vivo. however, tamoxifen treatment was able to rescue and support early b cell development from e2aer/er pre-prob cells in an ex vivo culture system. use of e2aer ex vivo culture systems may therefore be beneficial for the study of gene regulation in b cells and other e2a-regulated cell lineages.

RESULTS
generation of the e2aer allele
e2aer/+ and e2aer/er mice were generated by using a knock-in strategy for tamoxifen-inducible e2a function. the tamoxifen-responsive ligand binding domain of the mouse er  <cit>  was inserted at the carboxyl end of tcfe2a to produce the e2aer allele . with this targeting strategy, similar to that used for the e2agfp strain previously developed in our lab  <cit> , both alternatively spliced products of the tcfe2a gene, e <dig> and e <dig>  are translated as er fusion proteins. initial characterization of the e2aer allele indicated normal expression levels of e2a mrna in the presence of the er insertion . previous study of e2a knockout mice has demonstrated stunted growth and a high lethality rate of homozygous animals within the first few weeks after birth  <cit> . in contrast, the e2ae47bm strain, expressing a dominant negative form of e <dig>  was originally described as indistinguishable from wild-type litter mates in size and survival  <cit> . however, this work was analyzing mice on a mixed genetic background. upon backcrossing to c57bl/ <dig>  the e2ae47bm/e47bm mice became smaller in size and demonstrated the high lethality rate like that shown with the knockout animals . e2aer/er animals also exhibit stunted growth and reduced survival . fortunately, the lethality rate in our experience has been less severe in litters from the e2aer strain than that observed with our e2a knockout and dominant negative strains. however, we do not know if this slight increase in postnatal survival is due to the presence of the e2aer protein or because our e2aer strain is currently on a mixed background.

the e2aer allele resembles an e2a-deficient allele in the absence of ligand
b cells develop from hematopoietic stem cells  in the bone marrow through a series of developmental stages  <cit> . the pre-prob cell stage is an intermediate stage as lymphoid progenitors develop into committed prob cells. pre-prob cells can be characterized by the expression of b <dig> and cd <dig> and the absence of cd <dig> expression. as pre-prob cells transition to the prob cell stage, cd <dig> expression is induced and cells undergo commitment to the b cell lineage. e2a is critical for this transition, as demonstrated by the block in development at the pre-prob cell stage in e2a-deficient animals  <cit> . analysis of e2agfp mice displays the up-regulation of e2a protein levels from the pre-prob to prob stage   <cit> . this increase in e2a expression is likely critical for e2a's regulation of the b cell lineage gene expression profile given the importance of e2a gene dosage. for example, elimination of one copy of e2a has been shown to greatly reduce the number of prob cells  <cit> .

investigation of b cell development in e2aer/er mice revealed a block at the pre-prob cell stage, similar to that seen in the e2a-mutant e2ae47bm/e47bm mice   <cit> . occasionally we have observed a small population of cd19+ b cells in the bone marrow of e2aer/er mice, but these incidences of leaky b cell development did not appear to produce a significant population of mature, ig expressing b cells . even though e2a has been suggested to influence proliferation in developing b cells  <cit> , no significant difference in expansion at the pre-prob cell stage was observed by brdu analysis of e2aer/er and wild-type mice .

for analysis of e2aer protein expression and dna binding activity, we chose to derive abelson transformed preb cells from e2aer/+ and e2aer/er bone marrow  <cit> . e2aer protein expression was verified by western blot analysis of whole cell lysates from e2aer/+ and e2aer/er abelson cells . while e2aer protein levels appeared similar to wild-type levels when comparing e2a+/+ and e2aer/er cells, analysis of e2aer/+ cells suggested that e2aer protein expression may be lower than wild-type. protein analysis of tamoxifen treated cells displayed similar results, indicating that the relative e2aer protein levels are not affected by the presence or absence of tamoxifen. nuclear extracts from e2aer/er abelson cells were then used to conduct electrophoretic gel shift analysis of e2aer binding to an e2a binding sequence, μe <dig>  in the absence of tamoxifen treatment, no dna binding activity was observed from the e2aer protein . together, the block in b cell development and lack of e2aer dna binding activity suggest that the e2aer mouse model functions as an e2a-deficient system in the absence of ligand.

rapid activation and reversible regulation of e2aer activity
tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er abelson cells resulted in rapid e2aer dna binding activity within  <dig> hr of treatment . the specificity of the protein binding to the μe <dig> probe was verified by using an anti-e2a antibody that effectively super-shifted the protein/dna complex. the effect of tamoxifen withdrawal was then tested by washing tamoxifen-treated cells and growing them in the absence of tamoxifen for  <dig> and  <dig> hr time points. loss of e2aer dna binding activity was seen within  <dig> hrs of tamoxifen withdrawal , indicating relatively fast reversibility of e2a function. these results demonstrate that the e2aer model can be used not only as an inducible model, but this system may also be valuable for providing a tightly regulated window of e2a activity.

induction of e2aer activity supports early b cell development ex vivo
we first tested for a functional outcome of e2a induction by in vivo tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er mice followed by analysis of b cell populations in the bone marrow and spleen. all in vivo treatment efforts, including intraperitoneal injection and treatment in drinking water, unfortunately resulted in low efficiency rescue of b cell development. the emergence of b cells in tamoxifen-treated animals was rarely great enough to determine if the resulting b cells were generated in response to the tamoxifen treatment or were simply the incidence of leaky b cell development described above. the most significant recovery of b cells observed from in vivo treatment, which resulted from a  <dig> day tamoxifen treatment, was still considerably less than the b cell population in control mice . however, the presence of ig μ heavy chain  positive b cells in the spleen does suggest that a low level of tamoxifen-dependent b cell development occurred in vivo.

in contrast to in vivo tamoxifen treatment, treatment in an ex vivo b cell culture system effectively rescued the development of cd19+ b cells. sorted e2aer/er pre-prob cells were cultured in hormone-free media on an s <dig> stromal layer in the presence of il- <dig>  with or without tamoxifen. control dmso treated e2aer/er pre-prob cells failed to develop efficiently into cd19+ b cells over the course of  <dig> days, whereas tamoxifen treated e2aer/er pre-prob cells effectively gave rise to cd19+ b cells . interestingly, the kinetics of b cell development from tamoxifen treated e2aer/er pre-prob cells appeared delayed compared to that of control cells. in addition to using cd <dig> expression to validate the rescue of b cell development, we analyzed pax <dig> expression throughout the  <dig> day culture. pax <dig>  initiated downstream of e2a expression, is a transcription factor critical for b cell lineage commitment  <cit> . consistent with cd <dig> expression, induction of pax <dig> expression was observed in tamoxifen treated e2aer/er pre-prob cells, also appearing delayed compared to control cultures .

another key event during early b cell development, downstream of e2a function, is rearrangement of the ig heavy chain locus   <cit> . we next used this culture system to determine if induction of e2aer activity could also support igh v to dj recombination. to amplify v to dj rearrangements, we chose primers recognizing members of the vh <dig> gene family  <cit> , which represent a large percentage of the total igh v genes, and primers recognizing the jh <dig> gene segment. rearrangements were analyzed in day  <dig> cultured samples because we did not observe consistent v to dj pcr signals until this point in the time course analysis. wild-type mice were used as positive controls for detecting recombination events, and mice deficient in the recombination activating gene rag <dig>  required for vj recombination, were used as negative controls. analysis of day  <dig> cultures demonstrated a clear v to dj rearrangement product from tamoxifen treated e2aer/er cells . v to dj rearrangement was further verified by sequencing analysis . the faint product detected from dmso control treated e2aer/er cells was accompanied by a small "leaky" cd19+ population generated at this relatively late time point in the culture system . however, only one unique rearrangement product was identified out of all of the colonies sequenced for this sample. in addition to providing functional proof of induced e2a activity, the detection of igh recombination, along with the induction of cd <dig> and pax <dig> expression described above, suggests that restored e2a function can rescue b cell development from the pre-prob cell stage.

discussion
the e2aer system provides an improved method for analyzing e2a function. previous analysis using over-expression of e2aer fusion proteins by retroviral transduction has already demonstrated the value of inducible e2a activity  <cit> . however, toxicity is often a problem with high levels of e2a in the cell  <cit> , and viral transduction is not ideal for all cell types. in addition, the changes in gene expression detected upon over-expression of e2a may not always be representative of endogenous e2a function. therefore, generation of the e2aer allele provides an attractive system for studying gene regulation and other e2a-regulated events in potentially any e2a-expressing cell type at a more physiological level.

here we demonstrate the rapid induction of e2aer dna binding activity upon tamoxifen treatment and its potential for reversible function upon tamoxifen withdrawal. the ability to tightly control e2a activity allows for kinetic analysis of downstream events. analysis of b cell development in our ex vivo culture system demonstrated a rescue from the pre-prob cell stage, but suggested delayed kinetics from e2aer/er pre-prob cells compared to b cell development from control pre-prob cells. this result suggests that even though e2aer/er and wild-type pre-prob cells are phenotypically similar, e2aer/er pre-prob cells may not have equivalent developmental potential or may require additional cellular changes prior to entering the b cell lineage. it is possible that e2a-regulated events normally occurring earlier in development, as suggested in hematopoietic stem cell , lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor , and common lymphoid progenitor  stages  <cit> , were occurring upon restored e2a function in pre-prob cells and requiring these cells to "catch up" with their wild-type counterparts prior to progressing to the next stage. alternatively, the developing tamoxifen-treated e2aer/er b cells may not have expanded as rapidly as wild-type cells upon commitment to the b cell lineage. our western blot analysis of e2a proteins in e2aer/+ abelson cells  suggested that the e2aer protein level may also have been contributing to the delayed kinetics. in this sample, the e2aer band appeared less intense than the wild-type e2a band. however, it is not possible to determine from this analysis if the lower intensity was a result of reduced protein levels or variation in antibody affinity for the e2aer versus wild-type e2a protein. in addition, there was not a striking difference between the e2aer and wild-type protein levels when comparing the e2a+/+ and e2aer/er samples. further investigation of tamoxifen treated e2aer/er pre-prob cells will be necessary to understand why the delayed detection of cd19+ b cells was observed.

our ex vivo culture data clearly indicated a rescue of early b cell development to the prob cell stage. however, we have so far been unable to determine if tamoxifen treatment can rescue e2aer/er b cells through the subsequent preb cell stage, when e2a is known to be critical for ig kappa light chain  recombination  <cit> . we were unable to test for induction of igk recombination or surface igm expression by using our ex vivo culture system because this system primarily supports development at a stage prior to these events . the presence of the small, but increased, population of e2aer/er igm+ b cells in the in vivo treatment experiment  is the only current evidence suggesting tamoxifen-induced e2aer activity may be able to rescue b cell development to maturity. additional b cell culture systems would be necessary to determine if tamoxifen treatment can rescue later stages of e2aer/er b cell development.

while in vivo tamoxifen treatment was not efficient for restoring b cell development, in vivo treatment may still be useful for analysis of e2a function in other cell lineages. we suggest two reasons for ineffective rescue of in vivo b cell development. first, progression through several stages of lymphocyte development is known to be dependent on proper e-protein dosage  <cit> , and it is possible that the required e2a threshold is not maintained during our in vivo treatment for rescue of b cell development. for example, as mentioned above, we do not know if e2aer/er cells can sufficiently progress through the preb cell stage of development. second, e2a has been suggested to be important for b cell survival  <cit> . therefore, it is conceivable that even if b cells are rescued by tamoxifen treatment, they may be lost if e2aer activity is not maintained throughout the treatment.

the e2aer system may instead be more valuable for in vivo study of t cell development, or other lineages expressing multiple e-protein family members. since e-proteins demonstrate many redundant functions, t cell development is not completely blocked in e2a-deficient mice due to the presence of heb  <cit> . because t cells are fully developed in e2a-deficient mice, in vivo tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er mice may be more valuable for the study of e2a function during t cell development.

there are many additional applications for the e2aer system. in addition to advantages in speed, expression level, and reversibility, this inducible system may allow analysis of e2a function in specific cell stages that have been difficult to analyze in previous e2a-deficient models. tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er cells may be valuable by allowing progression to developmental stages that are absent in e2a-deficient animals or affected due to the lack of e2a at earlier developmental stages. e2aer/er mice also provide a useful tool for studying changes in e2a function with age or for analyzing e-protein function in combination with other genetic models. given the rapid induction of e2aer dna binding activity upon in vitro tamoxifen treatment, we believe that the use of e2aer ex vivo culture systems may be most valuable, especially for identifying new e2a targets and studying the kinetics of e2a gene regulation.

CONCLUSIONS
we have established a new genetic model by generating the e2aer allele. this model allows for inducible function of e2a, a transcription factor displaying an extensive range of functions across multiple developmental programs. e2aer activity is rapidly induced at the protein level upon tamoxifen treatment and is reversible upon tamoxifen withdrawal. tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er mice was, however, unable to efficiently restore wild-type levels of b cells. the functionality of e2aer was instead successfully verified by ex vivo tamoxifen treatment of e2aer/er b cell progenitors. in this ex vivo culture system, induced e2aer protein function was able to rescue and support early b cell development. thus, the e2aer model provides an attractive system to regulate and study e2a protein function, especially under ex vivo conditions where cells can gain sustained access to high levels of tamoxifen.

