BACKGROUND
sensory systems use specialized cells or organelles to receive signals that are conducted through the body electrically or chemically  <cit> . signal transduction in many unicellular eukaryotes occurs via cilia, which often have both motile and sensory roles  <cit> . the evolution of multicellularity necessarily involved the ability to transduce signals over longer distances, which in animals is now done by nerves  <cit>  to allow rapid coordinated movements of the whole organism  <cit> . although cilia play an important role in sensing the environment in both unicellular and multicellular animals, the evolutionary relationship of sensory cilia in unicellular eukaryotes, fungi and metazoans is unclear. studies of sensory systems in the earliest evolving metazoans could shed light on shared common mechanisms of sensation.

sponges lack a nervous system and while they are usually considered representatives of the first multicellular animals  <cit> , some recent phylogenomic analyses place ctenophores more basally  <cit>  calling into question our understanding of the evolution of nerves and the ancestral metazoan state. analysis of sponge genomes and transcriptomes has revealed a complex assortment of signaling molecules and proteins necessary for a post-synaptic scaffold  <cit> . together with physiological evidence that glutamatergic signaling occurs in sponges  <cit>  this suggests that a signaling system similar to that seen in other metazoans may be used to coordinate sponge behavior. whereas sensory organs are well-known from ctenophores, in sponges the mechanism for transducing sensory information from the environment has as yet remained unknown.

here we provide experimental data which suggest that an array of non-motile cilia in the sponge osculum–the chimney-like structure through which water exits from the sponge–functions as a sensory system to detect changes in flow and control whole animal responses. we used an emergent model system, the freshwater sponge, to investigate the ultrastructure and physiology of the cilia. we also studied the molecular evolution of sensory channels of the transient receptor potential family in porifera. regardless of whether sponges as we know them today were or were not the earliest multicellular animals to evolve, it is intriguing to consider that an array of sensory cilia like this in sponge oscula could have given rise to more complex signalling cells, such as nerves and sensory sensilla, in the early evolution of animals.

RESULTS
sponge oscula are ciliated
sponges are unusual in possessing both cilia and flagella  on somatic cells. these include ciliated epithelial cells of sponge larvae which are involved in locomotion and also photoresponses  <cit> , ciliated cells at the exit of the feeding choanocyte chambers  <cit>  and flagellated choanocytes involved in pumping water through the canal system . in contrast, the epithelia of adult sponges are usually naked. we were therefore surprised to find cilia on all cells forming the epithelial lining of the osculum in the freshwater sponge ephydatia muelleri, a demosponge that can be cultured in the laboratory . the osculum is the most prominent feature of a sponge, and is the final exit of water filtered through the sponge body for food and oxygen.

in e. muelleri a pair of cilia, each 4– <dig> microns long, emerges above the nucleus of every epithelial cell . a survey of  <dig> other demosponges showed that in each, the oscula are also lined by ciliated cells; in some species the cells have a single cilium, and others up to  <dig> cilia, all arising centrally above the cell nucleus . even glass sponges , which are syncytial, have cilia at the lip of their large oscula. there is no data available so far for the other two classes, calcarea and homoscleromorpha, although the latter is known to have cilia throughout the canals, and therefore presumably also up to the osculum lip.

serial sections through the base of the cilium in e. muelleri show basal bodies are simple, with no structures linking pairs of cilia in a cell . in contrast to the flagella of choanocyte chambers, which have a central pair of microtubules, in cross section the oscula cilia have a 9 +  <dig> axonemal skeleton , which is characteristic of sensory cilia in other organisms  <cit> . both fluorescence and scanning electron microscopy show pairs of cilia in e. muelleri are oriented perpendicular to the water flow , which may be important for sensing changes in flow. in live animals the cilia label with the vital dye fm 1– <dig>  and high frequency time-lapse microscopy showed that they are non-motile and only vibrate in the flow that passes out of the osculum .

cationic channel blockers inhibit sponge behaviour
in the last decade it has been recognized that most cells in the vertebrate body, and many in invertebrates, possess specialized sensory structures called ‘primary’ cilia, which function as sensory organelles as in kidney epithelial cells, chondrocytes, odontoblasts, embryonic endocardial cells, and ‘kupffer’s vesicle’  <cit> . primary cilia, although similar to motile cilia in their basic structure, lack the radial spokes and dynein arms that enable motility. instead they possess stretch-activated cationic channels that are part of the transient receptor potential  channel superfamily  <cit>  including polycystin- <dig>  and polycystin- <dig>   <cit>  or their homologs, which allow them to function as sensory organelles  <cit> . remarkably, trp channels are responsible for almost all forms of sensation experienced by eukaryotic cells, including movement, taste, smell, temperature, vision and osmolarity.

the function of trp channel sensation is difficult to assess directly, and is therefore usually done by behavioral assay; for example inhibition of an avoidance reaction by the unicellular alga chlamydomonas using trp channel blockers has shown that trp <dig> is involved in mechanosensation  <cit> . in multicellular organisms it is difficult to study the function of primary cilia in living tissues, except in cell culture. in contrast, freshwater sponges are small and transparent, and cilia can be viewed live. furthermore, both of the freshwater sponges e. muelleri and s. lacustris can be triggered to inflate and then contract their whole body  in response to mechanical or chemical stimuli . because the osculum is the final channel through which water exits the sponge, we hypothesized that the cilia have a sensory role in controlling the canal diameter to optimize normal flow through the sponge filter, and in particular during the sneeze behaviour.

three commonly used chemicals–the antibiotic neomycin sulfate, styryl dye fm1- <dig>  and cationic channel blocker gadolinium –have been shown to inhibit sensory ability of primary cilia in other organisms  <cit> . these drugs are all thought to block trpp <dig>  channels on the ciliary membrane. in sponges natural stimuli  as well as bath treatments of 75–90 μm l-glutamate trigger the inflation and contraction of the excurrent canals  <cit> . treatment of sponges with neomycin sulfate  and fm 1– <dig>  reduced the maximum amplitude of the inflation response by 60%  in both cases, and treatment with gd3+  eliminated the response; the effects were reversible . after recovery, the gd3+-treated sponges showed an enhanced response to l-glu . this knock-down and knockout of the sponge behaviour by drugs that are known to affect channels on ciliary membranes implicates the cilia in sensing stimuli and transducing them into behaviour. further support for this idea comes from the direct effect the drugs had on ciliary length.

lengthening of primary cilia in other organisms has been proposed to increase their sensitivity  <cit> . ciliary  length is determined by a dynamic process of intraflagellar transport  which continuously brings molecules, including tubulin, up and down the cilium  <cit> . chemical or mechanical stimuli that interfere with ca2+ influx have been shown to alter ift, thereby changing cilium length  <cit> . in e. muelleri cilia length increased  <dig> -fold after only one hour of treatment in all three drugs , and gd3+ treated sponges recovered partially after a one-hour washout. these data suggest that the drugs interfere with ift in the oscula cilia. unlike cilia, the flagella in choanocyte chambers of e. muelleri did not change length , implying that the effects of the drugs reported here are only on ciliated cells.

although pharmacology is almost universally used to study the sensory roles of cilia and flagella in other organisms  <cit> , neomycin sulfate, fm 1– <dig>  and gadolinium can also affect other calcium transport processes in tissues including smooth muscle contractility. we therefore tested whether another calcium channel blocker could equally affect the sponges. in contrast to neomycin sulfate which eliminates all response in the sponge, the l-type calcium channel blocker verapamil  had no effect on the amplitude of the sneeze reflex . this finding is consistent with experiments on vertebrate primary cilia  <cit> . we found that longer incubation in neomycin sulfate  repressed the sneeze reflex for longer. fm 1– <dig> is fluorescent and was clearly localized primarily to the cilia , but to determine where neomycin sulfate localized we incubated sponges in texas red-conjugates of neomycin sulfate. cells in the sponge osculum labeled within 2 minutes of incubation in the dye, and the same cells co-labelled with yo-pro <dig>  which selectively labels hair cells in the lateral line of zebrafish   <cit>  . taken together, the effect of these treatments suggests that stretch-activated, nonselective cation channels are involved in the sponge behavior.

while we cannot rule out the possibility that any of these drugs have other effects on the sponge in addition to working on the cilia, in our experience very few molecules cause the sponge to relax–most trigger contractions  <cit> . however, to confirm that the cilia in the osculum, and the osculum itself, are indeed required for the sponge sneeze reflex we used both chloral hydrate to deciliate the sponge and removed the osculum, and tested the responsiveness of the sponge in each instance. chloral hydrate is known to remove cilia from cells, causing a loss of behaviour in both metazoans  <cit>  and unicellular eukaryotes  <cit>  after 20 hr exposure. it is thought to act by weakening the attachment of the cilium to the basal body, with full loss of cilia occurring after 68 hr in kidney epithelial cells  <cit> . we found that 20 hr exposure to 4 mm chloral hydrate eliminated the sneeze reflex and it took 120 hr for recovery of sensitivity . as in kidney cells  <cit> , it took 70 hr to remove all cilia from the epithelium of the osculum .

we have found that when removed, a new osculum forms again after 8 hours. de-osculated sponges could not be triggered to sneeze , and although the sponge continued to filter water at all times during repair of the osculum, it was only after the osculum had fully formed that the sneeze response returned. together these results suggest that both the osculum and the cilia lining it are necessary for the sneeze reflex. to determine when ciliated cells first appear on newly formed oscula, we labeled sponges from which the osculum had been removed with the cell proliferation marker edu and detected incorporation of uridine into new cells using click-it . at 8 hr after the osculum was removed, cilia were found on cells in a few discrete places on the surface of the sponge . pinacocytes in the sponge surface are not usually ciliated, therefore we interpreted the differentiation of cilia on pinacocytes as an early marker of the location of a new osculum. furthermore, although mesohyl cells were labeled within 6 hrs of incubation in edu, cells of the new osculum were not labeled with edu, and it was only 24 hr after the new osculum was formed that a few new ciliated cells labeled . although we were unable to trace the migration of cells in live animals, we interpret these data to suggest that cilia differentiate on cells in the surface of the sponge, thereby identifying the region as a potential osculum; then as the osculum grows to full height using cells already present in the sponge, new ciliated epithelial cells differentiate from newly formed mesohyl cells.

sponges possess a repertoire of transient receptor potential channels
considering the conserved role of trp channels, and in particular pkd in sensory behaviour across eukaryotes  <cit> , we searched the transcriptomes of  <dig> sponge species for homologs of both pkd <dig> and pkd <dig> and other trp channels. a 700aa homolog of pkd <dig>  was identified in corticium candelabrum  and a 178aa sequence of a pkd <dig>  gene was found in the freshwater spongilla lacustris  . we found a 978aa sequence of a type ii trp  in sycon coactum , and several sequences with similarity to various type i trp channels were found in all  <dig> porifera classes . these candidates were included in an alignment containing more than  <dig> representatives for all the trp families across bilaterians . the ability to retrieve protein sequences depends on the quality of the transcriptome and the divergence of sequences in transcriptomes. negative results do not imply conclusive absence. our phylogenetic analysis grouped sponge pkd sequences with type ii trp and specifically pkd <dig> channels genes from bilaterians with high support . sponge pkd channel sequences showed similar domain architecture and proposed 3d protein folding to both mouse and chlamydomonas sequences , and other sponge sequences showed amino acids indicative of the trp domain . although the pharmacology of the sponge cilia is similar to that of cilia known to have pkd <dig> channels, several trp channels from chlamydomonas have also been found to transduce mechanical signals so we cannot rule out the possibility that other trp channels are involved in flow sensing in sponges.

CONCLUSIONS
in the sponge, obstruction of the canals by particulates in the feeding current would cause changes in pressure across the system; the osculum is the single exit of the entire system and is expected to be sensitive to this change, so it is plausible that the cilia detect changes in water flow or pressure. the absence of motility of the cilia, and their specific localization to the inner lining of the sponge osculum strongly suggest a sensory role for the osculum; the pharmacology and ablation experiments also support the hypothesis that the cilia have a sensory function. the primary cilium, which extends out from the cell and has a high surface-area to volume ratio, is an ideal organelle for both sensing and transducing signals  <cit> . these cilia in the sponge osculum have all the characteristics of primary cilia.

while the role of cilia in sensing information may have evolved many times within eukaryotes, the sponge sensory system described here is certainly very similar to signalling via primary cilia in other metazoans  <cit> . the role of cilia in the sponge osculum suggests either a convergent role in sensing and transducing flow information into behaviour across all metazoa, or implies that primary cilia had an ancient evolutionary role in transducing sensory information, and in particular flow, in early multicellular animals. given the unique position of porifera as extant representatives of one of the first groups of multicellular animals  <cit> , and in particular their lack of conventional nervous and coordination systems, the finding of such an organized array of sensory cells in sponges provides new insight into possible mechanisms of evolution of early sensory systems.

