BACKGROUND
many microorganisms utilize species-specific small signal molecules to coordinate a range of important activities, including virulence factor production, antibiotics biosynthesis and biofilm. this cell-cell communication mechanism is known as quorum sensing   <cit> . as a ubiquitous environmental organism which infects various animals, plants, and insects, pseudomonas aeruginosa is also a major source of opportunistic infections in both immunocompromised individuals and cystic fibrosis patients  <cit> . it has evolved at least three types of quorum sensing  systems, i.e., las, pqs and rhl, which are implicated in regulation of several aspects of pathogenesis, including virulence factor production, biofilm development, and antimicrobial resistance  <cit> . besides the qs systems, most clinical isolates of p. aeruginosa also use type iii secretion system  to evade phagocytosis and facilitate infection  <cit> . t3ss is an important virulence determinant which is conserved in many animal and plant pathogens, including salmonella spp., shigella flexneri, yersinia spp., escherichia coli, and chlamydia spp.  <cit> . although previous study already revealed that qs controls t3ss in some bacterial species, the relationship between qs systems and t3ss in p. aeruginosa is still not clearly determined  <cit> .

there is a new form of microbe-microbe antagonism interaction designated as signal interference  <cit> . this type of antagonism acts not by killing, but instead by interfering with the signal-mediated gene expression of the competitors  <cit> . it has been found that some microorganisms could boost their competitive strength through interfering with qs signaling of their competitors  <cit> . this interference mechanism has been employed to develop novel drugs as the antagonists of signaling systems of bacterial pathogens. for example, some compounds have been identified or synthesized to act as the antagonists of qs systems of p. aeruginosa, including n-acyl cyclopentylamides, furanone derivatives, garlic, malyngolide, iberin, protoanemonin, norbgugaine and caffeine  <cit> . besides the signal interference with qs system, interfering with t3ss system has also been shown as an effective method to treat the bacterial pathogens  <cit> . given the fact that the anti-qs or anti-t3ss compounds display a significantly inhibitory activity on the virulence of p. aeruginosa, suggesting that interference on qs systems or/and t3ss can be specifically utilized as favorable therapeutic methods on p. aeruginosa infection  <cit> .

as a new type of qs signal, the diffusible signal factor  has been demonstrated to play an important role to control the biological functions such as biofilm formation, motility, virulence and antibiotic resistance  <cit> . among dsf-family signals, cis-2-dodecenoic acid  was originally identified in burkholderia cenocepacia to be involved in regulation of biofilm formation, virulence and motility in b. cenocepacia <cit> . furthermore, besides the significance on intraspecies signaling, bdsf also appears its critical importance for maintenance of ecology through interspecies and inter-kingdom communication  <cit> . exogenous addition of bdsf from b. cenocepacia restored the biofilm dispersal and virulence factor production of xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris dsf-deficient mutants. it was also revealed that candida albicans germ tube formation was strongly inhibited by exogenous addition of physiological relevant level of bdsf  <cit> . moreover, bdsf from b. cenocepacia and stenotrophomonas maltophilia was found to be involved in modulation of virulence, antibiotic resistance and persistence of p. aeruginosa in the cystic fibrosis airway  <cit> . in combination, these results have well established the role of bdsf play not only in regulation of a range of biological functions through intraspecies signaling, but also in microbial ecology through interspecies and cross-kingdom communication. in this study, we investigate the role of bdsf in the inter-species communication between b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa; and discover the inhibitory effect of bdsf on qs systems and t3ss of p. aeruginosa.

RESULTS
bdsf interferes with qs systems of p. aeruginosa
there are at least two ahl-dependent qs systems in p. aeruginosa, las and rhl systems, which control the expression of numerous genes  <cit> . it was found that the two qs systems are in a hierarchy where las system is dominant over rhl system  <cit> . moreover, it was also identified that lasr was required for the production of pqs, which plays a positive effect on rhl system. the three qs systems are interconnected with las system at the top of the qs cascade, which controls rhl and pqs systems  <cit> . recently, it was revealed that pqs and rhl systems are under the positive regulation of iqs system , which is tightly controlled by las system in p. aeruginosa <cit> .

it was found that there is a regulatory interaction between the different type qs systems, bdsf and ahl systems in b. cenocepacia <cit> . disruption of both bdsf synthase and receptor caused a substantial down-regulation of ahl signals production and ahl synthase gene expression in b. cenocepacia. given the fact that b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa share the same niche in cystic fibrosis patent, we then hypothesized that bdsf may play a regulatory role in the qs systems of p. aeruginosa. to determine the influences of bdsf on the qs systems of p. aeruginosa, the promoter-lacz fusion reporters were constructed to test the transcriptional expression of the regulator encoding gene of qs systems, i.e., lasr, pqsr and rhlr, in the absence and presence of bdsf. it was shown that exogenous addition of bdsf did not obviously affect the bacterial growth of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> . but the transcriptional expressions of lasr, pqsr and rhlr were repressed by treatment with bdsf in a dosage-dependent manner. addition of  <dig>  mm bdsf resulted in 38%, 35% and 48% reduction of the expression of lasr, pqsr and rhlr, respectively . to further investigate bdsf effect on the qs signal production of p. aeruginosa pa <dig>  production of 3-oxo-c12-hsl, pqs, and c4-hsl were tested in the absence and presence of bdsf. consistently, it was revealed that treatment with bdsf decreased the production of 3-oxo-c12-hsl, pqs and c4-hsl. as shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  addition of bdsf slightly decreased the production of 3-oxo-c12-hsl; while obviously inhibited the production of pqs and c4-hsl.

bdsf inhibits biofilm formation and virulence factor production of p. aeruginosa
it is well known that qs systems in p. aeruginosa modulate biofilm development, virulence factor production, and antimicrobial resistance  <cit> . linking with the finding of the inhibitory activity of bdsf on the qs systems, we then continued to determine the effect of bdsf on the biofilm formation and virulence factor production. as shown in figure 1a, exogenous addition of bdsf showed no obvious effect on the growth rate of p. aeruginosa pa14; while it remarkably decreased the biofilm formation. addition of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm bdsf reduced the biofilm formation by  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively .

p. aeruginosa usually utilizes exoenzyme to induce its pathogenesis  <cit> . to study the effect of bdsf on the production of exoproteases, which are important virulence factors of p. aeruginosa, bdsf was added to the growth medium of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> to test its effect on the secretion of proteases in the supernatants. results demonstrated that addition of bdsf inhibited the production of proteases, treatment with  <dig>  mm bdsf caused 30% reduction of the protease activity . the reduction was increased to 50% when  <dig>  mm bdsf was supplemented .

during the growth process, it was observed that bdsf inhibited the pigment accumulation of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> in the medium. p. aeruginosa produces a number of colored secondary metabolities; one of them is pyocyanin, which is a virulence factor  <cit> . to determine whether bdsf affects this virulence factor production, we measured pyocyanin accumulation in lb medium in the absence and presence of bdsf. as shown in figure 2c, addition of bdsf to the bacterial medium substantially reduced the production of pyocyanin. compared with the control, addition of  <dig>  and  <dig>  mm bdsf reduced the pyocyanin production by about 55% and 70%, respectively .

it was reported that dsf from s. maltophilia influences biofilm formation and polymyxin tolerance in p. aeruginosa through the sensor kinase pa <dig>  <cit> . to test whether pa <dig> is also the sensor of bdsf in p. aeruginosa, we then measured the protease activity and pyocyanin production of pa <dig> deletion mutant in the absence and presence of bdsf. however, our results showed that disruption of pa <dig> was not able to diminish the inhibitory effect of bdsf on the virulence factor production , suggesting that pa <dig> is not bdsf sensor kinase in p. aeruginosa.

exogenous addition of bdsf represses t3ss of p. aeruginosa
besides the qs systems, t3ss is also an important virulence determinant in p. aeruginosa. we firstly studied the effect of bdsf on t3ss of p. aeruginosa by using semi-quantitative rt-pcr. at the panel of 5 ng rna, results showed that addition of 100 μm bdsf to p. aeruginosa led to about 30% and 50% reduction in the signal density of exsc and exsa, which are the master regulators and positively control the expression of t3ss effectors genes in p. aeruginosa   <cit> . we then continued to measure the effect of bdsf on t3ss effectors. semi-quantitative rt-pcr analysis showed that treatment of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> with 100 μm bdsf caused about 39% and 17% reduction in transcripts levels of exos and exot at the panel of 50 ng rna, respectively . furthermore, western blotting assay was used to analyze the effect of bdsf on the secreted exos in supernatant. as shown in figure 3b, addition of 100 μm bdsf significantly reduced the amount of exos secreted in supernatant. when the final concentration of bdsf was increased to 500 μm, there was almost no detectable protein band of exos.

it was previously reported that a long-chain fatty acid  negatively modulates the expression of type iii exsceba operon in p. aeruginosa through the sensor psra  <cit> . to investigate whether bdsf shares the same signaling pathway as lcfa, we then further measured the effect of bdsf on t3ss in p. aeruginosa psra mutant. unexpectedly, deletion of psra displayed no effect on the inhibitory activity of bdsf on t3ss of p. aeruginosa, suggesting that bdsf possibly acts through another sensor different from that of the lcfa molecule .

bdsf inhibits t3ss of p. aeruginosa at its physiological relevant level
to determine whether bdsf affects t3ss gene expression in p. aeruginosa pa <dig> at its physiological relevant level, t3ss reporter pexsceba-lacz was used to test the t3ss gene expression at transcriptional level. b. cenocepacia cells were firstly grown in luria bertani  broth to an od <dig> of  <dig> ; and cultures were centrifuged to collect the supernatants, which were then filtered with  <dig>  μm syringe filter to remove the remaining cells. t3ss reporter strain was inoculated in the mixture of the supernatant of b. cenocepacia strains and lb broth at a ratio of 1: <dig> , with supplementation of 5 mm nitrilotiracetic acid . the bioassay result showed that the reporter strain displayed the greatest activity when it was cultured in the supernatant of bdsf-deficient mutant; while the supernatants of both the wild-type strain and over-expression complementary strain showed a remarkable inhibition on the t3ss gene expression at the time points examined .

many bdsf derivatives show inhibitory activity on t3ss of p. aeruginosa
it was revealed that structural features of fatty acids molecules may contribute to their biological activity  <cit> . to investigate whether bdsf derivatives share the inhibitory activity on t3ss of p. aeruginosa, and study the interaction between structural features and inhibitory activities of dsf-family molecules on t3ss, a series of bdsf derivatives with different structures  were applied to test their effect on the transcriptional expression of exsceba. the t3ss reporter strain, pexsceba-lacz, was refreshed and cultured in lb medium supplemented with 5 mm nta. bdsf and its derivatives were added at a final concentration of 10 μm. beta-gal activity was measured when the cultures reached an od <dig> of ~ <dig> . bioassays results revealed that α,β-unsaturated fatty acids with chain length more than twelve showed a significant inhibition on t3ss gene expression . moreover, it was indicated that configuration of bdsf derivatives contributes to their inhibitory activity; and cis-conformational fatty acids showed the strongest inhibitory activity, followed by their saturated isomers and trans-isomers . additionally, methyl group substitution and chain length could also affect the inhibitory activity .

bdsf attenuates the virulence of p. aeruginosa in both in vitro and in vivo assays
to determine the effect of bdsf on the virulence of p. aeruginosa pa <dig>  hela cells were firstly used as the in vitro model. results indicated that exogenous addition of bdsf significantly decreased the cytotoxicity of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> to hela cell. for 2 hours inoculation, the cytotoxicity was reduced by 41% and 75% with treatment of 5 μm and 25 μm bdsf, respectively . while for 5 hours inoculation, the reductions were 16% and 73%, respectively .

zebrafish was reported to be a good infection model for the test of t3ss-mediated virulence of p. aeruginosa <cit> . we then analyzed the effect of bdsf on the virulence of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> by infecting 6-month-old zebrafish , which was used as an infection model for b. cenocepacia <cit> . as shown in figure 6b, treatment with 100 μm bdsf significantly reduced the virulence of p. aeruginosa pa <dig> in zebrafish infection model. while 60% of the fish infected with p. aeruginosa pa <dig> died within 24 hours post-inoculation, the p. aeruginosa pa <dig> treated with bdsf was much less virulent and only 10% of the infected fish died .

discussion
this study demonstrated that besides acting as an intraspecies signal, bdsf can also mediate inter-species communication between b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa through inhibiting on qs systems and t3ss of p. aeruginosa. previous studies already found that there is a cross-talk between b. cepacia and p. aeruginosa, which is modulated by ahl qs signal from p. aeruginosa <cit> . it was reported that addition of cell-free exoproducts of pao <dig> to b. cepacia markedly enhanced its production of siderophore, lipase and protease; while addition of the supernatants of pao <dig> with attenuated production of ahl only had slight effect on the production of these virulence factors  <cit> . moreover, ahl from pao <dig> can also induce the biofilm formation of b. cenocepacia h <dig>  demonstrating that ahl signal plays an important role in the cross-talk between the two bacterial species, which usually share the same niche in cystic fibrosis patients. recently, the critical role of bdsf in the interspecies communication between b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa was also well established by the finding that bdsf modulates virulence, antibiotic resistance and persistence of p. aeruginosa in the cystic fibrosis airway  <cit> . our findings not only further confirmed the bdsf role in the complicated interaction between b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa, but also depicted how bdsf modulates the virulence of p. aeruginosa.

in p. aeruginosa, there are at least three qs systems, i.e., las, pqs and rhl, consisting of a hierarchy regulatory network. these qs systems regulate a broad range of genes important for the metabolism and virulence of p. aeruginosa. inhibition on these qs systems will finally attenuate the virulence factor production and virulence of p. aeruginosa. our study showed that addition of bdsf caused the decreased expression of lasr, which is the regulator of las system . consistently with the dominant role of las system over pqs and rhl systems, addition of bdsf also obviously inhibited pqs and rhl systems , suggesting that the inhibitory activity of bdsf on the qs systems of p. aeruginosa may initial from the inhibition on las system. recently, a dsf sensor, pa <dig> was identified in p. aeruginosa <cit> . to determine whether bdsf and dsf share the same sensor in p. aeruginosa, we then tested the bdsf effect on the virulence factor production mediated by qs systems in pa <dig> deletion mutant. however, it was revealed that pa <dig> is not bdsf sensor kinase, as disruption of pa <dig> could not diminish the inhibitory effect of bdsf on the virulence factor production . how does bdsf interfere with qs systems in p. aeruginosa still needs the further investigation.

t3ss is a key virulence determinant in a wide range of animal and plant pathogens and plays diverse roles in host-pathogen interactions. in p. aeruginosa, the transcriptional expression of effector genes of t3ss is coordinated by exsa encoded by the exsceba operon. our results showed that bdsf inhibited the expression of exsceba, which was confirmed by the results of semi-quantitative rt-pcr analysis and western blotting analysis . it was recently reported that psra serves as a sensor for a long chain fatty acid  to negatively modulate the expression of t3ss in p. aeruginosa <cit> . however, exogenous addition of bdsf still showed a similar inhibition pattern on psra deletion mutant, suggesting that bdsf may control t3ss through another sensor . moreover, the fact that t3ss is more sensitive to the exogenous addition of bdsf than the qs systems indicates that bdsf may interfere with qs systems and t3ss of p. aeruginosa through two independent signaling pathways. besides the inhibitory effect on the qs systems and t3ss, our microarray analysis data suggests that bdsf also affects many other genes in p. aeruginosa . it was found that treatment with 250 μm of bdsf up-regulated  <dig> genes more than 2-fold, which is  <dig> % to the total number of genes in genome. meanwhile, a total of  <dig> genes were down-regulated by more than 2-fold . these genes are classified into the functional groups of metabolism, secretion, motility and cell wall, transcription regulation, protection, enzymes and carbon compound catabolism , suggesting that bdsf plays a global effect on p. aeruginosa.

antibiotics have been used for a long time to treat the bacterial infection of p. aeruginosa, but resistance to antibiotics could be evolved during clinic treatment. interestingly, recently studies found that some compounds successfully interfered with n-acyl homoserine lactone of p. aeruginosa and suppressed bacterial qs in lungs, finally caused accelerated lung bacterial clearance and reduced the severity of lung pathology  <cit> . furthermore, some other compounds were identified to be the inhibitors of p. aeruginosa t3ss, treatment with these compounds caused the attenuated cytotoxicity of p. aeruginosa on mammalian cells  <cit> . combined with our findings, it is suggested that interferences on the qs systems and t3ss can be specifically utilized as favorable therapeutic methods on p. aeruginosa infection  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
bdsf mediates the cross-talk between b. cenocepacia and p. aeruginosa by interfering with qs systems and t3ss of p. aeruginosa. biological functions such as biofilm formation and virulence factor production of p. aeruginosa were inhibited by exogenous addition of bdsf. furthermore, bdsf and some of its derivatives are also able to inhibit t3ss of p. aeruginosa at a micromolar level. treatment with bdsf obviously reduced the virulence of p. aeruginosa in both in vitro and in vivo models.

