BACKGROUND
macrophages  represent the most abundant immune cell population in the tumor microenvironment and play a key role in tumor development  <cit> . high levels of mΦ infiltration into tumor tissues are associated with a poor prognosis; this is particularly true for hepatocellular carcinoma   <cit> . although a decreased number of macrophages correlates with a reduction in tumor growth in several tumor graft models  <cit> , there are some exceptions. for example, depletion of kupffer cells worsens the prognosis of tumor-bearing mice in peritoneal xenograft models because the cancer cells are able to metastasize to the liver; thus, the mice die from the increased tumor burden in the absence of mΦ  <cit> . these contradictory reports highlight the fact that little is known about the exact role of tumor-associated macrophages  during tumor development.

mΦ are a highly heterogeneous cell population. this is because their phenotypes and diverse functions are shaped by the tumor microenvironment  <cit> . mΦ can be classified on the basis of two distinct activation states. classically activated mΦ , induced by ifn-γ or microbial products, produce high levels of proinflammatory cytokines , express major histocompatibility complex  molecules and inos, and act as the primary source of anti-tumor immune cells  <cit> . in contrast, alternatively activated mΦ , polarized by il- <dig> or/and il- <dig>  secrete anti-inflammatory cytokines and are characterized by increased arginase- <dig> activity and the expression of ym- <dig>  mgl, fizz <dig>  and msf  <cit> . functionally, m <dig> mΦ are thought to suppress inflammation and to facilitate wound healing by promoting angiogenesis and tissue remodeling  <cit> . a recent study shows that mouse mammary tumors contain phenotypically and functionally distinct tam subsets, and that these subsets promote tumor growth via different mechanisms  <cit> . hla-drhigh and hla-drlow il-10+ monocytes/mΦ have also been identified in different regions within tumor tissues, where they mediate t cell anergy through pd-l <dig> and increase tumor cell migration and invasion  <cit> . however, the precise role played by these heterogeneous tam subsets in tumor progression has rarely been reported.

clodronate -encapsulated liposomes cause irreversible damage to mΦ in vivo, thereby efficiently decreasing the number of infiltrating mΦ  <cit> . strategies incorporating liposome-mediated mΦ depletion have been successfully used in murine tumor models of teratocarcinoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, lung cancer, and melanoma  <cit> .

in the present study, cl2mdp-liposomes were used to partially deplete tams in a murine transplanted hepatoma model to investigate the exact role played by tams during tumor development and the mechanisms underlying tam-mediated tumor progression.

RESULTS
partial depletion of mΦ using cl2mdp-liposomes
to examine the extent of in vivo monocyte/mΦ depletion by cl2mdp, naïve mice were intravenously  injected with cl2mdp-encapsulating liposomes  <dig> days before tumor inoculation. as shown in figure 1a, the proportion of monocytes/mΦ in the peripheral blood was approximately 5-7% before cl2mdp-liposome administration. this proportion decreased markedly   <dig> h after the injection of cl2mdp-liposomes, before recovering   <dig> h later. the pbs liposome control did not affect the number of monocytes/mΦ in vivo. we next examined the in vivo effects of cl2mdp-liposomes on tam survival on day  <dig> post-tumor inoculation. immunohistochemical staining with a rat anti-mΦ monoclonal antibody , anti-f4/ <dig>  and anti-cd <dig> showed that the number of mΦ in tumor tissues was significantly lower than that in control tissues . this suggests that cl2mdp-liposomes efficiently deplete the number of tams in tumor-bearing mice. in addition, we also assessed the survival of tumor cells treated with cl2mdp-liposomes in vitro. the results showed that survival was not significantly affected . thus, it appears that cl2mdp-liposome treatment may partially deplete mΦ without directly affecting the growth of tumor cells in vivo.

partial depletion of mΦ inhibits tumor progression in tumor-bearing mice
to determine the effect of tams on tumor growth in hepa1- <dig> tumor-bearing mice, mΦ were depleted using cl2mdp-liposomes . as shown in figure 2b, the rate of subcutaneous  tumor growth in the cl2mdp-liposome-treated group was significantly slower than that in the controls . a similar experiment was also conducted in a murine orthotopic tumor model, in which tumors were induced by implanting small tumor masses into the mouse livers . the results showed that macrophage depletion mediated by cl2mdp-liposome treatment partially inhibited tumor growth . taken together, these results suggest that cl2mdp-liposome-mediated inhibition of tumor growth is positively correlated with a decrease in tam infiltration.

tumor progression correlates with the level of tam infiltration
to further examine the role of tams in tumor progression in murine models, several tam-associated suppressive factors were analyzed in situ. figure 3a shows that expression of il- <dig>  tgf-β, mmp- <dig> and vegf in the tumor microenvironment was markedly reduced in the cl2mdp liposome-treated group compared with that in the control vehicle-treated group. this result suggests that increased tam infiltration contributes to the formation of a suppressive tumor microenvironment and the promotion of tumor growth. this conclusion was verified by examining cd <dig> expression . taken together, these data show that tumor infiltration by tams plays an important role in tumor progression.

tams in tumor-bearing mice are a heterogeneous population
to further elucidate the mechanisms underlying tam-mediated tumor growth, tams were isolated and phenotypically characterized. single cells were recovered from tumor tissues at the indicated time points. two heterogeneous tam populations were identified based on their expression of mhc class ii molecules, namely mhc class iilow and mhc class iihi . strikingly, the mhc class iilow tam subset expressed high levels of ym <dig>  mgl1/ <dig>  fizz <dig>  arg- <dig>  msf, il- <dig>  tgf-β, mmp- <dig>  vegf, and ptge <dig>  whereas the mhc class iihi tam subset expressed high levels of il-1β, il- <dig>  il- <dig>  and inos . next, the differential expression of il- <dig> between both tam populations was examined in co-staining experiments. the proportion of il-10-expressing mΦ in the mhc class iilow tam subset was approximately 42% on day  <dig> post-tumor inoculation, whereas the proportion in the mhc class iihi tam subset was only around 18% . we next examined changes in the levels of the two subsets within tumor tissues during tumor progression. the proportion of mhc class iihi tams was higher than that of mhc class iilow tams during the early stages of tumor development . however, both the proportion and number of mhc class iilow tams markedly increased as the tumor progressed , indicating that infiltrating mΦ preferentially differentiate into mhc class iilow tams as tumors continue to grow.

to determine the effects of cl2mdp-liposomes on the two tam subsets, we examined expression of mhc class ii in both untreated and tam-depleted tumors using immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. as shown in figure 4f, there were differences in the expression of mhc class ii between untreated and tam-depleted tumors. although the total number of tams expressing mhc class ii decreased after treatment with cl2mdp-liposomes, the number of mhc class iilow tams in the treated tumors was significantly lower than in untreated tumors. in contrast, the number of mhc class iihi tams was not significantly affected by treatment with cl2mdp-liposomes . taken in the context of the data presented in figure 3a, these results suggest that after depleting the majority of tams, the remaining mΦ undergo transition from mhc class iihi to mhc class iilow at an accelerated rate, resulting in delayed tumor growth.

taken together, these data demonstrate that two tam subsets exist within the tumor tissues and that transition between the two sub-populations is closely related to tumor progression, during which the predominant mhc class iihi subset may shift to an mhc class iilow subset.

mhc class iilow tams promote tumor growth and mhc class iihi tams promote tumor inhibition
to further characterize the effects of the two heterogeneous tam subsets on tumor progression, the mhc class iihi and mhc class iilow cells were sorted and adoptively transferred to tumor-bearing mice  <dig> days after tumor inoculation. as expected, compared with the control group , tumor progression was significantly induced in mice treated with mhc class iilow tams, but markedly inhibited in mice treated with mhc class iihi tams . these results were verified by measuring tumor weight and size . we then analyzed the expression of mhc class ii molecules within the tumor tissues using immunohistochemistry. as shown in figure 5c, the number of mhc class ii-expressing cells in the tumors from the control mice and from mice treated with mhc class iilow was significantly lower than that in the tumors from mice treated with mhc class iihi tams. these results suggest that tumor progression is positively correlated with the number of infiltrating mhc class iilow tams, but negatively correlated with the number of infiltrating mhc class iihi tams.

mhc class iilow tams inhibit t cell activation and promote invasion of tumor cells by secreting immunosuppressive factors
since t cell-mediated cellular immunity plays a critical role in the regulation of tumor progression, we examined the contribution made by each of the tam subsets to the activation of t cells. a t cell polyclonal activation assay was performed using the tam subsets. sorted mhc class iihi and mhc class iilow tams were co-cultured with allogeneic splenocytes in the presence of an anti-cd <dig> antibody. t cell proliferation was measured using the brdu assay. mhc class iihi tams promoted anti-cd3-induced t cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner, whereas mhc class iilow tams suppressed anti-cd3-induced t cell proliferation. the increasing number of mhc class iilow tams correlated with a decrease in t cell proliferation . mhc class iilow tams express high levels of il- <dig> and tgf-β, which may contribute to t cell inactivation. this was examined using antibodies to block il- <dig> and tgf-β. as shown in figure 6b, t cell activation was significantly inhibited in the absence of the blocking antibodies. this was reversed by neutralizing il- <dig> and tgf-β. these results were further verified by measuring the levels of il- <dig> and tgf-β in the supernatants of tams co-cultured with splenocytes . the results suggest that mhc class iilow tams contribute to tumor progression via il-10/tgf-β-mediated suppression of t cell activation.

we also examined the expression of mmp- <dig> and vegf in both subsets using rt-pcr and western blotting. the expression of mmp- <dig> and vegf in mhc class iihi tams was lower than that in mhc class iilow tams . to assess the effects of the different tam subsets on the invasiveness and metastasis of mouse hepatoma cells, an invasion assay was performed using hcc cells. the invasiveness of cancer cells was markedly enhanced by mhc class iilow tams . this result suggests that mhc class iilow tams promote cell invasion to a greater extent than mhc class iihi tams.

discussion
this study showed that partial depletion of mΦ by cl2mdp-liposomes efficiently modulates the tumor microenvironment and tumor progression in the hepa1- <dig> cell-transplanted tumor model. furthermore, heterogeneous tam populations were found to coexist in the tumor microenvironment. mhc class iihi tams appeared during the early phases of tumor development and showed tumor suppressive activity. in contrast, mhc class iilow tams became more dominant as the tumors progressed, and were alternatively  activated and promoted tumor growth.

cl2mdp is a bisphosphonate developed to treat osteolytic bone disease  <cit> . the free drug does not easily enter cells and has an extremely short half-life in the circulation and body fluids. however, it is ingested specifically by mΦ and has a longer half-life when encapsulated in liposomes  <cit> . mΦ are irreversibly damaged owing to intracellular accumulation of the drug and undergo apoptosis because of the formation of toxic atp analogues  <cit> . this strategy efficiently reduces the number of mΦ in vivo and has been used successfully to investigate the role of mΦ in animals  <cit> . the results of the present study show that treatment with cl2mdp-liposomes efficiently and specifically reduces the number of tams in a murine transplanted hepatoma model. although tumor regression following tam depletion has been reported in a human hepatoma xenograft nude mouse model treated with sorafenib, treatment with cl2mdp-liposomes alone has no inhibitory effect on tumor growth in tumor-bearing nude mice  <cit> . this disparity can be explained by the absence of t cell-mediated cellular immune responses in nude mice. another possible explanation is that the effects of cl2mdp-liposome treatment are limited in nude mice. that said, the role of mΦ in tumor-bearing mice and rats is still extensively studied using cl2mdp-liposomes.

the choice of administration route used for liposome treatment enables some degree of selectivity with respect to the mΦ populations targeted  <cit> . injection of cl2mdp-liposomes via the i.v. route depletes mΦ in liver, spleen, bone, and circulation, whereas s.c. injection only affects mΦ in the lymph nodes  <cit> . a recent study shows that intratumoral  injection of cl2mdp-liposomes into tumor-bearing mice significantly delays tumor growth  <cit> . although the total number of mΦ affected by i.p. injection is higher than that affected by other routes , it necessitates the use of a relatively large volume of cl2mdp-liposomes  <cit> . thus, in the present study, we injected cl2mdp-liposomes via the i.v. route for orthotopically implanted tumors, and via both i.v. and i.t. routes in the s.c.-implanted tumor model, to maximally reduce the number of tams infiltrating the tumors and to minimize any possible toxic side effects mediated by the cl2mdp-liposomes. we did not examine the effect of i.v. or i.t. injection of cl2mdp-liposomes on s.c.-transplanted tumors, as the combination of i.v. injection plus i.t. administration was thought to be the effective procedure for depleting tams in our models. however, the choice of injection route needs to be validated by additional investigations.

unlike lymphocytes, mΦ do not express specific markers, although f4/ <dig>  cd <dig>  and cd11b are commonly used to label these cells. a rat monoclonal anti-mΦ antibody  was developed against isolated mouse mΦ and was used to label mΦ in some studies  <cit> . a recent study shows that mΦ can be classified into cd11b+ly6chi and cd11b+ly6clow populations based on their expression of cd11b and ly6c  <cit> . differences in the expression levels of these biomarkers can be used to examine mΦ subpopulations. in the present study, histological analyses showed that tams could be exclusively labeled using antibodies to f4/ <dig>  cd <dig>  and with the rat monoclonal anti-mΦ antibody , although there were quantitative differences in the expression levels of these biomarkers.

mΦ within tumors are polarized toward the m <dig> phenotype by tumor-derived factors, which cause them to promote tumor progression  <cit> . il- <dig> and tgf-β play an important role in promoting tumor growth. il- <dig> is likely to induce tam-derived ccl <dig>  which is a chemoattractant for naive t cells, followed by t cell anergy via altered stat <dig> expression  <cit> . the results of the present study showed that mhc class iilow tams expressed high levels of il- <dig> and tgf-β. the role of these cytokines was verified, at least in part, by blocking cytokine-mediated t cell suppression in vitro using anti-il- <dig> and anti-tgf-β mabs. interestingly, the levels of il- <dig> and tgf-β, which are expressed by mhc class iilow tams in the ts/a tumor model, are low  <cit> . this may be explained by disparities in the experimental models; for example, the constitution of the tumor microenvironment may be different. there may also be a more complex mechanism that mediates suppression of t-cell polyclonal activation by mhc class iilow tams in the ts/a tumor model. however, mhc class iilow tams in the hepa1- <dig> tumor model are more likely to mediate suppression of t-cell activation via production of il- <dig> and tgf-β. although the exact mechanisms underlying mhc class iilow tam-mediated suppression of tumor growth in vivo are yet to be elucidated, our observations provide an insight into how tams subvert anti-tumor adaptive responses and redirect t cell activity to favor tumor growth. tam-mediated t cell anergy may play an important role in tumor promotion. our investigation also shows that mhc class iilow tams promote invasion of hepa1- <dig> cells via the production of angiogenesis-associated molecules such as vegf and mmp- <dig>  this suggests that mhc class iilow tam subset-mediated angiogenesis could be another important cause of runway tumor progression. thus, the mechanisms underlying tam subset-mediated tumor growth are intricate and need further study.

tams are a heterogeneous population that may have both inhibitory and stimulatory influences on malignant growth  <cit> . the transition between complex phenotypes depends on the tumor milieu  <cit> . for example, studies in patients with hcc reveal that two distinct populations  of monocytes/mΦ exist within different regions of the tumor, which modulate t cell activation via different mechanisms  <cit> . although the mhc class iihi tam and mhc class iilow tam populations in the ts/a tumor model mediate tumor progression through different mechanisms, dynamic analysis of tam subsets shows that there is a balance between these populations  <cit> . this is consistent with our observation that a shift from mhc class iihi to mhc class iilow in the hepa1- <dig> tumor model correlates with tumor progression. infiltrating monocytes are more likely to differentiate into mhc class iihi tams during the early phase of tumor development, whereas mhc class iilow tams become gradually more prominent as the tumors progress. however, this study also showed that mhc class iilow tams promoted tumor progression, whereas mhc class iihi tams had a suppressive effect on tumor growth. further investigation into the effects of the tumor microenvironment on the balance between tam subsets may help to explain this discrepancy.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that tam depletion causes tumor regression in a murine hepatoma xenograft mouse model. heterogeneous tam subsets co-exist within the tumor microenvironment, and there is a transition from mhc class iihi to mhc class iilow tams that correlates with tumor progression. the mhc class iihi tam population appears during the early phase of tumor development and contributes to tumor suppression, whereas the mhc class iilow population becomes dominant as the tumor progresses. mhc class iilow tams are alternatively activated and promote tumor growth. therefore, targeting the transition of mΦ may be a novel strategy for drug development and immunotherapy.

