BACKGROUND
gilles de la tourette syndrome  is a chronic motor and vocal tic disorder of unknown origin. volumetric mri studies demonstrated volume changes in brain regions associated to cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuits 
 <cit> , but there is only a limited number of studies available using diffusion tensor imaging , a sensitive method to detect microstructural changes in white matter. dti provides information about the directional organization of brain tissue by measuring water diffusion. to characterize the degree of anisotropy and structural organization in the brain the fractional anisotropy  and the apparent diffusion coefficient  can be used. in most of the dti studies that have been performed so far in ts, only children have been included. findings in children are consistent with the hypothesis of dysfunctional cstc demonstrating reduced fa in the corpus callosum 
 <cit> , increased thickness and tract density in the prefrontal region
 <cit> , increased parallel and mean diffusivity in the putamen bilaterally
 <cit> , increased perpendicular diffusivity in the right thalamus
 <cit> , reduced anisotropy in the bilateral thalamus
 <cit> , decreased fa in the left globus pallidus
 <cit> , and increased adc in the bilateral caudate nucleus
 <cit> . furthermore reduced fa and reduced parallel diffusivity  was found in the caudate nucleus bilaterally
 <cit> , decreased connectivity between the caudate nucleus and the anterior dorsolateral frontal cortex 
 <cit>  and increased adc in the corticostriatal pathway )
 <cit> .

in addition, there are six studies available using dti to investigate adult ts patients compared to normal controls. it can be assumed that results in children cannot be compared directly to data obtained in adult patients: on the one hand, adults with persistent tics probably constitute a subgroup of patients with ts; on the other hand, microstructural alterations that can be detected by dti – as well as functional changes identified by bold functional mri - in adults are likely to be caused not only by the underlying pathophysiology, but also by secondary compensatory neuroplastic processes. cavanna et al.
 <cit>  found reduced fa in the cc in an adult monocygotic twin with ts “only”  compared to his unaffected co-twin. bäumer et al.
 <cit>  used a combined approach with transcranial magnetic stimulation  and dti in  <dig> unmedicated adult patients with ts “only” and found an abnormal interhemispheric connectivity in ts compared to normal controls demonstrating not only weaker left-to-right  interhemispheric inhibitions in ts patients, but also reduced left-to-right interhemispheric inhibitions in ts compared to normal controls. in a study by thomalla et al.
 <cit>  a bilateral fa increase in the white matter was demonstrated in  <dig> unmedicated adults with ts “only” in the regions underlying the post- and precentral gyrus, below the left supplementary motor area and in the right thalamus . using probalistic fiber tracking, in addition, structural alterations in somatosensory pathways could be demonstrated
 <cit> . neuner et al.
 <cit>  investigated the microstructure of gray matter nuclei in  <dig> adult patients with ts “only” and found no differences in the fa and the diffusion parameters between patients and normal controls in the basal ganglia and thalamus, but a positive correlation between diffusion indices and tic severity in the left nucleus accumbens, the right amygdale, the globus pallidus bilaterally, and the left putamen. in another study, the same group found decreased fa and increased radial diffusivity in the corticospinal tract, the cc and long association fibre tracts when using tbss in  <dig> adults with ts
 <cit> . using cortical thickness estimation and voxel-based analysis of t1- and diffusion-weighted structural mri, draganski et al.
 <cit>  examined  <dig> adults with ts and found grey matter volume/cortical thickness decrease in prefrontal and limbic structures bilaterally. cortical thinning extended into the limbic mesial temporal lobe. increase in somatosensory cortex depended on the intensity of premonitory urges, while decrease in prefrontal cortical thickness correlated negatively with tic severity. in addition, white matter abnormalities were detected including changes in fibre integrity within the cc and in subcortical tracts corresponding to frontal and parietal portions of superior longitudinal fascicle.

taking available results together obtained from dti neuroimaging studies in ts patients, it can be concluded that in both children and adults microstructural changes can be detected in the cc, different parts of the basal ganglia, thalamus, frontal regions, and the connectivity in cortico -striatal pathways. in adults, in addition, fa and adc were altered in the limbic system, somatosensory pathways, and the corticospinal tract. thus, from recent studies it is suggested that these latter brain regions are involved in compensatory processes related to age-dependent tic reduction and voluntary tic suppression.

this study was initiated to further investigate microstructural changes using dti in adult, unmedicated patients with ts “only”. in a recent volumetric mri study using magnetization transfer imaging  and voxel-based morphometry  in the same group of patients, we were able to detect abnormalities predominantly in the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex, and to a lesser degree in the caudate nucleus and the cc
 <cit> . using dti, our hypothesis was to detect alterations in the same brain regions.

RESULTS
group comparisons
fractional anisotropy 
compared to normal controls, patients with ts showed significantly reduced regional fa in the white matter of the frontal, parietal, occipital, and limbic lobe. in particular, fa was reduced bilaterally in the medial frontal gyrus, the pars opercularis of the left inferior frontal gyrus , the middle occipital gyrus, the right cingulate gyrus, and the medial premotor cortex underlying ba  <dig>  . no regions displayed significant regional increases in fa in ts patients compared to control subjects.

apparent diffusion coefficient 
patients displayed increased mean diffusivity in the white matter of the frontal and parietal lobe. the adc was significantly increased in the left cingulate gyrus , prefrontal areas corresponding to ba  <dig> and  <dig> , and the left precentral gyrus below ba  <dig> . in addition, there was a cluster of increased diffusivity in the left putamen with a local maximum in the claustrum . no significant decreases in adc maps were found in ts patients compared to controls .

thus, both fa decrease and adc increase could be detected in the right medial frontal gyrus, the left inferior frontal gyrus, the left cingulate gyrus and the left claustrum.

correlations between fa and adc maps with tic severity
tic severity  was negatively correlated with fa values in the frontal, occipital and limbic lobe: the left superior frontal gyrus , the medial frontal gyrus bilaterally , the cingulate gyrus bilaterally, and the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the right thalamus. a positive correlation between tic severity and fa was found in the body of the cc, the left thalamus, the right superior temporal gyrus and the left parahippocampal gyrus .

when correlating regional adc values and tic severity , we found a positive correlation in the left cingulate gyrus, the putamen bilaterally, the medial frontal gyrus bilaterally, the left precentral gyrus  as well as the ventral anterior nucleus of the left thalamus .

discussion
using dti, we found microstructural changes in the white matter of prefrontal areas, the pars opercularis of the left inferior frontal gyrus, the cingulate gyrus, the medial premotor cortex, the left precentral gyrus, and the left putamen. for the following brain regions there was a positive correlation between tic severity and fa and adc values, respectively: body of the cc, left thalamus, right superior temporal gyrus, putamen bilaterally, left parahippocampal gyrus, left cingulate gyrus, medial frontal gyrus bilaterally, and left precentral gyrus . in addition, we found a negative correlation between fa values and tic severity in the left superior frontal gyrus, medial frontal gyrus bilaterally, cingulate gyrus bilaterally, and the ventral posterior lateral nucleus of the right thalamus. thus, most of those brain regions that showed abnormalities in structural organization, also demonstrated a correlation with tic severity. furthermore, these results obtained by dti are in broad agreement with our prior findings in the same group of patients using vbm and mti
 <cit> . in addition, most of these alterations have been described before in other dti studies investigating adults with ts including the cc
 <cit> , precentral gyrus
 <cit> , thalamus
 <cit> , left putamen
 <cit> , and limbic regions
 <cit> .

comparable to our recent vbm/mti study in the same group of unmedicated adult patients with ts “only”, we detected the most prominent changes in different frontal areas, particularly in medial and inferior prefrontal areas  including the left pars opercularis  and the left precentral gyrus . these results are in line with several other studies using both functional and structural neuroimaging techniques
 <cit> . since our group of patients comprised only patients with ts “only” without comorbidities, alterations in these frontal regions in ts patients have to be related to the presence of tics  and obsessive compulsive disorder ). this assumption is corroborated by the fact that we found not only reduced regional fa and increased mean diffusivity in medial and inferior prefrontal areas, respectively, but also a positive correlation between tic severity and regional adc values in the medial frontal gyrus bilaterally and the left precentral gyrus. since, we detected, in addition, a negative correlation between fa values and tic severity in prefrontal areas bilaterally, it can be hypothesized that - at least in adult patients - these frontal regions are involved not only in tic generation but also in tic suppression or compensatory adaptation mechanisms resulting in tic decline with increasing age as suggested earlier
 <cit> .

our data further corroborate an involvement of the cc in the generation of tics in adult ts patients as suggested earlier: in both children and adults, larger cc volumes
 <cit>  and reduced fa
 <cit>  have been reported as well as an altered structure-function relationship in the motor cc in adults with ts “only” using a combined tms-dti approach
 <cit> . since we found a positive correlation between tic severity and fa values in the cc, it can be speculated that cc alterations are correlated to neurodevelopmental abnormalities - resulting in reduced transcallosal inhibition of cortical neurons - rather than adaptive mechanisms to compensate for impairments in other brain regions
 <cit> . this interpretation is further supported by the fact that even in children a negative correlation has been reported between tic severity and cc volumes
 <cit> .

comparable to our recent study in the same group of patients
 <cit> , we detected abnormalities in the cingulate gyrus. using vbm and mti we found reduced gray and white matter cingulate volumes
 <cit> ; in this study using dti reduced regional fa and increased mean diffusivity were obvious. we hypothesize that these changes represent secondary compensatory mechanisms, because  in both of our studies using three different mri techniques we found a negative correlation between tic severity and changes in the cingulate gyrus,  in functional studies it could be demonstrated that the cingulate is activated during tic inhibition
 <cit> ,  the cingulate gyrus has numerous interconnections with the prefrontal and orbitofrontal cortex, motor systems, and the striatum – regions that have been suggested to be involved in tic generation
 <cit> , and  there is evidence for an involvement of the cingulate gyrus in the initiation and motivation of goal-directed behaviours
 <cit> . furthermore, dti studies in children failed to detect abnormalities in the cingulate gyrus.

in accordance with other dti studies in adult ts patients, in addition, we found alteration in the thalamus
 <cit>  and the putamen
 <cit> . these brain regions have been extensively described in association with ts pathophysiology in adults and children not only when using dti
 <cit> , but also when using other mri techniques such as vbm
 <cit> . accordingly, the thalamus is the most often used target for deep brain stimulation in adult patients suffering from severe treatment resistant ts
 <cit> . although some studies in both children with ts “only” 
 <cit>  and neuroleptic-naïve adults with ts or chronic motor tics with and without comorbidities 
 <cit>  failed to detect changes in the basal ganglia and thalamus, today there is little doubt that these brain regions are involved in the pathophysiology of tics.

as described before by thomalla et al.
 <cit>  in a group of  <dig> unmedicated adults with ts “only” and draganski et al.
 <cit>  , we were able to detect altered fa in the precentral gyrus, a brain region that can be assigned to networks involved in sensory-motor processing
 <cit> . however, in contrast to our results and those from other studies
 <cit> , thomalla et al.
 <cit>  and draganski et al.
 <cit>  found an increased  fa with adc decrease in the somatosensory cortex region bilaterally and in other brain areas such as the thalamus
 <cit> . these conflicting results could either be related to methodological differences in the different cross-sectional studies or be caused by different groups of patients . this problem can only be solved by follow-up studies investigating whether the fa changes over time and may reflect compensatory structural changes in patients with ts. in addition, until today it is unclear which histological changes correlate to these alterations detected by dti. the involvement of the precentral gyrus in the pathophysiology of tics is further supported by the fact that we found not only a reduced fa, but also a positive correlation between the adc value in the left precentral gyrus  and the tic severity.

our finding of a reduced regional fa in the left pars opercularis should receive special attention. the inferior frontal gyrus consists of three distinct subparts: the pars opercularis, the pars triangularis, and the pars orbicularis. there is substantial evidence that the pars opercularis is not only involved in language and music , but also in motor processing. in particular, the pars opercularis seems to be a key component in the human mirror neuron system that is activated during action observation and imitation
 <cit> . in accordance with this assumption, a significant volume reduction of the pars opercularis could be demonstrated in patients suffering from high-functioning autism spectrum disorders suggesting that this brain region also plays an important role in social function
 <cit> . in addition, the role of the pars opercularis in inhibitory control has been demonstrated using repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation 
 <cit> . in accordance with these results, structural abnormalities in the pars opercularis have been demonstrated in children suffering from adhd suggesting that developmental abnormalities of the pars opercularis lead to inhibition difficulties
 <cit> . in ts, therefore, it is conceivable that the pars opercularis is involved in inhibitory control mechanisms and in particular in the generation of complex motor and vocal tics such as copro- and echophenomena. accordingly, it has been suggested that echophenomena might be caused by a dysfunction of the mirror neuron system
 <cit> .

it should be mentioned that studies using newer techniques  resulted in additional findings demonstrating alterations in somatosensory pathways
 <cit> , long association fibre tracts such as the inferior fronto-occipitalis fascicle, the superior longitudinal fascicle and the fascicle uncinatus
 <cit>  and cortical thinning in prefrontal and limbic structures
 <cit> , respectively.

the following limitations of the study have to be addressed: firstly, we investigated a carefully selected group of patients including only adult, unmedicated male with ts “only” without comorbidities. since influences from sex, age, medication, and comorbidities can be excluded, it can be concluded that microstructural abnormalities detected in this study are indeed related to the tic disorder. since the majority of adult patients with ts, however, suffer not only from tics, but also from one or more psychiatric comorbidities
 <cit> , it has to remain open whether our group of patients is representative for adults with ts. it is still matter of discussion whether ts is a unitary or heterogeneous condition encompassing different phenotypes 
 <cit> . secondly, comparable to most other neuroimaging studies in ts, our sample size was relatively small. however, using dti a sample size of at least  <dig> subjects is regarded as suitable for reliable analyses. in all but one dti study performed so far in adults with ts a smaller number of patients has been included. thirdly, we demonstrated uncorrected data. however, our results were supported by recent findings in the same group of patients using both vbm and mti
 <cit> . fourthly, in this study spm <dig> was used to analyze the data. one might argue that a better segmentation and registration tool might provide more reliable findings. to address the issue of compensatory mechanisms in ts in more detail a prospective follow-up study is necessary.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we used dti to investigate microstructural integrity of white matter pathways and brain tissue in a relatively large group of unmedicated, adult patients with ts “only”. our results are in line with recent findings in a small number of studies suggesting that tics are caused by alterations in prefrontal areas, thalamus and putamen. it can be hypothesized that additional changes in the cingulate gyrus are related to secondary compensatory mechanisms.

