BACKGROUND
mating preferences are widespread and can function to confer indirect, genetic benefits for offspring  <cit> . direct evidence for genetic benefits from mate choice come from studies that compare the fitness of offspring from females  mated with preferred  versus non-preferred  males  <cit> . for example, it has been shown that peahens  had increased reproductive success when mated with p males  <cit> . similarly, in house mice  offspring sired by females’ p males had higher survival compared to offspring sired by np males  <cit> . however, it remains unclear how mate choice enhances offspring survival. since there is much genetic variation influencing immune resistance to infection  <cit> , it has been suggested that mate choice may provide genetic benefits that enhance offspring resistance against infectious diseases   <cit> .

since hamilton and zuk’s  <cit>  classic paper, numerous studies have found that males with more parasites or weak immune responses have reduced secondary sexual traits compared to other males  <cit> , and that females show preference for healthy versus experimentally parasitized males. for example, in house mice, males produce scent marks, which are attractive to females, and females are able to recognize and show preferences for the scent of healthy, uninfected versus experimentally infected males  <cit> . such preferences may provide direct benefits  or indirect, genetic benefits  <cit> . for example, a study with stickleback fish  found that offspring sired by more brightly coloured males were less likely to become infected after an experimental exposure to cestode larvae compared to duller males   <cit> . yet, there have been no studies to our knowledge that have experimentally tested whether female choice enhances offspring resistance to infectious diseases within a single study.

we conducted a study with wild-derived house mice  to test whether female preferences enhance offspring’s resistance to an experimental challenge of salmonella enterica . several genes control resistance to salmonella in mice, which include mhc   <cit> , slc11a <dig> , and toll-like receptor  <dig>   <cit> . after testing females’ preferences for individual males in dyadic ‘partner preference’ experiments, we mated females to either their p or np males. the offspring of these pairings were experimentally infected with a mouse pathogen  to assess their ability to resolve infection over three weeks . we expected that offspring sired by p males would have lower pathogen burdens  and enhanced survival compared to those sired by np males. in addition, females can potentially enhance offspring survival due to differential maternal investment into offspring sired by high quality males   <cit> . alternatively, it has been suggested that females should invest more into offspring when mating with low-quality males and enhance offspring body mass and survival   <cit> . therefore, we also tested whether offspring from p sires had greater body mass compared to those from np males.

RESULTS
reproduction
after the experimental matings with p or np males, most females  produced litters and females mated with a p male were more likely to produce a litter  compared to females mated with np males , though this difference was not significant . females mated with p males produced significantly larger litters  than those mated with np males  . in addition, heavier females produced larger litters than lighter dams . the interaction between sire treatment  and dam body mass was non-significant . no evidence was found to suggest that mean offspring body mass was affected by pairing dams with p or np males  or female body mass , and the two-way interaction between partner preference and female weight was non-significant . pairing females with p males resulted in more male offspring compared to np pairings and heavier females produced more sons compared to lighter females .

offspring survival
we challenged offspring with an experimental salmonella infection and we found that 73%  of offspring survived the infection until euthanasia, and offspring sired by p males had higher survival than those of np males . survival of offspring sired by np, but not by p males decreased over time, as shown by the significant interaction between the partner preference treatment  and week . female offspring  had better survival than male offspring  regardless of the partner preference . the main effects of body mass, week, and all remaining two-way interactions did not affect survival . body mass of animals of p and np sires used in the infection experiment did not differ significantly  or across weeks , yet males were heavier than females ; females:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  g; f <dig>  =  <dig> ; p <  <dig> ). all two-way interactions were non-significant .

p
**: p <  <dig> .

x: interaction between two variables.

offspring pathogen clearance
the overall pathogen load was unrelated to partner preference , duration of infection , or sex . all two-way interactions remained non-significant .

discussion
we found that females experimentally mated to p males produced significantly more offspring  than those mated to np males, which confirms that non-random partner preferences confer fitness benefits  <cit> . furthermore, we found that offspring sired by p males were significantly more likely to survive the experimental salmonella infection than those sired by np males. the difference in survival between offspring from p and np sires emerged three weeks after inoculation, which corresponds precisely to the peak of salmonella growth in the spleen of house mice  <cit> . we are confident that the differences in survival was due to the experimental infection because sham-infected mice never die in our experience  <cit> , and the other offspring from our experimental matings, which were not experimentally infected , all survived the three-week experiment. our findings are consistent with a previous study that found outbred house mice are more likely to survive salmonella infection than inbred mice  <cit> . thus, our results support the hypothesis that female preferences can enhance offspring ability to survive infection.

the enhanced survival of offspring from p versus np sires could have been due to differences in their ability to control pathogen burden  or their capacity to cope with or limit the damage caused by a given pathogen burden   <cit> , or both. we found that pathogen loads did not differ between treatments, which suggest that female preferences enhanced tolerance to infection rather than immune resistance per se. however, as we were unable to assess the pathogen loads of the mice that died during the experiment, we cannot rule out possible benefits from controlling pathogen growth. previous sexual selection  studies have mainly measured immune responses to novel antigens  or observed parasite burdens, but our findings emphasize the importance of using functional challenges with real pathogens and measuring hosts’ ability to cope with infection   <cit> . otherwise, measuring only resistance to infection will fail to detect many important aspects of host defences, such as immunoregulation, which functions to minimize damage from immunopathology   <cit> . studies are needed to determine whether tolerance – like resistance to infection – is heritable  <cit> , condition-dependent  <cit>  and influences the expression of secondary sexual traits . it is likely that females are able to obtain tolerant and disease resistant offspring by preferring males in overall good condition   <cit> , as expected by the genic capture hypothesis <cit> .

the enhanced survival of offspring sired by p males may have been due to genetic effects, maternal allocation, or both. this benefit was potentially genetic, as it has been found that outbred mice have better survival following salmonella infection compared to inbred  mice  <cit> . since neither litter size nor the offspring weight differed between p versus np sires, we found no evidence for differential maternal allocation, though we cannot rule out this potential mechanism. we also found that females mated to p males produced more sons than those mated to np males, though this bias in offspring sex-ratio could have been due to maternal or paternal effects. heavier females produced significantly more sons than lighter females, suggesting offspring sex ratio depends on females’ condition, as predicted by the trivers and willard hypothesis  <cit> . yet, differences in litter size and offspring sex ratio do not explain why p offspring had better survival compared to np offspring, and therefore, it is more likely that this difference we found was due to genetic influences to disease resistance  <cit> . further studies are needed to test whether genetic effects or differential maternal allocation can explain the variation in offspring survival after an infection.

finally, female offspring had better survival following salmonella infection compared to males, and as we found no sex differences in pathogen clearance, this result also appears to have been due to sex differences in tolerance to infection . females generally have increased resistance to pathogens and parasites compared to males  <cit> , and another study found that female mice showed lower salmonella prevalence compared to males following experimental infection  <cit> . such sex differences may be due to testosterone or other steroid hormones  <cit> . for example, it has been reported that estrogen administration in females resulted in a higher susceptibility to salmonella typhimurium, whereas progesterone enhanced resistance to infection  <cit> , though these findings are controversial  <cit> . future studies are needed to compare sex differences in tolerance to salmonella infection, and the underlying mechanisms, especially in wild or outbred house mice.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings provide the first direct experimental evidence to our knowledge that partner preferences enhance offspring survival following infection. we found no evidence that the offspring from preferred sires had more effective pathogen clearance than offspring from non-preferred sires, suggesting mate choice may enhance the ability to cope with infection . future studies are needed to investigate this hypothesis, and especially the underlying developmental mechanisms controlling tolerance to infection, both genetic and environmental maternal effects. our results and the rapidly growing research on measuring tolerance to infection should inspire renewed interest on pathogen-mediated and sexual selection.

