BACKGROUND
in many species of angiosperms, both male and female reproductive structures are found in the same flower. this arrangement is thought to facilitate the deposition and collection of pollen by pollinators in just one visit. however, it also creates the potential for self-fertilization. self-fertilization is problematic because it increases homozygosity, thereby reducing the contribution of overdominance to fitness and exposing deleterious recessives to selection. as a consequence, selfed progeny tend to suffer from inbreeding depression, i.e. a reduction in fitness of selfed offspring compared to outcrossed offspring  <cit> .

inbreeding depression has been measured for a wide variety of species possessing a range of mating systems  <cit> . these studies have shown that species that typically outcross tend to have greater inbreeding depression than species that typically self  <cit> , that inbreeding depression is usually greater when measured under field conditions than under greenhouse  conditions  and that inbreeding depression varies among families within populations . furthermore, several studies have suggested a strong connection among inbreeding, herbivory, and disease  <cit> . in these studies, resistance to herbivores and pathogens was usually found to decrease with inbreeding  <cit> , in most cases in a family-specific manner  <cit> . in fact, it has been proposed that specialist herbivores should perform better on outcrossed plants than on inbred plants  <cit> . therefore, field studies regarding the estimation of inbreeding depression should take into account the extent of herbivory as well as the potential family-specific effects of inbreeding on measures of fitness.

because of its adverse effects on fitness, inbreeding depression has been regarded as a major force in the evolution of plant mating systems  <cit> . many species of plants have evolved traits that reduce selfing. such traits include morphological changes in the positioning of the sex structures , temporal uncoupling of maturation of the male and female parts within flowers  and biochemical recognition and rejection of self-pollen .

self-incompatibility  is a genetic mechanism, usually controlled by a single highly polymorphic locus called the s-locus; each polymorphic variant is referred to as an s-allele  <cit> . si allows a pistil to recognize and reject self-pollen prior to fertilization, based on biochemical interactions between pollen and pistils  <cit> . in the solanaceae, si disrupts the growth of pollen tubes that have an s-allele in common with the pistil they pollinate  <cit>  thus avoiding fertilization. the disruption of self pollen tube growth is caused by specific ribonucleases  produced by the s-alleles in the pistil  <cit> . these rnases enter the growing pollen tubes, where they degrade messenger and ribosomal rna of pollen tubes identified as incompatible  <cit> . this generalized degradation eventually causes tube growth to arrest  <cit>  or slow down relative to cross pollen tubes  <cit> .

solanum carolinense l. is a rhizomatous short-lived perennial, native to the eastern united states and canada. solanum carolinense has a gametophytic si system , typical of the solanaceae  <cit> . unlike most self-incompatible plants, however, s. carolinense is a weed that inhabits early successional habitats, waste places, crop fields and pastures. it is listed as a noxious weed by the usda  <cit>  and the seeds act and regulations of canada  <cit>  and it is classified as an invasive weed in all of the  <dig> states in which it has been reported. self-incompatibility is uncommon in weeds and early successional species  <cit>  because disturbed habitats require frequent episodes of colonization [hence populations are repeatedly founded by one or a few individuals bearing a limited number of s-alleles,  <cit> ), effective population sizes are small , and habitats are often short-lived .

in previous studies we have investigated this apparent anomaly  and we have found that the si response in s. carolinense is a plastic trait – its strength being affected by the age of the flowers  <cit> , and prior fruit production  <cit>  and that there are genetic differences among families in their self-fertility  <cit> . in short, these studies reveal that when outcross pollen is scarce  and/or when few or no outcross fruit are produced on the first 3– <dig> inflorescences, some plants are capable of setting self seed. we have also recently shown that variability in self-fertility is associated with particular s-alleles . the importance of this variation in self-fertility on the ability of horsenettle to found and establish new populations will depend, to a large extent, on the magnitude of inbreeding depression. inbreeding depression is expected to be high in horsenettle because, as a species with an rnase-mediated gsi response , selfing would not be that common.

in the study reported here we performed a series of greenhouse and field experiments in order to determine the magnitude of inbreeding depression in s. carolinense, to determine whether inbreeding depression varies by family and to determine whether the estimates of inbreeding depression vary under field and greenhouse conditions in horsenettle.

RESULTS
in this study, we assessed the extent of inbreeding depression in  <dig> inbred  and  <dig> outbred  progeny from  <dig> genets of solanum carolinense under both greenhouse and field conditions. the percentage of seed germination varied from  <dig> to 95%. there was no significant effect of cross  on the percentage of germinated seeds . in the greenhouse study, selfed progeny set significantly fewer seeds following outcross pollinations than outcrossed progeny . although initial measures of growth did not differ between selfed and outcrossed progeny , the selfed progeny showed a decrease in the vigor of plants  produced from rhizome cuttings. these rhizome resprouts produced fewer leaves and were smaller when obtained from selfed progeny  indicating perhaps that fewer resources were allocated to vegetative spread via rhizomes in selfed progeny compared to outcrossed progeny. however, selfed plants were better at setting fruits following self pollinations, with a twofold increase in fruit set compared to the selfed fruit produced on outcrossed progeny. the index of self compatibility  indicates that the self progeny seem to have become more self-compatible . we also found that genet  has a significant  effect on many of our measures of vegetative vigor and reproductive output . in addition, the analyses of variance also revealed significant genet by cross  interactions for many of our measures of reproductive output indicating that the families differ in their magnitude of inbreeding depression.

after completion of the greenhouse study, two rhizome cuttings from each of the self and cross progeny from each of the  <dig> original genets were transplanted into two field plots. one plot was sprayed weekly with an insecticide. in this sprayed field plot, outcrossed plants had a significantly greater number of leaf nodes at six weeks after transplanting than selfed progeny . there were also slight but not significant differences in herbivory between selfed and outcrossed plants . curiously outcrossed plants had slightly greater herbivory than selfed plants. the primary herbivores that we observed included the eggplant flea beetles , the tobacco hornworm  and both the colorado and false potato beetle , all of which are specialists on the solanaceae and include some of the most important pests of cultivated species in this family. in the nonsprayed plots there was severe herbivory resulting in the death of  <dig> plants  and 79% of those plants that did survive failed to flower or set fruit . for those plants that survived, the outcrossed progeny had a greater number of leaf nodes six weeks after transplanting  and a higher ratio of fruits per flower . in contrast to the greenhouse study, we found no significant effects of genet  or genet by cross interactions on vegetative vigor or reproductive output under field conditions.

discussion
although solanum carolinense has an rnase-mediated self-incompatibility system  <cit> , our previous studies  <cit>  have shown that when cross pollen is scarce , plants are capable of setting some self seed. whether this plasticity in self-fertility plays a role in colonization and establishment of new populations of horsenettle depends, to a large extent, on the magnitude of inbreeding depression.

numerous studies have suggested that inbreeding depression is a potent force in the evolution of plant breeding systems and that inbreeding depression is greater for plants that typically outcross than for plants that typically self due, presumably, to the purging of deleterious recessives upon repeated inbreeding, . in this study, we found that for many of the individual reproductive output measurements there were no significant effects of inbreeding. however, to determine the total effect of inbreeding depression on reproductive output , it is necessary to calculate the multiplicative fitness effects of inbreeding across the various components/measurements of reproductive output  <cit> . this overall value of δ can be estimated as  <dig> - Π, where ri is the relative performance of the selfed progeny for each trait . in the greenhouse experiment, the multiplicative effects of inbreeding on total reproductive output ] × the number of seeds per fruit ) is  <dig> , indicating that the average inbred progeny suffers a reduction of 17% in reproductive output. similarly, the multiplicative effects of inbreeding on reproductive output in the field experiment , flower number per plant  × fruits per plant  is  <dig> , indicating that on average, inbred plants suffer a moderate 37% reduction in reproductive output due to inbreeding depression compared to outbred progeny . in contrast to other predominately outcrossing species, the overall impact of inbreeding on reproductive output in s. carolinense is low  or moderate  .

other studies have also found that inbreeding depression increases under field conditions compared to the greenhouse and more benign field conditions . because field estimates of inbreeding depression include the combined impacts of inbreeding depression and natural enemies  on fitness, natural enemies that preferentially attack inbred plants will inflate the estimate of inbreeding depression  while natural enemies that preferentially attack outbred plants will reduce the estimate of inbreeding depression. in this study, we found more  herbivory on outcrossed progeny than on selfed progeny. it was our intention to have a low herbivory treatment  and a moderate herbivory treatment . however, the no spray treatment experienced uniformly severe levels of herbivory:  <dig> plants died and 79% of the plants that did live failed to reproduce. this is probably due to the fact that cultivated tomato, potato and eggplant were growing in nearby fields and are grown year after year at our field site , causing the specialist herbivore community to artificially build up over the years. consequently, the large numbers of specialist herbivores present in our site resulted in a high herbivory and a severe herbivory treatment. in general, specialist herbivores are thought to prefer feeding on outbred plants over inbred plants, because these herbivores are adapted to locate their hosts based on their volatile compounds produced by the plants and to feed on the secondary chemicals present in outbred plants  <cit> . the opposite would be true for generalist herbivores that prefer feeding on s plants because inbreeding can directly compromise plant defense mechanisms and the general reduction in plant vigor associated with inbreeding may prolong vulnerable stages of development  <cit> . even if natural enemies show no preference for either inbred or outbred plants, the impact of severe herbivore pressure  on fitness can mask more subtle differences in vigor between self and outcrossed progeny. the heavy herbivory that we observed in our field plots reveals why s. carolinense is a particularly problematic weed in and around solanaceous crop fields – it serves as a reservoir for specialist insects that can potentially re-colonize agricultural fields.

in the greenhouse, we also found significant effects of genet  on our various measures of vegetative vigor and reproductive output indicating that there is broadsense heritability for traits related to fitness in our population. perhaps, more importantly for this study, we found significant genet by cross  interactions indicating that the amount of inbreeding depression varies by family. these findings suggest that our genets differed in the number and type of deleterious recessives/overdominant loci that affect reproductive output. moreover, we found that the selfed progeny set significantly more fruits upon self-pollination than did the outcrossed progeny. our previous studies have found that all of the plants that we examined produced at least some self seed when self pollinations are made on older flowers and on plants with few or no developing outcrossed fruits  <cit>  and that the genets that produce the most seeds under these conditions possess certain s-alleles . because the selfed progeny on these plants can inherit the leaky s-allele through either the pollen and the ovule, the selfed progeny are more self-fertile  than the outcrossed progeny from the same plant.

in the greenhouse, the vegetative vigor of rhizome sprouts from outcrossed plants was greater than that of selfed plants, indicating that inbreeding depression can potentially affect vegetative spread in this species under field conditions. in horsenettle the above-ground parts die soon after the first frost of the autumn while the below-ground parts overwinter and new shoots emerge early in the spring  <cit> . these plants send out rhizomes that spread up to  <dig> m from the original plant and thereby ease in the invasion and spread of newly colonized areas. the reduced vigor of rhizome sprouts from selfed plants may limit their ability to compete with outcrossed plants in established populations. however, the ability to self-fertilize when population sizes are small may be particularly important for this weedy species that lives in ephemeral habitats and experiences frequent episodes of colonization and extinction. under these conditions, the increased ability of selfed progeny to self-fertilize  makes them more likely to produce and disperse seed in newly colonized habitats where outcross pollen may limit seed production due to a low diversity of s-alleles.

CONCLUSIONS
genetic variants that promote self-fertilization should increase in frequency, due to the inherent 50% transmission advantage and the ability to produce offspring when cross pollen is scarce, unless these variants are opposed by other evolutionary forces such as inbreeding depression and pollen discounting  <cit> . our findings reveal that the population-wide estimates of inbreed depression in s. carolinense are low under greenhouse conditions and moderate under our field conditions. moreover, we found that inbreeding depression varies significantly across genets for most of our measures of vegetative vigor and reproductive output and that selfed progeny are more self fertile than outcrossed progeny. taken together, these results suggest that the genetic variants underlying plasticity in the si system should increase in frequency  and that plasticity in the si system could play a role in the establishment of new populations of this important weed. however, further studies are needed to determine if our findings are robust throughout the extensive geographical range and the variety of habitats occupied by s. carolinense in order to determine if horsenettle has a stable mixed mating system  or whether the mating system has taken the first steps toward more complete self fertility.

