BACKGROUND
since the advent of second generation sequencing  technologies, the scientific community has been inundated with hundreds of genome assemblies of varying quality. assembly quality has a significant impact on genome annotation and all subsequent downstream analyses. in addition to the annotation of gene space, a detailed annotation of repeated sequences and transposable elements   is critical for understanding the biology of a genome, as well as an important tool for the improvement of high-quality genome assemblies. the adoption of exhaustive repeat libraries developed directly from the genome under investigation is important for minimizing false negatives in the annotation. false negatives arise due to repeat/te sequence diversification across taxa which can hamper the identification of distinctive repeat features  of the species.

the fastest and most common way to annotate the repetitive fraction of a genome assembly is to create repeat libraries derived from a set of previously identified representative repetitive sequences and screen the target genome using homology-based searches. unfortunately, this method loses power when the target genome is distantly related to the species used to develop the repeat library. the use of repeat libraries of one species to detect repeats from a related species  is highly problematic as it is known that intergenic space is rapidly evolving for the high turnover rates of transposable elements and repetitive sequence. in the last decade, numerous software tools have been developed to identify complete tes based on structural features  <cit> . such tools are useful for the identification of full-length  and low-copy tes, but are not suited for quantifying high-copy number tes – especially when investigating sgs assemblies. conversely, de novo methods such as piler  <cit>  and repeatmodeler  have been developed to identify repeats in genome assemblies based on the number of times a sequence motif appears in an input file. other tools, such as reas and repeatexplorer   <cit>  apply the same principle but importantly do not rely on a genome assembly to isolate the repeat fraction. unlike reas, re is designed to use sgs data as input, thereby producing a more granular representation of a genome at lower cost and with higher resolution.

unfortunately, high-copy number repeats and transposable elements are not well represented in most genome assemblies. this is because most current genome assemblies have been generated using short-read chemistry : highly repetitive sequences and transposable elements pose significant problems to assembly algorithms. as a result, repeat annotation of most sgs assemblies leads to skewed representations of the actual native repeat content. therefore the use of software tools such as reas and re can lead to a more accurate and complete representation of the repeat content of a given genome.

the majority of available repeat data for plants is derived from a few crops and model species. however, the development of specific repeat libraries for new genome projects is now becoming a routine. the dissemination of repeat libraries organized in databases is a common mechanism used to provide informative and convenient access to repeat and te sequences. most repeat databases contain repeat libraries from a single to a few genome assembly projects , or can span the whole spectrum of organisms .

in rice , for example, efforts to annotate and distribute rice repeats have led to both generic  and more specialized databases  <cit> . rice has been extensively used as a model species to investigate many aspects of plant biology. in  <dig> the international rice genome project published what is still considered the highest quality genome assembly of any crop plant . since  <dig> the international oryza map alignment project  has generated a large set of genomic resources aimed at exploiting the wild relatives of rice for basic research and crop improvement  <cit> . this work is targeted towards the generation of a total of  <dig> highly quality genome assemblies that have been annotated for gene and repeat space .

here we present the rice te database , a comprehensive repeat dataset developed with sequence data from  <dig> oryza species and the outgroup leersia perrieri. our aim is to provide a complete and detailed annotation of tes and repeated sequences as a resource to the plant and evolutionary biology communities.

methods
rite-db is set up on a linux-apache-mysql-perl  system. we use javascript libraries including jquery , jqueryui  and some additional plugins to perform dynamic web services. we provided keyword and sequence-based blast search functions. in the current version, rite-db contains  <dig>  te and repeat sequence entries from  <dig> oryza and one outgroup species. users can retrieve data with auto-search options by selecting preloaded keywords from database type, species, repeat code and element type, and then download the search results for local use. users can also use the search result to construct a customized database for remote blast searches. the  <dig>  entries included in the database resulted from different sources, each detailed separately below. the rite-db source code is available upon request.

plant repeats dataset
it is a collection of plant te and repeated sequences  created by merging datasets from several publicly-available sources: trep , plant repeat databases at michigan state university , soybase  <cit> , submissions to ncbi, individual publications  and an in-house collection of repeats from several oryza species . to classify all te superfamilies and repeated sequences, a modification of the classification system proposed by wicker and colleagues  <cit>  was adopted, and  <dig> different codes were used . to remove redundancy, but at the same time retain multiple representatives of each family, a clustering criteria of 90 % sequence similarity was set using usearch . because of the large number of sequences coming from a variety of species and obtained from different sources, preda sequences were not classified for degree of autonomy and species.

repeat explorer libraries
single-end reads of  <dig> oryza species and l. perrieri were collected from different sources . chloroplast and mitochondrial reads were isolated by aligning the reads to public sequences  with bowtie <dig>  <cit> . non-aligned reads were converted to a fasta format and a random subset spanning ~ <dig> × of the genome was extracted  and used as input for repeatexplorer   <cit> . re output was further processed and characterized as follows: for each cluster, all sequences with less than 5 % at or gc content were removed and the remaining reads were assembled with phrap  <cit> . assembled sequences were then aligned to ncbi’s non-redundant protein database  to remove sequences containing non-te coding sequence. remaining sequences were masked using the most recently available version of preda with repeatmasker . the output was used to characterize sequences down to the superfamily level. each new dataset produced was characterized using all previously developed databases combined into a single repeat library.table  <dig> features and source materials for the  <dig> oryza species and leersia perrieri. approximately  <dig> × of single-end raw illumina reads was used for de novo repeat library construction and assembled sequences were used to detect full-length elements. two independent re libraries were developed for each of the two o. sativa subspecies. the genome assembly of o. officinalis was not available for the full-length element characterization


o. sativa. ssp. japonica
http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu

o. rufipogon

o. sativa. ssp. indica
http://rise <dig> genomics.org.cn

o. nivara

o. glaberrima

o. barhii

o. glumipatula

o. longistaminata

o. meridionalis

o. punctata

o. officinalis

o. brachyantha

leersia perrieri

areferences: a:  <cit> ; b:  <cit> ; c:  <cit> ; d:  <cit> ; e:  <cit> ; f: arunuganathan k. pers. comm


bstatus: chr: chromosome pseudomolecules; scf: scaffolds

sine
mule
helitron

o. sativa. ssp. japonica

o. rufipogon

o. sativa. ssp. indica

o. nivara

o. glaberrima

o. barhii

o. glumipatula

o. longistaminata

o. meridionalis

o. punctata

o. brachyantha

leersia perrieri


long terminal repeat retrotransposons
de novo prediction of long terminal repeat retrotransposons  for each oryza species was performed using ltrharvest software  with the same parameters as in  <cit> . all candidate sequences composed of tandem repeats were removed using tandem repeats finder  <cit> . ltr-rts were masked with preda using all non-ltr-rt repeats to avoid the presence of nested insertions. families of paralogous elements were defined as previously described by wicker et al.  <cit> . any family with less than three copies that did not contain any domains related to copia or gypsy elements was removed from the dataset. to reduce the redundancy of highly repeated families while conserving their diversity, centroid sequences were defined using cluster_fast with centroids option , as part of the uclust package . a total of  <dig>  complete non-redundant ltr-rts was indentified . the same method adopted to define families within a species was applied to all the elements for all  <dig> genomes, defining families shared between two or more assemblies. information about single insertions were encoded in the sequence header in the following way: _#______  . for example: the ltr-rt copy named rlg_#ltr/gypsy_ojapo1_fam7_chr4_7056110_ <dig> hopi fl, is  a gypsy  retro-element  from o. sativa ssp. japonica ,  that belongs to the family number  <dig> of o. s. ssp. japonica ,  and to family  <dig> of the whole dataset . it is located on chromosome  <dig> ,  shows homology with the retroryza hopi family, and  is a full-length copy .

terminal repeat retrotransposons in miniature
trims were annotated by combining de novo and homology-based search methods. the  <dig> genomes were first analyzed with ltr-finder software  <cit>  using default options except for minimum ltr size and minimum length between two ltrs that were both decreased to 30 bp. the o. sativa trna database was used to predict the primer binding site. output sequences were manually inspected to remove false positives composed of tandem repeats and other non-trim sequences. ltr-rts with homology to reverse transcriptase were removed by blastx searches, and only elements shorter than  <dig>  kb were considered as trims. additionally, the identified trims were used to search against other genomes to find homologous trims. only one representative for each family  was included in rite-db.

short interspersed nuclear elements
the characterization of full-length short interspersed nuclear elements  was conducted by adopting the sine-finder software tool  <cit> . scans for sine elements were performed three times on each genome using different settings and the results were combined. the first run used all default parameters, the second used the target site duplication  score cutoff set to  <dig>  and the third run had specific a-box and b-box motifs derived from monocotyledonous elements. outputs were aligned against internal repeat databases and assembled genome sequences to confirm the sine nature and refine the ends. tsds were removed from each sequence and elements were renamed with a three-letter code  <cit> . to reduce redundancy, only one copy from two or more 100 % identical elements was retained.

mule dna transposons
terminal inverted repeat  sequences of mutator-like elements  in oryza sativa ssp. japonica were obtained from ferguson et al.,  <cit> . we also scanned for de novo mule tir sequences in all  <dig> genomes using repeatscout . repeat families with at least  <dig> copies were collected and consensus sequences were obtained and grouped with known o. sativa mule tir sequences. to remove sequences from other repeat types, repeatmasker  was run using the classified preda sequences as a library. sequences with at least 30 % of the length masked by known non-mule tes from preda were removed. to examine whether de novo consensus sequences represent the tirs of a mule, repeatmasker was run on the  <dig> genome data set with the remaining tir sequences as the library. elements that satisfied the following criteria were identified: 1) the element contained two tir sequences belonging to the same family; 2) the tirs had opposite orientation; 3) the distance between the two repeats was less than 20 kb; and 4) a 7–11 bp tsd flanks both repeats. specifically, we allowed a maximum of  <dig> mismatches/indels in the 9–11 bp tsds and  <dig> mismatch/indel in 8 bp tsds and perfect match in 7 bp tsds. if a given de novo consensus contained at least five members, this sequence was considered to be a mule tir. elements that were composed by the two tir and internal sequence were defined as mule elements. to comprehensively search for mule copies, we used the de novo-identified mule tirs and o. sativa mule tir to mask the  <dig> genomes with repeatmasker. we allowed the tsds to have a maximum of a 10 bp swing from the putative ends of each element. from the above mule candidates, we further removed the ones containing any known non-mule transposon contained in preda . we further classified elements whose internal sequences were highly similar to annotated non-transposase proteins  as pack-mules. elements whose sequences were highly similar to oryza mule transposase proteins  and were longer than 3 kb were classified as autonomous mules. the main findings are summarized in additional file 1: table s <dig> and described in supplementary information.

non-autonomous dna transposons
candidate non-autonomous dna transposons  sequences were identified by searching each genome assembly in 1000 bp windows  for inverted repeats that were flanked by 2 bp  or 3 bp  tsd. for stowaway, we searched specifically for the canonical motif ctcctccc in the tir and an adjacent ta target site duplication. for tourist, the only condition was that the tir began with a g or c and was at least 8 bp long. approximately  <dig> candidate sequences were aligned with clustalw  <cit>  to identify groups of sequences that occurred in multiple copies. for each group, a consensus sequence was derived. redundancy  was removed to determine the initial set of families. for each consensus, 30– <dig> copies were isolated from the genome to produce a second and more robust consensus sequence. final consensus sequences were then mapped to the genome using blastn to identify all copies of each family. in cases where more than one family consensus mapped to the same locus, priority was given to the one that resulted in the longest hit.

helitrons
the annotation of these elements was carried out in two steps: identifying a reliable set of helitron ends under stringent conditions, and searching for complete helitrons in the assembled genomes, using data from the previous step under relaxed settings. in the first step, the four genome assemblies were searched for sequences capable of forming hairpin structures using “scan_for_matches”  with the pattern: p1 = 7… <dig> 2…4 ~ p <dig> <cit>  6… <dig> ctrrt. results were parsed and sequences having low complexity were removed. the remaining sequences were then sorted into putative families, defined by groups of fragments with identical stem sequences. families having less than  <dig> elements were not considered. all members of each family underwent a pairwise comparison to identify putative 3’ and 5’ ends: from each candidate a sequence tract encompassing 15 kb upstream and 200 bp downstream from the putative 3’ end was extracted. the tracts were then compared in dot plot analyses using dotter  <cit>  software, and the results were manually parsed to verify the element’s 3’ end and 5’ ends . tracts of 40 bp in length were extracted from the ends of all putative elements and were used to create a helitron ends library. for the second step, the library produced was used to scan all genome assemblies using repeatmasker . output files were parsed according to the following relaxed criteria: a) 5’ and 3’ ends should have the expected orientation; b) the distance between both ends must be longer than 200 bp and shorter than 15 kb; c) a maximum of  <dig> mismatches out of 40 bp in each end was permitted; d) no more than  <dig> mismatch was allowed in the 3’ ctrr end; and e) the helitron at insertion rule was respected. any pair of ends fulfilling the above criteria was considered as the ends of a putative complete helitron, for a total of  <dig> complete elements .

RESULTS
rite-db contains both published and original data, and is centered on the characterization and public distribution of new repeat sequences from previously uncharacterized and unpublished oryza genome assemblies . it is composed of three data sets derived from: 1) the plant repeat database , 2) de novo repeat assemblies; and 3) full-length  transposable elements . preda is an in house database mostly composed of plant repeats gathered from publicly-available sources. its role is to represent the current diversity of available plant repeat collections, compensating for the contingent absence of specific repeats from one source, and was used for the characterization of new repeats. de novo repeat libraries were developed using re  <cit>  from raw illumina data , and the output sequences were manually curated and characterized. fl elements were identified using structure-based methods from sequence assemblies of the  <dig> oryza and the outgroup species . complete insertions were characterized for the following six te orders:  canonical ltr-rts of the copia and gypsy superfamilies,  terminal repeat retrotransposons in miniature ,  short interspersed nuclear elements ,  mule dna transposons,  non-autonomous dna transposons , and  helitrons. redundancy was removed from the database by retaining only a single representative of a set of highly similar sequences . all three data sets will be the subject of periodic updates and curation to improve the quality of the sequences.fig.  <dig> structure of the rice te database. the rice te database  is composed of three data sets: publicly characterized tes and repeats, de novo repeat libraries, and full-length elements isolated from genome assemblies. result can be downloaded for the users' needs or used to build custom database quires for blast searches



sequence classification was based on the published system of wicker et al.  <cit> , with the addition of new codes for other superfamilies and non-te repeated sequences, such as ribosomal dna and structural repeats . of the numerous families of dna transposons in grass genomes, most are small non-autonomous elements often referred to as miniature inverted-repeat transposable elements . however, this term is not useful for systematic classification, because the term mite includes short transposons from several different superfamilies. thus we classified na-dnats based on conserved sequence motifs in their tirs and assigned them to corresponding superfamilies. a fourth letter  was added to na-dnat sequence codes to highlight their non-autonomous nature. the dtx code  was assigned to non-autonomous dna transposons that could not be assigned to a specific superfamily. similarly, for sequences whose complete classification was not possible, the character x at the corresponding code position was used to denote classification ambiguity. ribosomal dna and trna sequences were assigned to brn and btn codes, respectively. structural repeats, such as centromeric, telomeric, tandem repeat and low complexity sequences were classified with a code starting with s . additional file 1: tables s <dig> and s <dig> describe the amount of sequence belonging to different repeat classes in the preda and re datasets, with the individual contribution of each species shown for the latter dataset.

the web-based interface developed for rite-db allows one to search, browse, visualize, and retrieve sequences , and perform blast searches against them . users can conduct searches on the basis of the different criteria used to describe sequence features such as: sequence identifier, element type , repeat code, and species. the hierarchical structure of sequence classification and species taxonomy features was exploited to retrieve multiple subclasses in a single data base query . a set of checkboxes for each category allows for easy selection of one or more features to conduct searches . selected entries can be then be visualized , downloaded , or used as a dynamic blast database for the custom queries .fig.  <dig> rite database search function. four main classifiers and checkboxes allow for the customization of search parameters , that are listed and visualized . search results can be used as a dynamic blast database  or downloaded locally by using the links provided in via email

fig.  <dig> the rite database blast function. a query sequence can be aligned to the entire rite-db or to a customized subset of sequences. alignment parameters can be tuned and the results can be visualized as pairwise alignments or in a tabular format



CONCLUSIONS
rice is the most important food crop in the world. the development of higher yielding and more nutritious and sustainable varieties will play a key food security role as the world population increases to  <dig> billion in less than 35 years. to help meet this need, the international oryza map alignment project  developed a large array of genomic resources that can be used to interrogate the genus oryza  for the identification and harnessing of agriculturally important genes and variation not currently present in modern rice varieties . these resources include a new set of full genome assemblies from eight oryza species , and a single outgroup species leersia perrieri, bringing the total number of full oryza genome sequences to  <dig>  in order to understand and compare the functional and evolutionary diversity of this novel  <dig> genome data set, our consortia used two genome annotation pipelines for both gene and repeat space annotation, the latter of which is the subject of the development of the rice te database .

the added value of a custom repeat collection comes from the isolation of target sequences by exploiting all of their fundamental features – i.e. existing in a high copy number, possessing typical sequence motifs, and/or encoding for specific domains. the de novo and assembly-independent approach guaranteed isolation of all repeated sequences regardless of their inclusion in the assembly. the complete elements – displaying specific signatures and isolated from the genome assemblies – enabled the identification of recently transposed or divergent elements, including those present at a single copy. the combination of approaches adopted provided a systematic and uniform survey of repeats across the oryza, allowing for direct comparison across species. extensive efforts were put in cross-validating all datasets by manual curation to minimize the mis-classification of individual entries or the presence of any other type of sequence different than the one described in the entry . because of how it was conceived, this dataset has its optimal return on genomics research conducted within oryza species. for the investigation of the repeat complement in species outside of this genus, we suggest to use the present method as a template for the production of new and more customized datasets. given the general conservation of sequence features across plant tes, most of the methods adopted here can be applied to other plant species with minor modifications. more details are available in the supplementary information.

we developed three complementary libraries to which we applied a widely adopted method to classify, handle, and use the data. distinctions of rite-db include that it does not reduce all repeats to a consensus sequence and it spans the breadth of a whole genus. the specificity of the three letter-based classification system adopted  <cit>  allows the user to recognize precisely and associate immediately any transposable element or repeated sequence to a corresponding superfamily. in this study, we expanded the wicker et al. system to incorporate a new set of codes for non-te repeats and non-autonomous dnats. this allowed for the incorporation of new types of repeats into the database and to encode information about element transposition capacity.

with this database, we expand the amount of repeat data currently available for the oryza genus in a more curated and uniform manner. for example, repbase, the most common and complete repeat collection of repetitive sequences , does not encompass this perspective. out of  <dig> repbase entries  belonging to the oryza genus, only nine come from species other than o. sativa . besides re-annotating the four published genomes , our rite-db includes tens of thousands tes and repetitive sequences for nine new species, where each entry is characterized and classified. the presence of full-length elements is another important step towards building a complete catalog of tes in a genus. the availability and free circulation of rite-db will enable the community to keep pace with the continuous generation of genomic data  <cit> , providing high-quality annotation of any new oryza genome. the breadth and comprehensiveness of rite-db was deliberately conceived to help develop hidden markov models of repeated sequences, since scanning genomes with these profiles allows for the identification more ancient or diverged repetitive sequences  <cit> .

we present the rice te database , the first example of a repeat database spanning the breadth of an entire biological genus. the methods used to identify and catalog oryza repeats have been applied consistently across all  <dig> species, making these datasets directly comparable. the complementarity of the strategies adopted – the detection of all highly repeated sequences and all complete tes – guarantees the comprehensiveness required for high quality genome annotation. in the future, we envisage the addition of more complete elements from other superfamilies, covering all major plant te classes. these contributions will support the effort to unlock mechanisms of genome evolution – such as structural or regulatory variations – between species, towards the ultimate goal of linking genetic variation to functional biology and crop improvement.

availability
the rice te database is freely accessible at www.genome.arizona.edu/rite.

additional files
additional file 1: table s1–s <dig>  ᅟ

additional file 2: figure s1–s <dig>  ᅟ



competing interests

the authors declare no competing interests.

authors’ contribution

dc, meb, dg, jw, eb, rmc, aa, ceml, sr, tw, az. isolated and characterized repeats, jz developed the database, ho, mc, acdo, bh, rh, yh, nk, ww made available sequence data, cf, az, op, saj, and raw supervised the work and co-wrote the manuscript with dc. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

