BACKGROUND
human genomes differ only in about  <dig> % from each other, but this small genomic difference contains the key difference that can determine a person's susceptibility to diseases. in order to identify the genomic basis of certain diseases, genome-wide association  studies, an approach to find genetic variations  associated with a particular disease have become increasingly popular and useful. with completion of the human genome project and hapmap project and availability of dense genotyping chips and assembly of large and well-characterized clinical samples  <cit> , it is now technically possible and financially feasible to conduct gwa studies that are powerful to detect candidate genes for certain genetic diseases. meanwhile, the surging amount of available gwa data provides us an excellent opportunity for mining of disease relationships.

in this study, we focused on understanding the genetic basis of associations between seven common human diseases, using the data generated by a recent extensive gwa study undertaken in the british population  <cit> . the study examined about  <dig>  humans for each of seven major diseases and a shared set of about  <dig>  controls. this study was led by the wellcome trust case control consortium  that brought together over  <dig> research groups from the uk that are active in researching the genetics of common human diseases. the seven diseases examined are bipolar disorder , coronary artery disease , crohn's disease , hypertension , rheumatoid arthritis , type  <dig> diabetes , and type  <dig> diabetes . although these seven diseases differ in their clinical symptoms, according to the wtccc  <cit> , theses diseases can be clustered into three natural groups: cad+ht+t2d ; ra+t1d ; and cd+ra+t1d . however, whether the grouping has sound genetic basis, that is, whether the diseases that belong to the same group share similar genotypes, was not addressed in depth in the wtccc study. elucidating the genetic commonality between diseases  can help us discover possible hidden relationships between diseases that may appear unrelated phenotypically. it may also improve therapeutic treatment, disease diagnosis, and better prevention  <cit> .

in this study, we took advantage of the gwa data of the seven diseases to examine whether different diseases share some level of commonality in genotypes. our goals are to:  fish out sets of snps associated with the seven diseases in the wtccc study and analyze whether there are overlaps between different sets of snps that correspond to different diseases,  analyze commonalities between genes associated with the snps in these diseases,  construct protein-protein interaction networks for the sets of genes and explore common features of the networks across the diseases, and  analyze the phenotypic similarities between the diseases.

RESULTS
analysis of snp clusters
the gwa study by the wtccc produced a list of snps that are associated with each of the seven diseases. the confidence of association of a snp with a specific disease is represented by the snp's p-value. the lower the p-value is, the more likely that the snp is associated with the disease. similar to the wtccc study  <cit> , we discarded the snps that have p-value higher than 10- <dig> because these snps are weakly associated with the diseases and are more likely owing to some statistical noise than to real biological significance. the snps with p-value = 10- <dig> were clustered into blocks. there are around  <dig> clusters  of snps for each disease, with blocks that are on the same chromosome at least  <dig> mb  apart from each other.

in order to measure the degree of commonalities between snp blocks of different diseases, we employed two different metrics, the jaccard index and the total length measurement. for both metrics, the larger the metric is, the more similar two cluster patterns are to each other. first, figure  <dig> shows a matrix of jacobian values between each pair of seven diseases. it is a symmetric matrix. according to the disease grouping by the wtccc , we colored diseases into red groups  and green groups . we expect to see more similarities between diseases within the same group, and thus cells with deep red and deep green are expected to be bigger than others in the same row or column. this proposition is true for the green group. however it is not true for the red group.

second, we also used the total length to measure similarities between two sets of clusters. figure  <dig> shows the matrix for seven diseases. similar to the results based on the jacobian values, strong similarities are observed in the green group , and are not observed in the red group .

therefore, results on both measurements of the similarities in snp blocks for disease pairs show that the grouping of cd, ra, and t1d has a strong genetic basis, whereas the grouping of cad, ht, and t2d has little genetic evidence. within the green group , it is unclear which two of them have a higher degree of commonality. for example, the jocobian value between cd and ra is the highest within the three diseases, whereas the total length measurement between ra and t1d is the largest.

since strong correlations in snp blocks are observed between cd, ra, and t1d, one would wonder whether paired blocks/clusters between these three diseases have highly similar distribution patterns. we plotted three sets of paired clusters between these three diseases in figure  <dig>  if paired clusters are the same, then they should appear at the same location, which is not the case. therefore, although there are strong genetic associations between each pair of the three diseases, the patterns of such relations are quite different from each other and there is little commonality shared by all three diseases.

from snps to genes
as some of the snp clusters reside in genes that may have different biological functions  <cit> , we can map the snp clusters to genes for each disease and characterize the degree of association between diseases at the gene level. studying the pattern of gene overlaps between different diseases will allow us to move one step further towards the functional mechanisms of diseases, most of which result from abnormality or absence of certain proteins in the human body. thus not only would we be able to obtain a clearer picture than from the snp clusters in how diseases may be related, but also it facilitates our investigation of disease association at the level of protein networks  <cit> .

the number of candidate genes shared between diseases can indicate association of diseases. the more candidate genes shared by two diseases, the more closely related between the two diseases  <cit> . thus, when snp blocks are converted to genes, we expect to see the relation between any two diseases by calculating the number of shared genes. as stated in the methods, we examined the distribution of the distances of snp blocks to their downstream genes and decided to use the two extreme values for this analysis. figures  <dig> and  <dig> display the comparison results on the number of shared genes between all possible combinations of disease pairs with  <dig> distance  and the maximal distance . we observe a large number of genes shared between ra, t1d, and cd, which are all auto-immune diseases. however, the other pre-categorized group cad, ht, and t2d, does not show any significant relation within its three members. therefore, the results of the analysis at the level of genes display similar outcomes to the analysis at the level of snps.

 <dig> kb upstream regions of genes tend to be enriched with regulatory elements  <cit> . snps in such regions as well as in transcription factor binding sites  are mutations that might affect the regulation of gene expression and genetic interactions. interestingly, we found that although there are  <dig> snps in ra, for example, located within the  <dig> kb upstream region of genes, none of them reside in the predicted regions of tfbss. thus, there is little evidence for the claim that some studied snps may lead to abnormal regulation of gene expression that in turn contributes to the pathogenesis of diseases.

from genes to protein networks
analysis of snps can show us the low level of association between primary sequences and diseases. but in order to understand the disease pathogenesis from a functional point of view, we need to study snps  at the protein level because the majority of genes must be translated into proteins to participate in protein-protein interaction networks or pathways and to perform their biological functions  <cit> . mapping gene data onto the protein-protein interaction  network and comparing the ppi networks associated with different diseases will allow us to investigate whether different diseases have overlaps in networks or pathways, and thus may provide an alternative approach for identifying the genetic basis of commonalities or associations between diseases.

using the string database, we constructed seven disease networks. figure  <dig> shows the seven networks, each of which contains a set of proteins that are associated with the diseases. because hub nodes form the backbone of a network, they are considered to be an important measurement for the similarity between protein interaction networks; moreover, backbone network has also been shown to be highly conserved in maintaining housekeeping biological function of the cell  <cit> . thus, we examined all the hub proteins in the networks to see whether there are shared hub proteins. we defined hub proteins as the protein nodes with degrees ≥  <dig> in a disease network  <cit> . table  <dig> shows the number of hub proteins identified for each disease. the t1d has the highest number of hub proteins among the seven diseases, probably due to the fact that it has the highest number of genes that were used to construct the disease network.

shared hub protein analysis reveals two findings . first, cd, ra, and t1d shared a protein, the dna-directed rna polymerase i subunit provides the molecular evidence for the grouping of these three diseases. it has been shown that the dna-directed dna polymerase activity of ra specimens was increased in the high-speed pellet fraction of cell lysates, which makes virus infection in ra more vulnerable  <cit> . also it has been shown that polymerase chain reaction is a very important step in mycobacterium paratuberculosis, which is in turn a infectious cause of crohn's disease  <cit> . the dna-directed rna polymerase i subunit can be easily exploited by virus to produce virus dnas for subsequent infection. we were not able to find any literature documenting the connection between the dna-directed rna polymerase and t1d. therefore, existing literature seems to support our finding of the molecular link – the dna-directed rna polymerase, for the associations between at least two of the three diseases. second, ra and t1d share five proteins , suggesting that they have a stronger association in their molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis as compared to cd and t1d or cd and ra. table  <dig> shows the biological function of the five proteins and whether their association with ra and t1d is supported by existing literature. four proteins were found to be associated with ra and two proteins with t1d. two proteins, hla class i and iex- <dig>  are both supported to have association with ra and t1d. also notice that hla class i has immune response function, which is consistent with the grouping of cd, ra, and t1d into auto-immune diseases.

therefore, our results show that it is possible to identify the underlying molecular mechanism that might contribute to the commonality between different diseases, either in terms of pathogenesis or disease phenotypes, by tracing shared hub proteins between diseases.

comparison of disease phenotypes
all three levels of analysis of the seven diseases show consistent results that support the grouping of cd, ra, and t1d, but not the grouping of cad, ht, and t2d. in order to further verify our results, we compared the phenotypes of the seven diseases to see how they are related at the phenotypical level using mimminer. mimminer is a phenotype comparison tool that uses the online mendelian inheritance in man  database and various text mining algorithms to classify phenotypes  <cit> . the mimminer score measures the degree of similarity of various diseases to the target disease in terms of phenotypes. the higher the score is, the more similar the two diseases are in terms of their phenotypes. thus, we can judge using the mimminer score the degree of similarity of various diseases to the diseases of our interest. table  <dig> shows the mimminer results for three of the seven diseases . we did not find any significant hits for bd, cad, ht, and t2d from any of the seven diseases. it is clear that consistent with the results of the analysis performed at the levels of snp, genes, and proteins, crohn's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and type  <dig> diabetes also have a close phenotypic connection, whereas coronary artery disease, hypertension, and type  <dig> diabetes do not.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed associations between gwa studies of seven diseases. our study was carried out at four levels – analysis at the nucleotide level , analysis at the gene level, analysis at the protein level , and analysis at the phenotype level. for one group of diseases , strong associations are found across all levels of analysis. in particular, our results indicate that within this group, ra and t1d are more strongly associated than they are to cd, suggesting ra and t1d are originated by highly similar molecular mechanisms, which can shed light on further exploration of these diseases. for another group of diseases , no genetic association is found at all levels of analysis. the negative result could be due to inappropriate grouping of the diseases  or that our analysis might be too primitive to recover the hidden genetic associations for this group. however, given our rather thorough analysis to uncover the relationships among these diseases and the strong confirmation of the grouping of cd, ra, and t1d, we think that the latter is highly unlikely.

our study is a first attempt on mining of gwa data to examine genetic associations between different diseases. the positive result is apparently not a coincidence and hence demonstrates the promising use of our approach. with the increasing amount of gwa data, it becomes increasingly important to examine whether there are any hidden relationships between different diseases, especially the diseases without apparent phenotypic commonalities . at the same time, many diseases have highly similar symptoms such that it remains controversial whether they are different diseases or actually one disease with different names. for example, there has been a long-standing controversy whether schizophrenia and bipolar are one or two disease traits  <cit> . it is conceivable that with proper data, our approach could make a definite contribution to this question and questions of similar kind.

