BACKGROUND
phylogenetic tree reconstruction from molecular sequences  was first suggested by emile zuckerkandl and linus pauling  <cit>  and is now one of the major tools in the arsenal of bioinformatics. by ptms we will understand methods which build a phylogenetic tree based solely on sequences, either coding dna or amino acids. of the many people who have contributed to this field, j. felsenstein deserves special mention for his many contributions summarized in his book  <cit> .

computing phylogenies is ubiquitous, and not only of academic interest, but also quite practical: selecting model organisms  <cit> , tracing disease  <cit> , finding vectors  <cit> , finding suitable defenses to new viruses  <cit> , maximizing diversity for species conservation,  <cit>  tracing ancestry and population movements  <cit>  and many other problems are solved with the aid of good phylogenetic trees.

the state of testing of ptms is far from satisfactory. this is obvious when we see the discrepancies between the results from bioinformatics and the accepted taxonomies produced by biologists, and the high confidence measures that bioinformatics has tried to attach to their results  <cit> . in short, in our experience, the distrust that biologists may have on ptms is justifiable.

most results in the literature supporting ptmss use: extensive simulations, measures of quality,  small scale comparisons of some specific trees,  some intuition. these techniques are useful, but limited. specifically, simulations are excellent to discover errors and to find the variability that we may expect from the methods. yet simulations usually rely on a model of evolution . it is then expected that a method which uses the same model will perform best. measures of quality include bootstrapping, branch support confidence and indices on trees  trees). these measures also rely on some statistical model which is essentially an approximation of reality. bootstrapping values have suffered from over-confidence and/or misinterpreted and are sensitive to model violations  <cit> . furthermore these techniques are directed towards assessing a particular tree rather than assessing the methods. small scale comparisons are valuable but usually lack the sample size to make the results statistically strong. we consider any evidence which is in numbers less than  <dig> to be “anecdotal”. any study where a subset of cases is selected is a candidate to suffer from the bias arising from an author trying to show the best examples for his/her method. finally, intuitions are very valuable, but cannot stand scientific scrutiny. we refer as intuitions, decisions which are not based on strict optimality criteria. e.g. character weights in traditional parsimony methods; using global or local alignments; various methods for msa computation; various measures of distances, etc.

the main problem is that there is no “gold-standard” against which methods can be evaluated. hopefully this paper will provide two such standards.

computing phylogenetic trees consumes millions of hours in computers around the world. because some of these computations are so expensive and not reliable, biologists are tempted to use faster, lower quality, methods. this evaluation  will help bioinformaticians extract the most of their computations. in particular, as we show, some of the best ptms are remarkably fast to compute.

we measure the quality of the ptms in two ways, by their average difference on trees which have followed the same evolution and by their average distance to taxonomic trees. this allows us to find the best methods, and by averaging in different ways, the best components of the methods.

there is no single method that is best in all circumstances. some of the classes of species show a preference for a particular method. this should not come as a surprise, different organisms may leave different molecular imprints of their evolution.

RESULTS
we now introduce the two measures on ptmss.

the intra measure
for a given ptms and several orthologous groups  we can construct a tree for every og. the trees should all follow the same evolutionary history, hence the trees should all be compatible . the average distance between trees built from different ogs is thus a measure of quality of the method . we call this measure the intra measure. since the ptms does not get any information about the species of the input sequences, the only way for it to produce a smaller distance between trees is by extracting information from the sequences. in this sense, the best algorithm is the algorithm which extracts the most relevant information from the sequences to derive the phylogeny; which is exactly what we want. in mathematical terms the intra measure of a ptms m is the expected value: 

  intra=edmgi,mgj 

 where gi and gj are two different orthologous groups. the distance d is the robinson-foulds distance  <cit>  between two trees built with the same ptms over different ogs. it is computed only over the species appearing in both ogs . we estimate this expected value from all the available pairs of ogs. the measure will be incorrect for the cases of lateral gene transfers , where sequences do not follow the same evolution. lgt events will be few and since all methods will be affected we do not expect a bias from them.

the taxon measure
this measures how far the computed tree is from the true taxonomic tree. a smaller distance, averaged over a large number of ogs, means a better method. for a given ptms and several orthologous groups  we compute the distance between the tree built on each og and the true taxonomic tree . we call this average distance the taxon measure. the trees derived from the taxonomy represent the consensus and summary of many scientific papers, databases and experts and could be described as the “state of the art”. errors in the taxonomy should affect all methods equally and will be like random noise. section.) in mathematical terms the taxon measure of a ptms m is the expected value: 

  taxon=edm,tg 

 where d is the rf distance between two trees, g is an orthologous group, m is the tree produced by m applied to the sequences in g and tg is the taxonomic tree for the species in the group g. we estimate the expected value by the average over all the orthologous groups available to us. notice, that while the taxonomic tree is a single tree, we will be sampling tens of thousands of different subsets of this single tree . see methods, table  <dig>  for full results. in  <cit>  a similar idea is used, that of comparing the trees against a small, indisputable, topology.

to achieve statistical significance we consider complete genomes and apply the methods to all the ogs possible  according to the oma database  <cit> . this gives us very large sample sizes and an unbiased sample, as almost nothing is excluded .

to describe the ptmss unambiguously we need to use a descriptive name for each one. the convention that we use describes the steps which are used to build the tree. for example, stands for the name of the procedure which starts by making a multiple sequence alignment  using clustalw, then derives the distances from the pairwise alignments induced by the msa and finally builds a tree from these distances using the bionj algorithm. a method is then a sequence of components which start from the molecular sequences and end with a phylogenetic tree. the components of the tree building methods used here are listed in table  <dig> 

most of the possible compatible combinations were tried. notice that the total number of methods can grow very quickly, for this study  <dig> ptmss were tested.

our main results are: the introduction of the intra and taxon measures to evaluate ptmss; the excellent correlation between them; the top rated ptmss for metazoa and non-metazoa; the results on best components, i.e. best msa methods, best tree building methods and best pairwise alignment methods.

it should be noted that, for a given class or set of classes, the numerical values of the intra measure for all the ptmss are comparable . so are the values of the taxon measure. but, for a given class, the intra and taxon measures are not numerically comparable, as they are taken over different sets, in one case over all the pairs of ogs which intersect on  <dig> or more leaves in the second case over all the ogs. this is why we compare the orderings  of the ptmss by each measure, but not the corresponding numerical values.

tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the best  scoring ptms. the first table shows the top  <dig> methods for metazoa and for non-metazoa. the results group well in two sets. metazoa favors codon-based methods whereas the rest favor induced distance methods. in terms of sample sizes this division is quite even, the number of ogs are in a 1: <dig> relation but since metazoa has larger groups and longer sequences, the total amino acids involved are close to 1: <dig> .

the symbol “≫” stands for a method which is better than another with statistical significance better than  <dig> in a million . the symbol “>” stands for a p-value <  <dig>  and the symbol “≥” means its p-value >  <dig> .

to justify the grouping of the classes we have computed the correlations between the classes. table  <dig> shows pearson’s correlation coefficients of the intra measures for all the classes against each other.

the average correlation for non-metazoa is  <dig>  in a tight range, from  <dig>  to  <dig> . notice also that othereukaryota share the same preferences for the methods as archaea and bacteria away from metazoa. all the correlations with metazoa are much lower. the natural grouping of the classes is to have one group with metazoa and another group with the rest. the very high correlations of the different non-metazoa classes are the main argument supporting the quality of the taxon measure. the measure is strong enough to replicate the rankings on several groups. this is a form of bootstrapping, as the results are replicated from independent different samples.

averaging over the component methods
tables  <dig> and  <dig> show results over component methods for the taxon measure. we are working under the assumption that better trees derived from variants of the components  mean better components . while this may be controversial, it is very difficult to argue the opposite, see  <cit> . these results are aggregations of various classes and various methods. in all cases care is taken to include the same companion methods for each comparison. the numerical value Δ shows the difference of the taxon measures  between the methods. it measures the average difference of rf distances or wrong splits, e.g. Δ= <dig> means that on the average one method makes one additional mistake per tree. n indicates the number of ogs which have been used to measure this difference . see methods, table  <dig> 

sample output showing the selection of which methods to compare when summarizing results, table  <dig>  the difference of the taxon measures is taken over corresponding pairs of trees. these corresponding pairs differ only in the components we want to compare. furthermore, they will be computed over exactly the same population of ogs.

phyml is the best tree builder using msas . the results are consistent accross classes except for a significant worsening of parsimony and gap for metazoa.

global alignments  <cit>  dominate the pairwise alignments methods . the most significant difference between metazoa and non-metazoa is that codonpam is propelled to the front by a significant margin in metazoa. it should be noted that the codonpam mutation matrix is an empirical mutation matrix based on data from vertebrates  <cit> . the genomes included in metazoa have diverged more recently than for other classes, like archaea, which also explains the better performance of the codon-based methods. from an information-theoretic point of view, codons are over an alphabet of size  <dig> as opposed to  <dig> for amino acids, so they must carry more information. regardless of the reason, the advantage of codon-based methods is an order of magnitude larger than the differences between the other methods. hence codon-based methods appear unavoidable for metazoa. table  <dig> confirms the same difference at the level of msa-induced alignments.

the distance methods, table  <dig>  see lst changing from last position in non-metazoa to first position in metazoa. in this case the absolute differences are relatively small.

the most important message coming out of these results is that the best methods are minimal evolution  methods over pairwise alignments induced by msas. a method like mafft_inducdist_biome is 2- <dig> orders of magnitude faster than ml methods and outperforms them all by a good margin.

discussion
it may appear surprising that the best method for non-metazoa starts by using mafft which is not the best msa . in general, the best ptms may not include the best components, and vice-versa, the best individual components may not give the best ptms. components may combine/exploit their abilities/weaknesses. for example, an msa method which does a very good job with amino acids but a mediocre job with gaps, may compose very well with ml methods but poorly with gap trees. we have to remember that the analysis of components, tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> is done over an average of many situations.

the statistical significance of the difference between methods is one aspect, the magnitude of the difference is also important. the testing was done over such large samples that often minor differences are still statistically significant. we consider that a difference of less than Δ= <dig>   is without practical significance. a Δ= <dig>  difference, on the other hand, means that one method will produce one better branch every  <dig> trees, which can be considered significant.

mafft_inducdist_biome is the top method for non-metazoa under the taxon measure and is ahead of the top ml method, prank_phyml, by Δ= <dig>  correct branches per tree. the number of incorrect branches per tree of each method is  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.  this shows that there is a long way to perfection. some of this distance  is due to the inherent randomness of the molecular mutations left by evolution, some of it may be due to imperfect ptmss.

caveats, what can go wrong?
here we describe some problems that may affect the power/correctness of the ptms evaluation . 

· the ogs should follow the same evolutionary history. this is normally the case, except when we have lateral gene transfers  or ogs which do not follow fitch’s definition of orthology  <cit>  precisely. for the purpose of testing the methods, it is much better to skip dubious ogs. the oma orthologous database fits best our needs  <cit> , as it sacrifices recall in favor of precision.

· the intra test measures the ability of recovering a phylogenetic signal from sequences. other reasons for mutation of the sequences may leave their trace in the conclusions. for example, it is known that the environmental temperature affects the gc content of the sequences due to dna stability  <cit> . consequently, we will expect a bias at the codon level that will tend to group together organisms that live in a high-temperature environment.

· the methods should produce trees with complete structure, i.e. no multifurcations, all nodes must be binary. a method which produces a tree with multifurcations will have an advantage as it will normally make fewer mistakes. in the extreme, a star tree is always correct.

· since ptmss have been in use for many years, the preferred methods of the community may show an undeserved good performance under the taxon measure . this is not unreasonable, since for bacteria many classical phylogenetic methods do not apply , and taxonomies may have been constructed with some of these methods. a method which has been the favourite of the taxonomists will be displaced to the left of the main line in figure  <dig> . we can see that parsimony, raxml and phyml show a small shift to the left and hence it is possible that these methods have biased the building of the taxonomies. this shift is noticeable but quite small, so we can conclude that this is not a major bias.

· finally, the intra measure, by being a consistency measure, may be insensitive to systematic mistakes of the tree building. this would be something that affects the intra measure but not the taxon measure. stephane guindon suggested that long branch attraction  could mislead the intra measure for methods that suffer from it, by systematically computing one of the incorrect trees. to study this properly we generated a new class called lbaexamples which is composed of a quartet ,), where the branches leading to the leaves c and d are much longer than the other branches. this quartet is sometimes called the “felsenstein example” and is used to demonstrate how some methods, like parsimony, systematically will reconstruct the wrong tree . see figure  <dig> we built  <dig> such quartets for random values of α and for  <dig> different sets of leaves c and d with the values f= <dig> , <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> . that is  <dig> examples of each quartet. the results are available in their entirety in the same website repository as all the other results. the most significant results of the study of these quartets are:

· 

there is a clear division of methods under the taxon measure  and the intra measure. all the methods using parsimony, gap, synpam and prankguide suffer from lba . all the other methods  score much lower, taxon ≤  <dig>  and intra ≤  <dig> . remember that there are only  <dig> possible quartets and that an error in a quartet gives a distance of  <dig>  hence for quartets the values of the taxon measure coincide with the number of incorrect trees. the gap that separates the non-lba from lba methods is large in absolute and in relative values. so we can conclude that lba is successfully detected by both measures.

methods based on k-mer statistics  fare much worse than all the other methods in general. these are methods which count the number of, for example, tri-mers, and use as distances a statistical test  on the tri-mer frequencies. for example, a method based on dna tetra-mers scores  <dig>  for the taxon measure  but scores  <dig>  in the intra measure. this is quite extreme,  but supports the observation that the intra measure is a consistency measure and if the method systematically fails and there is only one way of failing, then the consistency is good. in terms of the plot of figure  <dig>  these cases will be points displaced to the right of the main line. this extreme case reinforces our recommendation of using both measures to conclude the performance of methods.

this side study showed additional surprises. the guide tree produced by prank, usually quite good, but unfortunately it suffers severely from lba . we were also unaware that the synpam methods, which are maximum likelihood methods, also suffer from lba.

the above caveats indicate that the problems are relatively few and seldom apply to both measures. consequently a method which does well under both measures is a very strong candidate.

CONCLUSIONS
we show, through a comparison of methods against trees involving tens of millions of data points, which are the most effective ptmss. this uncovers a big surprise as one of the favorite methods among the community, the ml methods, score poorly. methods based on msa induced pairwise alignments and minimal evolution not only produce better trees, but are  <dig> to  <dig> times faster to compute. this should revolutionize this niche of bioinformatics.

we also show that a new measure of quality, the intra measure, is highly correlated with the taxon measure  and it does not suffer from the biases of the practice. these new measures are likely to be extremely helpful in the development of new and better algorithms.

