BACKGROUND
chromosome inversions occur when a chromosome breaks in two places and the segment between the breakpoints is re-inserted in the reverse orientation. in drosophila and other diptera, inverted and noninverted  forms of chromosomes often coexist within the same population. these inversion polymorphisms can be identified by examining the banding patterns of chromosomes in the larval salivary gland cells, and by the formation of loops during chromosomal pairing between inverted and standard arrangements, making them convenient genetic markers for studying evolution  <cit> . studies on inversion frequency changes in natural and laboratory populations of drosophila by dobzhansky and his colleagues provided early evidence that inversion polymorphisms are under strong selection and adaptation  <cit> . since then evidence for selection and adaptation involving inversions have been found in increasing numbers of species including plants  <cit> , seaweed flies  <cit> , butterflies  <cit> , anopheles mosquitoes  <cit> , fruit flies  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . inversions are also thought to play a role in the evolution of sex chromosomes and speciation  <cit> .

the spread and maintenance of inversion polymorphisms is thought to be due to their impact on linkage disequilibrium. inversions maintain associations between alleles because crossing over between inverted and standard arrangements gives rise to nonfunctional meiotic products. under the coadaptation hypothesis proposed by dobzhansky, inversions have selective value because they hold together favourable combinations of alleles  <cit> . a crucial aspect of the hypothesis is that alleles at loci within the inversion have epistatic interactions that increase fitness. heterosis and the idea that the allelic content of the inversion evolves after inversions arise are also assumed, leading to different alleles in populations within the same inversion  <cit> .

an alternative hypothesis is that inversions have selective value because they bring together two or more alleles that are adapted to local conditions  <cit> . with this model, no epistasis is needed for the inversion to gain a fitness advantage, so the mechanism can operate even when alleles are adapting to different environmental variables. it also does not require sets of alleles to become coadapted within a chromosomal arrangement in a population, or for the presence of heterosis. this mechanism may therefore occur much more frequently than mechanisms involving coadaptation  <cit> . an inversion harbouring locally adapted alleles will go to fixation unless a polymorphism is maintained by migration or balancing selection. other explanations why inversions spread through populations include direct selection on the inversion  arising from a mutation at the breakpoints, underdominance and overdominance  <cit> .

much of the empirical support for the idea that inversions are locally adapted comes from laboratory experiments on drosophila reviewed in  <cit> . several studies have shown that changes in inversion frequencies in population cages depend on when and where samples from natural populations were taken  <cit>  and how they have been maintained  <cit> . more recently, lowry and willis  <cit>  have used reciprocal transplant experiments involving outbred lines where inversion chromosomal arrangements were introgressed into different genetic backgrounds to demonstrate local adaptation in the yellow monkey flower.

molecular studies provide further evidence that inversions evolve over time and are involved in local adaptation. levels of linkage disequilibrium  and nucleotide divergence between inverted and standard chromosome arrangement change over time, and become reduced towards the middle of the inversion where multiple crossover and gene conversion are expected to be higher see  <cit> , although this is not always the case . patterns of ld within inversions may also reflect selection as well as recombination and historical processes; in drosophila pseudoobscura and drosophila melanogaster, ld between genes within inversion decreases as they are situated further apart, but some nonadjacent genes maintain high ld with regions of low ld between them, suggesting selection at loci across the inverted region  <cit> .

by contrast, molecular evidence for local adaptation is surprisingly scarce and inconsistent. allozyme studies on d. pseudoobscura have shown that the same inversions from different populations have unique combinations of alleles  <cit> . however, samples sizes in these studies tended to be small  <cit>  and nucleotide sequences of genes situated within inversions show no significant differences among populations within the same arrangements  <cit> . in mosquitoes, patterns of nucleotide divergence between chromosomal arrangements are inconsistent with neutral models  <cit> , but these patterns are not always found  <cit>  and clear footprints of selective sweeps or balancing selection on genes within inversions are uncommon  <cit> . however, signatures of selection have been reported in genes within inversions in drosophila .

here, we examine geographic variation in the int inversion in populations of d. melanogaster along the east coast of australia. this chromosome arrangement is located in the middle of the left arm on chromosome  <dig>  and has been the focus of many studies due its close proximity to the alcohol dehydrogenase  locus. as found on other continents, both adh and int show latitudinal clines in eastern australia, with higher frequencies of the adhs allele and int at lower latitudes, providing strong evidence that natural selection is maintaining the polymorphisms  <cit> .

if int is locally adapted along eastern australia, we would expect to see differences in the allelic content of inverted chromosomes between sites from different latitudes. due to the interaction between recombination processes  and selection, we would also expect to see a mosaic of more and less differentiated regions between standard and inverted chromosomes  <cit>  that differ among sites, as well as different patterns of ld within int among sites. we test these predictions by examining microsatellite variation within standard and int chromosomes at three different sites . haplotypes were obtained by crossing isofemale lines to an isogenic strain and subtracting the allele present in the isogenic strain from the genotypes of the f <dig> progeny. under the assumption that microsatellites are neutral, no differences between chromosome arrangements or among the same arrangement from different sites are expected by selection on the microsatellite loci themselves. however, hitchhiking effects aided by extensive ld across the inverted regions, as well as mutations accumulating in chromosomes after hitchhiking events, may lead to genetic differences in the allelic content of int along the cline.

RESULTS
marker variation
large differences in diversity were observed between markers. the number of alleles ranged from two to  <dig> and gene diversities ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . all individuals from the isogenic strain were homozygous for the same allele at all markers and all f <dig> individuals had a genotype that included at least one allele from the isogenic strain. there were marked differences in the frequencies of the adhs allele and int among sites. frequencies of the adhs allele ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and int from  <dig>  to  <dig> . these frequencies were very close to those reported by umina et al.  <cit> , suggesting the crossing scheme did not favour a particular adh allele or chromosome arrangement .

markers in bold type are located within the breakpoints of int. h is gene diversity.

genetic diversity tended to be lower in chromosomes with int compared to those with the standard arrangement . pairwise tests between chromosome arrangements at each site revealed significantly higher allelic richness in the standard chromosomes at innisfail  and when all sites were pooled , but there were no significant differences in allelic richness between chromosome arrangements at coffs harbour  or melbourne . there were also no significant differences between sites within each chromosome arrangement . gene diversity did not differ significantly between chromosome arrangements at any site  or between sites within standard chromosomes , but there were significant differences between sites in the inverted chromosomes . pairwise tests indicated that the differences in gene diversity were between the innisfail and melbourne sites .

there was a significant heterozygosity excess at the melbourne site in the inverted chromosomes , indicating a recent severe reduction in effective population size. none of the other site/ chromosome arrangement combinations had higher than expected heterozygosities .

genetic differentiation within and between chromosome arrangements
nearly all markers within int showed significant differentiation between the standard and inverted chromosomal arrangements at the innisfail and coffs harbour sites . significantly differentiated markers were also evident outside the inversion breakpoints , but they were less common and the divergences were lower . fewer markers were significantly differentiated at the melbourne site, a likely consequence of the relatively small number of inverted chromosomes sampled at this site. overall, patterns of differentiation between inverted and standard chromosomes were quite similar across sites , but there were notable differences. for example, the region of highest differentiation between chromosome arrangements at innisfail was in the middle of int, but it was more evenly spread across the inversion at coffs harbour .

in addition to differentiation between chromosome arrangements at each site, there were significant differences among sites within each chromosome arrangement . however, the differences among sites within chromosome arrangements were small compared to the differences between inverted and standard chromosomes. amova revealed that  <dig> % of the total genetic variation was among chromosome arrangements, while only  <dig> % occurred among sites within chromosome arrangements. levels of differentiation between pairs of sites within each chromosome arrangement increased as the geographical distance between them increased . it was also apparent from non-overlapping 95% confidence limits  that genetic differentiation between sites was significantly higher within the inverted chromosomes than it was within standard chromosomes .

the outlier analyses identified a single marker, adh, with an excessively high fst value compared to neutral expectations. it was an outlier in the comparison between innisfail and melbourne . adh also had a high fst value relative to other markers in the comparison between coffs harbour and melbourne, but was non-significant after correcting for multiple comparisons using a false discovery rate of 10% .

linkage disequilibrium and genetic mixing
associations between marker alleles and int were evident at all sites , though they tended to be higher in the low and middle latitude sites  than in the high latitude site at melbourne . nevertheless, associations between alleles and int were consistent across sites. spearman’s rank correlations between r <dig> values at different sites were highly significant  with rs values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> .

cluster analysis on the genetic markers situated within int revealed a strong correspondence between membership to a particular cluster and chromosome arrangement . in most cases, individual chromosomes were assigned completely to one cluster, with each chromosome arrangement being represented by a different cluster. however, there were exceptions. some chromosomes were assigned to the cluster that represented the alternate chromosome arrangement. there were also several chromosomes with a significant proportion of membership to both clusters .

decay of linkage disequilibrium and genetic differentiation between chromosome arrangements
our simulations suggest that double-crossovers will homogenize allele frequencies and breakdown ld at loci in the middle of the inversion quickly provided the rate of gene exchange is high. when simulations were run using a rate of gene exchange calculated from map distances , genetic differentiation between chromosome arrangements  declined sharply with fst’s close to zero by generation  <dig>  even when the initial allele frequency differences were at a maximum . declines in genetic divergence were also evident when the rate of gene exchange was set at  <dig>  per generation, but fst’s were still well above zero after  <dig> generations . similar patterns were observed when levels of gene diversity and allelic richness were compared between chromosome arrangements. when the level of gene exchange was set at the higher rate, differences in genetic diversity decreased rapidly to be close to zero by generation  <dig>  irrespective of the starting divergence between chromosome arrangements. however, under the lower rate of gene exchange, significant differences in gene diversity and allelic richness  were still present at generation  <dig>  when simulations were started using maximum divergence between chromosome arrangements , differences were either non-significant or there was higher genetic diversity in the inverted chromosomes.

no significant ld between marker alleles and the inversion was found in the simulated data sets at generation  <dig> when the higher rate of gene exchange was used . however, some ld was detected when the lower rate of gene exchange and maximum levels of genetic divergence between chromosome arrangements was used, with  <dig> %  of alleles showing a significant association with the inversion for simulations started at maximum genetic divergence between chromosome arrangements. this dropped to  <dig> %  when there was a moderate level of divergence. therefore the simulations suggest that we observed more ld than expected in all but the most extreme case. moreover, these estimates assume an effective population size of  <dig>  likely to be an underestimate for d. melanogaster populations  <cit> .

discussion
according to the models proposed by dobzhansky  <cit>  and kirkpatrick and barton  <cit> , the selective value of inversions comes from their ability to hold together sets of locally adapted alleles. however they differ on whether epistatic interactions are necessary among the alleles, and also on whether there are interactions among alleles in inverted and non-inverted chromosomes. moreover, while the kirkpatrick and barton  <cit>  model focuses on the spread of an inversion in populations due to the combination of favourable alleles, dobzhansky’s verbal arguments focused on combinations of alleles that worked together within as well as between populations, and emphasized that different combinations might be favoured in different populations even when they were in the same chromosomal rearrangement.

both these models predict that the genetic content of inverted and standard arrangements should differ, and that differences may also develop within arrangements at different sites. consistent with this, our data show there is strong differentiation between chromosome arrangements at all sites, particularly for some chromosomal regions. they also show significant differentiation among int chromosomes sampled from different sites along a latitudinal cline that is significantly greater than levels of differentiation observed at the same markers in standard chromosomes. while a small number of allozyme studies have shown differences in allelic content of the same inversion among populations in drosophila , they are characterized by low sample sizes and analyses involving only a few loci  <cit> . due to the low frequency of int at high latitudes, our high latitude site also had a low sample size. however, this is not the case for the low and mid latitude sites , which also show significant differentiation between chromosome arrangements and between sites within the same chromosome arrangement.

a similar pattern of differentiation between chromosome arrangements that we have observed here has been found in other studies  <cit> , whose authors have argued that such patterns arise through directional selection maintaining divergence between chromosome arrangements at specific loci in the face of genetic exchange between them. in our case, where there has been a recent introduction, is a low incidence of recombination adequate in explaining these patterns, without the need to invoke selection? the clustering analysis indicates that some inverted chromosomes had the allelic content of standard chromosomes, suggesting an ongoing process of recombination between the arrangements. it is interesting to note that these chromosomes were absent in the low latitude site, suggesting stronger selection against standard chromosome alleles in the inverted background at low latitudes.

recombination is also suggested by the absence of strong genetic differentiation between northern and southern australian populations in the regions spanned by int, even though there is a cline for this inversion  <cit> . recombination by crossing over should be more effective away from inversion breakpoints that maintain a strong historical signature, which may include int in drosophila <cit> . however, in our analysis there is no tendency for genetic differentiation to decrease towards the centre of this large inversion. instead a combination of ld and selection across multiple loci along the inversion may explain this pattern, although the simulations suggest that we cannot entirely rule out initial colonization of australia by individuals with inverted and standard arrangements fixed for different alleles and/or a lower than expected rate of gene exchange.

differences in genetic variation between chromosome arrangements may reflect the fact that the inversion is derived from the standard arrangement, although it is not likely that this event, estimated to be some time ago , would have much ongoing effect on microsatellite variation. alternatively, the differences may reflect a lower number of founders with the inverted arrangement at the time of colonization . however, again, we would expect this difference to break down due to recombination and gene conversion unless the effective size of a population is particularly low. indeed our simulations show that differences in allelic richness and gene diversity between chromosome arrangements would disappear relatively quickly, within the time since colonization, if the frequency of double crossovers in heterokaryotypes matches the level expected from map distances. the extent of ld between markers and the inversion was also much lower in the simulated data than was observed, even when the level of gene exchange between arrangements was low, except when the starting divergences between arrangements were extreme.

the outlier analysis provided evidence of directional selection on the adh polymorphism along the cline, but only in standard chromosomes. this result is not unexpected given the strong association between the adhf allele and standard chromosomes. based on data from previous studies and their own, veuille et al.  <cit>  reported only two inverted chromosomes with an adhf allele in a list of  <dig> chromosomes, although  <dig> were expected at random. in our survey of  <dig> chromosomes, including  <dig> inversions  and  <dig> adhf alleles , we found only two int chromosomes with an adhf allele. the proportion of int and adhf chromosomes in our study was slightly higher, but not significantly different , to the proportion reported by veuille et al.  <cit> . the strong association between standard chromosomes and adhf has been attributed to both selection and historical processes. based on molecular variation at adh, veuille et al.  <cit>  suggests that the historical explanation is more likely, with the lack of int and adhf chromosomes due to recent contact between different haplotypes that evolved in isolation.

CONCLUSIONS
genetic markers situated within the inverted regions showed high levels of differentiation between chromosome arrangements, despite the potential for recombination between chromosome arrangements as emphasized by the clustering analysis. this strong differentiation particularly away from inversion breakpoints suggests that patterns of variation are partly influenced by selection and ld. simulations provide support for this view, but more accurate estimates of gene exchange between chromosome arrangements are required and we cannot entirely rule out strong differentiation of markers in the initial colonization of australia. there was also some evidence for the development of population differentiation within arrangements and particularly the inverted arrangement. levels of genetic variation were lower within the inverted arrangement, which may reflect founder events, but selection facilitated by ld is also suggested because there was no evidence of severe reductions in effective population size. additional research on combinations of chromosomal regions should help indicate whether there are epistatic interactions among regions.

