BACKGROUND
the mineralocorticoid receptor  belongs to the steroid hormone receptor  subfamily of nuclear receptors. it plays a major role in the regulation of sodium and water homeostasis in epithelial cells of the colon and distal nephron of the kidney as part of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system . the mr derived from a common ancestor with the glucocorticoid receptor  through duplication at least  <dig> million years ago  <cit> , predating the emergence of the raas and suggesting that the mr has other more ancestral functions  <cit> . accordingly, in recent years, additional functions of the mr in cardiovascular regulation, neuronal fate and adipocyte differentiation have been discovered .

the mr is organized into three major protein regions : the n-terminal domain , the dna-binding domain , which binds to dna-sequences on target genes, and the ligand-binding domain  in the c-terminal, which binds to the steroid hormones aldosterone, cortisol and corticosterone. dbd and lbd are connected by a hinge-region .

the ntd contains two trans-activating ligand independent domains af1a  and af1b , and one inhibitory domain   <cit> . the mr recruits through its functional domains  distinct co-activator or co-repressor complexes to ensure, at the post-receptor level, transcriptional selectivity. the id is sufficient to limit the activity of the ntd when fused to either of the trans-activating domains  <cit> .

whereas the structures of lbd and dbd are already known, the folding of the ntd remains to be defined. the ntd is of particular interest because it is specific in sequence to the mr and therefore possibly explains the particular functional variability that distinguishes the mr from other steroid binding receptors. to complete the structural picture of the mr we carried out a sequence similarity analysis of the ntd. a sequence similarity search of the sequence of the human mr against the protein sequence database suggested the existence of tandem repetitive sequences evidenced by multiple partial sequence matches between the repeats in orthologs of the mr across several species.

tandem repeats form structural ensembles with peculiar characteristics. their characterization allows the prediction of secondary and tertiary structure and may be useful to suggest particular functions to specific protein regions  <cit> . to facilitate the study of the structure and function of the ntd of the mr, here we present computational analyses of tandem repeats in the ntd, to describe their evolution and predict their structure. our results suggest that these repeats fold together to form a β-solenoid domain involved in intra-and inter-molecular interactions.

RESULTS
definition of the repeat ensemble
sequence similarity search of the sequence of the human mr against the protein sequence database  indicated multiple matches of similarity between fragments of the human mr and its orthologs in several species evidencing a repetitive pattern within a region of the protein of about  <dig> amino acids. we followed up this discovery with an iterative procedure where we first aligned a selection of orthologs of the human mr, examined visually patterns of conservation in the corresponding region, and generated increasingly complex regular expressions that were used to search the aligned sequences  attempting to capture this pattern while minimizing matches outside the repeat region. the multiple sequence alignment was manually modified in some positions to align equivalent matches to the regular expression. homology of this region was restricted to actinoperygii species , which suggests that the ntd emerged with the mr, and signifies the importance of the ntd as characteristic of the functionality of the mr.

the final regular expression and its matches in a multiple sequence alignment of representative orthologs of the human mr  suggest that the tetrapoda sequences have at least  <dig> tandem repeats whereas the bony fish sequences have  <dig> tandem repeats . the repeats have a length of  <dig> amino acids with a highly conserved ser-pro motif at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  linkers between the repeats tend to be very short: for the human mr there is no gap between repeats # <dig> and # <dig>  but  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids is the most common linker length.

we did not observe this tandem repeat in the closest human paralog, the glucocorticoid receptor , or in less related human receptors , all of which share significant similarity to the dbd and lbd domains of the mr, which indicates their common evolutionary origin.

the specific presence of the tandem repeats in the mr indicates that their function is specific to this receptor. the increase in the number of repeats between bony fish and tetrapoda suggests that there was evolutionary pressure to increase the length of the ensemble of repeats once they were incorporated in an ancestral version of the mr. this probably occurred in a short  time period, that is, between the divergence of the mr from the gr around  <dig> million years ago and the divergence of tetrapoda from bony fishes around  <dig> million years ago. such variability in an overall large number of elements of an ensemble of tandem repeats suggests that they assemble in an elongated domain as opposed to repeats forming closed structures such as wd <dig> or kelch, which tend to appear in multiples of six or seven units  <cit> .

in order to search for instances of these repeats in families distant to the mr, we built a hidden markov model  of an alignment of the repeats, which was used to search the protein database . we did not find significant new hits, which supports that these repeats are unique to the mr.

finding the appropriate frame can be a problem when dealing with tandem repeats. the production of the regular expression was incremental, starting from the conserved ser-pro motif, and therefore we could have misidentified the boundaries of the repeat unit; these can be deduced from sequence analysis of the pattern of insertions , or if a well defined repeat is either followed or preceded by a region clearly not being a repeat.

as a means to complement our analysis we took advantage of several computational methods that are available as web tools for the detection of repeats in protein sequences. an overview of the results obtained with the application of these methods to the human mr is indicated in additional file 1: table s <dig>  the ser-pro motif was readily detected by some of the tools, which reproduced the frame that we deduced.

secondary structure prediction
after defining the sequence of the repeat, we tried to predict its structure. initially, we approached the prediction of the secondary structure of the repeat region using jpred <dig>  <cit> , a tool that, like most secondary structure predictors, takes advantage of the conservation patterns in a multiple sequence alignment  to aid its predictions. intriguingly, neither a default analysis of the region nor analyses on manually curated alignments of either one or two consecutive repeats resulted in any predicted secondary structure. this result might be not surprising considering that secondary structure predictors such as jpred <dig> are trained and specialized in globular proteins and might not work for isolated short sequences and regions of compositional bias.

next, we tried a computational tool that predicts contact-dependent secondary structure propensity , based on the observation that the conformational preferences of a short sequence are influenced by the context of a native protein scaffold . this method has been successfully used to detect hidden β-propensities and offers the additional advantage of accurate structure prediction even for extremely short sequences. we hypothesized that such an approach could be applied to predict the conformational preferences of the short tandem mr repeats.

as shown by the cssp profile of this domain , a short region upstream the ser-pro motif of each mr repeat, has a relatively high propensity to form a β-strand . more importantly, the cssp prediction reflected the periodicity of the repeats and even suggested the presence of two extra repeats , which we had not detected previously due to their extreme sequence divergence . according to the cssp prediction, the short β-strand is the only structural element in each mr repeat. this prediction is in line with published circular dichroism  data from a fragment of the mr repeat region , showing a relatively high content of β-strand  and β-turn  structures for this domain, in the absence of structure stabilizing agents . furthermore, the repetitive structure predicted by cssp suggests a possible assembly between consecutive mr repeats, where the short β-strands of each of the repeats pack against each other to form β-sheets.

evolution of the repeat ensemble
the similarity between d. rerio f <dig> and f <dig>  is outstanding: these repeats have  <dig> out of  <dig> identical positions , the highest level of identity among non-equivalent repeats in the dataset. this reflects a possible event of repeat duplication unique to bony fishes, suggesting evolutionary pressure to increase the size of the ensemble both in the tetrapoda and in the bony fish lineages.

the average identity between tetrapoda repeats to the equivalent human repeat shows that the repeats situated in the middle of the ensemble are more conserved ; this suggests that these repeats fold together serially forming an elongated domain where the middle repeats form a core that is more conserved than the repeats at its boundaries.

3d-structure prediction
our cssp predictions, in conjunction with published cd data on the md fragment of the mr repeats in buffer  suggested a 3d-fold formed by repeated structural units comprising short β-strands connected by turns, which is reminiscent of β-solenoids  <cit> . adding to this observation, the short length of the mr repeats  reinforces the idea of a β-solenoid fold. namely, it has been shown that the solenoid folds are predominant in proteins with repeats of  <dig> to  <dig> residues, with β-solenoids corresponding to proteins with the shorter repeats, as they require fewer residues to complete one coil of the solenoid superhelical fold  <cit> .

to test the solenoid hypothesis, we used the repetita method, which discriminates solenoid from non-solenoid proteins  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig> , the repetita output  of the tandem human mr repeats  falls into the region of solenoid proteins, suggesting a solenoid fold for this domain with high certainty, as reflected by the large distance  from the optimal line separating solenoid from non-solenoid proteins . similar results were obtained for the mouse and danio rerio mr repeat regions .

a β-helical fold can also be inferred from two additional observations: first, as detected by a sequence logo of the mr repeat sequences, the mr repeats consistently have aliphatic and polar residues  at repeat positions  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  respectively  suggesting a stacking arrangement of these residues. polar stacks, i.e., hydrogen-bonded ladders of polar side chains and especially the so-called, asparagine ladders, are indicative of right-handed parallel β-helices  <cit> . second, according to published data, in the presence of structure-stabilizing agents , the far-uv cd spectrum of the md fragment exhibited a deep minimum at ~216 nm, a cross over point near 208 nm and a large maximum at around 197 nm , which is reminiscent of the parallel β-helical spectra obtained in the case of the β-helical proteins, pele and pelc  <cit> . an additional negative band at 220-230 nm in the spectrum of the md fragment, however, resembled the signal seen with α-helices  <cit> . the cd profile of another, highly regular, β-helical protein  also, superficially, resembled the cd profile typical of an α-helix and this artifact has been attributed to the high regularity of this particular β-helix  <cit> . adding to this, other cyclic β-structures also display a cd spectrum typical of an α-helix  <cit> , showing that cd alone can be misleading in the case of some β-helical folds.

taken together, our observations, so far, support the idea of a regular parallel right-handed β-helical structure for the mr repeats.

3d-model of consecutive mr repeats
to further support the hypothesis that the mr repeats fold as a parallel β-helix we generated a detailed model of the 3d-structure of five consecutive mr repeats. first, three consecutive repeats of human mr  were modeled as a three-coiled right-handed parallel β-helix, using the crystal structure of the t. molitor antifreeze protein  as template. the choice of this particular template was based on the following similarities with the mr repeats:  similar repeat length ,  the template structure is a right-handed parallel β-helix containing single, short  β-strands in each β-helical coil, as also predicted by cssp for the mr repeat region ,  the extremely low content of hydrophobic residues  excludes the possibility of a strong hydrophobic core for the mr repeats, as is the case for the template  <cit>  and  the resemblance of the cd profile of the md fragment of the mr repeats with that of the template  suggests a similar, highly regular β-helical structure  <cit> .

in our initial 3d-model, each mr repeat was modeled as one coil of the β-helical structure, with the regions of each repeat corresponding to the consensus sequence motifs, ssv, at repeat positions  <dig> to  <dig> and spxn, at positions  <dig> to  <dig>  modeled as the short β-strand and a β-like turn of each β-helical coil, respectively . the former was based on our cssp prediction , whereas the latter was based on the observation that tetra-peptide spxx motifs fold into compact β-turn-like structures  <cit> . as in the template structure, the short β-strands pack against each other to form a three-stranded β-sheet along the axis of the β-helix . the core of the produced solenoid is formed exclusively by polar side-chains, mainly corresponding to inward-pointing serine and asparagine residues of the ssv and spxn motifs .

to test the stability of the produced β-helical model, we performed two types of independent molecular dynamics  simulations. first, and in order to overcome kinetic trapping problems, one set of long enough  replica-temperature exchange md  simulations  <cit>  was performed, at four temperatures  using implicit solvation. an additional, 50 ns long, classical md simulation was carried out at a single temperature  with explicit treatment of water , to test the stability of the initial model in a more realistic environment. the dominant cluster of the last 50 ns of the remd replica at 303 k  incorporated approximately 71% of the ensemble and corresponded to the initial β-helical fold . the modeled β-helical structure remained also stable after the solvated 50 ns md simulation , further supporting our β-helical model. conservation of the β-helical fold and of the polar core was also observed in the dominant clusters of the remd replicas at higher temperatures , suggesting a high thermal stability of this particular β-helix. indeed, burial of polar contacts has been shown to enhance the thermal stability of enzymes  <cit> .

next, two more coils, corresponding to two additional human mr repeats, were added to the initial structure to produce the 3d-model of five consecutive mr repeats . the stability of this model was subsequently tested by a 20 ns classical md simulation  with explicit treatment of water . the energy minimized model resulted from this md simulation also showed preservation of the β-helical fold and of the polar core . monitoring of the secondary structure along the 20 ns md trajectory  demonstrated that the few secondary structure elements, namely the short β-sheet  and the turn  structures of the consensus ssv and spxn motifs, remained rather stable during the entire md simulation, with the exception of the n-terminal repeat . this observation is in line with the notion that the repetitive units of solenoid proteins require one another to maintain structure  <cit> . additional, transient β-strands, packed as an extra β-sheet perpendicular to the initial one, were formed at the inter-repeat t9-t <dig>  t10-t <dig> and to a lesser extent, t11-t <dig>  regions . the coordinates of this model in pdb format are available as additional file 2: table s <dig> 

as predicted, during the course of the md simulation, similar residues stacked against each other , stabilizing the β-helical structure through hydrogen bonding along the axis of the β-helix . in particular, the side chains of the inward-pointing serines and asparagines of the conserved spxn motif of each repeat, imposed by its β-like turn structure , hydrogen bonded to main-chain carbonyl oxygens and amide nitrogens of the same and preceding β-helical coils, leading to the formation of extensive serine and asparagine ladders, respectively . such interior, polar stacks have been proposed to stabilize turns in β-helical folds  <cit> . indeed, the turn structure of the spxn motif of each mr repeat remained remarkably stable during the entire solvated 20 ns md simulation . furthermore, hydrogen bonded ladders of internal polar residues at both conserved and variant positions, reinforced the polar core of the resulting β-helix .

in its turn, the stacking of the spxn turns, through extensive hydrogen bonding along the β-helical axis, caused a remarkable stacking of the conserved prolines of this motif . proline residues, although uncommon, have been also found in other β-helical proteins  . the proline stacking predicted here for the mr repeats and a similar stacking of pro  <dig> and pro  <dig> in igf1r, demonstrate that proline residues can be accommodated in β-helices and “extend our idea of what can be efficiently stacked”, as also suggested by jenkins et al. <cit> .

the packing of polar residues into the interior of the modeled β-helix forced the few conserved aliphatic residues, at repeat position  <dig> , to adopt a solvent-exposed orientation in our initial model . during the course of the md simulations, these residues stacked  to form an external hydrophobic stripe , implying a role for this surface as an interacting platform and/or as a dimerization domain. indeed, stacking of solvent-exposed hydrophobic residues has been observed in several β-solenoids and has been mainly linked to homo-oligomerization . the conservation of the hydrophobic character of this repeat position , in conjunction with the observation that the folding of the mr-md repeat fragment is stabilized in the presence of tfe  <cit> , which mimics a partial hydrophobic environment, further support our model. furthermore, some conserved cysteine residues occupy the adjacent semi-variant repeat position  <dig> , which according to our model is also solvent-exposed  and may thus contribute to inter-molecular interactions or dimerization through the formation of inter-molecular cys-cys bonds. in addition, basic residues corresponding to mr repeat position  <dig>  also stacked during the course of the 20 ns md simulation, forming an exposed basic surface , which could also serve as a molecular recognition platform, reinforcing our idea of the mr repeat β-helical fold acting as a protein interaction and/or dimerization scaffold.

taken together, our observations strongly support a β-helical structure for the repeat region of the mr inhibitory domain.

discussion
we have described a novel repeat specific to the mr, present in bony fishes and tetrapoda, which in the human mr conforms to an ensemble of at least  <dig> repeats extending for about  <dig> aa, forming most of the inhibitory domain  of the mr. this repeat is defined by a  <dig> aa pattern with a conserved ser-pro motif at positions  <dig> and  <dig>  the spacers between the repeats are often of  <dig> or  <dig> aa, indicating that it forms a very compact structure.

this domain of tandem repeats in the mr seems to have evolved by tandem repeat duplication in “just” over  <dig> million years to a number of units that became fixed for the following  <dig> million years . we could detect only one other event of repeat duplication, which happened in bony fishes and evidenced an ancestral situation where there was evolutionary pressure to increase the size of the ensemble by repeat duplication. tandem repeat structures can easily accommodate such duplications since the packing of consecutive units is not affected by the insertion of a new one, as far as the periodicity is maintained  <cit> . the fact that in tetrapoda the number of units remained constant for  <dig> million years suggest that the length of the domain of repeats is of functional importance.

based on several lines of evidence  and using comparative molecular modeling in combination with molecular dynamics simulations, we predicted here that consecutive mr repeats are compatible with a β-solenoid fold, namely a β-helical structure. solenoid structures often serve protein-protein interactions  <cit>  and appear to promote dimerization  of multidomain proteins  <cit> . since the mr is also involved in many inter- and intra-molecular interactions  <cit> , including homo-and hetero-dimerization  <cit> , we hypothesize that the function of the repeat ensemble within the mr inhibitory domain is to serve some of these interactions by presenting various interacting surfaces through the formation of a β-solenoid fold.

indeed, according to our 3d-model, several polar residues at conserved repeat positions stack in the interior of the β-solenoid stabilizing the β-helical fold, whereas hydrophobic as well as basic residues cluster on the surface of the β-helix implying an important role of this fold and of the resulting surfaces as interacting platforms. in particular, the β-solenoid surface resulting from the stacking of the solvent-exposed conserved apolar residues at mr-repeat position  <dig> , may promote dimerization  and intra- or inter-molecular hydrophobic interactions of mr.

a study of a fragment of the id , missing repeats  <dig> to  <dig> , demonstrated that binding of several transcriptional co-regulatory proteins, acting either as co-repressors  or co-activators  required prior folding of this fragment  <cit> . on the other hand, this fragment does not seem to possess a stable structure, neither in isolation nor in the context of the full ntd, as demonstrated by cd experiments on the mr-md and mr-ntd domains in the absence of structure stabilizers  <cit> . instead, the β-helical fold of the complete repeat region may be stabilized in the context of the full receptor e.g. via an inter-domain allosteric mechanism such as the allosteric interaction between the ntd and dbd domain in response to dna binding, as proposed for other steroid receptors . acquisition of an ordered conformation, through a “cross-talk” between the ntd and an extended dbd-containing fragment of human gr has, in turn, been correlated with the interaction of the gr-ntd with co-regulatory proteins  <cit> . it is tempting to speculate that a similar “cross-talk” exists between the mr-ntd and the mr-dbd-hinge regions in response to dna binding, which in turn stabilizes the β-helical fold of the repeat region allowing interactions with co-regulatory proteins. in line with this hypothesis, the mr-ntd-dbd fragment has been shown to be able to exert trans-repression activity on a reporter gene in the presence of the smrt co-repressor, whereas this activity was abrogated when a deletion mutant, lacking the mr-md region, was used instead  <cit> . taken together, these observations strongly support the idea of a stabilized β-helical fold of the mr-repeat region in response to dna binding, serving as interaction platform for various co-repressor proteins, thus contributing to the action of this region as a transcriptional inhibitory domain .

β-solenoids have been predicted to be located immediately before and/or after functional domains  <cit>  and the mr-repeat region is flanked by the mr af1a and af1b trans-activation domains. thus, in addition to providing interaction surfaces for co-repressor proteins, the proposed β-solenoid fold of the mr-repeat region may also play an indirect role in the function of mr by e.g., regulating  the relative positioning of its transcriptional trans-activation domains. indeed, both the af1a and af1b regions have been shown to be involved in the aldosterone-specific mr inter-domain interaction between the ntd and lbd , which in addition, has been proposed to be influenced by the distance between the two interacting domains  <cit> . in support to this idea, the n/c interaction in mr was found to be specific to its n-terminus as substitution by the gr or ar n-terminus, lacking the repeat region, did not allow interaction with the mr lbd .

phosphorylation of steroid receptors has been shown to play an important role in modulating their function and most of the sites identified after hormone-treatment, include ser-pro motifs located at their ntds . the mr contains multiple phosphorylation sites regulated by different kinases , including phosphorylation of the serines of many of the spxn motifs of the repeats such as ser <dig>  <cit> , from repeat t <dig>  and serines  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> -sp-x at repeats t <dig>  t <dig>  t <dig>  t <dig>  t <dig> and t <dig>  respectively; figure 2) that were recently reported to undergo rapid aldosterone-induced phosphorylation by the erk1/ <dig> kinase  <cit> . according to our 3d-model, such serines appear to be inward-pointing and therefore inaccessible to kinases in the proposed folded form of the repeats ; their phosphorylation would require a prior opening  of the β-helical structure, at least locally. this could be achieved, for example, by another type of phosphorylation at exposed site. alternatively, unfolding prior to phosphorylation may be induced by the kinase itself. unfolding of their substrates upon docking and prior to phosphorylation has been attributed to some kinases working through docking motifs  including erk <dig>  <cit> . the observed increase of the sedimentation coefficient of ser/thr-phosphorylated mr   <cit> , suggestive of a phospho-induced opening of the mr structure, and the fact that many phosphorylation sites exist in the mr  <cit> , support the idea of a specific phospho-induced unfolding of the helical structure of the mr inhibitory domain . in further support to this idea, aldosterone-induced sequential phosphorylation of mr repeats via erk1/ <dig> results in destabilization of the receptor through a polyubiquitylation/degradation mechanism  <cit> . furthermore, the observation that this specific phosphorylation by erk1/ <dig> disrupts the tsg101/mr interaction leading to monoubiquitin removal from mr  <cit> , implies an important role of the proposed β-helical structure of these mr repeats in tsg <dig> binding and in preserving the monoubiquitylation state of the receptor. based on these observations, it is tempting to speculate that the β-helical fold may offer an additional mechanism to prevent unspecific phosphorylation of mr.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we propose that the inhibitory domain of the mr contains sequence repeats compatible with a β-helical fold offering a scaffold for multiple intra-and inter-molecular interactions  and that these interactions are modulated via conformational changes, involving β-helix to random transitions, regulated by specific kinases, thus playing an important role in the coordination and sequential interactions of various mr partners and therefore in the specificity and in the physiological function of this receptor. we expect that these results should guide future research on the mechanisms of mr function.

