BACKGROUND
nowadays, there is a trend in winemaking that consists in decreasing fermentation temperatures to improve the aromatic profile of wines. however, lowering fermentation temperatures has its disadvantages, including prolonged process duration and a greater risk of halted or sluggish fermentation  <cit> . these problems can be avoided by providing better-adapted yeasts to ferment at low temperature. although the wine industry already has yeasts that are sold as cryotolerant yeasts , most do not offer desirable fermentation performance at low temperature  and the type strain from s. kudriavzevii ifo <dig>  a cryotolerant yeast, in natural must fermentations. significant differences were found in the expression of those genes related to translation machinery. sensitivity of translation inhibitor paromomycin reflected the enhanced translation efficiency of s. kudriavzevii at low temperatures. indeed, an increased translation rate of s. kudriavzevii was observed after cold shock, suggesting that the efficiency of protein synthesis is an important process for the adaptation of yeast cells to grow at low temperatures.

RESULTS
effect of low temperature stress
previous studies in our laboratory have clearly shown growth differences among the species belonging to the genus saccharomyces in colony development on gpy plates at low temperature  <cit> . to confirm this behaviour in the strains selected for this study, we performed a dropping assay at 12°c with ifo <dig>  and used the yeast t <dig>   as a control to verify the enhanced growth of the s. kudriavzevii strain at the selected cold temperature. colonies were grown on gpy plates incubated at 12°c and 28°c to test yeast tolerance against low temperature . growth at 28°c was recorded after 36 h of incubation, while growth at 12°c was recorded after 6 days of incubation. at 28°c, both strains were able to grow until the last dilution. at 12°c, ifo <dig> reached the last dilution, while t <dig> was clearly at a disadvantage since it displayed a strong low temperature effect.figure  <dig> 
s
. kudriavzevii
has increased grow abilities at low temperature. a drop test assay was performed in rich media gpy with s. cerevisiae strain t <dig> and s. kudriavzevii strain ifo <dig> and plates were incubated at different temperatures .



differential growth kinetics was also observed during wine micro-fermentations in vessels with  <dig>  l of tempranillo grape must. at 12°c, the s. kudriavzevii strain took around 50 hours to consume 15% of sugars, almost  <dig> times less than t <dig>  which demonstrates the better adaptation of ifo <dig> to low temperature. in addition, s. kudriavzevii strain maintained a good fermentation ratio until the end . t <dig> finished in 21 days . thus, these data not only prove that the selected temperature produces a cold stress in both yeasts, although it becomes much more critical in t <dig>  and but also validate this temperature to produce differences in the adaptation of both strains to cold temperature.table  <dig> 
time needed to consume 15% , 50%  and 100%  in tempranillo must micro fermentations


t15
1
t50
1
2
1
1
2

s. cerevisiae

s. kudriavzevii

1hours, 2days. asignificant differences compared to the control strain  at the same temperature. bsignificant differences due to temperature.



differential gene expression in s. cerevisiae and s. kudriavzevii at low temperature
changes in the global expression of genes during acclimation to low temperature in the wine fermentation of natural must were analysed with microarrays containing the annotated genome of the s. cerevisiae s288c strain. this comparative transcriptomic study of s. cerevisiae and s. kudriavzevii was carried out during wine micro-fermentations in 500 ml vessels of tempranillo grape must at 12°c and 28°c with wine yeast strain t <dig> and ifo <dig>  the gene expression of these species was analysed at the beginning of the exponential phase by taking samples two generations after inoculation. after extracting rna and verifying quality, the samples were retrotranscribed to cdna, and were mixed in equal amounts and hybridised against the microarray based on the s288c genome. it should be borne in mind that an average of 86% of sequence similarity exists between s. cerevisiae and s. kudriavzevii. thus, we used heterologous conditions in the hybridisation of the cdna of both strains tested against the s. cerevisiae s288c microarrays. genomic dna hybridisations were done previously to assure the efficiency of the methodology; under our conditions, 95% of the total gene spots from the s288c array were hybridised by s. kudriavzevii dna  <cit> . the use of non-restricted conditions increases the noise, but improves the hybridisation of the s. kudriavzevii samples. the gene expression of each strain was compared at both temperatures by performing biological triplicates. significant genes with differential expressions were taken into account for further analysis using the sam  test with an fdr below 5%. table  <dig> shows the amount of the up- and down-regulated genes found in each species in relation to temperature and after comparing one species against the other. in s. cerevisiae strain t <dig>   <dig> genes were up-regulated, while  <dig> were down-regulated at 12°c, while for s. kudriavzevii, these numbers were  <dig> genes and  <dig>  respectively. the transcriptome variation between temperatures  in s. cerevisiae was compared with the transcriptome variation between temperatures  in s. kudriavzevii, and an increased expression of  <dig> genes in ifo <dig> and of  <dig> in t <dig> was observed .table  <dig> 
functional group analysis of transcriptomic data




the go terms analysis  was performed to observe the functions of the significant up- or down-regulated genes . at 12°c, t <dig> showed the go-terms cytoplasmic translation and localisation to be significantly up-regulated, whereas no functional group was found among the down-regulated genes. s. kudriavzevii also showed significantly up-regulated translation, together with the term amino acid catabolic process via the ehrlich pathway. finally, the comparison made of both species between them ended up with only one significant functional group present in the ifo <dig> up-regulated genes: translation. the presence of this go was confirmed with the funspec database that also detected other translation related functional groups  and protein complexes  . this result suggests that, although both species increased the expression of those genes related to protein biosynthesis, s. kudriavzevii has an enhanced or faster response after cold shock.

in an attempt to find the putative signal transduction pathways involved in cold adaptation, we searched the transcription factors that regulate each up-regulated gene in the yestract database  <cit> . in this search, we found that the main transcription factor was sfp1p, which regulates the transcription of ribosomal proteins and biogenesis genes, and is related to  <dig> % of the activated genes in ifo <dig> and to  <dig> % of the activated genes in the t <dig> strain. furthermore, sfp1p was the principal regulator in the genes activated when comparing both species, with  <dig> % of the genes. this result confirms not only the importance of the translation machinery in response to cold shock in both species, but also the enhanced response of s. kudriavzevii. we also found that  <dig> % of the genes induced in ifo <dig> and  <dig> % in the t <dig> strain were regulated by msn2p. this result is also interesting since the transcriptional network of the complex msn2p/msn4p has also been suggested to participate in adaptation to cold stress  <cit> .

cold stress markers in adaptation to low temperature
several genes that have been systematically found in different transcriptomic studies in response to low temperature stress are considered cold stress markers . one example of a gene induced by low temperature and involved in translation initiation is nsr <dig>  which encodes a nucleolar protein that binds nuclear localisation sequences and is required for pre-rrna processing and ribosome biogenesis. among the genes regulated by msn2p/msn4p, a paradigm group of genes systematically found in different transcriptomic studies in response to low temperature stress are different heat shock proteins related to oxidative stress. this is the case of hsp <dig>  which encodes a chaperone involved in correct protein folding under many stress conditions, including cold shock. we observed that nsr <dig> and hsp <dig> were up-regulated in both yeasts after cold shock , thus confirming once more its implication in the cellular response against low temperature stress.

the comparison made between both species showed an increased expression of other cold shock markers in the ifo <dig> strain if compared to t73: ole <dig>  tip <dig>  erg <dig> and pau <dig>  ole <dig> and erg <dig> are implicated in lipid metabolism, whereas tip <dig> and pau <dig> belong to the dan/tir family of putative cell-wall mannoproteins and its sequence-related seripauperin  family, respectively. this observation supports the idea of an enhanced transcriptional response in s. kudriavzevii as compared to s. cerevisiae after cold shock.

nsr <dig> expression profile during synthetic must fermentation
it was our intention to test the expression profile of one of the main cold markers genes defined for cold in other time points of fermentation and to know if nsr <dig> behaves similarly in both species. to do this, we did fermentations in synthetic must, a media that mimics natural must. the time points selected at both temperatures were: 2 h after inoculation, when the od doubled the initial od, in the middle of exponential phase, and finally at the start and at the end of the stationary phase  . as previously described  <cit> , cold marker nsr <dig> in the s. cerevisiae strain was induced at the beginning of growth with a much higher expression level at 12°c . this confirms the use of this gene as a cold marker. during the entrance in the stationary phase, it was repressed at 28°c and became less activated at 12°c in s. cerevisiae. in s. kudriavzevii, there a similar induction to s. cerevisiae occurred, but it was not repressed as it was in s. cerevisiae, and maintained greater activity during the rest of the process, especially at 12°c.figure  <dig> 
s. kudriavzevii
has increased expression of the cold stress gene marker
nsr1
at low temperature. gene expression measured by qpcr technique after s. cerevisiae  or s. kudriavzevii  cells were transferred to  <dig>  or 28°c  synthetic grape must. samples were taken 2 hours after the inoculation , when the od <dig> reached the double of the initial od <dig> , in the middle of exponential phase , and at the start  and at the end  of the stationary phase . average of biological triplicates was calculated and standard deviations were lower than 20%. gene expression levels are shown as the changes in the concentration of the studied gene compare to the control sample and normalized with the concentration of the housekeeping act <dig> gene. gene expression differences between  <dig> a 28°c were statistically significant, except in the case of time point a for s. kudriavzevii.



translation efficiency at low temperature
to demonstrate that s. kudriavzevii adaptation to low temperature is related to enhanced translation efficiency, we tested its sensitivity to paromomycin, a potent translation inhibitor  <cit> . we studied the paromomycin  growth inhibition of yeast cells at either 28°c or 12°c for two s. cerevisiae strains  and two s. kudriavzevii strains . a growth inhibition halo was observed under some conditions . a summary of the results, presented in table  <dig>  indicates that s. cerevisiae strains t <dig> and qa <dig> were severely affected by paromomycin at 12°c whereas the s. kudriavzevii strains showed low  or no growth inhibition at all . this result confirms the better translation performance of s. kudriavzevii at 12°c. at 28°c, the s. cerevisiae strains showed no growth inhibition, whereas s. kudriavzevii strains presented a mild negative effect of paromomycin on cell growth. this result can be explained because 28°c is a high temperature for s. kudriavzevii <cit>  and this suboptimal situation, together with paromomycin inhibitory effects, can affect cell growth.figure  <dig> 
s. kudriavzevii
presents increased translation efficiency at low temperatures. in panel a, the inhibitory effect of the translation inhibitor paromomycin was evaluated by measuring the halo diameter generated in s. cerevisiae  or s. kudriavzevii  lawns growing in gpy plates at  <dig> or 12°c. in panel b, the translation efficiency was evaluated by measuring 35s-methionine incorporation 16 h after transfer s. cerevisiae  or s. kudriavzevii  cells to cold  rich media. cpm values were normalized with od <dig>  relativized to maximum value and represented against the time. average of biological triplicates and standard deviations are shown.


sensitivity of the different yeast strains to translation inhibitor paromomycin at 28°c or 12°c


s. cerevisiae
s. kudriavzevii
size of the halo produced in the lawn of yeasts was: − , + , ++  and +++  in cm.

since the data obtained in this work suggested an enhanced response to cold shock in the s. kudriavzevii strain, especially in those genes related to translation machinery, we decided to study the translation kinetics of both species after cold shock by measuring the 35s-methionine incorporation rate before yeast cells started to grow , which is an indication of the translation rate. quantification of the 35s-methionine incorporation rate to nascent peptides after transfer yeast cells at either 28°c or 12°c culture media for two s. cerevisiae strains  and two s. kudriavzevii strains  is presented in table  <dig>  the results show that the 35s-methionine incorporation rate of both s. kudriavzevii strains was significantly lower than any s. cerevisiae strain at 28°c . in contrast at 12°c , the situation was the opposite; the 35s-met incorporation rate of both s. kudriavzevii strains was significantly higher than any s. cerevisiae strain. these results support the notion that the cryotolerant species s. kudriavzevii has an enhanced translational response after cold shock, which allows cells to better adapt to the stressful condition and start to grow.table  <dig> 
the
35
s-methionine incorporation rate
1
of the different yeast strains


s. cerevisiae
s. kudriavzevii
*significantly different  to any s. cerevisiae strain value.


1rates are expressed in cpm · uod600
−1 · h− <dig> 



discussion
temperature fluctuations are an inevitable aspect of microbial life in exposed natural environments, although sub-optimal temperatures are also common in industrial processes. low temperatures  are used in wine fermentations to enhance production and to retain flavour volatiles. although s. cerevisiae is always predominant in wine fermentations, a drop in temperature affects its competitiveness. in contrast, s. kudriavzevii showed the lowest optimum growth temperature, which confirms that this species is more psychrophilic than s. cerevisiae, and that its competitiveness increased as the fermentation temperature dropped . thus, despite them being absent in fermentative environments, s. kudriavzevii strains have a great potential for being used in wine fermentations at low temperature. moreover, if these strains are not sufficiently stress-tolerant to cope with the stress of wine fermentation conditions, they can be used to build artificial hybrids with s. cerevisiae strains. these hybrids might acquire some physiological properties of both parents. it should be noted that the natural hybrids of s. cerevisiae × s. kudriavzevii have already colonised central european wine fermentations  <cit> . the psychrophilic nature of the s. kudriavzevii strain has once again been supported by the drop test obtained at low temperature in this study.

in any case, s. kudriavzevii is a good model to study adaptation at low temperatures.. a transcriptome comparison with s. cerevisiae has shed light on the response of this cryotolerant yeast species. a common answer for both species is the presence of the up-regulated genes related to translational machinery . there are a number of publications of genome-wide analysis at low temperature . as tai et al.  <cit>  remarked, these studies present some inconsistencies; for instance, the different expression of ribosomal protein genes. since we selected a condition where cells were already growing at both temperatures, we did not expect any differences in ribosome biogenesis or proteins synthesis because these categories are typical from the start of exponential growth. on the contrary, our results reveal that both species have up-regulated go-terms related to translation, although s. kudriavzevii shows an enhanced response. we postulate that it could be the result of changes in the stability of a functional rna conformation in relation to a competing structure  <cit> . it has been described that cold sensitive phenotypes, caused by hyper-stabilisation of rna structures, can be found elsewhere in the spliceosome, where rna structures must form and then disrupt for splicing to progress. if this plasticity of rna structures is reduced by rna stabilisation due to a cold environment, the maturation of ribosomes may be in danger .

another result that relates low temperature adaptation and translation efficiency of the saccharomyces species is the differential regulation of cold shock gene marker nsr <dig>  this gene, together with other nucleolar proteins with small nucleolar rnas , is required for the normal processing of rrna precursors. these snornas associate with pre-rrna as snornp complexes and participate in the assembly of ribosomal subunits  <cit> . the plasticity of these secondary rna structures is essential to constitute snornp complexes, but secondary rna structures are highly subjected to malfunction due to low temperatures. it is possible that some of these snornas are more sensitive to cold than others, especially those required by nsr1p. studies in prokaryotes have shown the induction of a set of cold shock proteins, which include rna helicases  <cit> . it is possible that nsr <dig> can function as bacterial cold shock proteins , which destabilise the rna secondary structures that have been stabilised as an effect of low temperatures and acts as an rna chaperone. csps also present greater protein resistance to unfoldment, and therefore play an important role in adaptation to low temperature  <cit> . the interspecies differences observed in the nsr <dig> gene expression profile during a fermentative process between s. cerevisiae and s. kudriavzevii are an example of how different yeasts species adapt to low temperatures.

the different susceptibility to paromomycin suggests that other mechanisms might be implicated in s. kudriavzevii-enhanced adaptation to low temperatures. paromomycin, a potent inhibitor of translation, is a member of the aminoglycoside family of antibiotics. this family is thought to reduce the dissociation rate of a-site trna from the ribosome  <cit> . paromomycin increases the error rate of the ribosome, but it has been also described as a powerful inhibitor of ‘ribosome recycling’  <cit> . ribosome recycling represents the reaction to recycle the spent ribosome for the next round of translation of new mrna. kurata et al.  <cit>  have recently reported that paromomycin negatively affects all different ribosome recycling steps to produce a dramatic effect on translation efficiency. thus, increased resistance to paromomycin can be the result of enhanced translation efficiency due to an increased number of ribosomes available to a new round of mrna translation. since s. kudriavzevii is less affected by paromomycin at low temperatures than s. cerevisiae, our data suggest that this species has increased translation efficiency due to higher ribosome availability after adaptation to cold shock.

it is also worth mentioning the specific activation of the genes of the amino acid catabolic process via the ehrlich pathway. recently our group compared the metabolomic differences between s. cerevisiae and s. kudriavzevii <cit> . the main differences between the metabolic profiling of both species were observed for amino acids. in fact, nitrogen metabolism is one of the most affected cellular processes at low temperature in s. cerevisiae. pizarro et al.  <cit>  reported that the physiological and transcriptional response of laboratories and wine yeast strains to stress at low temperature was similar to growth under nitrogen-limiting conditions. thus, the stronger activity in s. kudriavzevii of the genes involved in one of the main amino acid pathways might represent this metabolic bottle-neck having been better surpassed in this species. as already reported tronchoni et al.  <cit> , a better adapted lipid membrane composition in s. kudriavzevii might enable better transport of nitrogen compounds and, therefore, more activity of amino acid metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
our results confirm that s. kudriavzevii is better adapted to grow at low temperatures and reveals an enhanced translation in s. kudriavzevii. our data suggest that translation efficiency can be an important target of adaptative evolution when cells face changing environments. new studies of comparative genetics could shed light on the specific mechanism underlying enhanced translation efficiency at low temperatures.

