BACKGROUND
the past decade has witnessed the evolution of ex-vivo retinal procurement and culture methodologies to study the effects of exogenous gene transfer, and/or the use of pharmacological reagents on retinal development  <cit> . several advantages are afforded by the ex-vivo approach, including the ability to target a relatively synchronous population of retinal progenitor cells  for plasmid transfection via electroporation. multiple aspects of retinal development, including detailed timing of interkinetic nuclear migration, terminal mitosis, radial migration, morphological and physiological maturity and connectivity can all be evaluated using this approach  <cit> . central to this technique, is the ability to transfect cells with plasmid dna constructs driven by either ubiquitous or cell type-specific promoters  <cit> , as well as gain-of-function and loss-of-function vectors. fluorescent reporter genes located within knockdown vector constructs or co-transfected alongside knockdown plasmids permit the identification and morphological assessment of transfected cells in time and space.

a number of publications have highlighted the advantages afforded by live imaging during retinal development  <cit> . with the use of the transparent zebrafish embryo, movement kinetics of rpcs, cell specification, and terminal mitoses can be imaged, tracked and interrogated with the aid of transgenic approaches  <cit> . although the rodent retina does not exhibit the same degree of optical accessibility and transparency to that of zebrafish embryos, imaging of explanted rodent retinas has been reported  <cit> , and has provided valuable data pertaining to retinal cellular movement and physiology. the use of higher penetrating power, 2-photon microscopy has also expanded our ability to view deep tissue phenomena. a protocol describing the use of an adaptable and portable imaging system for use with 2-photon analysis would greatly improve our ability to temporally monitor rodent retinal development.

in this report, we describe a method of maintaining explanted mouse retinas in a culture preparation that is accessible to a wide assortment of inverted and upright imaging systems. we have modified our protocols to employ a co2-independent media, and a simple, portable imaging chamber system. examples of live imaging data and analysis demonstrate that nuclear and cytoplasmic morphology, as well as detailed data pertaining to interkinetic nuclear migration can be characterized using fluorescent reporters. analysis of detailed movement kinetics with the use of hierarchical clustering analytic algorithms revealed a complex heterogeneity in nuclear migration that is sensitive to gene disruption. collectively, these methods provide a robust assay for evaluating movement kinetics, cell morphometry, and migration in the developing rodent retina, and provide new insight into the detailed kinetics of rpc function.

RESULTS
co2-independent, live retinal explant culture, immobilization and imaging
to determine whether orthogonal assessment of rpcs can be evaluated in living mouse retinas, we developed a protocol for extended maintenance of immobilized explants for use with laser scanning microscopy . p <dig> mouse retinas were dissected and transfected with a panel of fluorophore expression plasmids  via square wave electroporation as previously described  <cit> , with some modifications. in cursory evaluations under wide-field epifluorescence, we observed cytomegalovirus  promoter driven histone-2-b  - green fluorescent protein  fusion protein reporter  signal as early as ~15h post-electroporation . following 20h of culturing on polycarbonate membranes, retinas were transferred to a custom-assembled co2-independent imaging chamber adapted for imaging on either an inverted or upright microscope . following immobilization with agarose-supplemented media, retinas were maintained in normal atmospheric conditions at  <dig> degrees c for up to 7-days. fixed tissue histological comparison of agarose-embedded explants with age matched  in vivo and non-embedded explant controls revealed a high preservation of cell distribution, composition, and overall retinal integrity when cultured in agarose for 48h . despite the presence of gfp-transfected cells in explants cultured in agarose for  <dig> days, histological evaluation revealed a loss in retinal adhesion and the presence of rosette formation at this time . based on these observations, modifications to this protocol would need to be employed in order to organotypically culture beyond 48h.

with the use of laser-scanning confocal microscopy, agarose-embedded retinas were live imaged , and were compared to temporally matched  samples of fixed retinal sections that had been maintained on polycarbonate membranes, and that were prepared using conventional histological techniques . evaluation of both cytoplasmic and nuclear-localized fluorescent labeling in all explants tested revealed no discernible difference in retinal architecture when comparing live and fixed samples. similar to a previous study  <cit> , live imaging at the edge of explants revealed a folded portion of the retina that provided a cross-sectional view across the apical-basal axis . the advantage of this orientation is that most of the cellular movements  occur along the apical/basal axis, parallel to the x-y plane. thus, with the apical edge of the retina serving as a visual landmark it is much easier to correct z-axis projections for growth-related changes in cell position.

to test whether detailed morphological assessment of individual rpcs could be viewed in tandem with nuclear positioning, cmv:h2b-gfp plasmids were co-electroporated with cmv:cre and a conditional dsred reporter plasmid, pcalnl-dsred that is turned on following cre-mediated removal of a floxed stop codon  <cit> . the cmv:cre plasmid concentration was titrated down in an effort to generate unlabeled space between dsred expressing cells, allowing for a detailed view of individual cells . two-channel confocal  and 2-photon  live imaging revealed expression of gfp and dsred in all retinal explants tested.

to acquire a detailed view of morphological changes exhibited by transfected nuclei over time, we used 2-photon microscopy to acquire time series z-stacks using a 3-minute scanning interval starting at approximately 20h post-electroporation . at this level of temporal resolution, a detailed view of nuclear movement was evident, which allowed for the identification of both motile and immotile rpc nuclei. we observed clear changes in nuclear morphology in highly motile progenitors, including apical nuclear protrusions during apical migration . furthermore, evaluation of stationary cells revealed what appeared to be a maturing morphological transition from an elongated to a more rounded nucleus .

cell tracking
to determine whether a protracted view of movement kinetics can be evaluated in live mouse retinas, we acquired z-stacks using 2-photon microscopy at  <dig> minute to  <dig> hour intervals for durations up to 48h. time lapse movies demonstrated h2b-gfp labeled nuclei display robust and heterogeneous patterns of interkinetic nuclear migration and terminal mitosis during early postnatal development . to generate quantitative data pertaining to cellular movement, we tracked the position of individual nuclei over time using the mtrackj plugin for imagej . data rendered as individual traces revealed a complex and highly heterogeneous population of rpc interkinetic nuclear movements . to validate the utility of this approach to measure cell cycle kinetics and gene disruption, we compared h2b-gfp  nuclear traces to those nuclei in which cell cycle progression was disrupted using an arsenate resistance protein-2-gfp fusion protein expression plasmid . ars <dig> has been shown to interfere with cell cycle progression in highly proliferative populations in plants and animals, and misexpression functions as a dominant-negative  <cit> . evaluation of ars2-gfp transfected retinas revealed a clear difference in y-axis position over time, with reduction in both the minimum and maximum apical/basal ranges travelled by those nuclei .

statistical screening of rpc movement kinetics
in an effort to characterize the movement kinetics of tracked nuclei, we initiated a series of statistical screens with the aim of identifying specific analytic algorithms that can be used to isolate individual categories of rpc movements . as a starting point, we identified four visually predominant categories of nuclear movement by reviewing individual raw data traces acquired for h2b-gfp labeled  nuclei . these categories include: 1) quivering nuclei, which displayed a heterogeneous apical/basal range of movement, with a relatively high frequency of direction change; 2) smooth tracking nuclei, which displayed a heterogeneous apical/basal range, but with a relatively low frequency of direction change; 3) erratic tracking, which is comprised of a relatively homogeneous apical/basal range, with a relatively high frequency of direction change; and 4) mitotic events. lists of cases  that exhibited one of the four identified categories of movement were compiled and used as a reference population for follow-up statistical screening. our statistical screening method involved the use of hierarchical cluster analysis, based on the hypothesis that we would be able to accurately and reproducibly re-capitulate the membership of individual nuclear traces to the same categories of movement established though visual identification. the hierarchical cluster analytic approach was chosen, mainly because it is a simple and well-established statistical approach to segmentation and partitioning of multidimensional data in to groups. in our approach, clustering by this method is achieved using the ward’s method with squared euclidian distances of hierarchical clustering, which calculates the statistical distance of individual data points, based on any one, all, or combination of imagej-generated dependent variables . clusters are generated by minimizing the total within-cluster variance after merging cases. data was first standardized into z-scores for use with this approach. as outlined in figure  <dig>  we used data  acquired for  y-position,  length of each trace,  distance to start, and  distance to next point, for use with hierarchical clustering. individual dependent variable data categories, as well as iterations of all combinations of those variables were used to comprehensively screen all clustering possibilities afforded by the tracking data. the resulting dendrogram output  summarized the clustering products generated from each analysis. dendrogram clusters that exhibit longer horizontal axis stems are defined as having stronger clustering relationships compared to those with shorter stems. data were then screened for enrichment of cases that had been previously identified as belonging to individual movement categories. our criteria for selecting algorithms for the identification of particular movement kinetics included that each algorithm be able to exclusively identify cases that belong to that movement category. by extension, we select against algorithms which identified a particular movement, but that also contained cases that belong to other movement categories. the results of our hierarchical cluster screen  indicated that the identification of individual movement kinetics can be isolated with high accuracy using either individual measures, or combinations of dependent variable data using this approach. algorithms that included single, two and three dependent measures were all represented in accurate clustering solutions, indicating a need for multiple dependent measures for use in analyzing complex movement kinetics .

to validate the utility of these screening algorithms, we analyzed tracking data acquired from  <dig> nuclei derived from  <dig> hours of live imaging . using analytic algorithms identified from initial screening , we tested whether progressive inclusion of more dependent measures increased the efficacy of movement clustering . comparison of single variable , bivariate  and multivariate  hierarchical clustering revealed an increase in the clustering efficiency contained within the solutions. for example, comparison of distance to next point univariate clustering to that which uses all four measures revealed a striking increase in natural clustering, as defined by longer x-axis stems and visual inspection of traces. to test the applicability of this method in comparing control retinas to those in which the cell cycle was disrupted by expression of ars2-gfp, we employed the same hierarchical screening method and compared these retinas to those transfected with h2b-gfp . all tracking data from ars2-gfp and h2b-gfp retinas were combined and randomized. using all four dependent variable measures, our screen accurately clustered control nuclei with 100% accuracy, knockdown  nuclei with  <dig> % accuracy, and mitotic nuclei with 100% accuracy in merged and randomized datasets. together, these data indicate that detailed movement kinetics can be isolated and compared statistically, both in the context of exploring movement characteristics, and when comparing control and experimental manipulations.

discussion
live tissue imaging provides a means by which a relatively low number of explant preparations can be used to evaluate multiple time points, without affecting the statistical power required to evaluate the effect size. this is due, in part, to reduced variability when estimating treatment effects resulting from the processing of multiple samples, and increased power afforded by the repeated measures analysis. this approach is particularly advantageous during early pilot studies involving any characterization of effects over time, wherein 4d analysis with sufficient time resolution will allow one to precisely identify the onset of a treatment effect. high temporal resolution data pertaining to cellular movement, distribution and morphology are also highly informative, particularly with regard to interkinetic nuclear migration, mitosis, and terminal migration kinetics. when used in conjunction with cell-type-specific reporters, one can extend this analysis to include the onset of fate specification in relation to cell cycle exit.

live imaging and orientation
with the use of either confocal or 2-photon imaging systems, we can evaluate z-stacks acquired at regular intervals from a single live sample explant. this approach can be utilized to acquire time-series stacks in 4d, with the option of using single or multi-channel scanning acquisitions. data from individual cells can be acquired through identification of transfected cells via fluorescent reporter constructs used in the transfection protocol . one key aspect to this analysis is the orientation and visualization of the retinal cell layers, which becomes accessible during the natural folding of the retinal explant during procurement and culture   <cit> . careful microscopic exploration of the folded portion of the retina will reveal a “histologically-analagous” view of the retinal layering, which provides an anatomically familiar field to work with. this annulus of imageable tissue is comprised of retina located approximately half way between the central retina and peripheral margin . the use of cytoplasmic and nuclear reporter constructs  provides an abundance of morphological reference for orientation, and can be used as reference points for any corrections in the xyz alignment over time. it is suggested that the experimenter adjust the amount of plasmid that is transfected according to the type of analysis being performed. for example, we have found that in nuclear tracking experiments, it is more difficult to distinguish individual cells in explants with a very high transfection efficiency.

plasmid selection
the selection of plasmids for use in these experiments is rapidly expanding, and includes anything from general fluorescent reporter expression, to overexpression constructs, knockdown vectors and physiological sensors. for gene disruption studies, we employ the use of fluorophore-expressing shrna-based knockdown constructs . as an example, these vectors, which provide cytoplasmic and nuclear localized turbo-gfp, can be co-transfected with chromatin-binding  fluorescent fusion protein constructs. this approach, when using 2-channel scanning, provides the ability to discriminate between nuclear and cytoplasmic domains, and can be used to quantify phenotypes related to gene disruption. in addition to ubiquitous fluorophore expression, cell fate analysis can also be evaluated with the use of cell type-specific reporter vectors  <cit> . these reporter constructs contain promoter sequences that drive fluorophore expression during the specification of sub-types or classes of cells. examples of commonly used retinal cell fate reporters include nrl- , cralbp , cabp <dig> , and hes <dig>   <cit> , all of which are available through addgene . these plasmid-based reporter strategies can be used in conjunction with pharmacological manipulation, and the use of thymidine analogues for follow-up lineage tracing and cell cycle analysis. upon completion of live imaging, explants can either be fixed for post hoc histological evaluation, or dissociated for use with flow cytometry.

CONCLUSIONS
our method offers a simple and affordable way to evaluate the kinetics of mammalian retinal development in live explants, and to analyze various features of rpc movement using a relatively simple series of statistical algorithms. although this work focused on nuclear movement, our data also indicates that this method provides sufficient spatial and temporal resolution for use in many other areas of investigation, including terminal migration and evaluating subcellular changes in reporter localization.

