BACKGROUND
a number of models approach the computational modelling of primary visual cortex by using two processing stages. first, there is a linear filtering with filters that are bandpass, oriented, and spatially localized. in some models, the outputs of the linear filters are half-wave rectified, but this difference is inessential because a rectification is done in the second stage anyway. the second stage then consists of pooling together rectified outputs of the first stage, so that cells that have the same orientation and frequency, as well as similar spatial locations, are pooled together. this pooling is then essentially a summation of rectified outputs of filters of different phases. these two processing steps are assumed to roughly correspond to simple and complex cells in v <dig>  respectively. while there is controversy of the validity of such models, see e.g.  <cit> , this is probably the simplest and most succesful approach.

recent research has seen a number of models that attempt to explain these processing stages based on statistical modelling of natural images . first, application of independent component analysis   <cit>  or sparse coding  <cit>  shows that the statistically optimal linear features of natural images are very similar to those computed in simple cells in v <dig>  <cit> . second, application of a variant of ica in which some pooling is done in a second stage leads to processing that is similar to what is done in complex cells  <cit> . thus, models based on natural image statistics have been able to succesfully reproduce the above-mentioned two stages, and many well-known observations on v <dig> 

it would be most useful if we could use this modelling endeavour in a predictive manner, so that we would be able to predict properties of cells in the visual cortex, in cases where the properties have not yet been demonstrated experimentally. this would give testable, quantitative hypotheses that might lead to great advances, especially in the research in extrastriate areas such as v <dig>  whose function is not well understood at this point.

here, we attempt to accomplish such predictive modelling in order to predict properties of a third processing step, following the two described above. previously, we have applied a modification of the ica / sparse coding model on the outputs of modelled complex cells whose input consisted of natural images  <cit> . the modification consisted of assuming that the coefficients in the generative decomposition, as well as the values of the higher-order features, were all non-negative.

we extend our previous results in two ways. the complex cells in our previous work were all constrained to have the same frequency, which was done in order to reduce the computational load. here, we first report a technical advance: it is not necessary to make the assumptions of nonnegativity as in  <cit> . thus, we are able to use the conventional, computationally optimized ica algorithms, in particular the fastica algorithm  <cit> . we are then easily able to incorporate complex cells of different frequencies in the input without exceeding available computational resources. this enables us to study whether some kind of interaction between different frequencies emerges in the statistically optimal higher-order representation.

RESULTS
experiment 1: using ordinary ica with no constraints
as described in methods, we input a large number of natural image patches into model complex cells that computed the sum of squares of outputs of two simple cells, one odd-symmetric and the other even-symmetric. then, we performed independent component analysis of the complex cell outputs using the fastica algorithm.

in the first experiment, we used only the output from complex cells in a single frequency band, f <dig> in figure  <dig>  the purpose was to show that the results in  <cit>  can be replicated using ordinary ica methods.

the higher-order features are represented by their basis vectors ai which show the contribution of the third-stage feature of index i on the activities of complex cells. a collection of the obtained basis vectors is shown in figure  <dig> for the nonlinearity g <dig> , visualized in the same way as in  <cit> , see methods. we can see the same kind of emergence of collinear features as in  <cit> . that is, the higher-order features code for the simultaneous activation of complex cells that together form something similar to a straight line segment.

those coefficients that are clearly different from zero have almost always the same sign in a single basis vector. defining the sign as explained in methods, this means that the coefficients are essentially non-negative. we thus see that the constraint of non-negativity of the basis vectors imposed in  <cit>  has little impact on the results: even without this constraint, the system learns basis vectors which are mainly non-negative.

other fastica nonlinearities led to similar basis vectors. however, some led to a larger number of longer contours. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of lengths for different nonlinearities. the nonlinearity g <dig>  seems to lead to the largest number of long contours.

experiment 2: emergence of pooling over frequencies
in the second experiment, the complex-cell set was expanded to include cells of three different preferred frequencies. in total, there were now  <dig> complex cells. we performed ica on the complex-cell outputs when their input consisted of natural images. thus, we obtained  <dig> higher-order basis vectors  ai with corresponding activities si.

we visualized a random selection of higher-order features learned from natural images in figure  <dig>  the visualization shows that the features tend to be spatially localized and oriented, and show collinearity as in experiment  <dig>  what is remarkable in these results is that many cells pool responses over different frequencies. the pooling is coherent in the sense that the complex cells that are pooled together have similar locations and orientations. a smaller number of cells is shown in more detail in figure  <dig>  where the coefficients in all orientation bands are shown separately.

we computed the frequency pooling measure pi in equation  of methods for the learned basis vectors. the distribution of this measure for natural image input and white gaussian noise input is shown in figure  <dig>  the figure shows that frequency pooling according to this measure was essentially nonexistent for white gaussian noise input, but relatively strong for many basis vectors when the input consisted of natural images. to express this more quantitatively, we computed the 99% quantile for the white gaussian noise input. then, 59% of the basis vectors for natural image input had a pooling index pi that was larger than this quantile.  thus, we can say that more than half of the higher-order basis vectors, when learned from natural images, have a pooling over frequencies that is significantly above chance level.

to show that the pooling measure is valid, and to further visualize the frequency pooling in the higher-order features, we chose randomly basis vectors learned from natural images that have pooling significantly over chance level . these are plotted in figure  <dig>  visual inspection shows that in this subset, all basis vectors exhibit pooling over frequencies that respects the orientation tuning and collinearity properties.

the corresponding results when the input is white gaussian noise are shown in figure  <dig>  for a smaller number of higher-order cells.  pooling over frequencies as well as collinearity are minimal. some weak reflections of these properties can be seen, presumably due to the small overlap of the filters in space and frequency, which leads to weak statistical correlations between complex cells that are spatially close to each other or in neighbouring frequency bands.

we also examined quantitatively whether the higher-order features are tuned to orientation. we investigated which complex cell has the maximum weight in ai for each i in each frequency band. when the input consisted of natural images, in 86% of the cells the maximally weighted complex cells were found to be located at the hot-spot *  and tuned to the preferred orientation of the higher-order feature for every frequency f. this shows how the higher-order features are largely selective to a single orientation. when the input consisted of gaussian white noise, only 34% of the cells were found to be orientation-selective according to this criterion.

finally, we synthesized images from higher-order feature activities to further visualize the higher-order features . figure  <dig> shows a slice orthogonal to the preferred orientation of one higher-order basis vector . the intensity of the synthesized image shows no side-lobes , while representing a sharp, localized edge. in contrast, synthesis in the white gaussian noise case  gives curves that have either side-lobes like the underlying gabor filters, or do not give a sharp localized edge. thus, the curve obtained from synthesis of the features learned from natural images corresponds better to the notion of an edge. we propose that the utility of pooling over frequencies is due to the broadband nature of real-world edges. typical edges in natural images are probably not very similar to typical band-pass gabor functions  which have oscillations. a proper representation of such broad-band edges would seem to require pooling over different frequencies.

discussion
frequency channels and edges
what is the functional meaning of the pooling we have found? we propose that this spatially coherent pooling of multiple frequencies leads to representation of an edge that is more realistic than the band-pass edges given by typical gabor filters  <cit> . presumably, this is largely due to the fact that natural images contain many sharp, step-like edges that are not contained in a single frequency band. thus, representation of such edges is difficult unless information from different frequency bands is combined.

in terms of frequency channels, the model predicts that frequency channels should be pooled together after complex cell processing. models based on frequency channels and related concepts have been most prominent in image coding literature in recent years, both in biological and computer vision circles. the utility of frequency channels in the initial processing stages is widely acknowledged, and it is not put into question by our results – in fact, the statistical modelling framework does show that using band-pass simple and complex cells is statistically optimal  <cit> . however, the question of when the frequency channels should be pooled or otherwise combined has received little attention  <cit> . our results point out that a statistically optimal way is to pool them together right after the complex cell "stage", and this pooling should be done among cells of a given orientation which form a local, collinear configuration.

related work
several investigators have looked at the connection between natural image statistics, gestalt grouping rules, and local interactions in the visual cortex  <cit> . however, few has considered the statistical relations between features of different frequencies so far. it should be noted that some related work on interactions of different frequencies does exist in the models of contrast gain control  <cit> .

compared to our own previous work  <cit> , the main difference seems to be in the frequency tuning of the model complex cells. in  <cit> , the complex cells were all constrained to have the same spatial frequency tuning – just as in experiment  <dig> of the present paper. therefore, it was impossible to obtain results related to frequency pooling. it seems that any differences in the results are not due to differences in the statistical analysis of the complex-cell outputs or the natural image data set used, because in experiment  <dig> of the present paper, we essentially replicated the results of  <cit> . the statistical model for analyzing the outputs of complex cells was somewhat different in our earlier work: the components si and the coefficients aki were constrained to be non-negative, following proposals by  <cit> . however, this constraint seems to be immaterial, because even without imposing the constraint, the coefficients turned out to be essentially non-negative .

recent measurements from cat area  <dig>  emphasize responses to "second-order" or "non-fourier" stimuli, typically sine-wave gratings whose amplitudes are modulated  <cit> . these results and the proposed models are related to our results and predictions, yet fundamentally different. in the model in  <cit> , a higher-order cell pools outputs of complex cells in the same frequency band to find contours that are defined by texture-like cues instead of luminance. the same cell also receives direct input from simple cells of a different frequency, which enables the cell to combine luminance and second-order cues. this is in stark contrast to higher-order cells in our model, which pool outputs of complex cells of different frequencies. they can hardly find contours defined by second-order cues; instead they seem to be good for coding broad-band contours. furthermore, in  <cit> , any collinearity of pooling seems to be absent. this naturally leads to the question: why are our predictions so different from these results from area 18? we suspect this is because it is customary to think of visual processing in terms of division into frequency channels – "second-order" stimuli are just an extension of this conceptualization. therefore, not much attempt has been made to find cells that break the division into frequency channels according to our prediction. on the other hand, one can presume that the cells found in area  <dig> in  <cit>  are different from our predictions because they use a different coding strategy from the one used in our model, perhaps related to the temporal aspects of natural image sequences  <cit> .

another closely related line of work is by zetzsche and coworkers  <cit>  who emphasize the importance of decomposing the image information to local phase and amplitude information. the local amplitude is basically given by complex-cell outputs, whereas the physiological coding of the local phases is not known. an important question for future work is how to incorporate phase information in the higher-order units. some models by zetzsche et al actually predict some kind of pooling over frequencies, but rather directly after the simple cell stage .

towards predictive modelling
the present results are an instance of predictive modelling, where we attempt to predict properties of cells and cell assemblies that have not yet been observed in experiments. to be precise, the prediction is that in v <dig>  there should be cells whose optimal stimulus is a broad-band edge that has no sidelobes while being relatively sharp, i.e. the optimal stimulus is closer to a step-edge than the band-pass edges that tend to be optimal for v <dig> simple and complex cells. the optimal stimulus should also be more elongated  <cit>  than what is usually observed in v <dig>  while being highly selective for orientation.

statistical models of natural images offer a framework that lends itself to predictive modelling of the visual cortex. first, they offer a framework where we often see emergence of new kinds of feature detectors – sometimes very different from what was expected when the model was formulated. second, the framework is highly constrained and data-driven. the rigorous theory of statistical estimation makes it rather difficult to insert the theorist's subjective expectations in the model, and therefore the results are strongly determined by the data. third, the framework is very constructive. from just a couple of simple theoretical specifications, e.g. non-gaussianity, natural images lead to the emergence of complex phenomena.

we hope that the present work as well as future results in the same direction will serve as a basis for a new kind of synergy between theoretical and experimental neuroscience.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that pooling over complex cells of different frequency preferences emerges when we model the statistical properties of natural images. this is accomplished by applying ordinary ica on a set of modelled complex cells with multiple frequencies, and inputting natural images to the complex cells. the resulting independent components, as represented by the corresponding basis vectors, code for simultaneous activation of complex cells that have similar orientations, form a collinear configuration, and span multiple frequencies. thus, statistical modelling of natural stimuli leads to an interesting hypothesis on the existence of a new kind of cells in the visual cortex.

