BACKGROUND
with the availability of an ever-increasing number of whole genome sequences, evolutionary history can be analysed genetically on a more comprehensive level. among microorganisms, phylogenetic relationships have traditionally been defined by phenotypic characters. with current comparative genomics, evolutionary distances may be inferred more thoroughly, independent of variable expression profiles or morphological characteristics. recently, a number of studies suggested taxonomy should be based on whole genomic dna content in order to more properly reflect evolutionary relationships  <cit> . these studies concur with previous observations by coenye and vandamme, who tested phylogenetic consistency of a number of parameters in the lactic acid bacteria, including 16s rdna identity, genome synteny, identity of several house-keeping genes, codon usage and the genome signature similarity. they concluded that these genomic parameters largely agree with each other  <cit> .

the latter parameter, the genome signature, is a compositional parameter reflecting the dinucleotide relative abundance values, which are similar between closely related species, and dissimilar between non-related species  <cit> . the difference in genome signature between two sequences is expressed by the genomic dissimilarity , which is the average absolute dinucleotide relative abundance difference between two sequences. this parameter is suitable for intragenomic detection of putative horizontally acquired sequences  <cit> , and recently an online tool was made available to detect compositional dissimilarity between input sequences and representative whole genome sequences  <cit> , which has shown for example that plasmids are more dissimilar in composition compared to their host genomes than previously anticipated  <cit> , and that genomic islands can be clustered by similarities in dinucleotide composition  <cit> . although genome signature analyses have been used for both intragenomic comparisons  <cit>  and for intergenomic analyses  <cit> , these analyses were predominantly performed on relatively few, or only partial, prokaryotic genomes. while genome signatures had been analysed prior to the genomic era  <cit> , intra- and intergenomic comparisons based on the genome signature between eukaryotes have been scarce  <cit> . however, a recent study on several eukaryotic genome sequences  based on short range correlations in dna sequences, showed that in most cases, chromosomes originating from the same species cluster together  <cit> .

in order to assess the applicability of the genome signature in phylogenetic analyses in general, we performed a comprehensive interchromosomal comparison of prokaryotic genome signatures. using  <dig> prokaryotic genome sequences, we tested the congruence of the genome signature with the current genus and species nomenclature, and compared the signal of the genome signature to the phylogenetic signal of 16s rdna identity scores.

RESULTS
prokaryotic whole genome signature comparisons
we calculated the genomic dissimilarity values  between all  <dig> available prokaryotic genome sequences available at the time of analysis . we partitioned this large dataset to three smaller subsets to investigate specific topics : the δ* values between chromosomes from the same genus , the δ* values between chromosomes from the same species , and δ* values of prokaryotes with multiple chromosomes . genera are defined as organisms with the same genus name, and species are defined as organisms with the same genus name and the same specific designation, with two exceptions: shigella spp., which are considered the same species as escherichia coli  <cit> , and the bacillus cereus cluster, consisting of bacillus anthracis, bacillus cereus and bacillus thuringensis, which are also considered the same species  <cit> . indeed, for both these exceptions, intraclade δ* values are very low as mentioned previously  <cit> .

intrageneric compositional comparison of whole genomes
average intrageneric δ* values for  <dig> different genera consisting of both archaea and bacteria  are depicted in figure  <dig>  indicating a large variation in the genome signature, with an average intrageneric δ* score of  <dig> . all chromosomes from different species of the same genus were compared for these analyses, but intraspecific comparisons were carried out separately. extreme δ* values of intergeneric comparisons were highlighted in red  and blue .

the four genera with very high intrageneric δ* values are chlorobium, helicobacter, mycoplasma and treponema. although the chlorobium genome sequences are available, the sequences are unpublished, and it is therefore unclear why the genome signature between species of the same genus would differ so greatly. from the general genomic attributes at ncbi  <cit> , it is obvious however that the genomes of chlorobium chlorochromatii and chlorobium tepidum differ substantially in gc% content , and to a lesser extent in genome size , suggesting a substantial phylogenetic distance. this however conflicts with the 16s rdna sequence identity of 92%.

the reason for the high genomic dissimilarities between the genomes of helicobacter hepaticus and the two helicobacter pylori strains are possibly due to substantial differences in gene complement  between members of this genus  <cit> . a large phylogenetic distance between these species has been observed previously  <cit> , and whole genome analyses by dewhirst and co-workers support a phylogeny that places h. hepaticus more closely related to wolinella succinogenes than to helicobacter pylori  <cit> . the latter study actually supports hgt of 16s sequences, thus obscuring single locus-based phylogenies for this genus.

the mycoplasma spp.  and the treponema spp. show low intrageneric 16s rdna sequence identity scores , which had already been noted for a subset of the mycoplasma spp. genome sequences  <cit> . these two genera also show large intrageneric phylogenetic distances in a tree of life study based on universally conserved genes  <cit> .

the four genera with very low intrageneric δ* values are bartonella , bordetella , salmonella  and yersinia . these values are lower than the average intraspecific δ* values . all species that constitute these four genera have nearly identical 16s rdna sequences , thus corroborating the established close, possibly intraspecific, evolutionary relationship.

intraspecific compositional comparisons of whole genomes
although no archaeal genome sequences of the same species are currently available, for  <dig> bacterial species there are two or more genome sequences available , allowing the detection of variation of δ* of genome sequences from the same species. the average intraspecific genomic dissimilarity values are depicted in figure  <dig>  with an average intraspecific δ* of  <dig> . four clear outliers are detected with substantially higher δ* values , originating from intraspecific comparisons between the genomes from rhodopseudomonas palustris, prochlorococcus marinus, buchnera aphidicola and pseudomonas fluorescens .

except for b. aphidicola, for which the intraspecific 16s rdna sequence identity is low for members of the same species , the other 16s rdna sequence identities are >96%. however, for the p. marinus genomes, the range of genomic gc percentages is considerable , and the genome sizes differ substantially , suggesting that these organisms may not be the same species, they contain similar 16s rdna sequences due to hgt of these loci or that acquisition of large amounts of anomalous dna plays an important role in the genome organization and nucleotide composition.

for both p. fluorescens genomes, a difference in genome size is observed , but the difference in gc percentage is relatively small.

congruence between genomic dissimilarity values and 16s rdna identity values of different bacterial species
it had been suggested previously that various genomic parameters are congruent in their phylogenetic signal  <cit> . we compared eight sets of genomic dissimilarity values with 16s rdna sequence identity scores between eight different groups of species; one group containing the b. cereus cluster, and seven groups of several related species . an inverse correlation between these two parameters is observed , although incongruities are visible .

whole genome comparisons of prokaryotic chromosomes of species with multiple chromosomes
sixteen prokaryotic species contain more than one chromosome and the δ* values between the two chromosomes of the same strains are illustrated in figure  <dig> . on average, the δ* value between two chromosomes from the same species is  <dig> . four outliers are circled; the two higher outliers are comparisons between chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> from burkholderia spp.  <dig> and chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> from burkholderia xenovorans, indicating a very high genomic dissimilarity between these chromosomes and thereby suggesting an exogenous origin for chromosome  <dig> in these species . the two lower outliers are the two different chromosome i and chromosome ii comparisons from the two leptospira interrogans species. the intragenomic δ* value is  <dig>  for l. interrogans serovar copenhageni and  <dig>  for l. interrogans serovar lai suggesting a longer shared evolutionary history.

CONCLUSIONS
traditionally, the assignment of taxonomical appropriate names to microbes was based on phenotypic characters, such as gram stains or the possession of cell walls. currently, with over  <dig> whole genomes sequenced, there is ongoing debate to re-evaluate the prokaryotic species definition  <cit> . one such attempt, considering different genomic parameters, was performed by coenye and vandamme  <cit> , who compared different phylogenetic approaches on the lactic acid bacteria. they concluded that the different approaches agreed well, although these do not necessarily provide much additional information about phylogenetic relationships. in our study, we analysed the overall consistency of the phylogenetic signal of the genome signature in  <dig> prokaryotic. we tested the congruence between the δ* intragenerically, intraspecifically, and the δ* values with their corresponding 16s rdna sequence identity values.

for some species  it was known that they are probably the same species, and the low values for δ* corroborate this  <cit> . comparison of the intrageneric δ*  and intraspecific δ*  shows various intrageneric values to be well in the range of intraspecific values, suggesting that there are more clusters that may actually constitute one species. this is the case for the different bartonella spp., bordetella spp., salmonella spp. and yersinia spp., this may also hold true for m. bovis and m. tuberculosis, and the l. innocua and l. monocytogenes species. for these six groups, the 16s rdna data support the notion of very close phylogenetic relationships.

in contrast, four extreme intraspecific δ* values are within the intrageneric range. the different b. aphidicola species display high genomic dissimilarity values as well as low 16s rdna sequence identity scores, suggesting these might actually be different species. this is in agreement with an estimated divergence time of over  <dig> million years  <cit> . the reason why the different species of r. palustris, p. marinus and p. fluorescens display high δ* values, while the ribosomal sequences of the individual species are nearly identical remains unclear, although very long branches have been observed between members of these species in different phylogenetic studies  <cit> . it is of note that between the different p. marinus genomes substantial differences in size and gc percentage are observed.

generally, an inverse relation between δ* and 16s is found, but the perceived resolution of this relation seems low and therefore δ* values alone seem insufficient to infer reliable phylogenetic relationships. also, it is not possible to infer a reliable phylogenetic clustering based on distance matrices as bootstrapping is not possible.

for some prokaryotic species containing multiple chromosomes it had been suggested that the secondary chromosome may have been acquired via horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . we find that the genomic dissimilarity between the two primary chromosomes in bacteria is generally low, but it is higher than the genomic dissimilarity between chromosomes from the same species, supporting the hgt hypothesis. intragenomic dispersal of dna can ameliorate the dissimilarity in genome signature, obscuring compositional dissimilarities over time  <cit> . a consequence of this is that different chromosomes found in metagenomic analyses can not readily be grouped into genomes for prokaryotes, though this is a minor problem as most prokaryotes have single chromosome genomes. we find that each intragenomic comparison of the two chromosomes of the different vibrio genomes yields a higher δ* value than the average of δ* =  <dig>  in intraspecific comparisons . secondary chromosomes are present in all sequenced genomes of vibrio spp., and if they have been present in each genome since the split of the different vibrio spp. the different chromosomes in each genome should have had ample time to ameliorate towards more similar dinucleotide frequencies. the fact that the different chromosomes of each vibrio genome are still dissimilar from each other in composition may be caused by an instable chromosome ii, which is known to be less well-conserved between the different vibrio species than chromosome i  <cit> .

the precise origin of the genome signature is still unknown. for the gc percentage it has been suggested that certain environmental conditions shape the nucleotide composition  <cit> . this has also been found to be the case for the genome signature  <cit> , although the exact effect of different conditions on different genome sequences remains unknown. it is likely that mutational pressures direct the shape of the genome signature, but the fact that secondary chromosomes in most cases remain dissimilar from the primary chromosomes underscores our lack of understanding of the factors that shape the nucleotide composition.

in conclusion, the genome signature is more similar between closely related species, and increases with larger phylogenetic distances, but this relation seems inadequate to infer phylogenetic relationships by itself. unfortunately, distance matrices based on single values, as is the case with δ* scores, are not amenable to bootstrapping, so robust phylogenetic analysis can not be inferred from δ* values for prokaryotes. this parameter does however have a strong phylogenetic signal and can therefore be used to support or contradict a given phylogeny and resulting taxonomy. the combination of δ* and 16s rdna data given above for mycobacteria, listeria, prochlorococcus and buchnera provide convincing evidence for a re-evaluation of these taxonomic relationships. also, if there are no additional ways to infer relationships  the genome signature may help to cluster chromosomes, although the intragenomic δ* scores can be relatively high in multichromosomal genomes from prokaryotes.

