BACKGROUND
currently, two competing hypotheses describe the phylogenetic position of onychophorans ; they represent either the sister group of arthropods or the sister group of arthropods plus tardigrades . despite this ongoing debate, onychophorans play a key role for understanding the evolution of panarthropoda  and accordingly are a broadly investigated animal group .

one of the most enigmatic features of panarthropods is segmentation, which is evident in both arthropods and tardigrades, yet questionable in onychophorans. at first appearance, neither of the onychophoran groups  shows a conspicuous external segmentation , as clear boundaries of the cuticle are lacking  <cit> . the sole exception seems to be the appearance of segmentally repeated legs, although a closer look reveals additional segmental structures such as the ventral and preventral organs and crural papillae . internally, onychophorans also exhibit both segmental and non-segmental features. whereas some structures such as pairs of leg nerves, nephridia, ostia of the heart and cellular strands associated with the midgut are segmentally repeated, other structures e.g. longitudinal musculature and ring and median commissures show no segmental arrangement . thus, the question arises of whether or not onychophorans are truly segmented animals or, more precisely, how much segmentation is actually present in onychophorans. to clarify this issue, it is important to define what a segment is and how segmentation evolved. to date, two competing interpretations of segmentation suggest that a segment either evolved as a holistic unit composed of at least six substructures  <cit> , which has been multiplied as a whole along the body, or that segmentation is simply the sum of individual repeated structures that resulted from concerted evolution . the latter hypothesis receives additional support from intermediate degrees of segmentation occurring in onychophorans  <cit> .fig.  <dig> general anatomy and organisation of the central nervous system in onychophora. walking specimens of principapillatus hitoyensis  and euperipatoides rowelli . c simplified diagram showing the entire onychophoran central nervous system with the brain situated within the head and the two ventral nerve cords located in the trunk. d dissected single nerve cord from a specimen of p. hitoyensis. anterior is up. note the slight swelling in each leg-bearing region . an, antenna; at, antennal tract; br, brain; le, leg; ln, leg nerve; nc, nerve cord; mc, median commissure; rc, ring commissure; sp, position of slime papilla. scale bar: 50 μm 




comparative analyses of the nervous system are of particular use for clarifying such issues  <cit> . one of the most intriguing aspects of the arthropod and tardigrade nervous systems is the segmental organisation of their ventral nerve cords , which are subdivided into ganglia and somata-free connectives  <cit> . several previous studies on the nervous system of onychophorans, specifically on the ventral nerve cords  <cit> , have shown that, in contrast to arthropods and tardigrades, onychophoran nerve cords lack clear segmental boundaries  even though some features are segmental while others are not. whereas the only visible segmented structures are the repeated pairs of leg nerves, both ring and median commissures are arranged in a repeated but clearly non-segmental fashion as they show slight differences in number in each interpedal region even within the same specimen  <cit> . therefore, it is difficult to define onychophorans and their ventral nervous system as strictly segmented or non-segmented.

nevertheless, due to thickenings within the leg-bearing regions of the onychophoran nerve cords, their nervous system was suggested to be either equipped with “anlagen” of segmental ganglia  <cit> , “unfused ganglia”  <cit>  or rudiments of ganglia , thus implying that segmentally arranged ganglia were lost in the onychophoran lineage. this hypothesis has indeed been put forward previously  <cit> . however, the thickenings correlate with the regions of the nerve cord that bear the laterally projecting leg nerves, which are noticeably thicker than the ring commissures  that also arise laterally, but originate only from the interpedal regions of the nerve cord. therefore, we performed neuronal tracing experiments to compare numbers of somata supplying the leg nerves with those innervating the ring commissures in order to investigate a possible correlation of thickenings within the nerve cord with associated structures.

furthermore, little is known about the adult onychophoran nerve cord in terms of the distribution of different neuronal markers  and their segmental character. quantitative analyses of these markers are completely lacking. thus, we used a selection of established antibodies directed against known neurotransmitters and neuromodulators  and a synaptic protein  to review details of the internal organisation of key neuronal structures and their potentially segmental character  within the peripatopsid euperipatoides rowelli , a model onychophoran. finally, we discuss how the combination of segmental and non-segmental features in the onychophoran nerve cords relates to the evolution of segmental ganglia in panarthropoda.

RESULTS
general organisation of the onychophoran ventral nerve cord
the ventral nervous systems in both onychophoran species, the peripatopsid euperipatoides rowelli and the peripatid principapillatus hitoyensis, are characterised by two widely separated ventrolateral nerve cords that extend throughout the whole animal . the nerve cords are medially connected via numerous median commissures . additionally, the two nerve cords are connected via numerous ring commissures, which run dorsolaterally along the body wall  but originate from a different level of the nerve cords than the median commissures. these ring commissures are restricted to the interpedal regions and hence are absent from the leg-bearing regions. cross sections double stained with anti-acetylated α-tubulin serum and the dna-marker hoechst revealed a medullary structure of the ventral nerve cords, which are separated into a dorsomedial neuropil and a so-called perikaryal layer comprising ventromedial/ventral/ventrolateral cell bodies surrounding the neuropil, with the ventromedial portion of the perikaryal layer being the thickest . this composition can be detected consistently throughout the whole onychophoran nerve cords. for comparative analysis, we subdivided the nerve cord in hemisegments by using two consecutive posterior leg nerves as boundaries . to estimate the total number of neurons within one hemisegment of the ventral nerve cord, we counted the number of somata stained with the dna-selective marker dapi in a total of  <dig> sections  of one juvenile specimen of euperipatoides rowelli, whereby seven sections were counted from the leg-bearing regions of the nerve cord and nine from the interpedal region . our analysis revealed a mean of  <dig>  somata  per section of the leg-bearing region and significantly fewer somata, i.e. a mean of  <dig>  , in the interpedal region . taking into account that the leg-bearing region is larger  than the interpedal region  we calculated that the mean density of cells in the leg bearing regions  is in fact approximately 23% less than in the interpedal regions . additionally, cross sections of the staining revealed different circumferences of the neuropil region between the interpedal  and the leg-bearing regions,  with the neuropil region being thicker within the leg-bearing region. by extrapolating the data from our sampled sections, and assuming equal distributions of somata, we estimated that the leg-bearing region of the nerve cord, having a length of approximately 702 μm  contains ~ <dig> neurons in total, compared to the whole length of the interpedal region comprising ~2175 μm , with an estimated total of  <dig>  neurons. however, a length of the interpedal nerve cord equal to that of the leg-bearing region would contain ~ <dig> neurons and thus ~ <dig> neurons less than the total leg-bearing region. in total, dapi revealed ~ <dig>  cell bodies within one hemisegment of the nerve cord in e. rowelli .fig.  <dig> organisation of the ventral nervous system in onychophora as revealed by cross sections. a–d maximum projections confocal micrographs of vibratome sections of a specimen of euperipatoides rowelli double-labelled with anti-acetylated α-tubulin serum  and dna marker hoechst . dorsal is up in all images. median is left . a cross section through a whole specimen showing position of the ventral nerve cords that are connected via a median commissure . b–d cross section of a nerve cord. b anti-acetylated α-tubulin labelling showing the neuropil. c dna labelling with hoechst showing the perikaryal layer. d merged image of the same specimen as in  and . gt, gut; hn, heart nerve; ln, leg nerve; mc, median commissure; nc, nerve cord; np, neuropil; pe, perikaryal layer; rc, ring commissure. scale bars: 100 μm , 50 μm 


fig.  <dig> estimated numbers of neuronal somata per hemisegment in onychophora  as revealed by different markers. the upper left diagram shows the general organisation of a single ventral nerve cord in dorsal view  from one body side and two consecutive leg-bearing regions. to estimate the number of neuronal somata, the region of a nerve cord corresponding to a hemisegment  was subdivided into  <dig> equal regions , in which the somata were counted. each hemisegment was defined by two consecutive anterior leg nerves . bar graphs illustrate the counted numbers of labelled somata as identified by different antisera in corresponding regions of the nerve cord displayed below each diagram. note that the number of cell bodies stained with a dna-selective marker was estimated by using sections from the regions indicated by bar graphs. anti-rfamide-like immunoreactive cell bodies were categorised in small  and large cell bodies . note also that only one specimen was analysed for each marker. al1 and al <dig>  anterior leg nerve  <dig> and 2; le <dig> and le <dig>  leg nerve  <dig> and 2; mc, median commissure; rc, ring commissure; pl <dig> and pl <dig>  posterior leg nerve  <dig> and 2



the statistical significance for the student’s t-test  indicates that the deviation from the mean of stained somata within 20 μm thick sections of the leg-bearing region  differs significantly  from the deviation of the mean of stained somata within the interpedal region . the statistical significance for the χ2-test  indicates that the distribution of stained somata within the ten portions of one hemisegment differs significantly from a theoretically expected uniform distribution with no regional specialisation in the nerve cord. df, degrees of freedom for the test; n.s. not significant; p, probability of error




innervation pattern of peripheral nerves associated with the nerve cord
for our analyses we investigated the anatomy and composition of the onychophoran nerve cords, including their associated peripheral nerves, and estimated the number of supplying somata with neuronal tracing experiments . for comparative analyses, we subdivided the nerve cords into hemisegments, which were in turn subdivided into ten equal portions using two consecutive anterior leg nerves as boundaries .

the ventral nerve cords are associated laterally with both leg nerves and ring commissures . each leg is innervated by two nerves, the anterior and the posterior leg nerve, which can easily be distinguished from the ring commissures by their more substantial appearance . both leg nerves of each leg ramify  but differ in that the anterior leg nerve branches more proximally . nevertheless, our neuronal tracing experiments revealed a similar innervation pattern of both leg nerves supplying one leg . the cell bodies of motor neurons supplying the leg nerves are distributed within the nerve cord at the same level longitudinally but on the medial side, within the perikaryal layer . furthermore, the cell bodies of these motor neurons do not differ appreciably in size, being all ~8 μm in diameter. separate retrograde tracing experiments of the anterior and posterior leg nerve revealed a mirrored pattern of the position of motor neurons supplying each of the two nerves of one leg . somata and neuronal fibres of both the anterior and the posterior leg nerve are concentrated towards the midpoint of a leg-bearing region. thus, neurons supplying the anterior leg nerve show a posterior shift  whereas neurons supplying the posterior leg nerve are shifted anteriorly  with respect to the nerve itself. in total, one hemisegment of the nerve cord comprises ~ <dig> cell bodies of motor neurons innervating both leg nerves , almost all of which are concentrated within the leg-bearing regions .fig.  <dig> retrograde tracing of nerves associated with the ventral nerve cords in onychophora. maximum projection confocal micrographs. retrograde fills with dextran coupled to either tetramethylrhodamine or fluorescein. anterior is up  or left . median is left , up  or down . a position of neuronal cell bodies associated with ring commissures, and the anterior and posterior leg nerves in euperipatoides rowelli. b–d position of motor neurons associated with the anterior and posterior leg nerves in e. rowelli  and a separated depiction of the anterior  and the posterior leg nerves  of the same labelling as in b. e position of somata associated with two subsequent median commissures in principapillatus hitoyensis. al, anterior leg nerve; mc, median commissure; rc, ring commissure; pl, posterior leg nerve. scale bars: 100 μm  and 50 μm 


fig.  <dig> organisation of individual ventral nerve cords in onychophora as revealed by different neuronal markers: retrograde fills , dna labelling , antiserum against synapsin  and gaba . maximum projection confocal micrographs of euperipatoides rowelli. median is left. asterisks indicate that the distribution of somata is significantly different from uniform . dotted brackets indicate leg-bearing regions characterised by the position of leg nerves. a note that the somata of neurons associated with leg nerves are grouped near their bases . d note also the condensed groups of neuronal cell bodies labelled against the neuropeptide gaba that are also located near the bases of leg nerves. scale bars: 200 μm




in addition, we performed neuronal tracing experiments on the ring commissures, which also arise laterally from the onychophoran nerve cords . similar to the leg nerves, the somata occur within the nerve cord on the opposite side of each commissure . however, the neuronal cell bodies of the ring commissures do not show an anterior or posterior shift in position in comparison to the commissure, but instead are evenly distributed at the same level as the commissure. in total, we estimated ~ <dig> neuronal cell bodies innervating one ring commissure. in contrast to the somata of the leg nerves, those supplying these commissures differ in size . the majority of cell bodies are ~8 μm in diameter but some are almost double the size .

furthermore, retrograde fills of the median commissures, which connect the two nerve cords ventrally , revealed that their somata are distributed ventro-laterally in the nerve cord at the same level as each respective commissure . we estimated a number of approximately  <dig> somata supplying one median commissure. in contrast to the somata supplying the leg nerves, an anterior or posterior shift in position is not evident. moreover, the neuronal cell bodies of median commissures do not show any differences in size  as seen in ring commissures.

subdivision of the onychophoran nerve cord into a perikaryal layer and a synaptic neuropil
a variety of neuronal markers were employed to obtain a more detailed insight into the composition of the nerve cord  in euperipatoides rowelli. a dna-selective fluorescent dye revealed that the entire complement of neuronal cell bodies is distributed uniformly along the periphery of each nerve cord . cross and sagittal sections revealed a relatively thick layer of cell bodies in the medial part and a thinner layer of somata in the lateral part of the nerve cords . no cell bodies were found in the interior region, which instead composes the synaptic neuropil, as revealed by an antiserum against the vesicle-associated protein synapsin . this synaptic neuropil mass extends uniformly throughout the whole nerve cord. in contrast, the medial perikaryal layer is largely free of synapsin-like immunoreactivity  except for few immunoreactive neurites that project through the perikaryal layer to the median commissures . additionally, synapsin-like immunoreactive profiles extend to both laterally located ring commissures and leg nerves . particularly, the base of the leg nerves shows a strong synapsin-lir that decreases peripherally. both dna-labelling and labelling with an anti-synapsin serum revealed slight thickenings of the nerve cords within the leg-bearing regions compared to the interpedal regions of the same nerve cord. those thickenings differ in size for each investigated nerve cord and range from  <dig> to 130% of the adjacent interpedal regions in both groups investigated.fig.  <dig> organisation of individual ventral nerve cords in onychophora as revealed by different neuronal markers: antisera against dopamine , serotonin , octopamine  and tyramine . maximum projection confocal micrographs of euperipatoides rowelli . median is left. asterisks indicate the distribution of somata that is significantly different from uniform . dotted brackets indicate leg-bearing regions characterised by the position of leg nerves. d note the condensed groups of neuronal cell bodies labelled against the amine tyramine that are present near the bases of leg nerves. scale bars: 200 μm


fig.  <dig> organisation of individual ventral nerve cords in onychophora as revealed by different neuronal markers: antisera against allatostatin , perisulfakinin , pigment-dispersing-factor  and rfamide . maximum projection confocal micrographs of euperipatoides rowelli. median is left. asterisks indicate the distribution of somata that is significantly different from uniform . dotted brackets indicate leg-bearing regions characterised by the position of leg nerves. d note the condensed groups of neuronal cell bodies labelled against the peptide rfamide that are present near the bases of leg nerves. scale bars: 200 μm


fig.  <dig> detailed organisation of the ventral nerve cords onychophora as revealed by different markers: antiserum against sysnapsin , dna labelling , antisera against gaba , dopamine , serotonin  and octopamine . maximum projection confocal micrographs of euperipatoides rowelli at the level of leg nerve. median is up in all images. asterisks indicate the distribution of somata that is significantly different from uniform . a
arrowheads point to few immunoreactive fibres projecting through the perikaryal layer. b note that the dna labelling shows a detailed organisation only of a thin sagittal section of the middle part of the nerve cord, hence not all nuclei are visible. ln, leg nerve. scale bars: 50 μm


fig.  <dig> detailed organisation of the ventral nerve cords in onychophora as revealed by different markers: antisera against tyramine , allatostatin , perisulfakinin , pigment-dispersing-factor  and rfamide . maximum projection confocal micrographs of euperipatoides rowelli at the level of the leg. median is up. cases where the distribution of somata is significantly different to uniform are indicated . ln, leg nerve. scale bars: 50 μm




immunoreactivity within the onychophoran nerve cord as revealed by antisera against different neurotransmitters and neuromodulators
for a more detailed understanding of the composition of nerve cords in onychophorans we performed immunohistochemical staining with different antisera against several neurotransmitters and neuromodulators to reveal the distribution of immunoreactive neuronal cell bodies  and estimated the number of immunoreactive somata labelled with each specific marker per hemisegment for comparative analysis  within the model onychophoran euperipatoides rowelli.

our investigations revealed a relatively high number of gaba-like immunoreactive  cell bodies along the whole nerve cord whereby an increased number occurs in the leg-bearing regions . the uniformly sized cell bodies are mainly distributed in the medial perikaryal layer opposite to the leg nerves . in total, ~ <dig> gaba-lir neuronal cells bodies occur within one hemisegment of the nerve cord , with almost double that number within a section of the leg-bearing region compared to a section of an interpedal region of the nerve cord . in general, gaba-lir somata are more numerous than those labelled by any other immunohistochemical marker investigated herein . a slightly weaker gaba-lir signal is detected within neurites running medially through the nerve cord, some of which project towards the leg nerves, where the signal decreases distally.

immunohistochemical investigations with an antiserum against the neurotransmitter dopamine revealed a strong immunoreactivity of the neuropil fibres . dopamine-lir neurites are also present within the leg nerves and median commissures . furthermore, dopamine-lir cell bodies occur within the perikaryal layer , and are significantly more numerous in the regions that innervate the leg nerves . in total, immunohistochemistry revealed ~ <dig> dopamine-lir neuronal cell bodies within one hemisegment of the nerve cord. furthermore, many fibres show a strong dopamine-lir running through the median neuropil within the nerve cord . additionally, several of the dopamine-lir neurites project towards the base of the leg nerves .

serotonin-lir neuronal cell bodies are distributed along the whole nerve cord , with a slightly higher number occurring within the leg-bearing regions . however, this pattern is less evident as e.g. with gaba-lir or dopamine-lir somata and appears to be not significant . in total, we estimated ~ <dig> serotonin-lir cell bodies within one hemisegment , all of which are relatively larger in size  compared to all other immunoreactive somata investigated . additionally, the unipolar cell bodies of serotonin-lir neurons exhibit prominently labelled axons projecting from the perikaryal layer to the synaptic neuropil mass .

the distribution pattern of neuronal cell bodies showing octopamine-lir  is similar to that obtained with antisera against the neurotransmitters gaba and dopamine, i.e. immunoreactive cell bodies are distributed along the whole nerve cord but with a significantly higher number within the leg-bearing regions . our investigations revealed a total number of ~ <dig> octopamine-lir somata within one hemisegment in the nerve cord, all of which are located within the medial perikaryal layer . furthermore, octopamine-lir can be seen within the neuropil and within single neurites projecting to the median and ring commissures . the fibres within the base of the leg nerves especially show a prominent immunoreactive signal that decreases peripherally .

a similar distribution pattern is seen using an antiserum against tyramine . here, the number of immunoreactive cell bodies is, with ~ <dig> per hemisegment, the lowest of all neurotransmitters investigated . nevertheless, the occurrence of a significantly larger number of immunoreactive somata within the leg-bearing regions becomes clear, as some parts of the interpedal regions contain no immunoreactive somata .

cell bodies labelled with an antiserum against the neuropeptide allatostatin show a distribution pattern similar, albeit less evident, to most of the neurotransmitters in the onychophoran nerve cord . the allatostatin- lir cell bodies are distributed along the whole nerve cord, but with significantly more within the leg-bearing regions . in total, one hemisegment comprises ~ <dig> allatostatin-lir somata in the nerve cord . these occur within the medial as well as the lateral perikaryal layer . additionally, allatostatin-lir is present within the neuropil, where a thick fibre bundle, running centrally within the nerve cord, shows strong immunoreactivity.

a specific distribution pattern is not visible for perisulfakinin-lir neuronal cell bodies, as the somata are distributed rather indiscriminately along the whole nerve cord  within both lateral and medial perikaryal layers . one hemisegment of the nerve cord comprises ~ <dig> perisulfakinin-lir somata . moreover, the fibres within the neuropil and a few fibres projecting to leg nerves, ring and medial commissures also exhibit a prominent perisulfakinin-lir.

our immunohistochemical investigations with an antiserum against the neuropeptide pigment-dispersing factor  revealed labelled cell bodies distributed along the whole nerve cord but without any variation in any specific regions . noticeably, the antiserum against pdf exhibits two different sizes of cell bodies: small cell bodies  distributed along the medial perikaryal layer and relatively large cell bodies  distributed ventromedially along the neuropil of the onychophoran nerve cord . approximately  <dig> pdf-like immunoreactive somata are present within one hemisegment of the nerve cord . furthermore, the neuropil exhibits a bundle of neurites that shows a strong pdf-lir at the same level as the large pdf-lir somata . additionally, some few pdf-lir fibres project into the leg nerves and both ring and median commissures.

the rfamide-like immunoreactivity shows a unique distribution pattern of neuronal cell bodies. the majority of rfamide-lir somata  is distributed laterally within the perikaryal layer of the nerve cord . additionally, some larger somata  occur within the median perikaryal layer but solely within the leg-bearing region . however, this variation within the leg-bearing region compared to the interpedal region does not appear to be significant , if taking all rfamide-lir somata into account. when considered separately, at least the larger cell bodies show a highly significant arrangement, with all cell bodies occurring within the leg-bearing region , whereas the small rfamide-lir cell bodies are distributed without any significant differences in their arrangement along the nerve cord . we calculated ~ <dig> rfamide-like immunoreactive somata within one hemisegment in the onychophoran nerve cord  distributed within the medial and lateral perikaryal layers. additionally, prominently labelled neurites occur within the neuropil .

discussion
segmental and non-segmental features of the onychophoran nerve cord
previously, several researchers suggested the onychophoran nervous system to be segmentally structured due to thickenings within leg-bearing regions  <cit> . our data confirm the existence of swellings within the leg-bearing regions, which seem to show considerable differences between the onychophoran subgroups , between specimens within the same group and even between hemisegments within the same specimen. the impression of these thickenings might be enhanced due to a wavy appearance of the nerve cords within the animal, with the outwardly protruding regions corresponding to the position of the leg nerves  <cit> . additionally, this pattern is exaggerated in dissected nerve cords due to dissection artefacts resulting from either compression or stretching during treatment. nevertheless, a dna-selective marker not only revealed a higher number of cell bodies occurring within the region of the thickenings  but also a larger size of the nerve cord in general  within these regions. furthermore, a higher concentration of cell bodies occurring within the leg-bearing region could not be detected as the larger number of somata correlates with the larger size of the nerve cord within these regions. as the thickenings occur within the regions of the nerve cord that bear the laterally projecting, relative thick leg nerves, we suggest a correlation between thickenings and associated structures. in fact, our neuronal tracing experiments of the leg nerves revealed a significantly higher number of neuronal cell bodies that occur almost exclusively within the thicker leg-bearing regions than somata of the ring commissures, which are located within the interpedal regions. hence, the swellings occurring within the regions bearing the leg nerves are attributable to a high number of neurons within these regions compared to the interpedal regions.

additionally, our investigations with different antibody labelling revealed two major distribution patterns of neuronal cell bodies — either the immunoreactive somata are broadly distributed along the whole nerve cord  or the neuronal somata show an increased density within the segmentally repeated leg-bearing regions . furthermore, some markers, e.g. dopamine, allatostatin, and perisulfakinin, additionally show strongly labelled fibres. gaba-lir is one example where the strongest signal is found in the leg-bearing regions , including some neurites in the leg nerves, suggesting a role in innervation of the leg musculature. this locomotory function corresponds with other animal groups, where gaba-lir is associated with body wall musculature in annelids  <cit>  and leg muscles in arthropods  <cit> . additionally, our results show that gaba-lir is represented by the largest number of neurons of any marker that we tested in the onychophoran nerve cord, similar to what was found both in the earthworm lumbricus terrestris  and in the cricket gryllus bimaculatus .fig.  <dig> simplified diagrams of onychophoran nerve cords summarising the results of retrograde fills and immunohistochemistry. the upper left diagram shows the entire central nervous system in dorsal view . the remaining diagrams illustrate detailed nerve cords from one body side of two consecutive leg-bearing regions. al, anterior leg nerve; mc, median commissure; nc, nerve cord; pl, posterior leg nerve; rc, ring commissure




immunolabelling against dopamine, another marker that is concentrated in the leg-bearing regions , also revealed similarities to previous results from arthropods. similar to the moth manduca sexta, where dopamine in the thoracic ganglia influences flight motor patterns  <cit> , the concentration of dopamine-lir cell bodies in the leg-bearing regions of onychophorans suggests that this signalling molecule may be involved in locomotion in these animals as well. on the other hand, the strong signal seen from dopamine-lir fibres in the onychophoran nerve cord matches that of the cricket, where dopamine-lir is prominent in segment-spanning central interneurons  <cit> .

in the peripatopsid e. rowelli, rfamide-lir cell bodies are distributed in a unique fashion, with the majority of cell bodies spread equally along the nerve cord but with some larger somata occurring only within the leg-bearing region. in arthropods, rfamide is known to have an impact on a variety of functions such as regulation of the circulatory system and modulation of the digestive tract and somatic muscles  <cit> . the occurrence of the larger rfamide-lir somata within the regions of the legs in onychophorans leads to the assumption that they might have an influence on neurons supplying the leg musculature.

finally, anti-octopamine immunolabelling similarly shows increased immunoreactivity around the area of the leg nerves. this arrangement observed in the onychophoran ventral nerve cord may be related to the segmentally arranged, bilaterally paired, octopaminergic neurons of most arthropods  <cit> ; however, insects are unique in that they possess unpaired dorsal and ventral median neurons . with these special cells in mind, a pattern emerges across the arthropods with octopaminergic neurons being concentrated towards the midline of the body. this is evident not only in the dum and vum neurons of insects, but also in the paired octopaminergic neurons in the spider cupiennius salei  <cit>  and the lobster homarus americanus  <cit> . our results reveal a similar pattern, with octopamine-lir cells localising mainly in the medial half of the nerve cord, with octopamine-lir even being associated with the median and ring commissures. in line with arthropods, the number of octopamine-lir cells is relatively low compared to the other markers. on the other hand, octopamine in the arthropod central nervous system is present in a higher number of neuronal tracts, a distribution that is marginally observed in the onychophoran nerve cords.

interestingly, the onychophoran musculature, like the nervous system, is composed of both segmental and asegmental elements. the body wall musculature does occur in a repeated pattern but is not segmentally arranged, whereas the musculature of the limbs appears in a segmental pattern  <cit> . this pattern is reflected by the nervous system, where the repeated occurrence of two leg nerves supplying each leg and its associated motor neurons appear to be the only segmental pattern of the otherwise asegmental nerve cord in onychophorans  <cit> . the ring commissures, which also arise laterally and are repeated, cannot be considered segmental structures, as they occur at slightly different positions and vary in number in each body segment even within the same specimen  <cit> . these dorsolateral, non-segmental, repeated commissures supply the asegmental body wall musculature  <cit> . thus, the segmental arrangement, or lack thereof, of neuronal cell bodies within the onychophoran nerve cord is more likely a product of the segmental nature of the structures they supply.

evolution of segmental ganglia in panarthropods
our investigations revealed both segmental and non-segmental arrangements of neurons within the onychophoran ventral nerve cord . while such indications have already been observed previously, the segmental arrangement of leg nerves and slight swellings within the nerve cord in these regions led to the assumption of a loss of segmental ganglia, which are present in arthropods and tardigrades, within the onychophoran lineage  <cit> . thus, segmental ganglia were said to be an ancestral feature of panarthropods . according to the definition of richter et al.  <cit> , ganglia are an accumulation of cell bodies connected via somata-free connectives. therefore, a loss of ganglia in the strict sense would result in a complete loss of cell bodies within the onychophoran ventral nervous system. instead, the onychophoran ventral nervous system in this case would rather have experienced a re-distribution of cell bodies that were previously located within ganglia.

nevertheless, our data clearly show a mixture of segmentally repeated and non-segmentally arranged cell bodies labelled with several antibodies. additionally, the somata supplying the legs also occur in a segmental pattern at the base of each pair of leg nerves but they cannot be interpreted as remnants of ganglia, as the position of motor neurons is not comparable to a whole ganglion of arthropods, of which motor neurons are just a subset . instead, the arrangement of cell bodies corresponds to the arrangement of both segmental and non-segmental regions of the musculature or peripheral nervous system. consequently, we find no evidence that these cell bodies were ever condensed into ganglia in the ancestor and subsequently redistributed in the onychophoran lineage.

however, the absence of segmentally arranged ganglia does not automatically imply an asegmental ventral nervous system in onychophorans. hence, the issue is not whether or not the onychophoran nervous system is segmental but rather how much segmentation is present within their nerve cords and, moreover, whether or not the presence of segmentation is an ancestral feature of panarthropods. unfortunately the phylogenetic position of onychophorans and tardigrades is still under debate, as either tardigrades or onychophorans or both form the sister group of arthropods .

to suggest that tardigrades form the sister group to all remaining panarthropods, one would have to assume that segmental ganglia are indeed an ancestral feature that experienced a modification within the onychophoran lineage, in that the ganglionic cell bodies were re-distributed along the whole nerve cords, thus resulting in their medullary organisation. alternatively, if tardigrades and arthropods form the sister group to onychophorans, one would suggest that medullary ventral nerve cords, with local accumulations of motor and presumably other neurons at the base of each leg, as still seen in onychophorans, had already been present in the panarthropod ancestor. therefore, this partly segmentally arranged nerve cord might have been a prerequisite for the evolution of ganglia in the tardigrade and arthropod lineage, suggesting that the segmental ganglia evolved by a gradual condensation of neuronal subsets. our data show that an accumulation of neuronal cell bodies within specific regions of the nerve cord most likely correlates with either the presence of leg nerves or sets of musculature within the legs. this is in line with the assumption that segmentation evolves gradually through individual, repeated structures  rather than as complete holistic units  <cit> . thus, we suggest that the onychophoran nerve cords show an ancestral arrangement of the ventral nerve cord  — albeit with several segmental features already present — whereas the segmental ganglia most likely evolved in the tardigrade-arthropod lineage . accordingly, our data do not support previous assumptions that segmentation was already present in the last common ancestor of all protostomes . assuming that segmentation evolved only once would consequently imply secondary losses in many other animal groups, such as platyhelminthes, mollusca or cycloneuralia.fig.  <dig> scenario of the evolution of segmentation in the ventral nerve cord within ecdysozoans. simplified diagrams of the ventral nerve cords of putative last common ancestors of ecdysozoa , onychophora  and arthropoda . note the two alternative hypotheses regarding the architecture of the ventral nervous system in the last common ancestor of ecdysozoans with either a paired ventral nerve cord  or a median unpaired ventral nerve cord . note also the stepwise increase in the degree of segmentation of the ventral nervous system. diagrams of the onychophoran and arthropod nervous systems according to mayer and harzsch  <cit>  and richter et al.  <cit> , respectively. neuronal cell bodies of the ventral nerve cord are indicated in blue and somata of motor neurons of leg nerves are indicated in red. lca, last common ancestor




within arthropods, two different types of segmentation are known:  the initial metameric units, the parasegments, that are present during embryonic development and  the segments as seen in adults  <cit> . within adults, the presence of parasegments is represented by an anteriorly shifted position of ganglia with respect to the borders of true segments  <cit> . previously, the presence of both segmentation types was suggested to be either an autapomorphy of all panarthropods  <cit>  or a synapomorphy of tardigrades and arthropods  <cit> . so far, only the shifted position of ganglia  <cit>  indicates the presence of parasegments in tardigrades, as corresponding gene expression data are lacking. nevertheless, whether or not onychophorans share none, one or both of these segmentation types with arthropods  is still under debate  <cit> . although the existence of medullary nerve cords in onychophorans precludes the identification of parasegments based on position alone, recent expression data from segment polarity genes  <cit>  suggest that parasegments, if present at all, do not form the initial metameric unit  within the onychophoran embryo as known from arthropods  <cit> . additionally, our data show that, regardless of the marker used, an anterior shift of an accumulation of neuronal cell bodies with respect to the legs is not present within the onychophoran nerve cords. thus, based on evidence from both developmental and immunohistochemical data, we suggest that parasegments were not present within the last common ancestor of panarthropods but instead are either an autapomorphy of arthropods or evolved in the last common ancestor of tardigrades and arthropods. alternatively, if tardigrades represent the basal-most group within the panarthropods, one would assume a loss of parasegments in onychophorans.

unfortunately, the neuroanatomical characteristics of the last common ancestor of ecdysozoa are still unknown. currently, there are two alternative hypotheses regarding the layout of the ventral nerve cords within the last common ancestor  of ecdysozoans . yang et al.  <cit>  hypothesised that the ancestral ecdysozoan possessed an unpaired ventral nerve cord , which was retained in most cycloneuralians, a subclade of ecdysozoan animals  <cit> . therefore, a separation of the ventral nerve cord would have occurred in the lca of panarthropods, as all three panarthropod subgroups show paired ventral nerve cords  <cit> , as well as independently within the cycloneuralian subgroup loricifera  <cit> . an alternative hypothesis suggests paired ventral nerve cords to be the ancestral feature of all ecdysozoans , thus leading to the assumption that a fused unpaired ventral nerve cord constitutes an autapomorphy of cycloneuralians. furthermore, most subgroups of the spiralia  exhibit paired neural tracts  with few exceptions, such as the highly diverse annelida. instead, annelids show a considerable degree of variation regarding their ventral nervous systems  <cit>  but the ground pattern is potentially trineuralian , with varying degrees of fusion among the annelid subgroups  <cit> . in any case, hejnol and lowe  <cit>  note that the ventral nervous system was most likely centralised independently in arthropods and annelids. therefore, the ancestral condition of the ventral nerve cords within ecdysozoa  remains ambiguous and requires further investigation.

most recently, yang et al.  <cit>  investigated a well-preserved ventral nervous system of the more than  <dig> million-year-old stem-group arthropod fuxianhuiid fossil †chengjiangocaris kunmingensis . based on their findings, the authors suggest that the complex, ganglionated ventral nervous system in tardigrades and arthropods evolved within their common lineage, whereas the onychophoran nerve cord shows the ancestral state within panarthropods. although some previous authors described a ganglionated nerve cord in the lobopodian fossil †paucipodia inermis  <cit> , whether or not this interpretation is valid is still under vigorous debate  <cit> . thus, the latest study of yang and colleagues  <cit>  coincides with our findings, which suggest a stepwise evolution of the segmented nervous system within panarthropods  rather than a loss of an ancestral segmentation within the onychophoran lineage.

CONCLUSIONS
to date, the organisation of the nervous system and particularly its evolution within panarthropods remains an enigmatic feature causing various contentious presumptions, many of which surround the issue of segmentation of the nervous system within all three panarthropod groups . our findings, based on neuroanatomical investigations in onychophorans, clearly revealed the presence of both segmental and non-segmental features within their ventral nervous system. this pattern shows a notable correspondence in position between structures such as musculature and peripheral nerves, thus leading to the assumption that the arrangement of the neurons in the onychophoran nervous system is dictated solely by the organisation of the structures they supply instead of being organised in functional units  as known from arthropods. therefore, our data contradict previous assumptions of ganglia being already present in the last common ancestor of panarthropods and being reduced in onychophorans  <cit> . consequently, we suggest that the segmental ganglia of arthropods evolved by a gradual condensation of subsets of neurons within the arthropod or arthropod-tardigrade lineage and with onychophorans representing the ancestral state within panarthropods. these findings are in line with the hypothesis of a gradual evolution of segmentation within panarthropods .

