BACKGROUND
identifying gene regulatory and gene expression networks has become a central problem of post-genomics biology  <cit> . computational prediction of dna regulatory elements or binding sites of transcription factors is one of the essential parts of the problem. this regulatory motif discovery problem has been studied since the early years of bioinformatics, resulting more than thirty algorithms proposed, among which more than a dozen are publicly available  <cit> . however, recent comprehensive evaluations of existing motif discovery programs show that their prediction accuracy is still very low  <cit> .

the technical difficulty resides in the low signal/noise ratio of this problem. a straightforward direction to improve the prediction accuracy is to use a better motif model to capture characteristics of sequence patterns of regulatory motifs  and a better search algorithm in the sequence space . another approach is to incorporate additional information, such as phylogenetic trees or homologous sequences  <cit> . comparative genomics  <cit>  and gene expression data  <cit>  have also been used to improve the specificity of motif discovery.

here, we introduce another practical and powerful strategy for the motif discovery problem, that is, the ensemble approach, which is also called the meta-server approach or the jury-method. the fundamental idea of the ensemble approach is to run several different programs  and summarize their outputs to generate the final output. ensemble algorithms have been applied in several prediction methods in bioinformatics, such as gene prediction  <cit> , protein tertiary structure prediction  <cit> , protein domain prediction  <cit>  and protein secondary structure prediction  <cit> . the most remarkable success of the ensemble approach would be the several meta-servers which participated in the biennial world-wide protein structure prediction contest, casp , in  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> , which dominated the top ranks in the competition. the success of the ensemble approaches has been attributed to several factors. albrecht et al.  <cit>  referred their success to the noise-filtering properties of the ensemble approach, which damp the training errors of single methods. lundström et al.  <cit>  discussed that a key for the success of an ensemble approach is to properly measure the similarity between the different models. most ensemble algorithms use the same type of input data to make final predictions. in contrast, the ensemble algorithm by sen et al.  <cit>  combined different types of data, data mining results, threading, phylogenetic tree-based conserved residue prediction, and the structural alignment based prediction method to predict a protein-protein interaction site in a query protein tertiary structure. despite the wide range of applications of the ensemble approach in bioinformatics, to the best of our knowledge, there is no extensive study of ensemble algorithms for the motif discovery problem.

in our previous work  <cit> , we showed anecdotal evidence that a simple ensemble motif discovery algorithm, called cea, outperforms single stand-alone algorithms. at this juncture, it would be appropriate to clarify the differences between the previous work and the current work, called the emd algorithm. in the previous work, 1) only the combination of multiple runs of an identical algorithm was considered; and 2) only one data set with a short sequence size  was used in the benchmark. in this work: 1) we extend our ensemble approach by systematically combining predictions from five popular motif discovery algorithms, namely, alignace  <cit> , bioprospector  <cit> , mdscan  <cit> , meme  <cit> , and motifsampler  <cit> . in addition, we integrated projection  <cit>  to seek further improvement in terms of the scalability of emd. all the possible combinations of one to five component algorithms are examined. 2) to be able to combine predictions of different runs from different component algorithms, a novel ensemble algorithm, emd, is developed. 3) emd is tested on two different types of data sets. one data set is generated from the intergenic regions of the e. coli genome, and the other is input sequences of different lengths generated by adding margins of different sizes to each known site. the best ensemble algorithm performed  <dig> % better than the best single component algorithm in terms of the nucleotide level accuracy.

RESULTS
we developed a series of the emd algorithms with all the possible combinations of two to five component algorithms. an emd algorithm runs its component algorithms multiple times independently, and summarizes their results basically by majority . the potential of an emd algorithm lies in the fact that it could take advantage of superb predictions of every component algorithm. the five component algorithms used are alignace   <cit> , bioprospector   <cit> , mdscan   <cit> , meme   <cit> , and motifsampler   <cit> . below in the manuscript emd-x denotes a set of emd algorithms with all the possible combinations of x number of component algorithms. a multi-restart algorithm and random algorithm are also included as comparison bases. we name different ensemble algorithms by concatenating the abbreviations of the component algorithms: for example, al-bp is an emd algorithm with alignace  and bioprospector  used as the component algorithms.

results of emd on ecrdb62a intergenic sequence data set
in table  <dig>  the performance of the best ensemble algorithm in emd- <dig> to emd- <dig> is compared with that of the five stand-alone component algorithms, five multi-restart algorithms  and a random algorithm on the intergenic sequence data set. the performance is evaluated by the nucleotide level and site level accuracy in terms of the performance coefficient , sensitivity  and specificity . first, the nucleotide level performance coefficient  is very low for single component algorithms. even for the best algorithm, bioprospector, npc does not exceed  <dig> . it is remarkable that all of the four ensemble algorithms outperform the best single component algorithm in terms of npc. emd-al-bp-md is the best ensemble algorithm, achieving an npc score of  <dig> . this is a  <dig> % improvement over the best single algorithm, bioprospector, whose npc is  <dig> . note here that the improvement of emd over its component algorithms comes from an increase of both the sensitivity and specificity. surprisingly, the performance of the multi-restart algorithms is worse than that of the corresponding single component algorithm in each case . npc, nsn and nsp all dropped. this is because the score given to predicted motifs by the algorithms does not always reflect the accuracy well  <cit>  and also collecting the highest-scoring motifs from multiple runs can result in only picking up similar or identical motif predictions and neglecting the sub-optimal motifs. this observation highlights the necessity of reporting multiple top-scored motif predictions rather than reporting a single top predicted motif. the comparison of the emd algorithms with the multiple-restart algorithms illustrates that the improved performance of the emd algorithms is not simply due to the increased number of runs of component algorithms but a synergetic effect of the multiple runs.

at the site level, the emd-al-bp-md again achieves the highest prediction performance in spc, ssn, and ssp. all of the emd algorithms exceed  <dig>  in terms of spc. the same arguments above for the nucleotide level accuracy also hold for the site level performance.

comparison of different combinations of component algorithms
with five component algorithms, there are a total of  <dig> unique combinations to compose an ensemble algorithm. table  <dig> shows the npc scores for emd algorithms with all possible combinations of component algorithms tested on ecrdb61b- <dig> data set . note that the four emd algorithms in table  <dig> are the best emd algorithms amongst those with the same number of employed component algorithms benchmarked on ecrdb62a dataset. please also note that the algorithms shown in table  <dig> are all emd algorithms even if some emd algorithms only employ a single component algorithm; e.g. emd-al in table  <dig>  results of  <dig> runs of alignace are combined.

firstly, on average the accuracy improves as the number of component algorithms increases . the average accuracy of emd algorithms with a single component algorithm is  <dig> , and the average accuracy monotonically increases up to  <dig>  by the emd algorithm with five component algorithms. secondly, the standard deviation of the accuracy among the emd algorithms with the same number of component algorithms is small, which ranges from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . these results prove the positive effect of the ensemble approach in the motif discovery problem. the standard deviation of emd-x algorithms decreases as the number of component algorithms increases. it is observed that md, which is the best algorithm in constructing emd algorithms with a single component algorithm, is always involved in the best emd algorithm among those with a higher number of component algorithms . interestingly, al, which performed the worst in the single component emd algorithm with npc of  <dig> , can contribute to improved accuracy. indeed al-md-me performed the best among the emd- <dig>  these results vividly show the synergetic effect of the emd algorithm. note here that the standard error of each emd algorithm is very small. indeed it is less than  <dig>  for all of the cases, measured from twenty independent runs. this is consistent with our previous observation that the standard deviation of results  of the single component algorithms is very small  <cit> .

number of runs of component algorithms on emd performance
the number of runs of each component algorithms is an important parameter in an emd algorithm. it can affect the prediction performance and it also determines the required computational time. we examined the effect of the number of different runs of component algorithms in terms of the nucleotide level prediction accuracy  . in table  <dig>  the number of runs of the emd algorithms composed of two component algorithms is changed from  <dig> to  <dig> with an interval of  <dig> runs. more generally, any combinations of different number of runs can be assigned to each component algorithm. however, the exhaustive combinations of different number of runs have not been tried here because the current study would be enough to observe the behavior of emd algorithms and also because it is too computationally expensive.

from table  <dig>  it can be seen that on average, increasing the number of runs contributes to the improvement of the performance . this general trend does not necessarily apply to a particular emd algorithm. the optimal number of runs for a particular emd algorithm may be reflecting characteristics of component algorithms, and not very straightforward to determine. however, the general trend exists that the more number of runs increases the accuracy, and more importantly, the accuracy does not show a dramatic degeneration when the number of runs increases. therefore, practically for the emd algorithm, it is not inappropriate to set the number of runs to  <dig> times or probably any number between  <dig> and  <dig> 

scalability
we examined the scalability of the emd algorithms in terms of the length of input sequences . one algorithm from each emd-x  is examined. input sequences of different length are prepared as ecrdb61b data set with different margin sizes ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . for comparison, the results of the best individual component algorithm, mdscan , and the best multi-restart algorithm of bioprospector  are also shown.

one possible reason for the ineffectiveness of emd algorithms for the data sets with longer sequences may be that only  <dig> runs of the component algorithms are not sufficient. to check whether increasing the number of runs can improve the results, we run the al-bp-md-ms algorithm with different numbers of runs ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> with a step size of  <dig>  the corresponding npc scores were  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively. therefore, there is no significant performance improvement observed when up to fifty runs are conducted for each of the five component algorithms. to ameliorate the loss of advantage for longer margins, we have also added another algorithm, projection  <cit> , which has a good performance at longer padding sequence length, to emd-bp-md-ms algorithm . the emd-bp-md-ms-pr did perform the best for a sequence of the margin size of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  but did not show a superior performance for a longer margin size.

at this point, the scalability is still an issue for the future work, but note that the majority of the intergenic regions in e. coli are short. indeed the average length of the intergenic regions of e. coli is  <dig> nt, and  <dig> % of them are shorter than  <dig> nt , where the emd algorithms showed their superiority over the component algorithm .

performance on the dataset with shuffled margin sequences
we have carried out additional testing on a dataset with artificially shuffled margin sequences, named ecrdb61c . a drawback of the ecrdb62a and ecrdb61b datasets used above is that some input sequences contain multiple sites, so that the computed accuracy on the datasets may not precisely reflect the actual performance of the algorithms. in contrast, sequences in the ecrdb61c set has a target site in the middle of the sequence with artificially shuffled flanking sequences on both sides, thereby it is guaranteed that only one target site exists in a sequence. we tested al-bp-md-me-ms, because this combination achieved the best npc on ecrdb61b- <dig> data set . the results show that the algorithm performed better on the shuffled margin sequences  when the input sequence is short , but the performance difference vanishes as the input sequence length increases. the better specificity  largely contributed in the improvement in the npc for ecrdb61c- <dig> 

discussion
we have developed the emd algorithm, a framework of an ensemble algorithm for regulatory site motif discovery. the ensemble approach has been successfully applied in several prediction methods in bioinformatics  <cit> . the importance of comparing results of different programs is also recognized in the field of motif discovery. melina is a web-based tool which help visualize and compare outputs of various dna motif finding programs  <cit> . however, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first extensive report of an ensemble approach for dna motif discovery, which combines component algorithms to improved regulatory motif predictions. using the framework we developed, we have tested all the possible combinations of five component algorithms on a benchmark dataset of experimentally verified regulatory motifs in e. coli. in terms of the nucleotide level accuracy  on intergenic region data set, the best emd algorithm, al-bp-md achieved about  <dig> points  better accuracy than that of the best component algorithm, bioprospector . considering the low prediction accuracy of current single component algorithms, this improvement is significant. the advantage of the emd algorithms over the single algorithms decreases for a long input sequence set. however, importantly, the performance  of the emd algorithms was never worse than single algorithms, therefore, users of the emd algorithms will never lose accuracy by using them.

the largest advantage of the emd algorithm is its flexibility of incorporating new component algorithms. that is, if a novel superior motif discovery algorithm is made available, it can be readily incorporated to the emd algorithm system. in this study, the five component algorithms we employed were all sequence-based algorithms, because they are easily available on the internet and the basis of more recent algorithms. but there is no difficulty in incorporating advanced motif discovery algorithms which use additional information such as a phylogenetic tree, because the essence of the emd algorithm is to combine individual independent predictions. another advantage of the emd algorithm is that it is particularly suitable for running on a distributed computer system, such as a grid computing or a linux cluster, which will be certainly one of the main computational powers in the next generation.

below we discuss major considerations in designing a good ensemble algorithm: 1) consensus function: how to combine predictions from different algorithms with different confidence levels; 2) diversity of predictions: how to select and run component algorithms to obtain diverse predictions to ensure successful combination; and 3) strength of component predictions: ways to weight the predictions from different algorithms.

ensemble grouping and weighting
the key of an ensemble approach is how to assemble individual independent predictions from different algorithms. in the current implementation, predicted sites from each algorithm are sorted and grouped first by their score, then further grouped across the results from different algorithms. the intention of this implementation is to increase the specificity of the final prediction by considering the significance of predicted sites. thus, commonly predicted sites with a high score by different algorithms will be picked up well. in this way, the weight to predicted sites defined by the score is implicitly counted.

for further improvement of the ensemble algorithm, we discuss different strategies for clustering predicted sites. a drawback of sorting predicted sites by their score is that sites from different motifs in a sequence can be mixed and clustered together, although it has an advantage of increasing the specificity of the final prediction. alternatively, all predicted sites for a sequence can be placed on the sequence and votes can be cast to sequence positions occupied by predicted sites. votes from a predicted site can reflect its score assigned by the component algorithm. another idea is after grouping predicted sites by the score for each algorithm as it is done in the current implementation, each group can be corresponded to other overlapping groups  from a different algorithm, but not by the score rank.

weighting predicted sites is another important issue in an emd algorithm. in the current implementation, all predicted sites have an equal weight of one, although as it is mentioned above, the significance scores assigned to them by each algorithm are implicitly counted in the clustering phase. generally, a weight to a predicted site will originate from two sources, from the reliability of individual prediction indicated by the score and from the reliability of the algorithm itself, which can be measured by the overall prediction accuracy on a certain benchmark dataset. the weighting of sites can be considered in the voting phase in our implementation. counting the two sources of weights, a vote for a predicted site may be revised to w1b*w2a instead of one, where w <dig> will be proportional to the assigned score to a particular site, b, and w <dig> will be proportional to the overall accuracy of the algorithm, a. one way of doing this is to develop reasonable formulae for w <dig> and w <dig> and see if the weights improve the overall results or not. the difficulty lies especially in determining weights for algorithms, w2a, because they depend on the combination of component algorithms in an emd algorithm. as shown in table  <dig>  sometimes a combination of a relatively more accurate algorithm and a relatively less accurate one performs better than a combination of two average ones, so the resulting performance of an emd algorithm depends on the compatibility of component algorithms, not necessarily to the accuracy of individual algorithms. another way to change the strength of contribution of an algorithm is to change the number of runs.

an alternative way to find appropriate weights will be to use an optimization algorithm such as neural network or genetic algorithm. the weights assigned to component algorithms in an emd algorithm, w2a, could be optimized. as for the weight assigned to individual site prediction, first a formula for w1b should be developed using several adjustable parameters, and those parameters will be optimized. an advantage of using an optimization technique is that the other parameters such as the number of runs and/or built-in parameters for each component algorithm may be able to be optimized at the same time. again since the appropriate weights and the other parameters may totally depend on the combination of component algorithms, they should be optimized every time a different combination is tried.

diversity of predictions from component algorithms
to ensure that the predictions from component algorithms cover most target motifs, it is desirable that diverse predictions are generated from component algorithms. diversified predictions would contribute in increasing the sensitivity of the final prediction. for stochastic algorithms, multiple runs usually naturally generate multiple different predictions. for deterministic algorithms like meme and mdscan, we changed some parameters  to force them to generate different predictions. this idea of the diversity parameter is reasonable since the optimal parameter for a given input data set cannot be estimated in advance. however, a possible downside is that if the parameter is excessively changed, the quality of the predictions can be significantly deteriorated, resulting in a poor consensus building. another possible way to diversify predictions is to feed different runs or algorithms with different subset data sampled from the original input sequences, which is yet to be explored.

CONCLUSIONS
we have introduced an ensemble approach to the motif discovery problem. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that an ensemble approach is used in the motif discovery problem. by combining multiple predictions from multiple runs of one or more component algorithms, our ensemble algorithm showed good improvement in the sensitivity and specificity and thus, the overall accuracy over stand-alone component algorithms. the emd algorithm is scalable in the sense that the emd algorithms performed better, or at worst, equally compared to individual component algorithms. the improvement in the accuracy over the component algorithm is more significant for shorter input sequences. considering the importance of the regulatory motif discovery in gene expression analysis and the poor performance of the current individual motif discovery algorithms, our emd algorithms can be a very useful tool in the era of systems biology.

