BACKGROUND
tse in sheep have been recorded for more than  <dig> years in the form of classical scrapie. in classical scrapie, there is a clear link between susceptibility and sheep genotype  <cit> , and many countries are now implementing disease control programmes based on breeding for resistance. host genotype also appears to affect to some extent the ultimate pathological presentation of the disease  <cit>  as do specific scrapie 'strains'  <cit>  and this complex interaction is not yet clearly understood, although it is widely accepted that several variants of classical scrapie exist in the field. however, in  <dig>  a newly identified form of scrapie  was reported in norway, which was distinct from the established range of classical scrapie phenotypes  <cit> .

in  <dig>  regulatory requirements for active tse surveillance were implemented across the eu, and a number of countries have subsequently reported atypical isolates, full details of which can be found in the efsa opinion of  <dig>  <cit> . it has also recently been reported for the first time in the southern hemisphere, in a sheep native to the falkland islands  <cit> .

the current minimum scrapie control measures within the eu require selective culling within a flock, based on genotype susceptibility to classical scrapie. however, the susceptible genotype range for atypical cases differs from that of classical disease  <cit>  with most cases occurring in genotypes associated with relative resistance to classical scrapie, and so other measures need to be considered in flocks where only atypical scrapie is identified. this is particularly pertinent given the epidemiology of atypical scrapie, with the majority of cases occurring as singletons within a flock when arguably the existing culling policies will achieve little additional control.

it has already been established that such atypical isolates can transmit to over-expressing ovinised transgenic mice  but it is crucial to the formulation of control policies to establish whether or not this is a stable strain of tse which can transmit within the natural host.

the route of natural transmission for tse is still unclear, so the approach taken to establishing transmissibility of such an agent is generally performed in a number of steps. initial species susceptibility is established by transmission via intracerebral inoculation, which optimises the delivery of the agent to the target organ, and minimises any reduction in efficiency of transmission resulting from a more peripheral route. once such susceptibility is established, the outcome of challenges by more natural routes  is more informative.

this report presents the first successful intracerebral transmission of atypical scrapie within the natural host.

RESULTS
a  <dig> month old cheviot sheep  was inoculated intracerebrally with cerebellum from a case of atypical scrapie  identified through the fallen stock active surveillance programme. the recipient sheep was killed  <dig> dpi with signs of a neurological disease. these comprised behavioural changes  and circling clockwise , locomotor changes  and loss of weight  and bodily condition. pruritus was not a feature of this disease. the clinical findings were suggestive of a diffuse brain disease, which particularly involved the forebrain. the clockwise circling suggested an asymmetric lesion, but it was not possible to investigate this further, because only one half of the brain was fixed for histopathology. behavioural changes were first reported by animal care staff at  <dig> dpi.

a western blot  prepared using the biorad tesee™ revealed a banding pattern consistent with nor <dig>  <cit> , with a distinct low molecular mass band at approximately  <dig> kd. this pattern matched exactly the banding pattern of the donor sheep, and was consistent with the molecular characteristics of other uk atypical scrapie field isolates run on the same gel.

comparison of the distribution and type of prpsc immunolabelling in the brains of both the donor and recipient animals revealed preservation of the immunopathological features following transmission . immunolabelling in the medulla at the level of the obex was minimal, and confined to fine granular deposits in the nucleus of the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve. fine granular prpsc was distributed widely throughout the grey matter of the cerebellar and cerebral cortices, and the neuropil of the basal ganglia and thalamus in both donor and recipient. much less labelling was seen in the midbrain and medullary regions. globular or semi-globular staining in the white matter, possibly associated with oligodendrocytes, was also widely distributed throughout the brain, again with relative sparing of the brainstem regions. there was no intracellular labelling seen in either case, which is consistent with observations in other atypical scrapie field cases, and different from classical scrapie  apart from a small amount of vacuolation in the molecular layer of the cerebellum in the recipient animal, there was no tse-associated vacuolation observed in either animal. no immunolabelling could be demonstrated in the lrs areas examined in the recipient animal , which is in keeping with the limited observations in a similar range of lrs tissues which have been made in five animals naturally affected with atypical scrapie . however, this might also be partially attributable to the intracerebral route, since only very restricted lrs involvement was present in the classical scrapie positive control, which is contrary to observations in natural disease, and following oral challenge  <cit> .

a second animal, also of the ahq/ahq genotype, which received an equivalent challenge with the same inoculum is still alive and healthy at more than  <dig> dpi .

transmission of the source inoculum to tg <dig> mice, within a separate project , was successful, with an incubation period of  <dig> ±  <dig>  days and a histological lesion profile and prpsc distribution pattern consistent with nor <dig> and french discordant cases  <cit> .

discussion
to our knowledge this is the first report of the successful experimental transmission of atypical scrapie within the natural host. the retention of the molecular and pathological characteristics of the scrapie agent following this experimental transmission supports the hypothesis that disease in the donor animal was caused by a stable strain of the tse agent which has phenotypic characteristics distinct from those associated with classical scrapie. although clinical signs were not recorded from the donor animal because it presented dead , the signs seen in the challenged animal were consistent with those reported for the small number of passive surveillance cases so far identified in the uk  <cit>  and elsewhere  <cit> , which were characterised by gait abnormalities, abnormal behaviour and a relative lack of pruritic signs.

the transmission characteristics of atypical scrapie from different countries in tg <dig> mice  <cit>  and emerging data from similar transmissions of the isolate in this report indicate that at least one strain of atypical scrapie compatible with/indistinguishable from nor <dig> is widespread across europe, despite its relatively recent identification.

although it has now been demonstrated to be experimentally transmissible within and between species via the intracerebral route, there is little epidemiological evidence for ease of transmission of this strain under field conditions, where scrapie is most likely transmitted via the oral route. this raises the question of how it came to be so geographically widespread. one hypothesis is that this represents a spontaneous genetic disease in sheep similar to the familial forms of tse in man , in which the resultant disease can subsequently be transmitted experimentally  <cit> .

horizontal transmission of classical scrapie has been shown to occur in adult sheep exposed to an affected flock  <cit>  and even in animals which have had contact only with a contaminated environment . the environmental persistence of the classical scrapie agent is also supported by epidemiological evidence from icelandic repopulation studies  <cit> . however, the low molecular mass  band of prpsc seen in western blots of atypical isolates is associated with a reduction in pk resistance of this disease-associated protein. it is possible that this relative protease susceptibility may make the agent less robust in field conditions and thereby reduce the extent to which it is transmissible by natural routes, and so limit the number of cases. it could be argued that this in turn supports the hypothesis that the natural disease may arise spontaneously. however, although genetic studies have indicated a prp genotype host range for atypical scrapie which, for the majority of cases, is almost fully distinct from that of the classical forms of disease, they have not identified a single genetic feature  which might account for this.

this relative prpsc fragility  <cit>  compared to the prpsc in classical scrapie, may also account for the total absence of intracellular prpsc immunolabelling. the different pk cleavage sites in prp associated with different strains of tse infecting small ruminants can be used to differentiate them, both in blots and by immunohistochemistry. intracellular immunostaining is significantly reduced in sheep infected with bse compared to classical scrapie, when the appropriate monoclonal antibodies are applied, and it has been speculated that this demonstrates a partial digestion of the prpsc molecule by the endogenous proteases within the cells  <cit> . if the prpsc is more protease sensitive, then this loss of intracellular immunolabelling even with an antibody to the core of the protein  might indicate that cells can more effectively catabolise this abnormal form of the protein than more 'classical' forms, and therefore succumb to clinical disease much later, if at all. this may also account for the apparent absence of disease-related prpsc in lymphoid tissues. it is interesting to note that in familial cjd  also, prp labelling was seen as a uniformly fine deposit throughout all cortical layers  <cit> .

this study confirms that 'atypical scrapie' is transmissible within the natural host species, via the intracerebral route, without alteration of the pathological and molecular characteristics. this is the first report from a larger study which will explore more widely the effect of the prp gene on the experimental susceptibility and resultant phenotype following intracerebral or oral challenge with this type of scrapie isolate.

CONCLUSIONS
at present the significance of this result, in terms of the transmissibility or pathogenicity under 'field conditions' of this agent strain in any species remains speculative, but it supports the need for appropriate control measures protecting both the animal and the human food chain to encompass atypical scrapie cases specifically.

