BACKGROUND
an organism's dna contains numerous regulatory sequences that are used to modulate gene expression; yet dna sequence alone does not explain why some regulatory sequences are functional while others are not. because most genomic dna  is tightly packaged into nucleosomes  <cit> , alternating nucleosome occupancy has been proposed as an important strategy to regulate gene expression since its initial discovery  <cit> . indeed, higher expression levels are commonly associated with nucleosome depletion at promoters and other genomic locations, e.g. rdna  <cit> . it has also been demonstrated that nucleosome occupancy affects the accessibility of dna sequence motifs to transcriptional regulators; as a consequence different dna sequences can display different nucleosome occupancy levels  <cit> . further, motifs recognized and bound by active transcription factors are more likely to be nucleosome-depleted than those recognized by inactive ones  <cit> . differential occupancy on many motifs has been observed in certain environmental conditions  <cit>  and following environmental stresses  <cit> . however, it remains controversial whether changes of nucleosome occupancy  <cit>  or their initial positioning  <cit>  determines levels of gene expression.

most previous studies have focused on measurements of average transcription levels and average nucleosome occupancy over regulatory regions. the one-to-one connection between the occupancy of individual motifs and the resulting effect on gene expression has been tested only for a small number of genes. a recent study demonstrated that nucleosome depletion at two cell cycle-regulated promoters, cln2pr and hopr, ensures periodic expression pattern of genes involved in cell-cycle progression  <cit> . these experiments clearly linked a specific expression pattern  to nucleosome occupancy. the generality of this phenomenon for genes containing cell cycle regulating motifs remains to be tested through genome-wide experiments.

an average correlation between expression level and nucleosome occupancy at promoters across species has been reported  <cit> , but it is not, however, clear how motif-specific nucleosome occupancy patterns affect the expression of individual genes across different species. to address this question, we sought an analysis approach that transcends the average expression level and targets the response at a specific class of motifs under specific conditions. although predictions of nucleosome occupancy often assume that nucleosome positions are identical on conserved dna sequences  <cit> , experimental data is needed to test this assumption to better understand how nucleosome occupancy on motifs relates to phenotypic evolution. such comparison across species can provide insight that augments ongoing efforts to define the relative contributions of cis and trans acting factors in phenotype divergence.

in this study, we determined the genome-wide nucleosome positions in the yeast s. bayanus, and compared these findings to patterns of gene expression during the cell cycle of s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus, two closely related sensu stricto yeast species. we show that changes in nucleosome occupancy on motifs are correlated with phenotypic divergence between species. in particular, our results show that nucleosomes provide a conspicuous genome-wide signature of mbp <dig> cell-cycle motif recognition in these two yeasts and this signature distinguishes which motifs result in periodic, cyclic expression patterns of the downstream genes. although averaged expression level has previously been negatively linked to nucleosome occupancy at promoters  <cit> , our data provide a high-resolution, genome-wide demonstration of how the interplay between nucleosome occupancy and motif content is related to a specific expression pattern  of individual genes. conserved transcription factor binding sites are more likely to be nucleosome-depleted, suggesting that patterns of nucleosome occupancy may reflect conservation of regulatory circuits across species. finally, our cross-species comparison of transcription factor binding sites and nucleosome occupancy patterns reveals that changes in nucleosome-motif interactions are correlated to expression divergence, i.e. despite their conserved presence, motifs that become nucleosome-occupied during evolution no longer regulate downstream gene expression.

RESULTS
global nucleosome occupancy in s. bayanus
we compared the closely related saccharomyces species s. bayanus and s. cerevisiae to investigate how the interplay between nucleosomes and transcription factor binding motifs may affect downstream gene expression divergence. the two species are separated by  <dig> million years of evolution, a practical distance allowing us to investigate expression alterations between related genomes while still allowing for relatively unambiguous ortholog assignments. to map the genome-wide profile of nucleosome occupancy of s. bayanus, we used high-throughput, short read sequencing to detect nucleosome positioning as described in  <cit>  . applying a wavelet model  <cit> , we identified  <dig>  well-defined nucleosomes , consistent with published work  <cit> , with  <dig> % of the s. bayanus  <cit>  genome assembly sequence covered .

as a quality control, we examined the s. bayanus genome for several features known to be present. previous observations in s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus showed stereotypical nucleosome positioning relative to the start codon  <cit> . consistent with previous observations of nucleosome depletion at start codons  in s. cerevisiae  <cit> , in s. bayanus we observe nucleosome depletion centered at ~ <dig> bp upstream of the start codon  and at ~ <dig> bp downstream of the stop codon . in addition, we found nucleosome occupancy in s. bayanus peaks immediately downstream of the start codon, as observed in previous publications  <cit> . this confirms the technical quality of the sequencing data and provides an independent demonstration that the overall nucleosome occupancy pattern is conserved between s. bayanus and s. cerevisiae  <cit> .

nucleosome depletion on cell cycle regulatory motifs predicts periodic expression for downstream genes in s. bayanus and s. cerevisiae
previous studies have reported that, on average, nucleosomes are depleted over transcription factor binding motifs  <cit> , leading to the suggestion that the active transcription factors are correlated to depleted nucleosomes on their target sites  <cit> . we wanted to test if this correlation holds true at the level of individual genes, i.e. if, at a given motif upstream of several genes that vary in their gene expression levels, the level of nucleosome occupancy is correlated to these differences in gene expression. to test this possibility, we analyzed cell cycle gene expression data from s. bayanus cultures synchronized with alpha-factor. genes were ranked by their cell cycle expression periodicity as determined by fourier transform . the top motifs enriched in cell cycle-regulated genes were determined by a mutual information based algorithm, fire  <cit> , with the consensus sequences acgcga. this motif in s. bayanus maps to the s. cerevisiae cell cycle regulatory motifs for the transcription factor swi4p  based on the motif comparative tool stamp  <cit>  and the alignace database  <cit> . the sbf  complex, in concert with mbf , is the principal transcriptional regulator of the yeast cell cycle  <cit> .

our analysis is centered on motifs so that we could directly observe the nucleosome occupancy on motifs without aligning start codons or aligning the + <dig> nucleosome  <cit> . we observed a striking pattern of nucleosome depletion on swi <dig> motifs of periodically expressed genes , whereas, in contrast, nucleosomes tend to shield those motifs that occur in upstream regions of genes that do not show cell cycle regulation. this correlation is particularly apparent when nucleosome occupancy is examined alongside the expression data for the same set of genes: nucleosome depleted swi <dig> motifs occur in genes that peak in expression at the g1/s stage of the cell cycle, reflecting the established function of swi4p  <cit>  . to verify that these patterns of nucleosome depletion were not simply a result of functional motifs occurring preferentially within the nucleosome depleted region of promoters, we repeated this analysis focusing only on the subset of genes  with motifs in this  <dig> base pair nucleosome depleted region. again, only cell cycle regulated genes show consistent nucleosome depletion over these regulatory motifs . this indicates that the pattern of nucleosome occupancy reflects the active state of motifs on the individual gene level for this specific phenotype of cell cycle regulation. a secondary motif taaacaa mapping to fkh1p  was identified, and similar correlations between motif depletion and cell cycle expression were observed . because sbf-mbf is the primary driving factor in the cell cycle, our subsequent analysis focused on binding motifs of this complex.

to study the generality of this motif-nucleosome interaction on individual gene expression, we explored whether the motif-nucleosome interplay holds true in the related species, s. cerevisiae. using cell cycle expression data from s. cerevisiae cells synchronized with alpha factor under similar conditions to our s. bayanus experiment  <cit> , we identified genes displaying cell cycle periodicity . the most significant motif we identified, with the consensus cgcgt, corresponded to the mbp <dig> motif . mbp1p is a core member of the mbf complex with a consensus sequence very similar to that of swi <dig> , the motif we identified in s. bayanus. consistent with our observations in s. bayanus, nucleosome depletion  at mbp <dig> motifs is correlated with periodic expression during the cell cycle . genes downstream of these depleted sites show peak expression at g1/s, the cell cycle stage regulated by sbf-mbf complexes  <cit>  . in contrast, genes with nucleosome-occupied motifs did not show a periodic pattern of expression. these results highlight that our observations can be generalized across species that have diverged by at least  <dig> million years.

to directly examine whether the nucleosome-depleted motifs that are related to periodic expression in our study are correlated to transcription factor  binding, we compared the nucleosome occupancy of mbp1p bound and unbound motifs along with the expression patterns of their downstream genes  <cit> . the mbp1p-bound sites are significantly more nucleosome-depleted than an average mbp <dig> consensus  site in the upstream region  . we further investigated the gene expression patterns corresponding to the motifs occupied by mbp1p or not. we categorized genes as follows; 1) mbp1p-bound, containing an mbp <dig> consensus within the  <dig> bp upstream region of the gene, with the motif bound by the transcription factor mbp1p or 2) mbp1p-unbound, defined as having none of their upstream mbp <dig> sites bound by mbp1p. genes with the mbp1p-bound sites  display more periodic expression . this directly supports that the cyclic expression of the downstream genes is related to mbp1p binding and is reflected by nucleosome depletion on the motif sites.

motif preservation for orthologous genes is correlated with nucleosome depletion in s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus
in both species, we observe that genes with cell cycle regulatory motifs are periodically expressed when the motifs are nucleosome-depleted. if nucleosome occupancy is an effective regulator of motif function, we would expect relaxed selection on nucleosome-occupied motifs compared to those that are nucleosome-depleted. this could manifest as differential loss rates among consensus sequences that are otherwise considered equal. we tested this possibility by examining the nucleosome occupancy pattern of motifs present only in one species compared to those that are conserved across both. we defined the 'absent' motifs as those that occur in the upstream sequence of one species but are absent within  <dig> bp around that position at the orthologous gene in the other species. the 'absent' group  consistently showed significantly higher nucleosome occupancy than the conserved group . . while significant, this correlation represents only the overall tendency between nucleosome depletion and conservation of motifs, and exceptions are observed where some of the non-conserved motifs are also nucleosome-depleted. this result may partially explain the increased turnover rate of nucleosome-occupied dna sequences observed in intergenic regions  <cit> .

correlation between changes in gene expression and changes of nucleosome-motif interactions across species
the strong association between nucleosome depletion and the activity of a motif has an additional implication: changes in expression patterns across species should be correlated to either motif loss and gain or, alternatively through increased nucleosome occupancy of motifs in one species vs. nucleosome depletion in the other species. we therefore investigated the nucleosome occupancy levels at regulatory motifs in the upstream regions of orthologs that display changes in their cell cycle expression pattern between s. bayanus and s. cerevisiae. we defined the functional mbp <dig> motifs that control expression in s. cerevisiae as those that were upstream of 1) an open reading frame and 2) genes that were periodically expressed during the cell cycle. because motif loss and gain are likely to be accompanied by changes in motif content and spacing  <cit> , we restricted our comparison to motifs consistently present in the regulatory region of the orthologous genes in the two species, rather than considering only motifs with a conserved location within a particular promoter. we defined conserved motifs as those that appear at least once in the  <dig> bp upstream of the regulatory region of the orthologous gene. while this does not guarantee conservation of an exact motif , this approach ensures that the presence of any such nearby regulatory region is considered. using these criteria, we divided the orthologous cell cycle expressed genes in s. cerevisiae into two categories: those that do not have an mbp <dig> motif in s. bayanus and those that have conserved this motif. we found that genes lacking mbp <dig> motifs  lack periodic expression in s. bayanus , and the orthologous sequences corresponding to the s. cerevisiae motif positions are more nucleosome-occupied compared to those that are conserved .

to investigate whether there is a correlation between nucleosome and motif interaction to cell-cycle expression conservation, we ranked the orthologous cell cycle regulated genes with conserved mbp <dig> motifs according to whether they are cyclically expressed in s. bayanus. nucleosome depletion is a clear signal for those genes that remain periodically expressed in s. bayanus . the conservation of periodic expression pattern is not an artifact of the existence of non-expressed genes: when we restrict the analysis to expressed genes , we observe the same pattern . similar results were obtained when testing the motif and gene expression conservation patterns in the opposite direction, i.e., from s. bayanus to s. cerevisiae , supporting the generality of our observation and supporting the idea that motif gain/loss and changes in nucleosome-motif interactions contribute to alterations in gene expression patterns. this result suggests that alteration of nucleosome-motif interactions in the upstream regulatory region of genes is a biologically relevant phenomenon relating to gene expression divergence that is distinct from the loss of specific motifs in the regulatory region.

orthologous motif analysis on expression-nucleosome changes across species
the analysis described above reveals combined effects of the presence of a motif and the levels of nucleosome occupancy on the conservation of cell cycle expression. we further tested the robustness of our analysis on aligned motifs. the upstream regulatory region of s. cerevisiae and s. bayanus were aligned and our subsequent analysis was restricted to the motifs at orthologous positions . first, we considered those genes that are periodically expressed during the cell cycle in s. cerevisiae and which have an mbp <dig> motif in their upstream regulatory region. the orthologs of these genes with aligned mbp <dig> motifs were identified in s. bayanus and categorized into two groups:  <dig>  those genes that preserved periodic expression during the cell cycle; and  <dig>  those genes that no longer periodically expressed. we found that nucleosome occupancy is significantly lower in the first group than in the second group .

we also performed the analysis in the reverse direction, considering the conservation of nucleosome occupancy from s. bayanus to s. cerevisiae. these orthologous genes in s. cerevisiae were categorized into those that exhibit a cyclic pattern during the cell cycle and those that do not. the motifs upstream of periodically expressed genes show greater nucleosome depletion than genes which are not regulated by the cell cycle , suggesting that for some classes of genes nucleosome depletion alone can be correlated to expression changes independent of the movement of transcription factor binding motifs.

discussion
our observations provide two important perspectives on the current understanding of the control of gene expression. first our study provides strong evidence that cell-cycle regulation of gene expression is correlated not only to transcription factor binding motifs, but also to nucleosome occupancy at these sites. this genome-wide observation is consistent with a recent observation that nucleosome-depletion could ensure cyclic expression in two cell cycle-regulated promoters, cln2pr and hopr  <cit> . it is important to note that the nucleosome data presented here are from an asynchronous culture, and therefore the reported occupancy reflects the integration of the nucleosome occupancy signal throughout the cell cycle. nucleosome occupancy has been observed to fluctuate during the cell cycle in concert with periodic gene expression  <cit> , and further studies at the level of individual genes and groups of genes will help to elucidate this cause-and-effect relationship. indeed, deciphering specific cause-effect relationships between transcription factor binding and nucleosome depletion remains an important challenge.

second, we show that changes in gene expression across species can be correlated to either loss of the regulatory motif or a change in nucleosome occupancy on conserved motifs. compared to previous studies that focused on average expression level  <cit> , we demonstrate that such correlation is significant for cell cycle expression regulation. future work on nucleosome occupancy change on motifs between species and the resulting changes in gene expression may help, in part, to explain the disconnect between regulatory motif divergence and gene expression divergence. specifically, it has been reported that most of the differences between species in transcription factor -binding motifs in yeasts and mammals have a very limited ability to predict gene expression divergence  <cit> . our results demonstrate that alteration of gene expression patterns can be related to a combination of motif turnover and nucleosome occupancy. therefore, studies of transcription factor binding motifs may benefit from considering nucleosome occupancy data in parallel.

our observations on the evolution of cell cycle gene expression suggest that phenotype divergence is strongly related to changes of nucleosome-motif interaction. however, despite this general trend, not all expression pattern changes observed in our analysis are explained by changes in nucleosome occupancy or by alteration of motifs. this observation likely reflects the real underlying biological sophistication of gene expression control. as such, our results contribute a novel phenomenon that should be considered in studies aimed at understanding the divergence of gene expression during evolution and its impact on evolutionary change. the datasets provided with this study comprise a rich resource for additional analyses  to address these and related questions.

CONCLUSIONS
through analyzing nucleosome occupancy pattern and cell cycle expression divergence between two yeast species s. bayanus and s. cerevisiae, we found that many changes in cell cycle gene expression patterns across species can be correlated to changes in nucleosome occupancy on motifs . this observation suggests that alteration of nucleosome occupancy is a previously uncharacterized feature related to the divergence of cell cycle expression between species.

