BACKGROUND
a synonymous site substitution is defined as a change in a protein-coding gene that does not alter the amino acid sequence encoded by the gene. thus, synonymous substitutions are often assumed to be free of selection at the protein level, and the rates at which they accumulate are widely used as an approximation of the neutral mutation rate. the first study on rates of synonymous substitutions in flowering plants found that mitochondrial genes evolve a few times more slowly than chloroplast genes, about ten times more slowly than plant and mammal nuclear genes, and 50– <dig> times more slowly than mammalian mitochondrial genes  <cit> . later studies have confirmed the low rate of synonymous changes in angiosperm mitochondrial genes  <cit>  and extended the observation to the entire mitochondrial genome  <cit> . however, recent studies identified two genera of flowering plants, plantago and pelargonium, that have experienced a dramatic increase in the mitochondrial rate of synonymous substitution  <cit> . some of these rate increases were temporary, with rates approaching or returning to normally low levels in certain descendent lineages  <cit> .

phylogenetic analyses have suggested additional cases of rate acceleration for several plant lineages  <cit> , but it is unclear whether this is a widespread phenomenon in plants. here we test the generality of slow synonymous sequence evolution in plant mitochondrial genes across a large number  and wide diversity of seed plants . although genes from most species evolve slowly, as expected, additional cases of highly accelerated rates were found, as were examples of exceptionally slow sequence evolution. surprisingly, a few plants were also identified that contain a mixture of both quickly and slowly evolving mitochondrial genes. overall, these results demonstrate that the synonymous substitution rate in plant mitochondria is a more variable character than previously appreciated.

RESULTS
levels of sequence divergence in mitochondrial genes of seed plants
previous studies identified two plant lineages, plantago and the geraniaceae , that have independently experienced periods of accelerated substitution rates in their mitochondrial genes  <cit> . to determine whether additional cases of rate acceleration could be found in mitochondrial genes of other seed plants , blast searches were undertaken in order to collect all available atp <dig>  cox <dig>  and matr homologues from genbank. these three genes were chosen because they have been used in a number of broad phylogenetic studies and their sequences are available for hundreds of different species of plants. after removing multiple sequences from the same species, pseudogenes, cdnas, and short gene fragments, a total of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> sequences were available for atp <dig>  cox <dig>  and matr, respectively. for each gene, homologous sequences were aligned and maximum likelihood  analyses were performed using the muse-gaut codon model  <cit>  to obtain estimates of synonymous site divergence  per branch .

a surprising feature of these trees is the amount of branch-length variation seen . although the great majority of plants show conventionally low levels of synonymous site divergence, a number of species have substantially shorter or longer branches for one or more genes. the most striking examples of increased sequence divergence are from plantago and pelargonium, whose atp <dig> and cox <dig> branch lengths are exceptionally long , as previously reported  <cit> . although less extreme, one or more species from silene, apodanthes, acorus, ephedra, and podocarpus are also very divergent across multiple genes. patterns are not as clear for other taxa. for instance, goodenia and musa are highly divergent for atp <dig> but only moderately divergent for cox <dig>  for a number of species, such as carex and anthericum, a sequence from one gene is very divergent but data are not available for the other two genes.

in contrast to the examples of increased levels of mitochondrial sequence divergence, there are several groups that consistently show an unusually low level of divergence, even in the context of the general conservation expected for plants . within the angiosperms, these groups include the arecales , the chloranthales, the sister orders laurales and magnoliales, and most orders within the basal eudicots. several gymnosperm lineages also have short branches, including the cycadales, the pinaceae, and ginkgo.

unexpectedly, these analyses have also identified several lineages with high levels of divergence for some genes but low levels for others . for example, divergence levels for alisma are high for atp <dig> and matr but unexceptional for cox <dig>  the cox <dig> and matr genes from ranunculus are remarkable in that they are unusually conserved, similar to the very slow rates found in most basal eudicots, while its atp <dig> gene is moderately divergent. for polemonium and pentamerista , atp <dig> is divergent but matr is conserved. conversely, matr is divergent but atp <dig> is conserved for pilostyles .

to more accurately assess levels of sequence divergence across seed plants, synonymous  and nonsynonymous  divergence values were estimated for a subset of taxa from a combined analysis of five mitochondrial protein genes . patterns of divergence in the ds tree from the combined analysis  are similar to those observed for the trees based on analyses of individual protein-coding genes and rdna . in all cases, branch lengths are substantially longer for silene noctiflora, acorus, ephedra, and podocarpus than for most seed plants, but not as long as for plantago rugelii or pelargonium hortorum . dn values are also high for these six species, but they are less pronounced than the increases observed for ds .

absolute substitution rates in mitochondrial genes of seed plants
the length of a branch in a phylogenetic tree, which represents an estimate of the amount of sequence divergence for that lineage, equals the product of the absolute substitution rate and time. because of this confluence, the rate and time components must be separated in order to make direct comparisons of substitution rates among taxa. we previously described a method to calculate absolute rates of synonymous  and nonsynonymous  substitution along each branch in a phylogenetic context  <cit> , and we employ essentially the same strategy here. however, in this case ds and dn values were estimated from a combined analysis of five mitochondrial protein genes .

there is a wide range of variation in rs across seed plants . at one extreme, the synonymous rate in cycas is only  <dig>  substitutions per site per billion years . slow rates are also seen for several other gymnosperms, including pinus, ginkgo, and zamia. the cycas value is more than 5-fold lower than the lowest angiosperm rates, from platanus, laurus, liriodendron, phoenix, and sambucus. at the other extreme, rs is equal to  <dig> ssb for silene noctiflora. the high rate of synonymous substitution for s. noctiflora was recently discovered by a second group as well . rs for s. noctiflora is even faster than for those species of plantago and pelargonium sampled here, but lower than the fastest previously reported angiosperm rate of 166– <dig> ssb for plantago media  <cit> . between cycas and p. media, synonymous substitutions vary by a factor of  <dig>  to  <dig>  across seed plants.

rn is also variable across seed plants, ranging by a factor of  <dig> between liriodendron and s. noctiflora . there is a general correlation between rn and rs ; however, rn values are muted relative to their rs counterparts . consequently, rn/rs ratios  are generally lower for species with high rs  and higher for species with low rs . these ratios suggest very different evolutionary environments at the extremes. for p. rugelii and pelargonium, substitutions at synonymous sites occur  <dig> times more frequently than at nonsynonymous sites, whereas for pinus and cycas, nonsynonymous substitutions are actually estimated to occur 2– <dig> times more often than synonymous substitutions.

it must be noted here that sites of rna editing were not excluded in the analyses of this study. in plants, rna editing usually occurs at multiple positions for any mitochondrial transcript  <cit> . the retention of edited sites in rate analyses can sometimes bias estimates of nonsynonymous substitution rates, although their presence seems to have little to no effect on synonymous rate estimates  <cit> . indeed, the exclusion of edited sites in gymnosperm cox <dig> sequences resulted in a 30-fold reduction in the nonsynonymous rate  <cit> . thus, the high rn/rs ratios observed for pinus and cycas are probably an artifact of the large number of edited sites present in their genes.

to further explore the dynamics of the rate acceleration within silene, rn and rs for all internal and terminal branches in the caryophyllales were plotted phylogenetically . only the branch leading to s. noctiflora shows a substantial increase in rate, indicating that the rate acceleration occurred within the last five million years, subsequent to the divergence of s. noctiflora from the other two species of silene included in this analysis. to determine whether any other species of silene show elevated substitution levels, seven additional species were sampled for the genes cob and cox <dig>  however, none of the additional taxa appear to be any more closely related to s. noctiflora than is s. latifolia , and none of their sequences are unusually divergent . because these additional species did not provide further information on the timing of the rate acceleration, they were not included in the absolute rates analyses in figure  <dig> 

the frequency of mitochondrial rna editing was shown to be highly reduced in pelargonium and other geraniaceae, and this observation was postulated to be potentially related to the increase in their mitochondrial synonymous substitution rate  <cit> . to discover whether the frequency of editing is also reduced in s. noctiflora, edit sites were predicted using the online resource prep-mt  <cit>  for the six taxa shown in figure  <dig> . contrary to the situation in the geraniaceae, there appears to be little correlation between substitution rate and editing frequency in silene. the number of predicted edit sites in s. noctiflora is quite similar to the other two species of silene and to stellaria, despite the roughly 100-fold increase in the synonymous substitution rate specific to s. noctiflora mitochondrial genes.

discussion
absolute substitution rates
previous studies on synonymous substitution rates found that plant mitochondrial sequences evolve very slowly  <cit> . for the most part, the results presented in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> confirm these earlier findings. roughly 80–90% of the sampled species have normally low levels of sequence divergence at synonymous sites. however, a surprising number of species depart from the "normal" mitochondrial pattern. at one end of the spectrum, there are several angiosperm  and gymnosperm  groups whose genes are unusually conserved at synonymous sites. at the opposite end are taxa such as plantago, pelargonium, and s. noctiflora with long branches for multiple genes. many additional species have long branches for a single gene, but independent sequences are needed to confirm that these long branches are replicable and not artifactual . on the whole, these results suggest that while most lineages of plant mitochondria do indeed possess generally low synonymous substitution rates, it's increasingly naive and misleading to categorize all plants in this way, and that synonymous substitution rates are, for reasons still unclear, exceptionally fluid and variable in plant mitochondria.

because the analyses in figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> used almost all species available in genbank , they provide a generally unbiased representation of rate variation across seed plants. however, for comparisons among species, branch lengths alone are inadequate because they are a function of absolute substitution rate and time. in other words, equally long branches do not necessarily equate to equally fast absolute substitution rates. for example, ds for s. noctiflora, acorus, and ephedra are quite similar, but rs for s. noctiflora is almost  <dig> times higher than for acorus and ephedra . indeed, the synonymous rate for s. noctiflora is even faster than for the species of plantago and pelargonium examined here , despite the much shorter branch length for s. noctiflora .

these findings highlight the importance of taxon sampling in these analyses. the increased sampling of silene species allowed us to pinpoint the rate acceleration in s. noctiflora to a  <dig> million year period. similarly, sampling of multiple taxa within plantago in a previous study on synonymous rates identified one species, p. media, with rs a few times higher than for s. noctiflora over a similar time span  <cit> . the finding of extensive variation in synonymous substitution rates within these two genera suggests that there is likely to be much more rate variation in plant mitochondrial genomes than is already apparent. increasingly dense sampling of species is likely to uncover additional examples of rate variation. calculation of absolute substitution rates may identify further examples, because some increases may be so recent that sequence divergence is still rather low and not readily apparent in phylogenetic trees.

unfortunately, for acorus and ephedra there is little chance that increased sampling will provide a better estimate of the timing and magnitude of the rate acceleration, despite the fact that their increased divergence levels are spread over more than  <dig> million years. for acorus, the genus encompasses only three or four species and they all appear to be very similar at the molecular level . furthermore, there are no other genera in the acorales to break up the time period from the base of monocots to the diversification of acorus  <cit> . with over  <dig> species in ephedra, it may be possible to more finely dissect the dynamics of rate evolution in this genus. however, like the situation in acorus, the species included here show very little molecular divergence  and there are no other genera to break up the long time interval between the crown and stem group nodes of ephedra  <cit> .

among-species comparisons reveal that synonymous substitution rates vary by four orders of magnitude across seed plants, from a low of  <dig>  ssb in cycas  to a high of 166– <dig> ssb in plantago media  <cit> . excluding rna viruses  <cit> , this is, to our knowledge, by far the largest range of synonymous rates known for any phylogenetic group and genome, as well as both the lowest and highest estimated rates. to put this range in perspective, the amount of mitochondrial sequence divergence found in cycas after almost  <dig> million years of evolution would have taken p. media on average only about  <dig> thousand years to accumulate. these results highlight the advantage of estimating rates in a phylogenetic context. traditional pairwise methods average rates between two lineages, thereby masking any lineage-specific rate differences. a pairwise comparison between s. noctiflora at  <dig> ssb and s. latifolia at  <dig>  ssb would result in an averaging of their very different rates to ~ <dig> ssb, which doesn't reflect either of their actual rates very well. similarly, the low rate found in cycas  wouldn't be quite as low in a pairwise comparison with zamia  leading to a pairwise rate of  <dig>  ssb. the phylogenetic estimates of substitution rates indicate a 6000-fold range of variation between cycas and s. noctiflora versus a 1000-fold range based on the pairwise estimates.

although substitution rates are high for mitochondrial genes of s. noctiflora and acorus, chloroplast and nuclear genes from these species do not show any increase in sequence divergence   <cit> . thus, the rate acceleration in these species is confined to the mitochondrial genome, as seen also in plantago and pelargonium  <cit> . in those studies, defects in mitochondrial dna replication or repair were speculated to be, among a wide range of processes potentially affecting the mitochondrial mutation rate, the most likely causes of such severe, mitochondrial-specific increases in substitution rates. similar factors may also be at work in s. noctiflora and acorus. in contrast, in ephedra, chloroplast and nuclear sequences are also divergent  <cit> . this points to a factor acting at the organismal level, such as generation time, that would affect rates in all three genomes, although mitochondrial-specific forces may be at work as well. some studies  <cit>  have detected moderate, correlated differences in synonymous substitution rates across all three plant genomes and have attributed these to generation time effects  <cit> , paternal transmission of organelles  <cit> , or correlated substitution and speciation rates  <cit> .

within-plant variation in sequence divergence
one surprising finding from the broad-scale analyses is the number of plant lineages with levels of synonymous site divergence that appear to be relatively high for some genes and low for others . in most cases, the basis for this apparent within-plant rate heterogeneity is unknown, and as emphasized below, some of these cases are likely to be or potentially are the result of error of various kinds. others, however, have a possible biological underpinning. one likely biological explanation is horizontal gene transfer, which occurs surprisingly frequently between mitochondrial genomes of unrelated plants  <cit> . transfers between genomes with highly different substitution rates and accumulated sequence divergence could easily account for some of the within-plant, gene-to-gene differences shown in figs.  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and indeed is suspected to account for one particular case. two members of the apodanthaceae, pilostyles and apodanthes, have high levels of divergence for matr. the apodanthes atp <dig> gene is similarly divergent, but atp <dig> from pilostyles is not. phylogenetic analysis of the atp <dig> gene from pilostyles suggests the possibility that this gene may have been acquired via horizontal transfer from a plant with normally low mitochondrial rates  <cit> .

another potential biological explanation for differences in synonymous rates between genes from the same plant is that they are located in different genetic compartments that possess different substitution rates. with the exception of plantago and pelargonium  <cit>  and probably some of the new cases of high-rate mitochondrial genomes reported in this study, synonymous rates are much lower in mitochondrial than nuclear genomes in plants  <cit> . functional transfer of a mitochondrial gene to the nucleus will thus usually lead to much higher rates of sequence divergence. this possibility is exciting because there has been no report of functional nuclear transfer for atp <dig>  matr, or cox <dig> in any plant. this includes no evidence for loss of these three genes from the mitochondrial genomes of  <dig> diverse angiosperms examined by southern blot hybridization, whereas  <dig> other genes were inferred to be frequently lost from the mitochondrial genome and, equally frequently, functionally transferred to the nucleus  <cit> .

a third intriguing possibility is that synonymous substitution rates vary across regions of the mitochondrial genome. in the chloroplast genome of angiosperms, synonymous rates are known to be a few-fold higher in single-copy regions than in a large inverted-repeat region  <cit> , and of perhaps greater relevance, a small region with higher accelerated synonymous rates has recently been discovered in the chloroplast of one lineage of legumes . gene-to-gene variation in the mitochondrial mutation rate was also recently observed in populations of silene vulgaris  <cit> .

there are also several non-biological reasons why divergence levels for a particular species vary between genes. sequencing errors will artificially inflate sequence divergence. the pennisetum atp <dig> sequence is a likely example. including the atp <dig> sequence, eight mitochondrial genes were generated for pennisetum from the same unpublished study , and all show similar characteristics including frameshifting indels and a large number of nucleotide substitutions . most likely, these unpublished sequences are full of errors, and this is the cause of the apparently anomalous divergence of atp <dig> in pennisetum.

misidentification of the correct phylogenetic position of a sequence/organism could also lead to artifactually long branches . for example, two cases were found where the taxonomic sources of sequences were swapped. in the first case, a cox <dig> sequence whose source is listed as austrobaileya  is more similar to an independent ceratophyllum sequence than to other austrobaileyales sequences, while a sequence annotated as ceratophyllum  is actually more austrobaileya-like. these two genbank files have now been corrected. a similar mix-up occurred between a ginkgo-like sequence annotated as cabomba  and a cabomba-like sequence identified as ginkgo . in each example, the mislabeled sequences were generated from the same study and probably reflect a mix-up that occurred during the database submission process. they were easily identifiable  because they appeared as uncharacteristically long branches relative to independent sequences of the same gene from the same genus.

the use of topological constraints in the analyses may similarly lead to spuriously long branches. to evaluate this possibility, unconstrained analyses were performed on the four data sets used for figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> . as can be seen, almost all long branches in the constrained analyses remain long in the unconstrained analyses. however, the use of topological constraints apparently led to an erroneously long branch for archytaea matr and for pennisetum atp <dig>  archytaea was constrained as an asterid in the ericales , but it is actually a rosid in the malpighiales  <cit> . in the unconstrained analysis for matr, archytaea groups properly within the malpighiales and exhibits a more normal branch length . the long branch for pennisetum atp <dig> also greatly diminishes in the unconstrained analyses . as mentioned above, the long pennisetum branch may result from a poor-quality sequence read. alternatively, the sequence may have been acquired via horizontal gene transfer, or the dna sample was derived from an organism mistakenly identified as pennisetum.

these examples underscore the need for independent sequencing to verify that any and all cases of putative intragenomic variation in synonymous substitution rates are real and not the result of human error. for those cases that are validated, it will be interesting to see whether any turn out to reflect noteworthy events in mitochondrial evolution, such as gene- or region-specific differences in substitution rates within a mitochondrial genome, horizontal gene transfer, or the functional transfer to the nucleus of a gene that has never known to have been so-transferred in plants  or even among all eukaryotes .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have measured synonymous substitution rates in a phylogenetic context and uncovered numerous independent examples of rate increase and decrease. these results demonstrate that the synonymous substitution rate in plant mitochondria is a more variable character than previously appreciated. the extremes of synonymous substitution rates measured here constitute by far the largest known range of rate variation for any group of organisms, yet there is no obvious explanation for these divergent patterns. future studies are required to understand the evolutionary processes driving these patterns.

