BACKGROUND
since the discovery and isolation of the green fluorescent protein  from the pacific jellyfish aequorea victoria, fluorescent proteins  have become an increasingly powerful tool for use in molecular biology  <cit> . the lack of a required substrate or co-factor along with the visible fluorescence that is emitted upon excitation of the fluorophore make fps desirable tools and reporters for a wide variety of biological applications. recent advances in imaging methods have also enhanced the applications of fps in plant biology  <cit> . in plant gene expression studies, the genes for fps are often overexpressed alone or fused directly to other genes of interest to monitor spatial expression patterns, and entire vector sets have been constructed for the ease of this application  <cit> . additionally, fps have been used as tracking agents to detect and improve the efficiency of transient expression and stable plant transformation systems. in this case, fps are typically under the transcriptional regulation of highly constitutive promoters such as maize ubiquitin  <dig> promoter  or cauliflower mosaic virus  35s promoter  <cit> . while whole cell or whole organism expression of fps are common, fluorescent reporter genes have also been cloned under the control of tissue-specific promoters for discrete expression in transgenic plants, including in pollen  <cit> , endosperm and aleurone cells  <cit> , roots  <cit>  and vascular tissues  <cit> . fps are useful to characterize inducible promoters  <cit>  and can also be fused directly to sequence peptide tags at the n- or c-terminus of a gene sequence and targeted intracellularly to specific studies  <cit> .

although other fps have been added to the color palette during the past 12 years, gfp has remained the most commonly used fp in these studies; gfps generally form monomers in physiologically-relevant concentrations overexpressed in the cytosol, whereas native coral-derived fps  tend to autotetramerize. nevertheless coral-derived fps have gained wider use in recent years in transgenic plant studies simply because many of them are brighter, owing partially to their longer wavelengths. the longer wavelengths needed to excite rfps also have much lower levels of autofluorescence in mature green tissue as compared to uv or blue light, which is used to visualize gfp  <cit> . the greatest source of autofluorescence interference is chlorophyll autofluorescence  in green tissues, which can obscure gfp fluorescence.

dsred, derived from coral discosoma sp. was the first coral-derived fp to be used in plants as a reporter gene  <cit> , and remains the most widely-used fp in biology after gfp. systematic mutations have since been introduced into dsred to improve its folding dynamics, solubilization, photostability and to render monomerization, and more recent mutations and improvements in dsred have yielded derivative fps with increased fluorescence intensity or brightness  and altered spectral properties  for reporter gene applications  <cit> . these include mrfp <dig>  <cit>  along with tdtomato, mstrawberry, and, morange  <cit> . furthermore, additional sources of coral- and other organism-derived fps beyond discosoma sp. are constantly being discovered and have recently been exploited to produce novel fps, potentially resulting in improved fp reporter genes for plant biotechnology  <cit> . another gene in the toolbox is meosfp, which has recently been used in plants in various organelle-targeted versions  <cit> . eosfp is a green-to-red  photoconvertable fp that fluoresces green when by blue light. when excited by 390 nm-405 nm light for a few seconds will convert to orange emission .

the aim of this study was to survey a sample of promising fps that have seldom been used in plants to compare their performance as reporter genes. we also set out to improve them for use in applications where whole-plant fluorescence is of paramount importance . we evaluated and modified the following fps : dsred <dig> , tdtomato  morange  and pporrfp . whereas many of these proteins are often called red fluorescent proteins , as shaner et al.  <cit>  rightly point out, their emissions are all orange. therefore we will refer to these proteins as orange fluorescent proteins . the extinction coefficients and quantum yields of these ofps indicated that each should be useful as markers in plants, but all started with less brightness than tdtomato: dsred <dig> , morange , and pporrfp . since we are especially interested in their use as transgenic markers, and not as fusion protein candidates, tetramerization was not deemed to be a negative factor. however, we did use some monomeric protein-coding variants chosen because of their brightness. we compared non-targeted and endoplasmic reticulum-  targeted variants under the control of a constitutive promoter in identical dna vector backbones. transient expression in nicotiana benthamiana using agroinfiltration and stable transgenic arabidopsis thaliana and tobacco  plants were assayed using epifluorescence and confocal microscopy, and spectrofluorescence measurements.

RESULTS
agroinfiltration-mediated transient expression of ofps
the agroinfiltration experiment in nicotiana benthamiana was designed to rapidly screen the expression vectors for functionality, but to also assay gross comparisons of the effect of er-targeting, e.g., adding a signal peptide fusion to the n-terminus and an hdel er retention signal to the c-terminus that successfully improved whole plant fluorescence for gfp  <cit> . we were initially perplexed that the apparent fluorescence varied among ofps, instead of increasing the fluorescence in all the four different ofp genes. notable fluorescence increase from er-targeting was observed only for the non-tetramers: tdtomato , which essentially forms a monomer ofp, and the monomeric variant, morange . the tdtomato is a head-to-tail dtomato variant with a  <dig> amino acid linker, and therefore contains two chromophores, which explains why it is approximately twice as bright as the other ofps  <cit> . with a large stokes shift of 27 nm, tdtomato is also practically easier to visualize and measure compared with the other ofps tested with lower stokes shifts . we hypothesize that the additions to the n- and, especially the c- termini altered the homotetramerization of dsred- <dig> and pporrfp, which could have affected both their accumulation and ultimately their fluorescence. the agroinfiltration data also appeared to be congruent with the spectrofluorometric data of the stable transformants described below.

stable expression of unaltered ofp genes in tobacco
whereas agroinfiltration is useful as a first-pass gross screen for cassette functionality, stable transformation more closely mimics the range of expression levels seen when gene constructs are integrated in variable insertion sites. stable expression was required in order to quantitatively compare the expression levels of the different fluorescent protein encoding genes in similar tissues. transformants  of the most fluorescent t <dig> transgenic tobacco  lines were selected for analysis and, therefore, microscopy and fluorospectroscopy analysis of these lines yield a realistic variation with regards to the range of fluorescence in these eudicot species. there was a wide range of fluorescent intensity for the different transgenic lines for each ofp construct, with up to an eight-fold difference from the highest to the lowest expressing line . however, the overall range and average of fluorescence levels for each construct of dsred <dig>  tdtomato, pporrfp and morange were not significantly different, even though there were differences among specific lines within constructs . therefore, the results demonstrate that selecting any of these fp genes for use as transgenic reporters is justified and each should give relatively congruent results. we did note that the maximum fluorescence among all fp genes and events analyzed was for a pporrfp line  . also, pporrfp is a unique ofp to transgenic plants; these are the first published quantitative data on its use in plants. it is a tetramer ofp that was originally cloned from the hard coral porites porites; it was chosen for assessment because of its attractive spectral properties  <cit> , which enables microscopy using the standard ofp-dsred filter sets in epifluorescence microscopy. it was because of these early initial results that we chose pporrfp to include as the scorable fp marker when we constructed the versatile large panic vector set for gateway-enabled monocot transformation  <cit> . while there are no published expression- or fluorescence data yet in monocots, we observed that pporrfp is very effective in rice  and switchgrass  as a transgenic reporter gene  <cit> . indeed, until recently, switchgrass transformation has been very difficult and inefficient. the use of overexpression of pporrfp and tracking analysis of transformed tissue has enabled important increases in transformation efficiency of switchgrass  <cit> . we chose pporrfp instead of tdtomato for this purpose since the latter gene is approximately twice the size of the former and we valued minimizing the total vector size for this project.

plant codon optimization effects of pporrfp in stable transgenic plants
as a result of this high fluorescence using the native pporrfp gene, we modified the nucleotide sequence with the intention of optimizing the codons for plants to further enhance the fluorescent expression levels. utilizing arabidopsis thaliana most commonly used codons as a model, pporrfpmut was stably transformed into tobacco and transgenic t <dig> lines were screened for fluorescence. ten transgenic lines were selected and carried through to the t <dig> progeny as above, where they were directly compared to the native pporrfp gene for expression of fluorescence. surprisingly, the overall fluorescence level of the codon-altered pporrfpmut was significantly lower than that of the native pporrfp . the average fluorescent measurements at the peak emission wavelength  for the pporrfp and pporrfpmut transgenic tobacco were  <dig>  ×  <dig>  and  <dig>  ×  <dig> , respectively. we are curious as to why plant codon optimization failed, since it has increased expression and accumulation of other proteins synthesized in plants, most notably bacillus thuringiensis endotoxins  <cit> . one speculation is that in fact perhaps, the codon-optimized genes were overexpressed, yet misfolded, which was observed when dsred and the rfp eqfp <dig> were overexpressed in bacteria  <cit> . lower expression, in this situation, led to improved fluorescence.

er-targeting greatly enhances the fluorescence of tdtomato and morange in stable transgenic plants
the most important finding of our study is the dramatic enhancement of fluorescence in overexpressed fp genes from the additions of signal peptide and the er retention peptides to both tdtomato and morange. the spectrofluorometric measurements we observe in stably transgenic tobacco expressing tdtomato-er versus non-targeted tdtomato are congruent with the microscopy images we observed for the agroinfiltration experiments, in which er retention increased fluorescence . er targeting rendered a doubling of fluorescence for tdtomato when examining the best performing lines of each . when we compared the top four lines of each construct relative to fluorescence, there was, on average, nearly a tripling of fluorescence for er-targeted vs. non-targeted tdtomato  and  <dig>  ×  <dig> ). furthermore, the distributions of fluorescence between the two gene variants have very little overlap , inferring that the use of tdtomato-er for a reporter gene in transformation studies will enable researchers to identify expression over a greater range in plants, possibly enabling greater visualization and tracking of expressing transgenics. for phytosensing applications or other assays where real-time visible assays of inducible promoters are important, this dramatic increase in fluorescence will be a key feature in success in both the lab and field settings  <cit> .

we overexpressed the entire collection of genes  in arabidopsis, grown at the same time in similar to conditions to directly compare fluorescence among variants in a common species . again, the quantitative data are consistent with the qualitative data from the agroinfiltration experiment . there is a large and significant er-targeting enhancement for tdtomato and morange, while the alteration of the tetrameric protein encoding genes pporrfp and dsred resulted in diminished fluorescence and, hence, usability of these modified genes as reporters in transgenic plants . we observed an approximate  <dig> -fold greater fluorescence of arabidopsis compared with tobacco , but these data were taken at different times and might represent environmental effects or simply inherently brighter tissues  vs. leaves ) , so we caution against making definitive conclusions regarding direct ofp expression in tobacco vs. arabidopsis. we did, however, observe a similar trend of dramatic enhancement for er-targeting of morange that we observed in tdtomato. when stably expressed in arabidopsis, we observed a 2-fold enhancement of fluorescence in er-targeted morange compared with the non-targeted counterpart  and  <dig>  x  <dig> . additionally, the er-targeted tdtomato resulted in more than a 4-fold increase in fluorescence as compared to the non-targeted tdtomato  and  <dig>  x  <dig> . for recombinant proteins that have been shown to be relatively stable when synthesized in the cytosol, er-targeting and retention has also shown a three-fold increase  <cit> . er-targeting via n–terminus signal peptide addition and er retention via c-terminus hdel or kdel addition has been a common tool to aid protein accumulation in transgenic cells  <cit> . the reason for increased fluorescence of the er-targeted ofps is likely owed to increased accumulation of protein, which, in the er, comprises a protected environment with attenuated proteolytic activity that also is imbued with molecular chaperones for protein folding.

CONCLUSIONS
ofps have emerged as the real-time in vivo reporter genes of choice for plant transformation. endoplasmic reticulum targeting allows the accumulation of greater ofp monomers than non-targeting in select ofps. tdtomato-er is the most brightly fluorescing fp marker gene ever characterized in transgenic plants, followed by morange-er. these ofp variants will be especially valuable in quantifying inducible expression in plant organs.

