BACKGROUND
due to their regenerative and immunomodulatory potential mesenchymal stem cells  provide promising opportunities for the therapy of various diseases. for clinical applications of mscs, labeling and tracking is crucial to evaluate cell distribution and homing. for this purpose positron emission tomography , optical imaging , and magnetic resonance imaging  were evaluated in various studies  <cit> . limitations of pet include the poor spatial resolution  <cit> , the radiation of the tracers that results in cell damage, and the short half life time of the tracers used . oi also is a very sensitive method widely accepted in small-animal studies  <cit> . however, due to the limited tissue penetration of the light emitted from the fluorochromes the use of oi is limited to superficial processes. another problem is the quantification of the signal. high-field mri  in combination with special high-resolution receiver coils and innovative signal strategies might be a compromise for clinical purposes. advantages of mri are the lack of radiation exposure, the excellent spatial resolution down to  <dig> μm and the fact that patient size does not limit the examination. furthermore, long-term studies over six weeks already have been performed successfully  <cit> . to label cells for mri, paramagnetic substances like gadolinium  dtpa  <cit>  or superparamagnetic substances   <cit>  have been used. the latter seem to be more suitable as iron labeling results in larger susceptibility artifacts and iron is less toxic than gd. iron-based contrast agents are already fda and ce approved  and under consideration for approval . the major differences of those particles are size  and coating. spio-labeling of mscs does not affect the viability or differentiation potential of the cells  <cit>  but spio-labeling can have an impact on the iron metabolism, the migration capacity and the ability of colony formation of mscs  <cit> . exposition of cells and tissues to magnetic fields is not only the functional principle of mri, the magnetic force can also be used for the guided localization of iron-labeled stem cells to desired regions  <cit>  or for the seeding of scaffolds with stem cells  <cit>  or for the engineering of 3d tissues by stem cells  <cit> . human endothelial progenitor cells and murine macrophages labeled by iron nanoparticles were previously exposed to external magnetic field gradients with different experimental conditions and the formation of the three-dimensional multicellular assemblies have been described  <cit> . moreover, magnetic-fluid-loaded liposomes were guided to the near vicinity of human adenocarcinoma prostatic cells by means of a  <dig> -t external magnet  <cit> . except for sporadic reports on the influence of magnetic fields on hematopoietic progenitor cells  <cit> , neural progenitor cells  <cit>  and myoblasts  <cit>  to date no report exists investigating on possible effects of magnetic fields on iron-labeled and unlabeled human stem cells. in this study an innovative labeling protocol for tracking mscs by mri using spio in combination with magnetic fields was established. both, spio and the static magnetic field were identified as independent factors which affect the functional biology of human mscs. further in vivo investigations are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of the interaction of magnetic fields with stem cell biology.

RESULTS
characteriztion of human mscs
after in vitro differentiation and specific staining, the human mscs showed adipogenic, osteogenic and chondrogenic differentiation indicating their plasticity . moreover, the human mscs showed the typical surface epitope pattern: positive for cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  and hla class i and negative for cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  and hla class ii .

cell growth, proliferation and viability
mscs labeled with spio immediately exposed to magnetic fields before adhesion to the plastic surface ) initially accumulated in the area directly above the magnets at high density, adhered there guided by the magnetic force and grew out from this area throughout the culture flask or 6-well plates . unlabeled mscs immediately exposed to magnetic fields before adhesion to the plastic surface showed no accumulation at the area above the magnets. labeled or unlabeled mscs exposed to magnetic fields after adhesion to the plastic surface showed no accumulation at the area above the magnets. mscs labeled with spio and exposed to magnetic fields grew according to the magnetic flux lines  whereas unlabeled mscs with or without exposition to magnetic fields and labeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields showed the usual clonogenic growth clusters without general order in the culture flasks .

the proliferation rate and viability rate of unlabeled mscs and labeled mscs with and without exposition to magnetic fields showed no differences .

migration capacity
the migration capacity of unlabeled mscs and labeled mscs with and without exposition to magnetic fields showed no differences .

ability of colony formation
a possible influence of the exposition to magnetic fields on the ability of colony formation of labeled and unlabeled mscs was investigated by two settings:

in the first setting, the colony forming assay was started at the beginning of the exposition to magnetic fields and directly after labeling . here, the ability of colony formation of labeled mscs was significantly reduced compared to unlabeled mscs. the reduced ability of colony formation could be observed on labeled mscs with and without exposition to magnetic fields. exposition to magnetic fields did not influence the ability of colony formation of unlabeled mscs whereas immediate exposition of labeled mscs to magnetic fields significantly decreased the ability of colony formation compared to labeled mscs exposed to magnetic fields after  <dig> h .

in the second setting, the colony forming assay was started at the end of the exposition to magnetic fields and  <dig> days after labeling . here, the ability of colony formation of labeled mscs immediately exposed to magnetic fields was significantly enhanced compared to unlabeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields. no other alteration or reduction of the ability of colony formation of labeled mscs could be observed in this setting .

gene expression
a possible influence of the exposition to magnetic fields on gene expression of labeled and unlabeled mscs was investigated by microarrays analyzing the mrna expression of the whole genome. exposition of labeled mscs to magnetic fields led to an up regulation of cd <dig> and cadherin  <dig> and to a down regulation of zinc finger fyve domain. exposition of unlabeled mscs to magnetic fields led to an up regulation of cd <dig>  lipocalin  <dig>  sialic acid acetylesterase, and olfactory receptor and to a down regulation of ubiquilin  <dig> . however, on protein level the expression of the extracellulary localized proteins cd <dig> and cadherin  <dig> was not affected .

differentiation
to evaluate the possible influence of the exposition to magnetic fields on the differentiation potential of labeled and unlabeled mscs the expression of distinct lineage associated markers was quantitatively analyzed by qrt-pcr. exposition to magnetic fields led to a significantly enhanced expression of lipoprotein lipase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma under adipogenic differentiation of labeled mscs compared to unlabeled mscs. moreover, under adipogenic differentiation the expression of lipoprotein lipase and of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma was significantly enhanced in labeled mscs exposed to magnetic fields compared to labeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields . this indicates an enhancement of adipogenesis of labeled msc under the exposition to magnetic fields. exposition to magnetic fields led to a reduced expression of alkaline phosphatase under osteogenic differentiation of unlabeled mscs compared to unlabeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields . this indicates an impairment of osteogenesis of unlabeled mscs under the exposition to magnetic fields. labeled and unlabeled mscs showed no significant differences in expression of collagen  <dig> under exposition to magnetic fields .

electron microscopy and quantification of the til
independently on exposition to magnetic fields, complexes of spio were localized on the surface of the mscs without detectable uptake of spio into the cells directly after labeling . seven days after labeling, exposition to magnetic fields led to a significant enhancement of the til of mscs compared to labeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields. immediate exposition to magnetic fields was more effective than exposition after  <dig> h . eleven days after labeling, the highest til was again achieved after immediate exposition to magnetic fields, whereas the til of the labeled mscs exposed after  <dig> h to magnetic fields was not different from the til of the labeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields .

mri
spio labeled mscs with and without exposition to magnetic fields could be detected by mri in vitro in high quality. the lowest detectable cell number was  <dig> ×  <dig> labeled mscs after immediate exposition to magnetic fields. the detection limit by mri of labeled mscs exposed after  <dig> h to magnetic fields was  <dig> ×  <dig> mscs and the detection limit by mri of labeled mscs without exposition to magnetic fields was  <dig> ×  <dig> mscs . according to the til, the most effective labeling protocol was using spio in combination with immediate exposition to magnetic fields.

discussion
mri has been successfully established detecting in vivo mscs labeled with spio  <cit> . however, despite initial reports that labeling of mscs with spio is safe without affecting the msc's biology, recent studies report on influences of spio-labeling on metabolism and function of mscs  <cit> . moreover, in an animal model of multiple sclerosis the application of spio-labeled mscs led to an aggravation of the symptoms whereas unlabeled mscs ameliorated the symptoms  <cit> . therefore, prior to clinical studies safe and efficient spio-based labeling protocols for stem cells have to be established. with respect to the requirements of good manufacturing practice these protocols must include on the one hand comprehensive studies on possible side effects of spio-labeling, and on the other hand the optimization of the imaging properties of the spio formulation. exposition of cells and tissues to high magnetic fields is the functional principle of mri and iron labeled stem cells can be directed by the magnetic force in vitro and in vivo  <cit> .

the imaging properties of labeling protocols using iron nanoparticles correlate to the til of the mscs  <cit> . in our study we investigated if and how the magnetic force could be used to enhance the amount of magnetic spio in/on mscs in order to optimize the imaging properties. as described previously, the highest til of human mscs without exposition to magnetic fields could be achieved by labeling with spio + ta  and the detection limit by mri of spio labeled rat mscs + ta  without exposition to magnetic fields is  <dig> ×  <dig> mscs  <cit> . in our study we confirmed this detection limit by mri for human mscs and immediate exposition of labeled mscs to magnetic fields maximized the til resulting in a minimal detection rate of  <dig> ×  <dig> mscs by a clinical mr scanner. it has to be emphasized that the number of detected cells depends on the sequence used and is not a value in itself. therefore, comparing protocols with the same sequence as performed in this work does not necessarily reflect an advantage to different labeling protocols using different imaging settings.

the optimized labeling and imaging properties remained stable over a period of eleven days after labeling. therefore, optimized imaging of the cellular graft would be feasible within the first crucial two weeks after transplantation. the combination of enhanced retention of spio in mscs with more intensive exposition of mscs to spio could be regarded as the major mechanisms of the enhanced efficiency of this labeling protocol. this optimized labeling protocol using magnetic forces in combination with spio and ta did not affect cell growth, proliferation, viability and migration capacity of mscs. the ability of colony formation is a basic property of mscs reflecting their clonogenic potential related to their stemness  <cit> . in our study, the ability of colony formation of labeled mscs under exposition to magnetic fields was significantly reduced compared to unlabeled mscs, and the reduced ability of colony formation could be observed on labeled mscs with and without exposition to magnetic fields. these observations correlate to a prior study reporting on the reduced ability of colony formation of mscs by labeling with jpr  <cit> . exposition to magnetic fields did not influence the ability of colony formation of unlabeled mscs whereas immediate exposition of labeled mscs to magnetic fields significantly decreased the ability of colony formation compared to labeled mscs exposed to magnetic fields after  <dig> h. the fact that the functional influence on the ability of colony formation of mscs by the magnetic force was only observed on labeled mscs addresses the issue of the role of spio. whether the observed effect was exclusively caused by the magnetized spio or the magnetized spio aggravated a possible influence of the magnetic force per se remains unanswered but keeping in mind that spio are superparamagnetic nanoparticles that are fixed to the mscs, it is reasonable to assume that the tight growth pattern of spio labeled mscs caused by their accumulation over the area of high density magnetic fields was responsible for the reduced ability of colony formation. the colony forming ability of mscs  <dig> days after exposition to magnetic fields was not reduced, the groups showing a reduction of the ability of colony formation under exposition to magnetic fields recovered completely, and the ability of colony formation of labeled mscs after immediate exposition to magnetic fields was even enhanced. these data confirm the acute influence of labeling and magnetic fields on the ability of colony formation showing that after a time period of  <dig> days after labeling and  <dig> days after terminating the exposition to magnetic fields no adversive long term effects on the ability of colony formation may occur.

the exposition to magnetic fields of labeled and unlabeled mscs influenced the expression of cd <dig>  lipocalin  <dig>  cadherin  <dig>  zinc finger fyve domain, sialic acid acetylesterase, olfactory receptor and ubiquilin  <dig> on mrna level. however, analyses on protein level showed that the expression of the extracellulary localized proteins cd <dig>  a glycoprotein involved in innate immunity, inflammation and adhesion to endothelium  <cit> , and cadherin  <dig>  a protein involved in cell adhesion and in cell dispersion and migration along migratory pathways  <cit> , was not affected. under the exposition to magnetic fields the adipogenic differentiation of spio labeled mscs was enhanced, whereas no influence of the magnetic fields on the adipogenic differentiation of unlabeled mscs could be detected. recent studies showed no influence of spio labeling on adipogenic differentiation of mscs  <cit> . therefore, the enhanced adipogenic differentiation of the labeled mscs is most likely caused by the tight growth density of the labeled mscs over the area of magnetic fields. under the exposition to magnetic fields the osteogenic differentiation of unlabeled mscs was reduced indicating an influence of the magnetic fields on the differentiation. in a recent study the membrane potential was identified as an important factor regulating the adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation of mscs showing that depolarization of mscs prevents differentiation and hyperpolarization upregulated osteogenic markers  <cit> .

the paramagnetic ions na+ and k+ are crucial factors in the maintenance of the membrane potential, and their distribution may be influenced by magnetic fields. kangarlu et al. performed systematic analyzes of the effect of an  <dig>  t static magnetic field on physiological and/or cognitive function reporting on important changes in the electrocardiogram  which were related both to the position of the subject in the magnet and to the absolute strength of the magnetic field  <cit> . although no cognitive changes and no evidence of detectable changes in body temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, systolic pressure, and diastolic blood pressure myocardial stiffness index, cardiac output, systolic volume, troponin, and potassium levels were detected  <cit> , the impact on the polarization of a cell mass, as reflected by the changes in the ecg, demonstrates that the static magnetic field has an influence on cell physiology in vivo. in our study an innovative labeling protocol with optimized imaging properties for tracking mscs by mri using spio in combination with magnetic fields was established. the static magnetic field was for the first time identified as an independent factor which can functionally affect the biology and function of human mscs. further in vivo investigations are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of the interaction of magnetic fields with stem cell biology.

CONCLUSIONS
in our study an innovative labeling protocol for tracking mscs by mri using spio in combination with magnetic fields was established. both, spio and the static magnetic field were identified as independent factors which affect the functional biology of human mscs. further in vivo investigations are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of the interaction of magnetic fields with stem cell biology.

