BACKGROUND
the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome , caused by infection with the human immunodeficiency virus , is a major cause of disease and death worldwide. in the absence of a protective vaccine, prevention of infection and the treatment with antiretroviral drugs remain the only options to prevent the spread of hiv and combat the disease. current therapy of hiv infection  involves treatment with a combination of three or more drugs targeting different steps in hiv replication . the benefits of haart are limited by viral resistance development and the transmission and spread of resistant hiv variants. therefore, additional treatment options targeting alternative steps in the viral replication pathway are needed. the late replication steps of virion assembly and release are not targeted by any of the currently approved antiretroviral drugs and thus present targets for alternative inhibition strategies. the processes of hiv particle assembly and release, as well as the morphological maturation of particles into infectious virions, are orchestrated by the main structural polyprotein gag. compounds that do interfere with hiv infectivity in tissue culture by interaction with the gag polyprotein or its capsid domain , respectively, have been described. the compounds bevirimat  and cap- <dig>  <cit> , do not impair hiv immature particle release, but affect the maturation into infectious particles by binding to a proteolytic processing site in the gag polyprotein precursor or to the n-terminal domain of the ca protein, respectively. furthermore, a peptide , which acts as a bona fide inhibitor of particle assembly from purified hiv structural protein in vitro has been reported  <cit> . a cell-permeable derivative of this peptide has been shown in a proof of principle study to inhibit hiv replication in tissue culture, albeit with ic <dig> values in the low to mid μm range and a low selectivity index  <cit> . small molecule chemical compounds which specifically inhibit the steps of immature gag assembly or particle release have not yet been identified. rational development of such compounds is hindered by the fact that the late stages in the viral life cycle are highly complex processes involving the interaction of viral components with intricate cellular machineries, which are currently only partly understood. it is well established that components of the cellular escrt machinery  <cit> , which are recruited by a so-called 'late domain' motif within gag, are involved in the budding of hiv particles from the host cell  and a number of additional cellular factors have been implicated to be involved in the late stages of hiv replication . however, a comprehensive picture of cellular factors and pathways involved in the transport, assembly and release of viral components is currently lacking. genome-wide sirna screening approaches have been carried out with the aim of identifying host cell factors essential or inhibitory for hiv replication  <cit> . so far, only two published studies include late stages of virus replication in their analysis, and the results from the different studies showing surprisingly little overlap  <cit> . the availability of simplified cell based assay procedures specifically monitoring the steps of hiv assembly and particle release in tissue culture would greatly facilitate both large-scale sirna analyses focussing in particular on the late stages of virus replication, as well as the random screening of chemical compound libraries in order to identify lead substances which interfere with hiv particle formation. a well established and widely used method for quantification of hiv particle production is an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay  detecting the viral capsid  protein p <dig> in tissue culture supernatants. however, elisa measurements display a limited linear range and require many handling steps and expensive reagents. in contrast, measurement of fluorescence intensity is a direct, quantitative readout which can easily be performed in a multi-well format. thus, we decided to establish a simplified assay based on our previously described fluorescently labelled hiv derivative carrying an egfp moiety inserted as a separate domain into the main viral structural polyprotein gag . cells transfected with the egfp-carrying proviral construct release fluorescent virus like particles in a late domain dependent manner and we have previously used these labelled derivatives to analyze the dynamics of hiv- <dig> particle formation  <cit> . here, we describe a simple and direct assay for monitoring hiv particle release through quantitation of fluorescent vlps in tissue culture supernatant. based on this principle, we have established protocols suitable for the screening of either sirnas or chemical compounds for their interference with hiv assembly and/or release in a multi-well, medium to high throughput format.

RESULTS
setup of the assay procedure and optimization of assay conditions
the aim of this study was to develop a simple and direct assay for hiv- <dig> release based on our previously characterized fluorescently labelled hiv derivative  <cit> , which should allow the quantitation of particles in tissue culture supernatants from virus producing cells by direct measurement of fluorescence intensity. towards this end, we first optimized the detection conditions to increase the sensitivity of the measurements in tissue culture supernatants. due to intrinsic fluorescence of tissue culture media components at the wavelengths used for detection of fluorescent proteins, optimization of the assay initially required the selection of the fluorophore best suited for detection against medium background. fluorescence measurements of serial dilutions of bacterially expressed, purified enhanced green, cyan and yellow fluorescent proteins  as well as monomeric red fluorescent protein  <cit>  in pbs and various tissue culture media indicated that enhanced yellow fluorescent protein eyfp was most suitable among these fluorophors for detection against complete medium background. eyfp concentrations above <dig> ng/ml were detectable over medium background . omission of phenol red or fetal calf serum from the medium did not significantly alter the sensitivity of detection.

based on these findings, we constructed an hiv derivative carrying the eyfp gene within the gag open reading frame, analogous to the previously described construct pchivegfp  <cit> . the fluorescent protein was inserted between the matrix  and capsid  domains of the gag polyprotein, upstream of the proteolytic processing site between ma and ca . transfection of cells with pchiv and derivatives results in expression of all viral proteins, except for nef, under the control of the cmv promoter and to formation and release of entry competent virus like particles . the genome encoded by pchiv is replication incompetent due to deletion of the complete viral long terminal repeat regions essential for reverse transcription and integration.

as shown in figure 1b, cells transfected with pchiveyfp displayed the expected yellow fluorescence. furthermore, helap <dig> cells which express the receptor and co-receptors of hiv formed large syncytia upon transfection with pchiv derived constructs, indicative of hiv env protein expression. cell lysates as well as particle preparations from the supernatant of transfected cells were prepared and analyzed by immunoblot . analogous to our results obtained with the related construct pkhivegfp  <cit> , the gag.eyfp fusion protein expressed in the viral context was processed upon particle maturation by the viral protease to yield ma.eyfp, and released pelletable particles containing the ma.eyfp fusion protein in a late domain dependent manner . accordingly, particles should be detectable in the tissue culture supernatant by measurement of eyfp fluorescence intensity.

specific detection of released particles by fluorescence measurements
the exploitation of fluorescent ma for the quantitation of specific particle release from cells transfected with pchiveyfp by fluorescence measurements required appropriate controls. the fluorescence readout - analogous to p <dig> determination by elisa - does not necessarily reflect the amount of complete particles released, but rather quantitates the amount of the main particle component gag present in tissue culture supernatants. consequently, unspecific release of free gag, p <dig> ca or ma.eyfp from damaged or lysed cells could impair the accuracy of results obtained by either elisa or fluorescence based measurements. to control for unspecific protein release due to cell damage, we used cells expressing unfused eyfp protein, which is not secreted from intact cells, but will be detected in the medium when the sample contains cell debris or cytoplasmic content from lysed cells. secondly, a positive control for the successful inhibition of release was established. for this purpose, we generated a release deficient variant of the fluorescently labelled hiv derivative by replacing the 'late domain' motif ptap within the p <dig> domain of gag.eyfp with the amino acid sequence lirl. the late domain is known to mediate interaction with the host cell escrt machinery  and its mutation to lirl has been previously shown to affect hiv release efficiency  <cit> . an inhibitory compound which directly blocks viral late domain - escrt interaction or an sirna which downmodulates expression of a late domain interacting host factor can be expected to yield a comparable decrease in release efficiency as the mutation of the late domain, while compounds or sirnas targeting the gag assembly process may theoretically accomplish even stronger reduction.

expression of the gag.eyfp.late fusion protein and the release deficiency of this construct was confirmed by immunoblot analysis of cell lysate and pelleted tissue culture supernatant . while comparable amounts of gag.eyfp and gag.eyfp.late were detected in cell lysates , the amount of gag derived products in pelleted particles was significantly decreased in the case of the late-variant . free eyfp was expressed in transfected cells , but not detected in pelleted supernatant . we then determined the relative release efficiency of gag.eyfp.late by fluorescence measurements.

sensitivity of measurements
our previous characterization of egfp labelled hiv derivatives had revealed that - while bulk release efficiency of labelled virus was comparable to wild-type - cells expressing the labelled hiv derivative displayed electron dense aggregates at the plasma membrane, suggesting altered release kinetics; furthermore released particles displayed reduced infectivity. full wild-type particle infectivity and budding site morphology was restored by co-transfection of an equimolar amount of wild-type hiv proviral plasmid, leading to the formation of mixed particles carrying 50% of labelled gag  <cit> ; assuming an average number of approximately  <dig> molecules of gag per particle  <cit> , particles contain thus approximately  <dig> molecules of fluorescent protein. for this reason, equimolar mixtures of eyfp labelled proviral derivatives with the corresponding non-labelled provirus were used in all further experiments.

in order to determine the sensitivity of fluorescence based particle quantification, vlps were prepared from the tissue culture supernatant of cells co-transfected with an equimolar mixture of pchiv and pchiveyfp by ultracentrifugation through a sucrose cushion. the amount of ca p <dig> present in the particle preparation was determined by elisa, which represents a currently used standard method for hiv particle quantification. since both eyfp and p <dig> ca are expressed from pchiveyfp as parts of the gag polyprotein, they are translated and packaged into vlps at equimolar amounts; in the case of the mixed particles used here, one molecule of eyfp will thus correspond to two molecules of ca. serial dilutions of fluorescent particles in complete medium were set up and their relative eyfp fluorescence intensity was determined . the lowest particle concentration detectable above background by fluorescence measurements in complete medium corresponded to approximately 15- <dig> ng ca/ml , which was in good agreement with the results from measurements using purified fluorescent proteins. omission of fcs or phenol red from the medium or replacement of the medium by pbs only resulted in a minor increase in sensitivity . from these and similar data sets we concluded that robust fluorescence intensity quantitation can be performed for particle concentrations corresponding to  <dig> ng p24/ml or higher. this sensitivity is significantly lower than that of advanced elisa based detection systems  <cit> . however, this does not affect the usefulness of the system for the intended applications, since the amounts of particles released under optimized assay conditions were in a range easily detectable by fluorescence measurements .

assay validation and time course of particle release
we then analysed the time course of fluorescence release from cells transfected with equimolar mixtures of either wild-type or late domain defective variants of pchiv/pchiveyfp, respectively. samples of tissue culture supernatant were removed at consecutive time points between  <dig> and  <dig> h post transfection and subjected to fluorescence measurements. cells transfected with peyfp-c <dig> were used as a negative control. in order to investigate whether budding of hiv from the membrane could promote the release of free eyfp from cells, we included cells transfected with a mixture of pchiv and pefyp-c <dig> as an additional control. at  <dig> h post transfection, cells were lysed by detergent treatment and the fluorescence intensity of the lysate determined in order to normalize for transfection efficiency and gag or eyfp expression in the different samples. as shown in figure 3a, fluorescence in the supernatant above background was detectable at  <dig> h post transfection with pchiv/pchiveyfp  and increased over the following hours. again, release from the late variant  was found to be diminished. while fluorescence in the supernatant of peyfp-c <dig> transfected cells  remained at background levels, release of low levels of free eyfp was promoted in the presence of hiv expression . this might be explained by unspecific packaging of cytosolic eyfp into budding virus particles, since we observed that in this case release was also influenced by the presence of a functional hiv late domain .

results obtained from fluorescence measurements were validated by determination of p <dig> ca in the same samples by elisa. again, we calculated the amount of p <dig> in the supernatant relative to the amount measured in cell lysates at  <dig> h. results are shown in figure 3b. similar concentrations of p <dig> were detected in supernatants from cells transfected with pchiv/pchiveyfp  and with pchiv/peyfp-c <dig> , demonstrating that insertion of eyfp within gag did not affect release efficiency; p <dig> concentrations measured corresponded to ~ <dig> ng/ml at  <dig> h post transfection and ~ <dig>  μg/ml at the end of the experiment, respectively. evaluation by elisa yielded similar results for pchiv/pchiveyfp  and pchivlate/pchiveyfplate  as the fluorescence based assay , confirming the validity of the fluorescence assay method. a slightly larger deviation between parallel samples was observed in the elisa experiment, presumably because this procedure involved more handling steps. the observation that the relative ratio of intra- to extracellular fluorescence differs somewhat between the two types of measurement is explained by the fact that unprocessed gag  is recognized less well than processed ca , by immunoprecipitation  <cit>  or elisa. even prior heat and detergent treatment of samples, which has been reported to make unprocessed gag accessible to elisa detection  <cit> , did not confer full reactivity of the precursor form in our hands. thus, data derived from the elisa measurements are less suitable for reliable normalization of ca levels relative to intracellular gag expression levels. in contrast, in vitro cleavage of immature fluorescent particles using purified pr did not result in a change in fluorescence intensity, demonstrating that the fluorescence based quantitation of gag was independent of its processing status . we concluded that the assay described here is suitable to monitor hiv- <dig> particle release and can be used to test inhibition of hiv- <dig> particle formation in tissue culture.

in order to define conditions yielding efficient late domain dependent release accompanied by low levels of unspecific release we compared the ratio between release of the wild-type and late virus variants at the different time points. the ratio of late particles released compared to wild-type particles increased at later time points, presumably due to unspecific gag release from damaged or dead cells upon prolonged protein over-expression , indicating that harvest times of 33- <dig> h post transfection were optimal under the conditions used.

adaptation of the assay to medium throughput formats
further adaptation of the assay to a semi-automated multi-well format was performed to render the assay suitable for random screening. two different protocols were established suitable for screening of chemical compound libraries or for sirna screening approaches, respectively. for the purpose of compound screening we established a protocol for the bulk transfection of 293t cells. briefly, 293t cells were harvested and transfected in suspension using equimolar mixtures of pchiv/pchiveyfp, pchivlate/pchiveyfplate, or plasmid peyfp-c <dig> alone, respectively. cell suspensions were then distributed into wells of a 96-well plate or 384-well plate, respectively, using an automated reagent dispenser and plates were incubated at 37°c. the addition of chemical compounds dissolved in dmso was mimicked by the addition of a final concentration of  <dig> % dmso to the medium at  <dig> h post transfection. at  <dig> h post transfection, plates were briefly spun to pellet potential cell debris. aliquots of tissue culture supernatants were transferred to fresh plates using an automated liquid handler, the remaining supernatant was removed from the cell layer and cells were lysed on the plate as described in methods. relative fluorescence intensities of supernatants and cell lysates were determined using a tecan safire multi-well reader. supernatants and lysates from untransfected cells were used to determine background fluorescence. as shown in figure  <dig> and additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  this procedure yielded robust results in 96-well plates. a limited data set of  <dig> positive  and  <dig> negative  control wells from a pilot screen including  <dig> replicate plates was used to estimate statistical effect size, yielding a z factor  <cit>  of  <dig>  . mean fluorescence intensities in the supernatant of  <dig> wells from  <dig> plates  showed low plate-to-plate variability. the amount of eyfp labelled protein released into the supernatant by the late domain defective variant was reduced to 16% of the wild-type control. very similar results were obtained when fluorescence intensities of the supernatant normalized to the total fluorescence measured in the supernatant and cell lysate were compared . thus, normalization for intracellular protein expression was not necessary to improve the accuracy of measurements in a standardized 96-well setup. in the context of a random screening assay, however, the parallel determination of intracellular eyfp intensity in a screening assay can serve to identify compounds which do not specifically interfere with hiv particle formation but rather exert a general effect on protein expression. comparison of relative release efficiencies determined for labelled wild-type particles across rows 2- <dig> of 96-well plates in the absence of inhibitory compounds did not reveal any systematic aberration across the plate . we conclude that the assay allows for medium throughput screening of potential inhibitors of hiv- <dig> assembly or release.

transfer of the protocol to a 384-well format yielded less robust results . due to difficulties in reproducible preparation and measurement of cell lysates in the small well format, normalization of supernatant fluorescence to total fluorescence led to larger variability between wells . while the assay in its present form could be used to determine relative amounts of gag released into the supernatant using a 384-well format, further optimization would be required for a reliable parallel quantification of intracellular gag.

finally, a modified protocol was established to be used in screening of sirna libraries for factors involved in hiv release. for this, 293t cells were distributed onto 96-well plates which had been pre-coated with an sirna containing transfection mix using a previously described reverse transfection protocol  <cit> . dried pre-coated plates could be either used directly for knockdown experiments or be stored for up to  <dig> months without any loss of efficacy, thus ensuring improved reproducibility and comparability between different plates of the same batch as compared to liquid transfection of sirna. 293t cells were seeded onto these plates and incubated in order to achieve target gene knockdown, followed by transfection with pchiv/pchiveyfp and further incubation. in order to validate this approach we performed sirna mediated knockdown of the cellular escrt protein tsg <dig>  which has been previously shown to impair hiv release  <cit> . at the conditions used, prolonged knock-down of tsg <dig> resulted in reduced cell viability and cell death; to avoid this, we chose a relatively short incubation period of  <dig> h for the initial transfection with sirna, followed by transfection with pchiv/pchiveyfp. incubation was then continued for  <dig> h before read out of fluorescence intensities in supernatant and cell lysates was carried out. as shown in figure 5a, sirna mediated knock-down of tsg <dig> resulted in an approximately 4- <dig> fold reduction in release efficiency under these conditions, which was only slightly less pronounced than the reduction observed using the late virus variant.

we have performed a pilot screen, in which we tested an sirna library  targeting approximately  <dig> human kinases with one individual sirna per well and three distinct sirnas per target gene. since individual sirnas from this library have not been tested for their silencing properties and time course of gene silencing, we chose longer incubation times of  <dig> h after the initial transfection with sirna and  <dig> h after the second transfection. the results of this screen and the validation of primary hits will be described elsewhere. exemplary for the reproducibility of results obtained using the established protocol, figure 5b shows the correlation of relative release values  obtained for two replicate sets of  <dig> wells from the sirna screen. the values obtained for rfisup/rfitotal were slightly higher than those observed for the compound screen setup due to the modified assay procedure. pearson's correlation coefficients between replicates of identical sirna sets were generally found to be in the range of  <dig>  -  <dig> , indicating that the setup described here allowed us to obtain reproducible results in a  <dig> well format.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that direct measurement of fluorescence intensities after transfection of cells with a labelled hiv derivative represents a reliable method for monitoring hiv particle release, which is suitable for use in random screening approaches to search for chemical inhibitors or sirnas specifically interfering with hiv assembly or release.

