BACKGROUND
many diseases develop because of errors in signaling, and newer therapeutics specifically target proteins involved in cellular signaling  <cit> . however, these therapies are not always effective  <cit> , and the reason for failure, whether inherent poor interaction or complex cellular response, is unknown. in order to understand the development of disease and drug resistance in these cases, the recovery of the process that led to the specific cellular malfunction must be identified. such errors generally involve the cellular signaling networks that control cell growth, differentiation, apoptosis, and motility  <cit> . because of the extreme underlying biological complexity of these pathways, diseases that involve errors in signaling processes arise from a myriad of different cellular malfunctions, for example in cancers  <cit>  and diabetes  <cit> . it is from this complex background that functional genomics attempts to glean insight to improve our understanding of diseases.

one of the major uses of microarrays has been elucidation of gene expression in cancer, often focused on refining cancer identification using computational and statistical approaches  <cit> . in addition, the discovery of biomarkers in the form of differential levels of production of mrna has been a focus in a number of studies  <cit> . the fact that determination of the mrna levels of a single gene is easier than using an entire array has driven the shift to the use of arrays to generate potential biomarkers, so that the expression levels of these individual genes can be screened for in a more economical way . for diabetes, microarrays have been used to elucidate gene expression in both type i and type ii diseases, and customized chips targeting genes of interest have been developed  <cit> .

many tools for statistical inference, pattern recognition, and data mining have been developed for microarray data analysis. statistical tests include sam  <cit> , veraandsam  <cit> , anova techniques  <cit> , bayesian approaches  <cit> , and rank tests  <cit> . pattern recognition and data mining techniques comprise both unsupervised techniques, such as hierarchical clustering  <cit> , singular value decomposition  <cit> , multidimensional scaling  <cit> , bayesian mixture models  <cit> , and other clustering methods  <cit> , and supervised techniques, such as support vector machines  <cit>  and artificial neural networks  <cit> , .

while these techniques are useful, they have certain limitations as regards more advanced uses in the elucidation of mechanisms operating in diseased tissues. new therapeutics specifically target proteins involved in cellular signaling  <cit> . as noted above, these therapies are not always effective, and a method to understand the reason for their ineffectiveness is highly desirable. if the failure modes for the targeted therapeutics are understood, new therapeutics can be designed or combination therapies undertaken. in addition, to design new therapies that work alone or in combination with other therapies, an understanding of signaling networks is required. microarray measurements can provide insight into these issues.

unfortunately, the recovery of pathway information from transcriptional data requires complex analysis, since signaling protein activity is not generally linked to the mrna expression levels of genes encoding the signaling proteins themselves  <cit> , nor are protein levels tightly coupled to transcript levels even in yeast  <cit> . this makes it impossible to directly link an increase in mrna expression of the gene encoding a signaling protein, such as the therapeutic target, with activity of the protein and therefore of the signaling pathway. instead, an analysis must treat changes in mrna levels as downstream indicators of activity.

an important issue to resolve in order to correctly interpret patterns in microarray data is the underlying dimensionality of the data, since statistical analysis of genes in groups relies on correct separation. the dimensionality provides an estimate of the number of patterns required to explain the variation in the data not related to noise, which is equivalent to the number of basis vectors required mathematically to describe the data or the number of principal components required to span the data.

we present here a new application of bayesian decomposition  <cit>  and clutrfree  <cit>  that estimates dimensionality by measuring the consistency of assignment of genes to patterns. with this approach, transcriptional signatures are linked to signaling activities through gene ontology  <cit>  using the mips database  <cit>  and through analysis of transcription factor activity  <cit> . we demonstrate this technique on the rosetta deletion mutant dataset  <cit> , which is a compendium of genome-wide transcription measured for  <dig> genes across  <dig> conditions . figure  <dig> details the workflow of our analysis. previous studies of the compendium were performed using hierarchical clustering  <cit> , non-negative matrix factorization  <cit> , and bayesian decomposition  <cit> . the dimensionality of the data was estimated in various ways in these studies leading to estimates from  <dig> to  <dig> dimensions.

RESULTS
dimensionality of the data
we propose a value for the rosetta dataset dimensionality based on the average persistence calculations at each tree level made with clutrfree using multiple bayesian decomposition simulations. the dimensionality has been inferred from the average persistence defined in the methods section. as the number of basis vectors  k is increased, the curve shows a dramatic drop for k >  <dig> . this drop is due to the reorganization of the groups of mutants constituting the basis vectors for k >  <dig> patterns, leading to an overly low average persistence.

the freedom to move between branches leads also to some loss of consistency in the annotations as one moves down a branch. this contrasts with the behavior of basis vectors obtained for less than  <dig> patterns where biological functions split logically as the number of patterns increases. we also observed a reduction in the number of genes related to each basis vector for  <dig> patterns in comparison to  <dig>  also, the standard deviation across samples of the obtained vectors is significantly higher for  <dig> patterns  than for  <dig> patterns  indicating that the markov chain sampling is not as tightly constrained by the probability distribution. the behavior observed occurs because of the potential to overfit the data with  <dig> basis vectors allowing the algorithm to find multiple configurations to explain the variation in the data.

identifying patterns and functions
bayesian decomposition retrieves the two linked matrices: the p matrix  groups mutants that share cellular functions, which can be deduced from the genes linked to each pattern contained in the a matrix. each mutant  can belong to multiple patterns, which models the fact that each mutant will have many cellular functions active. each gene  can be assigned to multiple patterns, reflecting the fact that evolution has led to genes being involved in multiple cellular processes. interpretation of the results involves identifying cellular processes from the genes that are significantly expressed in a pattern .

we proceed by using the dimensionality estimate of  <dig> patterns and exploring for each pattern the genes associated with that pattern. these genes are interpreted using the mips ontology for yeast  <cit>  in order to predict the cellular processes associated with a pattern. in addition, for patterns that can be linked to signaling pathways, we discuss the use of data on genes regulated by specific transcription factors and validate the results by analysis of specific key deletion mutants. for each pattern that shows enhancement of ontological terms we provide the terms, the enhancement , and the p value for a hypergeometric test on the term.

we summarize the results in terms of patterns previously identified in other studies using this data set, then we present the new results isolating signatures for activity of the mating and filametation pathways.

patterns identified in previous studies
examination of pattern  <dig> shows expression of the overall common minimal processes necessary for survival, with  <dig> annotated genes associated with this pattern at a 3σ level. measure of enhancement, e, of cellular functions, reveals two highly represented functional groups: 1) groups related to protein synthesis and 2) groups related to dna synthesis. group  <dig> includes genes enhanced in protein targeting, sorting and translocation , protein synthesis , and ribosome biogenesis . group  <dig> includes dna processing , dna recombination and dna repair , and dna synthesis . the p-values for the ontology terms remain high, due to the large number of genes associated with this pattern.

this pattern, which essentially includes genes necessary for viability, contains all the mutants of the dataset, although the ssn6Δ mutant shows a lower level for this pattern than other mutants. as the ssn6Δ mutant exhibits substantially greater overall expression than any other mutant , this may reflect the high association of the ssn6Δ mutant seen in almost all patterns, which will have some gene overlap with this pattern.

pattern  <dig> contains  <dig> annotated genes. highly enhanced ontologies include transport-related functions: transported compounds , c-compound and carbohydrate transport , and cellular transport, transport facilitation and cellular routes , in addition to other transport terms at p < 10- <dig>  the pattern contains the two deletion mutants, ssn6Δ and tup1Δ, and represents the strong response seen in the original study  <cit> . ssn6p and tup1p form a system of transcriptional repression that appears to be highly conserved in eukaryotes  <cit> . in yeast, the complex acts as a global transcriptional repressor over a large number of genes , coordinating several cellular systems, including haploid specific genes, glucose repressible genes, and oxygen utilization genes  <cit> . turning off this repression leads to a large overall increase in gene expression .

pattern  <dig> is related to the lack of cell wall functions , as  <dig> cell wall genes  are absent from this pattern, while the other four genes have multiple annotations suggesting they have roles unrelated to cell wall function. enhancement is present for protein modification  and fermentation . this pattern contains the mutants gas1Δ and fks1Δ, which impair cell-wall synthesis, as well as the mutant yer083cΔ, annotated as disrupting the cell wall in the original study  <cit> . the pattern contains other mutants disrupting ergosterol biosynthesis as well, including erg2Δ, she4Δ, as well as yer044cΔ. in addition, the pattern includes yeast treated with the drugs that are known to disrupt the cell wall, such as tunicamycin and glucosamine.

pattern  <dig> is related to ribosomal function, with enhancements in terms for ribosome biogenesis  and protein synthesis . the pattern contains  <dig> mutants related to ribosomal proteins, rpll2aΔ, rpl27aΔ, rpl34aΔ, rpl6bΔ, rp18aΔ, rps24aΔ, rps24aΔ , and rps27bΔ, as well as some mutants with deleted orfs of unknown function, yor078wΔ, ymr269wΔ, and yhr034cΔ, proposed to be involved in ribosomal functions  <cit> .

patterns related to cellular signalling pathways
the two patterns that represent new insights into this data are  <dig> and  <dig>  which appear related to two strongly coupled developmental pathways in yeast. previous studies  <cit>  have identified the mating pathway transcriptional response, however this has included both the filamentation response and the mating response. it is difficult to separate these signatures, as the mating and filamentation pathways share many common elements in a mapk cascade as shown in figure  <dig> <cit> .

gene ontology  was used to determine the biological function described by each pattern, with a term added specifically for transposable elements, as these are known to play a role during filamentation  <cit> . the terms that showed enhancement are summarized in table  <dig>  the patterns show strong overlap, since many genes are shared between the mating and filamentation responses. however, the filamentation ontology term is significantly higher only in pattern  <dig>  which also shows a strong signature of transposable element genes. meanwhile, the go terms for meiosis and morphogenesis  are significantly enhanced only in pattern  <dig>  this allows association of pattern  <dig> with activation of the mating pathway, and pattern  <dig> with activation of the filamentation pathway.

in addition, we analyzed the  <dig> genes whose expression is most strongly linked to each pattern. these are shown in table  <dig>  which summarizes which genes are known to be regulated by the transcriptional activators related to the mating  and filamentation  pathways. the results show that the top  <dig> genes related to pattern  <dig> have  <dig> genes of known function, with  <dig> related to the mating response, of which five are known to be regulated by ste12p. for pattern  <dig>   <dig> of the top  <dig> genes are known to be transposable element genes, with three other genes having unknown functions. this again links pattern  <dig> to mating and pattern  <dig> to filamentation.

in order to validate that the patterns were actually measuring activity of the mating and filamentation pathways, we explored deletion mutants related to these pathways  <cit> . the mating response in s. cerevisiae is mediated via a mapk signaling cascade initiated by binding to the ste2p or ste3p membrane receptors . the signal is transduced through ste11p, ste7p, and fus3p with ste5p serving as a scaffolding protein. the signal activates the ste12p transcription factor, leading to transcription of mating response genes. in addition, the signal is transduced to the mapk cascade from the membrane receptor by a g protein complex or through the ste20p protein. pattern  <dig> shows near zero signal for the deletion mutants ste11Δ, ste7Δ fus3Δ, ste12Δ, ste5Δ, and ste2Δ, while showing signal for deletion mutants of ste20Δ and tec1Δ. this is exactly as expected, with the membrane receptor, all signaling proteins in the cascade, and the transcription factor necessary to generate the transcriptional response related to the mating signal . ste20p is not necessary to raise the mating response, since the g-protein complex can trigger activation of ste11p directly. for pattern  <dig>  the response is very similar. the signal is near zero for the deletion mutants ste2Δ, ste11Δ, ste7Δ, and ste12Δ. the fus3Δ mutant shows a signal for pattern  <dig>  as appropriate, while the fus3Δ, kss1Δ double deletion mutant does not. in addition, the tec1Δ mutant shows no signal for pattern  <dig>  indicating that tec1p is required for filamentation  <cit> . finally, the signal is greatly reduced for the ste20Δ deletion mutant in pattern  <dig> relative to pattern  <dig>  which agrees with previous work suggesting that the filamentation pathway is more dependent on ste20p signaling than is the mating pathway  <cit> .

discussion
microarrays and genechips™ have become the tools of choice for the investigation of genome-wide transcription in most biological systems. the resulting data comprises noisy estimates of transcription levels for roughly  <dig>  genes in yeast to more than  <dig>  genes in typical mammalian studies. numerous statistical and data mining methods have been applied to this data in order to identify individual genes showing differential expression, to identify patterns related to physiological states, and to identify groups of genes comprising biological processes. these studies generally have not focused on the estimation of cellular signaling from the data, despite the prevalence of cellular signaling in many diseases.

as noted in the introduction, the recovery of signaling pathway information from transcription data requires complex analysis, since protein levels do not correlate well with mrna levels and signaling protein activity is not generally linked to the mrna expression levels of genes encoding the signaling proteins themselves. as such, changes in mrna levels are limited to being a downstream indicator of activity. if a complete model for the transcription of genes, including all known transcriptional regulators and biological processes regulating transcription, was available, the inference of activity would be straightforward. unfortunately, the network models and even gene annotations are still far from being complete. in addition, the growing evidence supporting the important role of non-coding rnas in regulation of gene expression  further undermines the potential of using mrna species as markers for proteins and their activities  <cit> .

in order to overcome this incompleteness, we have created the method described here. we couple identification of transcriptional signatures with our bayesian decomposition algorithm to a consistency analysis for gene assignment to patterns determined by comparison of different dimensionalities using clutrfree. this allows the identification of the correct dimensionality to be applied to subsequent ontology and transcription factor analyses. clutrfree is also used to determine the ontological terms enhanced within each pattern and to obtain a list of genes tied to this pattern, which can then be linked to specific transcription factors. in this way, the biological processes associated with conditions can be identified, and inferences can be made on the activity of specific transcription factors. this then allows inference on the activity of signaling pathways, which cannot be obtained with methods previously applied to microarray data. overall, the method requires many separate steps, each modeling an aspect of the biological system, in order to make proper inferences on signaling from the data.

in the application to the compendium data presented here, our analysis was able to extract the common features for a set of mutants that eliminated related pathways. as in previous studies, the global transcriptional repressor complex ssn6-tupl has been isolated in a single group. in addition, patterns for cell-wall synthesis, ribosomal function, and the global functions necessary for continued viability of yeast were isolated. in contrast to previous analyses of this data, two pathways related to the mapk cascade were isolated, one related to mating and the other to filamentation. once the correct dimensionality was determined, bayesian decomposition was able to identify transcriptional signatures unique for each pathway. the assignment was validated by an investigation of the deletion mutants known to adversely affect these pathways.

CONCLUSIONS
microarray studies have been widespread in biological and medical research, often focusing on identification of genes significantly correlated with various disease states. however, many diseases arise from disruptions in cellular signaling, and in these cases gene expression only provides a downstream indicator of signaling activity. this greatly complicates the analysis. the new approach introduced here recovered signatures allowing us to make validated inferences on strongly overlapping signaling pathways.

the results demonstrate that for saccharomyces cerevisiae, the mating and filamentation pathways can be distinguished from transcriptional signatures determined from analysis of microarray data, despite the intrinsic high noise, confounding transcriptional activity, and tightly coupled nature of the pathways. the next step will be to apply these methods to more complex signaling networks in worms, flies, and mammals.

