BACKGROUND
the estimation of parameters in biokinetic models from experimental data is an important problem in systems biology. in general the aim is to calibrate the model so as to reproduce experimental results in the best possible way. the solution of this task plays a key role in interpreting experimental data in the context of dynamic mathematical models and hence in understanding the dynamics and control of complex intracellular chemical networks and the construction of synthetic regulatory circuits  <cit> . among biochemical kinetic systems, the dynamics of gene expression and of gene regulatory networks are of particular interest. recent developments of fluorescent microscopy allow us to quantify changes in protein concentration over time in single cells  even with single molecule precision . therefore an abundance of data is becoming available to estimate parameters of mathematical models in many important cellular systems.

single cell imaging techniques have revealed the stochastic nature of biochemical reactions  that most often occur far from thermodynamic equilibrium  <cit>  and may involve small copy numbers of reacting macromolecules  <cit> . this inherent stochasticity implies that the dynamic behaviour of one cell is not exactly reproducible and that there exists stochastic heterogeneity between cells. the disparate biological systems, experimental designs and data types impose conditions on the statistical methods that should be used for inference  <cit> . from the modeling point of view the current common consensus is that the most exact stochastic description of the biochemical kinetic system is provided by the chemical master equation   <cit> . unfortunately, for many tasks such as inference the cme is not a convenient mathematical tool and hence various types of approximations have been developed. the three most commonly used approximations are  <cit> :

 <dig>  the macroscopic rate equation  approach which describes the thermodynamic limit of the system with ordinary differential equations and does not take into account random fluctuations due to the stochasticity of the reactions.

 <dig>  the diffusion approximation  which provides stochastic differential equation  models where the stochastic perturbation is introduced by a state dependant gaussian noise.

 <dig>  the linear noise approximation  which can be seen as a combination because it incorporates the deterministic mre as a model of the macroscopic system and the sdes to approximatively describe the fluctuations around the deterministic state.

statistical methods based on the mre have been most widely studied  <cit> . they require data based on large populations. the main advantages of this method are its conceptual simplicity and the existence of extensive theory for differential equations. however, single cells experiments and studies of noise in small regulatory networks created the need for statistical tools that are capable to extract information from fluctuations in molecular species. few methods used cme to address this. algorithm, proposed by  <cit> , approximated the likelihood function, the other, suggested by  <cit>  simulated it using monte carlo methods. recently, also a method based on the exact likelihood  <cit>  has been developed. although, substantial progress has been made in numerical methods for solving cme, inference algorithms based on the cme are computationally intensive and difficult to apply to problems of realistic size and complexity  <cit> . another group of methods is based on the da  <cit> . this uses likelihood approximation methods  that are computationally intensive and require sampling from high dimensional posterior distributions. inference about the volatility process becomes difficult for low frequency data that are not directly measured at the molecular level  <cit> . the aim of this study is to investigate the use of the lna as a method for inference about kinetic parameters of stochastic biochemical systems. we find that the lna approximation provides an explicit gaussian likelihood for models with hidden variables and measurement error and is therefore simpler to use and computationally efficient. to account for prior information on parameters our methodology is embedded in the bayesian paradigm. the paper is structured as follows: we first provide a description of the lna based modeling approach and then formulate the relevant statistical framework. we then study its applicability in four examples, based on both simulated and experimental data, that clarify principles of the method. additional file  <dig> contains details of mathematical and statistical modeling, particularly comparison of the proposed method with an algorithm based on the da.

methods
the chemical master equation  is the primary tool to model the stochastic behaviour of a reacting chemical system. it describes the evolution of the joint probability distribution of the number of different molecular species in a spatially homogeneous, well stirred and thermally equilibrated chemical system  <cit> .

even though these assumptions are not necessarily satisfied in living organisms the cme is commonly regarded as the most realistic model of biochemical reactions inside living cells. consider a general system of n chemical species inside a volume Ω and let x = t denote the number and x = x/Ω the concentrations of molecules. the stoichiometry matrix s = {sij}i =  <dig> ...n; j =  <dig> ...r describes changes in the population sizes due to r different chemical events, where each sij describes the change in the number of molecules of type i from xi to xi + sij caused by an event of type j. the probability that an event of type j occurs in the time interval [t, t + dt) equals Ωdt. the functions  are called mesoscopic transition rates. this specification leads to a poisson birth and death process where the probability h that the system is in the state x at time t is described by the cme  <cit>  which is given in additional file  <dig>  it is straightforward to verify that the first order terms of a taylor expansian of the cme in powers of  are given by the following mre

   

where ϕi = limΩ→∞, x→∞ xi/Ω, φ = t and .

including also the second order terms of this expansion produces the lna

   

which decomposes the state of the system into a deterministic part φ as solution of the mre in  and a stochastic process ξ described by an itô diffusion equation

   

where w denotes r dimensional wiener process,  and fi = fi .

the rationale behind the expansion in terms of  is that for constant average concentrations relative fluctuations will decrease with the inverse of the square root of volume  <cit> . therefore the lna is accurate when fluctuations are sufficiently small in relation to the mean . hence, the natural measure of adequacy of the lna is the coefficient of variation i.e. ratio of the standard deviation to the mean . validity of this approximation is also discussed in details in  <cit> . in addition it can be shown that the process describing the deviation from the deterministic state  converges weakly to the diffusion  as Ω → ∞  <cit> . in order to use the lna in a likelihood based inference method we need to derive transition densities of the process x.

transition densities
the lna provides solutions that are numerically or analytically tractable because the mre in  can be solved numerically and the linear sde in  for an initial condition ξ =  has a solution of the form  <cit> 

   

where the integral is in the itô sense and  is the fundamental matrix of the non-autonomous system of odes

   

the itô integral of a deterministic function is a gaussian random variable  <cit> , therefore equations ,  imply that the transition densities of the process ξ are gaussian  <cit>  

   

where Θ denotes a vector of all model parameters, ψ is the normal density with mean μi- <dig> and covariance matrix Ξi- <dig> specified by

   

it follows from  and  that the transition densities of x are normal

   

the properties of the normal distribution allow us to construct a convenient inference framework that is reminiscent of the kalman filtering methodology .

inference
it is rarely possible to observe the time evolution of all molecular components participating in the system of interest  <cit> . therefore, we partition the process xt into those components yt that are observed and those zt that are unobserved.

let ,  and  denote the time-series that comprise the values of processes x, y and z, respectively, at times t <dig> ..., tn. here and throughout the paper we use the same letter to denote the stochastic process and its realization.

our aim is to estimate the vector of unknown parameters Θ from a sequence of measurements . the initial condition φ is parameterized as an element of Θ. given the markov property of the process x the augmented likelihood p is given by

   

where  are gaussian densities specified in , and  is an initial density assumed to be normal for mathematical convenience. it can then be shown that   is gaussian. therefore

   

where φ,..., φ, ) is gaussian density with mean vector ,..., φ) and covariance matrix  whose elements can be calculated numerically in a straightforward way . since the marginal distributions are also gaussian it follows that the likelihood function p can be obtained from the augmented likelihood 

   

where the covariance matrix Σ = {Σ}i, j =  <dig> ..., n is a sub-matrix of  such that  and φy is the vector consisting of the observed components of φ.

fluorescent reporter data are usually assumed to be proportional to the number of fluorescent molecules  <cit>  and measurements are subject to measurement error, i.e. errors that do not influence the stochastic dynamics of the system. we therefore assume that instead of the matrix  our data have the form . the parameter λ is a proportionality constant  and  denotes a random vector for additive measurement error. for mathematical convenience we assume that the joint distribution of the measurement error is normal with mean  <dig> and known covariance matrix Σϵ, i.e. . if measurement errors are independent with a constant variance  then . equation  implies that the likelihood function can be written as

   

since for given data  the likelihood function  can be numerically evaluated, any likelihood based inference is straightforward to implement. using bayes' theorem, the posterior distribution p satisfies the relation  <cit> 

   

we use the standard metropolis-hastings  algorithm  <cit>  to sample from the posterior distribution in .

RESULTS
in order to study the use of the lna method for inference we have selected four examples which are related to commonly used quantitative experimental techniques such as measurements based on reporter gene constructs and reporter assays based on polymerase chain reaction . for expository reasons, all case studies consider a model of single gene expression.

model of single gene expression
although gene expression involves various biochemical reactions it is essentially modeled in terms of only three biochemical species  and four reaction channels   <cit> . the stoichiometry matrix has the form

   

where rows correspond to molecular species and columns to reaction channels. let x =  denote concentrations of mrna and protein, respectively. for the reaction rates

   

we can derive the following macroscopic rate equations

   

for the general case it is assumed that the transcription rate kr is time-dependent, reflecting changes in the regulatory environment of the gene such as the availability of transcription factors or chromatin structure.

using ,  and  in  we obtain the following sdes describing the deviation from the macroscopic state 

   

we will refer to the model in  and  as the simple model of single gene expression.

in order to test our method on a nonlinear system we will also consider the case of an autoregulated network where the transcription rate of the gene is a function of the concentration of the protein that the gene codes for and where the protein is a transcription factor that inhibits the production of its own mrna. this is parameterized by a hill function  <cit>  where kr now describes the maximum rate of transcription, h is a dissociation constant and nh is a hill coefficient.

thus, the nonlinear autoregulatory model the system is described by the mre

   

and the sdes

   

where . we refer to this model as the autoregulatory model of single gene expression. the two models constitute the basis of our inference studies below.

inference from fluorescent reporter gene data for the simple model of single gene expression
to test the algorithm we first use the simple model of single gene expression. we generate data according to the stoichiometry matrix  and rates  using stochastic simulation algorithm   <cit>  and sample it at discrete time points. we then generate artificial data that are proportional to the simulated protein data with added normally distributed measurement error with known variance . furthermore we assume that mrna levels are unobserved. the volume of the system Ω is unknown and we put Ω =  <dig> so that concentration equals the number of molecules. thus the data are of the form

   

where  is the simulated protein concentration, λ is an unknown proportionality constant and  is measurement error. for the purpose of our example we model the transcription function by

   

this form of transcription corresponds to an experiment, where transcription increases for t ≤ b <dig> as a result of being induced by an environmental stimulus and for t > b <dig> decreases towards a baseline level b <dig> 

we assume that at time t <dig>  the system is in a stationary state. therefore, the initial condition of the mre is a function of unknown parameters , ϕp) = .

to ensure identifiability of all model parameters we assume that informative prior distributions for both degradation rates are available. priors for all other parameters were specified to be non-informative. to infer the vector of unknown parameters

  

we sample from the posterior distribution

  

using the standard mh algorithm. the distribution p is given by .

the protein level of the simulated trajectory is sampled every  <dig> minutes and a sample size of  <dig> points obtained. we perform inference for two simulated data sets: estimate  <dig> is based on a single trajectory while estimate  <dig> represents a larger data set using  <dig> sampled trajectories . all prior specifications, parameters used for the simulations and inference results are presented in table 1a. estimate  <dig> demonstrates that it is possible to infer all parameters from a single, short length time series with a realistically achievable time resolution. estimate  <dig> shows that usage of the lna does not seem to result in any significant bias. a bias has not been detected despite the very small number of mrna molecules  and protein molecules . the coefficient of variation varied between approximately  <dig>  and  <dig>  for both molecular species .



parameter values used in simulation, prior distribution, posterior medians and 95% credibility intervals. estimate  <dig> corresponds to inference from single time series, estimate  <dig> relates to estimates obtained from  <dig> independent time series. data used for inference are plotted in figure a for case a and figure b for case b. variance of the measurement error was assumed to be known σϵ =  <dig>  rates are per hour. parameters are nh =  <dig>  h =  <dig>  in case b.

inference for this model required sampling from the  <dig> dimensional posterior distribution . if instead one used a diffusion approximation based method it would be necessary to sample from a posterior distribution of much higher dimension . in addition, incorporation of the measurement error is straightforward here, whereas for other methods it involves a substantial computational cost  <cit> .

inference from fluorescent reporter gene data for the model of single gene expression with autoregulation
the following example considers the autoregulatory system with only a small number of reacting molecules. using ssa we generated artificial data from the single gene expression model with autoregulation. the protein time courses were then sampled every  <dig> minutes at  <dig> discrete points per trajectory . as before we assume that the mrna time courses are not observed and that the protein data are of the form given in , i.e. proportional to the actual amount of protein with additive gaussian measurement error. as in the previous case study we estimate parameters from two simulated data sets, a single trajectory and an ensemble of  <dig> independent trajectories. the inference results summarized in table 1b show that despite the low number of mrna  and protein  all parameters can be estimated well with appropriate precision.

inference for pcr based reporter data
in the case of reporter assays based on polymerase chain reaction  measurements are obtained from the extraction of the molecular contents from the inside of cells. since the sample is sacrificed, the sequence of measurements are not strictly associated with a stochastic process describing the same evolving unit. assume that at each time point ti  we observe l measurements that are proportional to the number of rna molecules either from a single cell or from a population of s cells. this gives a  × l matrix of data points

   

where  is the actual rna level, λ is the proportionality constant,  is a gaussian independent measurement error indexed by time ti. j =  <dig> ..., l indexes the l measurements that are taken at time ti. note that  and  are independent random variables as they refer to different cells. we assume that the dynamics of rna is described by the simple model of single gene expression with lna equations  and . let ϒt denote the distribution of measured rna at time t . in order to accommodate for the different form of data we modify the estimation procedure as follows. for analytical convenience we assumed that the initial distribution is normal . this together with eq.  and normality of measurement error implies that . simple explicit formulae for μt and  are derived in additional file  <dig>  since all observations  are independent we can write the posterior distribution as

   

where ψ is the normal density with parameters , . in order to infer the vector of the unknown parameters Θ =  we sample from the posterior using a standard mh algorithm. to test the algorithm we have simulated a small  and a large  data set using ssa algorithm with parameter values given in table  <dig>  the data were sampled discretely every  <dig> minutes and a standard normal error was added. initial conditions were sampled from the poisson distribution with mean b4/γr. the estimation results in table  <dig> show that parameters can be inferred well in both cases even though the number of rna molecules in the generated data is very small . since subsequent measurements do not belong to the same stochastic trajectory, estimation for the model presented here is not straightforward with the diffusion approximation based methods.

parameter values used to generate data, prior distributions used for estimation, posterior median estimates together with 95% credibility intervals. estimate  <dig>  estimate  <dig> columns relate to small  and large  sample sizes. variance of the measurement was assumed to be known  =  <dig>  estimated rates are per hour.

estimation of gfp protein degradation rate from cycloheximide experiment
in this section the method is applied to experimental data. after a period of transcriptional induction, translation of gfp was blocked by the addition of cycloheximide . details of the experiment are presented in additional file  <dig>  fluorescence was imaged every  <dig> minutes for  <dig>  h . since inhibition may not be fully efficient we assume that translation may be occurring at a  positive rate kp. the model with the lna is

   

the observed fluorescence is assumed to be proportional to the signal with proportionality constant λ. for comparison we also consider the diffusion approximation for which an exact transition density can be derived analytically 

   

since incorporation of measurement error for the diffusion approximation based model is not straightforward, we assume that measurements were taken without any error to ensure fair comparison between the two approaches. table  <dig> shows that estimates obtained with both methods are not very different.

priors, posterior mean and 95% credibility intervals obtained from chx experimental data using the lna approach and diffusion approximation approach. estimation with the lna involved one more parameter . estimated rates are per hour.

CONCLUSIONS
the aim of this paper is to suggest the lna as a useful and novel approach to the inference of biochemical kinetics parameters. its major advantage is that an explicit formula for the likelihood can be derived even for systems with unobserved variables and data with additional measurement error. in contrast to the more established diffusion approximation based methods  <cit>  the computationally costly methods of data augmentation to approximate transition densities and to integrate out unobserved model variables are not necessary. furthermore, this method can also accommodate measurement error in a straightforward way.

the suggested procedure here is implemented in a bayesian framework using mcmc simulation to generate posterior distributions. the lna has previously been studied in the context of approximating poisson birth and death processes  <cit>  and it was shown that for a large class of models the lna provides an excellent approximation. furthermore, in  <cit>  it is shown that for the systems with linear reaction rates the first two moments of the transition densities resulting from the cme and the lna are equal. here we propose using the lna directly for inference and provide evidence that the resulting method can give very good results even if the number of reacting molecules is very small. in our previous study  <cit>  we have presented differences between fitting deterministic and stochastic models, where we used diffusion approximation based method. our experience from that work and from study  <cit>  is that implementation of diffusion approximation based methods is challenging especially for data that are sparsely sampled in time because the need for imputation of unobserved time points leads to a very high dimensionality of the posterior distribution. this usually results in highly autocorrelated traces affecting the speed of convergence of the markov chain. our method considerably reduces the dimension of the posterior distribution to the number of unknown parameters of a model only and is independent of the number of unobserved components . nevertheless it can only be applied to the systems with sufficiently large volume, where fluctuations around a deterministic state are relatively close to the mean.

authors' contributions
mk proposed and implemented the algorithm. cvh performed the cycloheximide experiment. mk wrote the paper with assistance from bf and dar, who supervised the study.

supplementary material
additional file 1
supplemental information. supplementary information contains derivation of the theoretical results, details about algorithm implementation and comparison with the inference method based on the diffusion approximation.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this research was funded by bbsrc sabr grant bb/f005814/ <dig> and eu biosim network contract  <dig>  dar is funded by epsrc senior research fellowship ep/c544587/ <dig> and mk by studentship, dept of statistics, university of warwick. cvh was funded by wellcome trust programme grant  and now is recipient of the prof. john glover memorial postdoctoral fellowship.
