BACKGROUND
human α-synuclein  is a 140-residue, natively unfolded protein that in fibrillar form is the primary component of lewy bodies, the pathological hallmark of parkinson’s disease   <cit> . pd is the second most common neurodegenerative disease resulting from the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the brain: it affects ≈ 2% of the population over the age of  <dig> 

a structural and physiological understanding of as fibrils at the molecular level is critical for finding cures for pd. some evidence suggests that as aggregation is the key event that triggers as-mediated neurotoxicity  <cit> . however, other experimental data proposed a protective role of as against oxidative stress   <cit> . to investigate the exact mechanism underlying this protective action, as well as the role of as pathogenetic mutations, different research groups developed in vitro models of oxidative stress based on the exposure of selected cells to stress  and evaluated as-mediated protection by delivering as inside cells using the fusion protein tat-as   <cit> . these studies established that nanomolar amounts of tat-as protected against stress and increased hsp <dig> protein levels, whereas micromolar amounts of the protein were intrinsically toxic to cells and decreased hsp <dig> at the protein level.

recombinant as has been produced in escherichia coli since  <dig>  <cit>  by different methods which employ whole-cells extract as the protein source  <cit> , followed by ammonium sulfate or acid precipitation and successive chromatographic steps  <cit> . alternative strategies are based on the design of fusion proteins - for example, with the glutathione s-transferase or the chitin binding domain - and the use of specific enzymes for releasing the fused as  <cit> . most recently, as has been overexpressed within e. coli periplasm and from this compartment it was recovered in the native form by only two purification steps  <cit> . as was also produced as recombinant protein fused with transduction domain of tat protein from hiv. in fact, it was demonstrated that heterologous proteins chemically crosslinked to a domain of tat protein from hiv were able to transduce into cells  <cit> : accordingly, this method become widely used because full-length proteins can be rapidly introduced into primary and immortalized cells. the fusion proteins can be directly added to cell culture  <cit>  or injected in vivo into mice  <cit> . protein transduction occurs in a concentration-dependent manner, requires at least one hour to achieve maximum intracellular concentrations with nearly equal intracellular concentrations among all cells in the transduced population and the uptake does not depend on the cell type used  <cit> . the technology requires the synthesis of a fusion protein, linking the transduction domain   <cit>  to the molecule of interest by using a bacterial expression vector, followed by the purification of this fusion protein under either soluble or denaturing conditions. for a review, see  <cit> . tat-as was previously produced by expressing ptat/ptat-ha in a bl21plyss e. coli strain  <cit> . it was purified from a washed bacterial pellet suspended in 8 m urea followed by metal affinity chromatography on a ni-nta chelating column because of the hexahistidine tag added during the cloning procedure, following the guidelines reported in  <cit> .

to provide a tool to further characterize the molecular mechanisms of as neurotoxicity both in vitro and in vivo and to evaluate the relevance for pd pathogenesis and progression of extracellular as, we focused on setting up a fast, simple, and inexpensive method of producing high-quality as, both the native and the tat-fusion as form.

RESULTS
expression of recombinant as in e. coli
synthetic cdna encoding for native or tat-as  was subcloned into pet11a plasmid, giving a construct encoding for a protein that was 148- and 170-amino acids in length , both containing an n-terminal his-tag.

in order to optimize as expression, several experimental parameters were modified at the flask scale using lb medium: iptg concentration , growth phase at induction , and time of cell harvest after adding iptg . varying incubation times after adding iptg significantly affects expression of both as recombinant forms obtaining maximum protein production after five hours interval; no as production is observed before iptg is added . comparatively slightly higher  amounts of as are produced if expression is induced at an od600nm ≈  <dig>  than at the later exponential phase of growth. no increase in as expression level was observed using a richer medium  or decreasing the temperature of growth after iptg addition. the latter observation agrees with previous studies that reported the highest production of recombinant as at 37°c  <cit> : the rationale for the lack of temperature dependence is probably an effect of the small size of the investigated protein  <cit> . taken together, western blot analysis shows that the highest production of both native as and tat-as in e. coli  is observed by growing the cells in lb medium to an od600nm =  <dig> , adding  <dig>  mm iptg, and growing for another 5 hours at 37°c. the best conditions set-up was then scaled up to a 2-l flask level containing 500 ml of lb broth.

the overexpressed native and tat-as are largely  produced as soluble proteins, as demonstrated by sds-page of soluble and insoluble cell content following sonication . indeed, recombinant as is largely targeted to the periplasmic space where it represents ≈ 70% of the whole protein content . in fact, although no signal sequence is apparent for translocation into the periplasmic space, the c-terminal 99-to- <dig> portion of the protein plays a signal-like role, cooperating with the central 61-to- <dig> protein region  <cit> .

purification and characterization of recombinant as
starting from 2 l of fermentation broth, native as was purified by employing only two steps: osmotic shock to recover the periplasmic space content followed by chromatography on a hitrap chelating column. as shown in figure 1a, following preliminary washing steps at 5-10% of elution buffer , the recombinant as is eluted at 100% of elution buffer as a single, narrow peak. an overall yield of ≈ 16 mg native as/l of fermentation broth is achieved with a > 95% purity of the final preparation as judged by sds–page . interestingly, tat-as could also be purified to a high degree under the same experimental conditions  and gave a yield of up to 12 mg/l of fermentation broth .

the value obtained for the purification of tat-as is shown in brackets.

a the purity of as at each step of purification was estimated by sds–page.

b ratio of the amount of as obtained at each step to the total amount of as estimated in the whole cell extract.

c supernatant of the cell lysate by sonication.

d determined by bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as a standard.

e determined spectrophotometrically.

the endotoxins  were completely eliminated from the final protein preparation by treating it with triton x- <dig>  as assessed by the e-toxate test. the absence of the detergent in the final as sample was apparent from the absorbance spectrum, which showed a maximum at 276 nm .

the intrinsic fluorescence spectrum of purified recombinant as showed a maximum emission at 305 nm , as reported previously  <cit> . the circular dichroism spectrum of both purified as forms presented a strong negative peak at 202 nm and a small shoulder at around 222 nm , indicating a random coil structure possibly with short, marginally stable α-helices; see also  <cit> .

as is known to be a monomer using nondissociating page  <cit>  but it elutes in size-exclusion chromatography as a symmetric peak at a position corresponding to a larger apparent molecular mass  <cit> . gel-permeation chromatography of purified recombinant native as and tat-as gave a main peak at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kda : the abnormal behavior of as in size-exclusion chromatography has been ascribed to its natively unfolded conformation in physiological buffer  <cit> . indeed, an additional minor peak  corresponding to an apparent molecular mass of  <dig> ± 8 kda was also apparent: both peaks gave a single band at 18 kda in sds-page analysis . the peak at lower elution volume was previously demonstrated to correspond to a dimer of as due to disulfide bond formation between cysteines at position  <dig> under non-reducing conditions  <cit> . misincorporation of cys instead of tyr at position  <dig> was reported to happen in as with a 20-25% frequency: because of the reducing environment of the final cellular destination, dimeric as should convert into the monomeric form thus not affecting the cell assay.

atomic force microscopy and functional evaluation of purified as
as is natively unfolded and prone to aggregation. to evaluate the fibrillogenic propensity of purified as, we incubated as  for increasing time intervals  at 37°c with sporadic mild agitation. aliquots of the preparations were then analyzed by atomic force microscopy . starting from day  <dig> and up to day  <dig>  we observed as aggregation with clearly detectable oligomers, while fibrils were formed after longer incubation times. qualitatively, the tat-fused as form seems more fibrillogenic than the native counterpart .

to functionally assess the purified as, we performed a toxicity assay on shsy-5y cells. cells were incubated with increasing amounts of as  for 24 hours; then viability was measured by 3-- <dig> -diphenyltetrazolium bromide  colorimetric assay . we confirmed the toxicity of tat-as whereas the native form had no toxic effect in this kind of assay, as previously reported  <cit> . the basic toxicity of tat-as might be a starting point for experiments aimed at unraveling the relation between as and other kind of cellular stressors, for instance oxidative stress, proteasome impairment or autophagy, all features potentially linked to pd etiopathogenesis  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
mammalian cells can be manipulated by transfecting expression vectors, microinjection, or diffusion of peptidyl mimetics: these approaches have been rather successful but are not easily regulated and can be laborious. one approach to circumvent these problems is to use hiv tat-mediated protein transduction as initially described by  <cit> . we report on the expression and purification of as, a protein implicated in pd, which exists as a natively unfolded protein in physiological buffer. here, a new protocol for preparing recombinant native as and tat-as has been developed that involves two steps only:  osmotic shock for release of as-containing periplasm fraction and  hitrap chelating chromatography for further purification of as. previous methods used to produce recombinant native as in e. coli required more steps, comprising at least one ammonium sulphate precipitation and two chromatographic separations  <cit> . noteworthy, and differently from previously reported methods  <cit> , tat-as was largely produced as soluble protein thus avoiding the need for a resolubilization step. this result is due to a controlled rate of protein synthesis – because of the low iptg concentration added at the exponential phase of growth – and to the efficient targeting of tat-as to the periplasmic space. the latter is not an artifact of massive overproduction or of the experimental method of osmotic shock: as in the periplasm of e. coli exists stably in  disordered monomeric form  <cit> . the secondary, tertiary, and  quaternary structures of both native and tat-fusion as forms correspond to those of known protein. indeed, both recombinant as proteins form fibrils and tat-as only shows cytotoxic effects on shsy-5y cells.

this new protocol is a convenient, economical, and rapid procedure for preparing different forms of as, which favourably compares to methods currently being used. about 12–16 mg as  with 95% purity can be regularly prepared from a 1-l culture in 1 day. as is also commercially available  but its variant forms  are not.

in conclusion, the recombinant as forms produced here represent a useful tool for in vitro or in vivo experiments where a tight control of as concentration and intracellular or extracellular localization is mandatory. moreover, the capability of native as and tat-as to aggregate and form oligomers or fibrils, though with different toxic effect on our cell model, is of pivotal importance in order to discriminate the real toxic intermediate and the relevance of cellular localization in the dynamics of as aggregation, toxicity and cell-to-cell propagation, a still debated question in the field of pd pathophysiology.

