BACKGROUND
the field of genomics is expanding rapidly with full genome and transcriptome sequencing of many model and non-model species. annotating these genomes continues to pose a challenge  <cit> . due to sequence conservation of functional genes and the rapidly growing molecular knowledge of model organisms, basic local alignment search tools  facilitate the initial annotation of non-model genomes  <cit> . however, the ecological context of genes largely remains a mystery; nearly all gene annotation is based on studies of few model organisms in laboratory environments  <cit> . thus, genes that function primarily in natural settings remain unannotated, and other genes with known function in laboratory organisms have no ecological context.

studies of fishes are leading the way in providing an ecological context to genomes , atlantic salmon , killifish , threespine stickleback  and sockeye salmon ]. these studies have employed three basic methods to relate gene transcription to ecological systems  <cit> . first is in situ gene expression analysis . sampling occurs in the ecological context of interest in nature; fish capture and rna preservation occur in the field. this method measures both genetic and environmental effects on the transcriptome and it is often not possible to assign gene expression differences to either source. a study design with replication reporting parallel expression differences between two systems reduces population and perhaps environment specific gene expression . in general, this method is applicable to many species including large or long-lived species where laboratory rearing or genetic crosses are not practical. second, one can remove the natural environmental effect and only test for genetic effects on gene expression in common garden experiments. this strategy compares transcriptomes of genetically distinct ecotypes in controlled conditions  and is generally applied to species that can be reared artificially. reaction norms may be tested by experimentally manipulating conditions. third, one can perform expression quantitative trait loci  analyses by crossing genetically distinct ecotypes in a laboratory setting and mapping gene expression phenotypes to linkage groups . this method requires artificial rearing and is only practical for species with short generation times; however, this is also the only method of these three able to determine the overall genomic architecture of gene expression  <cit> . unfortunately, the latter two methods are removed from natural environment variation, and therefore may miss heritable expression that requires certain environmental conditions to manifest.

juvenile sockeye salmon exhibit a life-history dichotomy in their freshwater rearing environments; lake-type populations rear in lakes for one to two years before travelling to the ocean to feed whereas riverine populations rear in river habitats for up to two years . foraging, water current, and predation differ between habitats  <cit> . body shape differs between these life history types in association with the environment. in southwest alaska, riverine sockeye exhibit a deep robust body whereas lake-type sockeye are more fusiforme  <cit> . this may be the result of both predation regime and a foraging strategy favoring burst swimming in riverine and continuous swimming in lake-type habitats. similar morphological and behavioral differences are apparent within and among different species of pacific salmon  <cit> .

a set of recent studies characterized the transcriptome in ecotypes of another salmonid, the lake whitefish, employing both the in situ and common garden approaches in dwarf and normal ecotypes  <cit> . the primary ecological trade-off between an increase in growth and fecundity in the normal ecotype is the increased energetics in the dwarf ecotype  <cit> . the dwarf ecotype exhibits continuous swimming for feeding and is subjected to high predation compared to the normal ecotype  <cit> . therefore, both continuous swimming during plankton foraging and burst swimming during predator avoidance are likely favored in the dwarf ecotype, resulting in an energy expenditure for metabolism at the expense of growth  <cit> . this trade-off results in great differences in growth rate, age at maturity, body shape, and maximum lifespan.

phenotypically, lake whitefish ecotypes have drastically different sizes at the same age  <cit> . although the size distributions of the sockeye populations in this study overlap at the juvenile life stage, the riverine sockeye are longer and have a more robust body shape  <cit> . with less extreme morphological differences in ecotypes of sockeye salmon juveniles, we expect the molecular trade-offs to be different from the lake whitefish studies. we expect genes differentially expressed to reflect the differing emphasis on continuous swimming for lake-type and burst swimming for riverine.

in this study, we compare the body morphology and in situ transcriptome of two sockeye salmon populations in the same drainage that exhibit these divergent life histories. differences in foraging strategy and predation may have led to genetic differences between these populations  <cit> . we expect the transcriptome to reflect the functional molecular trade-offs driven by the ecological differences in these life histories. a greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms that relate to functional ecology will enhance our understanding of the phenotypic diversity of this species, as well as place specific gene annotations into an ecological context.

RESULTS
morphology
albert johnson creek  juvenile sockeye were differently shaped compared to the surprise lake  population, indicated in the significant population term of our model . generally, sl juveniles were streamlined compared with the robust shape of ajc juveniles . the interaction term centroid size × population was not significant and therefore not included in the final model.

microarray expression profiles
the microarray analysis indicates  <dig> transcripts with significant differential expression  ≥  <dig> ) between individuals from the riverine and lake populations . of these,  <dig> were over-expressed in ajc compared with sl  while  <dig> were over-expressed in sl compared with ajc . the fold differences were modest, most of which were below two-fold. in ajc, the genes with the highest over-expression with corrected p values were: type ii keratin e <dig> , kinesin-like protein , and ccaat/enhancer-binding protein . in sl the genes with the highest over-expression were: structural maintenance of chromosomes protein 1b , cd <dig> antigen , collagen alpha- <dig> chain precursor , ferritin, heavy subunit , and troponin i, slow skeletal muscle . overall, the cgrasp annotation file matched our checking of est sequences in megablast and tblastx quite well, but  <dig> of  <dig> genes from the differentially expressed lists with distinct descriptions  were found to have different descriptions , many of which have been submitted to ncbi databases recently.

genes with significantly greater expression in albert johnson creek  sockeye salmon muscle compared to surprise lake  sockeye salmon muscle. we present the gene description, the raw p values, the multiple test corrected p values, the average normalized expression values and standard deviations for each population, the genbank id and gene description.

genes with significantly greater expression in surprise lake sockeye salmon muscle compared to albert johnson creek  sockeye salmon muscle. we present the gene description, the raw p values, the multiple test corrected p values, the average normalized expression values and standard deviations for each population, the genbank id and gene description.

in order to expand differential expression lists to facilitate functional analysis, the stringent multiple test correction was removed during significance testing, and transcripts that showed any expression difference were included in this analysis . as a result,  <dig> genes were found significantly differentially expressed in muscle. of these,  <dig> genes were expressed at higher  levels in ajc compared with sl. of these over-expressed transcripts,  <dig> and  <dig> were annotated with biological process and molecular function gene ontology  terms, respectively. in all cases we used the go slim dataset. in biological process, biosynthesis  and behavior  were the only go categories significantly enriched . in the molecular function ontology, the only enriched category was structural molecular activity .

these are the significant go slim categories representing both biological process and molecular function ontologies for population specific significantly over-expressed  features. for each significant go category, we include the p value number of over-expressed genes in that go, percentage of representation in the over-expressed list, number of features of that go in the microarray, and percentage of representation on the entire microarray.

we found  <dig> genes significantly expressed at higher levels in sl muscle compared to ajc . of this list,  <dig> and  <dig> features were annotated with biological process and molecular function go terms, respectively. in this analysis, metabolism  was the only biological process category significantly enriched , containing  <dig> genes. there are six significant categories enriched from the molecular function category .

reverse-transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
as 40s ribosomal and 5-amino-levuleninic acid synthase  were identified as the most stable normalizer candidates through the genorm algorithm, these transcripts were used to generate relative expression ratios of genes of interest . the four goi's are  <dig> kda type iv collagenase precursor , troponin i, slow skeletal muscle , single-stranded dna-binding protein, mitochondrial precursor , and malate dehydrogenase . two of the four investigated genes were differentially expressed,  <dig> kda type iv collagenase precursor and troponin i, slow skeletal muscle, both significantly over-expressed in sl juveniles, presented in figure  <dig>   <dig> kda type iv collagenase precursor was highly significant . troponin i, slow skeletal muscle displayed a high level of biological variation among biological replicates, as can be viewed by the large 95% confidence intervals for this goi .

discussion
we have characterized molecular phenotypes in muscle tissue that relate to morphology, life history, and ecology in sockeye salmon. we also discovered differentially expressed genes and enriched functional categories associated with differing morphology and life history types of sockeye salmon in two habitats. this work represents the first characterization of a molecular phenotype in muscle or any other tissue of juvenile sockeye between these common habitat types. because these populations are in relatively pristine habitats, these ecologically based gene expression differences provide a reference for published and future studies of sockeye salmon in habitats more impacted by human activities  <cit> 

riverine sockeye have a deep, robust body compared with the lake-type life history  <cit> . we find this pattern between the ajc and sl populations . in parallel, some patterns in expression profiles in the present study reflect these phenotypes. for example, in ajc, ten ribosomal proteins were over-expressed compared with sl and one of these  was among the highest over-expressed in ajc . in comparison, we did not identify any ribosomal proteins over-expressed in sl compared with ajc . all of these features on the array map to different contigs with the cgrasp expressed sequence tag  clustering online tool and therefore are likely to represent different genes. many ribosomal proteins stabilize the structure composed mostly of ribosomal rna  <cit> . thus, the differential expression of these ribosomal proteins may indicate more protein synthesis in the muscle tissue of ajc sockeye. in addition, five genes associated with cell division, dna replication and a growth hormone gene were over-expressed in ajc . these patterns are consistent with faster growth and more muscle mass associated with the deeper body morphology in ajc sockeye  <cit> . the go category of biosynthesis  is defined as "the chemical reactions and pathways resulting in the formation of substances; typically the energy-requiring part of metabolism in which simpler substances are transformed into more complex ones" . this was an enriched category in ajc of the go slim biological process ontology which further underscores that the expression profile in ajc corresponds to increased biomolecule production.

creatine kinase  was over-expressed in ajc compared with sl. this gene is potentially important in both aerobic respiration in the pathway of oxidative phosphorylation, as well as anaerobic metabolism in glycolosis  <cit> . however in both processes this gene regulates the amount of available cellular atp so it facilitates fluctuating energy demands  <cit> . this may be important to the riverine "wait and burst" feeding style of ajc, which may involve more variable levels of feeding activity.

in the sl gene enrichment analysis, the sole significant generic go slim ontology is metabolism . also, one of the significant go terms in the molecular function ontology is electron transport indicating aerobic respiration. many of the individual genes in the over-expressed list relate to energy metabolism, mitochondria, and muscle contraction regulation. this is compatible with increased metabolism, especially for continuous swimming. several of these genes may be particularly important for the continuous swimming strategy of lake-type sockeye. troponin i, slow skeletal muscle  is a gene that regulates muscle contraction and the "slow" label of the annotation indicates that this transcript is specific to slow twitch or aerobic muscle fiber  <cit> . we confirmed with the cgrasp est clustering database that these features map to different contigs and therefore likely represent two different genes. the latter of these two genes was also found to be significantly over-expressed in our rt-qpcr analysis . these findings could be the result of either increased red muscle fibers present, increased recruitment of red muscle fiber, or both. additionally,  <dig> kda type iv collagenase precursor , was over-expressed in sl juveniles and is implicated in blood vascular remodelling  <cit> . this gene was also found to be over-expressed in our qpcr analysis. these may lay the infrastructure for increased aerobic needs. another sl over-expressed gene, selenoprotein k , is a response to oxidative stress  <cit> , which may occur in increased aerobic activity. we did not separate red and white muscle tissue in our experiment. many fish species have the muscle fiber types distinctly separated and ecotypes may differ in their composition of red and white muscle sections  <cit> . pacific salmon, however, have red muscle fibers mixed in with the main white muscle mass  <cit> . we collected all of the main locomotion muscle tissue from each individual as we also wanted to capture gene expression differences due to different muscle fiber composition.

other significant go terms have less of a clear functional relationship with the ecology of these populations. the translation factor activity  terms represented in sl is composed of translation initiation factor genes. this is in contrast to over-expression of ribosomal proteins in ajc including  <dig> in the significantly over-expressed genes  and  <dig> of the  <dig> genes in the biosynthesis  term . it is also unclear why behavior  is a significant go term enriched in ajc . there are likely important behavioral differences between these populations, but the ten genes contained within this go term, appear to be genes that have many divergent functions and the behavioural annotations are mostly related to mice.

rt-qpcr results were concordant to the microarray results in three out of four cases. additionally, in all four cases, the average expression level was in the same direction for the rt-qpcr and microarray assays . our sample size was smaller with the rt-qpcr  and this may have resulted in a reduction of power compared with the microarray assay and the lack of significance agreement in one of the four comparisons.

an unanticipated discovery was the increased expression of immune function genes in ajc, including two features annotated with mhc ii function . this may indicate differing immunity challenges in the river and lake rearing habitats of this study. this finding is a good example of indirect hypothesis generation that can come from using such large data-set producing tools. as microarrays facilitate the screening of a large number of genes they may uncover unexpected traits that are difficult to measure, even if not identified as potential traits of interest during experimental design  <cit> .

we detected differential regulation of select regulatory genes over-expressed in ajc including two transcription factors. pro-b-cell leukemia transcription factor  <dig>  and ccaat/enhancer-binding protein delta  regulate transcription  <cit> . the latter has the second highest over-expression fold change in ajc. in sl, one gene annotated as "unknown" in the cgrasp annotation file, was identified through the re-blast methods as "far upstream binding element protein 3" . these regulatory genes could have cascading effects in gene expression  <cit> , and their roles in these ecotypes should be investigated further.

whether due to recent sequence submissions  <cit> , or through the challenges of assembling large est datasets in individuals with recent genome duplications  <cit> , a few annotations of differentially expressed genes varied from the originally released 16k annotation file  <cit> . the genes with new annotation can be viewed in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  one example that our individual blast efforts identified was  <dig> s ribosomal protein l <dig> . also, we identified another gene as the antifreeze protein, type  <dig> ice-structuring protein . this gene has obvious ecological implications for the colonization of new lakes and may have been especially important in post-glacial lakes. these two different blast hits were very recently annotated 25-august  <dig>  <cit> . these few difference between the cgrasp annotation file and current blast hits underscore both the computational complexity of assembling genomes and the constantly changing knowledge of gene function.

both lists of differentially expressed transcripts contain many unknown function annotations, and although we cannot assign any molecular function to these genes based on this study, we do now have ecological context for these genes. furthermore, as more genes are annotated, we may gain more insight on the role of these unknowns in the ecotype variances, as was the case with "far upstream binding element protein 3" as described above.

our results yield both similarities and differences when compared to the gene expression work on lake whitefish  <cit> . the morphological and expected ecological differences in juvenile sockeye salmon are not nearly as extreme as those observed in lake whitefish, which are drastically different in growth rate and age of maturity. however, like the present study, the fold change differences between ecotypes in the lake whitefish work with both microarrays and qpcr are modest, suggesting this may be the norm for ecological transcriptomic differences in natural populations. unlike lake whitefish, sockeye salmon are anadromous, and our study populations move to the ocean after freshwater rearing, where feeding environments and access to them may be similar  <cit> . therefore, differences at the juvenile rearing stage may be limited, because this is only one part of a complex life history, and the life history types may developmentally converge for the ocean feeding stage.

in lake whitefish, parvalbumin beta  was the only gene involved with muscle contraction regulation that was consistently over-expressed in the dwarf ecotype. we did not find evidence of over-expression of this gene in sl, but another gene involved with muscle contraction, the slow twitch isomer of troponin, was significantly over-expressed in sl. it is expected that feeding strategy promotes continuous swimming in dwarf lake whitefish  <cit> . in addition, dwarf lake whitefish are under high predation compared with normal whitefish, an ecological attribute responsible for increased burst swimming. this should favor both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism in the same ecotype resulting in selection favoring overall increased metabolism and muscle contraction  <cit> . in the present study, high predation and a burst swimming feeding strategy are expected only in riverine ajc, whereas a continuous swimming strategy and low predation should occur in lake-type sl. these differing scenarios of selection may result in less-pronounced partitioning of swimming energetics in sockeye salmon compared with lake whitefish.

in lake whitefish, many of the differentially expressed genes in nature retained differential expression when individuals were raised in a common environment  <cit> . also, gene mis-expression in lake whitefish dwarf × normal backcross is associated with reduced egg survival  <cit> . it is difficult to distinguish cause from effect in these situations, as the mis-expression in underdeveloped eggs may be the result of the underdeveloped phenotype and the cause may be in an unmeasured earlier stage of development  <cit> . in summary, in lake whitefish, gene expression traits have a genetic component and can affect traits important to reproduction.

other fish species also manifest the benthic/limnetic ecotypes including threespine stickleback  <cit> , dolly varden   <cit>  and arctic charr   <cit> . though despite many behavioral, morphological, and genetic studies, relatively few of these important ecological model species have been investigated at the transcriptomic level. elmer et al.  <cit>  found non-synonymous divergence in ests related to biosynthesis, metabolism and development in south american crater lake cichlids . other studies of fish transcriptomics have focused on spawning survivorship  <cit>  and salt/freshwater transitions  <cit> 

our study has limitations in that we only present a single tissue type in a single point in time for these populations. also, the morphological sampling and the gene expression sampling took place in different years, though we expect that the morphological differences are temporally stable, at least in the time scale between the two sampling periods. the morphological and gene expression differences between these populations may be due to phenotypic plasticity, adaptive or non-adaptive genetic processes, or a combination of all three  <cit> . like many phenotypic traits, gene expression is an integration of both environmental and genetic components  <cit> . phenotypic plasticity itself may have a genetic component and may be adaptive, especially in species with range expansion and contraction, where colonization of new habitats occurs often  <cit> . even gene expression differences that are purely plastic are important to further our understanding of ecology and colonization, and may facilitate adaptation in other non-plastic traits  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed the first dataset characterizing gene expression differences between two populations of sockeye salmon representing lake-type and riverine life histories. although this represents a first step in considering the ecological transcriptomic differences of juvenile sockeye, we have already identified clear patterns relating to the divergent ecological phenotypes of these populations. in riverine sockeye muscle tissue, genes of higher expression were primarily associated with growth whereas in the lake-type sockeye, metabolism was the theme. since these populations reside in a pristine part of the sockeye range, this study may serve as a reference location for future studies of populations that are more impacted by human activities.

