BACKGROUND
asf is a fatal, haemorrhagic, viral infection of pigs caused by asfv, an asfivirus and the only member of the family asfarviridae, which poses a threat to both commercial and smallholder pig farmers. it is currently endemic in at least  <dig> countries in sub-saharan africa  <cit>  as well as on the island of sardinia , the caucasus, parts of russia, and in eastern part of the european union where it was introduced in  <dig>  the disease can have a severe socio-economic impact on people’s livelihoods, food security and both regional and international trade  <cit> .

in sub-saharan africa , the importance of pig production to food security and household incomes is growing and the numbers of pigs on the continent have increased almost threefold during the last decades  <cit> . this is as a result of a steady increase in demand for animal protein by a growing middle-class. since most of the increase is taking place in smallholder or backyard husbandry systems with low levels of biosecurity, the growth of the sector creates disease prevention and control challenges  <cit> . a larger and denser pig population on the continent coupled with an increase in movements of pigs and pig products, as well as people, is most likely the main factor responsible for the upsurge of asf in many new areas in ssa  <cit> . the current asf situation, with the rising numbers of endemically infected countries in ssa and europe and more asfv circulating globally constitutes a serious threat to asf-free countries in europe as well as asia  <cit> . further spill-over events from either africa, the caucasus or eastern europe, as a result of increased movement of people and pig products, could lead to huge losses in international trade  <cit> .

to date, three cycles involved in the transmission of asf have been identified: the sylvatic cycle involving circulation of the virus between warthogs  and soft ticks of the genus ornithodoros, the tick-to-domestic pig cycle and lastly the domestic pig-to-pig cycle  <cit> . the sylvatic cycle is present in eastern and southern africa and here, historically, it is considered the main source of outbreaks of asf in domestic pigs  <cit> . today, however, the disease has become endemic in the growing domestic pig populations in several countries in the region, including uganda, with outbreaks mainly associated with movements of pigs and pig products  <cit> . a sufficiently large population provides a constant supply of naïve pigs, and is, in the low biosecurity setting dominating in ssa, therefore likely to allow maintenance of asf without involvement of the sylvatic host. the presence of apparently healthy long-term carriers possibly shedding the virus as suggested by some authors  would further facilitate the indefinite perpetuation of the disease.

the aim of the study was to investigate the factors related to asf outbreaks at farm-level, and maintenance of the disease in the domestic pig population, including the existence and possible role of apparently healthy asfv infected pigs, which could act as long-term carriers of the virus.

RESULTS
farms sampled
a total of  <dig> pigs  and  <dig> pigs  were sampled at the first and second sampling time points, respectively. despite one of the study’s conditions being that the farmers were to keep pigs until the next visit for follow up, eight of the farmers were not available at the second sampling point. of these, two had sold off all pigs as a result of suspected asf on the farm. the rest either sold them off for reasons other than asf or they were not available for interview at the second visit.

four hundred seventy six  pigs on  <dig> farms from masaka and  <dig> pigs on  <dig> farms were sampled from rakai during the first sampling point . four hundred twenty two  pigs on  <dig> farms and  <dig> pigs on  <dig> farms from masaka and rakai, respectively were sampled during the second phase of the study .fig.  <dig> distribution of pig farms reporting asf in masaka and rakai, uganda. map of the study area showing the pig farms sampled  in masaka and rakai, uganda . the highlighted farms  are the farms where farmers reported asf during the study and cross symbol are those confirmed positive by rt-pcr



awareness and knowledge of asf
the vast majority of the farmers were aware of asf and could correctly describe two to three of the most important clinical signs. asf was generally described as a disease that has no cure or vaccine, and that kills large numbers of pigs fast. pigs develop high fever, lose appetite and die within two days. discoloration of the skin  is also mentioned.

incidence of asf
a total of  <dig>  farms reported having had incidences of asf one to two years preceding the first visit. between the first and second visits,  <dig>  farms reported having experienced an outbreak of asf , with mortalities between 12–100 % . in one of the farms, asf was confirmed as positive by rt-pcr in two out of the three pigs sampled. the incidence rates for asf were estimated at  <dig>  per  <dig> pig farm-years  and  <dig>  per  <dig> pig farm-years  for the periods prior to and between the two visits, respectively. the difference in estimated incidence rates for the two periods was not statistically significant .

asfv dna and antibody detection
genomic dna was successfully extracted from all the pooled samples. all the pigs in the initial round tested negative for asfv using rt-pcr. in the second sampling round, three pigs from two different farms tested positive  . these two farms were both located in areas where outbreaks of asf had occurred. the corresponding true prevalences were estimated at 0 %  and  <dig>  %  at the first and the second sampling-points, respectively.

twenty-three sera were either antibody positive or doubtful on the first run using ingenasa. however, a re-run on all the positive sera  using ingenasa and svanovir asfv-ab elisa tests, and all doubtful sera  using svanovir, resulted in none of the samples being positive for asf antibodies with either of the two different elisa tests used.

differential diagnosis
in total  <dig> samples were analyzed for presence of antibodies and nucleic acids specific to csfv and prrsv, respectively. all samples tested negative for csf and pprs in elisa as well as in rt-pcr. this is also reported as preliminary results in a student thesis  <cit> .

herd categories and risk factors
the numbers of farms according to size were  <dig>  and  <dig>  for small and medium-scale pig farms, respectively, with six missing values at first sampling. at second sampling, the numbers were  <dig>  and  <dig>  farms for the small-scale and medium-scale farms, respectively. results from the questionnaire are presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  there were more farms with high proportions of improved breeds compared to those with local breeds of pigs. there were comparably more farms that borrowed boars from other farms for mating than those that did not, more farms sourcing replacement stock from neighbouring farms than those obtaining replacement stock generated on their own farms. for small-scale farms, those with none of the biosecurity measures  were greater in number than those with at least one of the biosecurity measures in place . the medium-scale farms had more farms that had at least one biosecurity measure than those that had none . feeding swill was common in both small and medium-scale farms.table  <dig> risk factors for small-scale farms for asf reports between first and second sampling , 2010–2011

awareness c
biosecurity measures e

a asf between- reports of asf on farms during the one year between the first and second sampling visits. this is the dependent variable and the row variables in the table are the independent variables


b the numbers in each of the cells under columns no, yes and na are relative proportions  of the total number of pigs  in each of the table rows


c awareness encompasses those farms where farmers expressed having knowledge on the symptoms, spread, control and prevention measures for asf


d missing values


e biosecurity measures considered were presence of a fence to the farm, controlled entrance to the pig pens  and presence of foot baths

awareness c
biosecurity measures e

a asf between- reports of asf on farms during the one year between the first and second sampling visits. this is the dependent variable and the row variables in the table are the independent variables


b the numbers in each of the cells under columns no, yes and na are relative proportions  of the total number of pigs  in each of the table rows


c awareness as a variable encompasses those farms where farmers expressed having knowledge on the symptoms, spread, control and prevention measures for asf


d missing values


e biosecurity measures considered were presence of a fence to the farm, controlled entrance to the pig pens  and presence of foot baths



the risk factor analysis of reported outbreaks of asf during the study period did not produce any statistically significant predictors .table  <dig> univariable logistic regression model on pig farms for asf reports between the samplings , 2010–2011

awareness a
biosecurity measures b
asf between - reports of asf on farms during the one year between the first and second sampling visits


or odds tatio, ci confidence interval, asf african swine fever

- indicates that the model was inestimable because of skewed data


aawareness as a variable encompasses those farms where farmers expressed having knowledge on the symptoms, spread, control and prevention measures for asf


bbiosecurity measures considered were presence of a fence to the farm, controlled entrance to the pig pens  and presence of foot baths



discussion
asf has had a global upsurge, and has been reported in at least  <dig> countries in ssa alone during the last few years  <cit> . the disease is considered endemic in domestic pig populations in many of these countries, but data on incidence rates is scarce. in our study population, more than 5 % of the farms reported incursions of asf during the one-year study period . albeit based on farmer reports, this gives a rough estimate of the incidence rate of the disease in the population. nine of the  <dig> affected farms were located in areas in which we confirmed asf during this period , supporting the accuracy of the reports. the estimated incidence rate for the period prior to the study  was numerically higher compared to asf between, but the difference was not statistically significant. this latter estimate is likely to be less accurate than for asf between, because it includes farmers’ perception of time since last experience of asf and was therefore excluded from analysis of risk factors. record keeping among smallholder pig farmers in the region is generally poor  <cit> .

important differential diagnoses to asf such as csf and prrs, have never been reported in uganda or in neighboring countries  <cit> , and our study also failed to demonstrate presence of or exposure to these diseases in the study population. moreover, during the period 2010– <dig>  we investigated around  <dig> reported outbreaks of suspected asf in uganda, including several in the study area, and in all but two asf was confirmed, clearly suggesting asf as the most prevalent cause of disease with high mortality in pigs in the region. all samples  from four of these outbreaks, including the two in which asf was not confirmed, were also tested for csf and prrs with negative results in all but one sample which was weakly positive on prrs elisa  <cit> . given that only one out of a total of  <dig> samples tested positive for prrs antibodies, the weakly positive result was interpreted as false positive. our case definition was based on farmer reports of outbreaks of disease with clinical signs suggestive of, but not pathognomonic to asf, which could imply a risk for misclassification. however, given the level of awareness of asf demonstrated by the farmers, the very dramatic clinical signs typically associated with asf, and the probable absence of the most important differential diagnoses in the study population, this risk is considered low.

bacterial diseases such as erysipelas, which do occur in the study area, are also often mentioned as differential diagnoses to asf, due to similar clinical signs in the individual animal. however, in contrast to asf, erysipelas is a curable disease that most often affects individual animals rather than entire herds, and was therefore not considered in the study.

several authors have reported high prevalences of asf, based on detection of asfv dna in blood, serum and/or tissues using pcr in apparently healthy and often seronegative domestic pigs originating from locations from which no disease had been reported . although the importance of this finding is debated  <cit> , it has raised concern of a role of long-term carriers, which would not be detected through clinical or serological surveillance, in the maintenance of the disease in endemically infected populations. in this study, we did not find any evidence supporting a role of long-term carriers. no pcr positive animals were detected during the first sampling, only a few during the second, and no antibody positive animals during either of the samplings. the two farms with pcr positive animals were both located in areas that had recently reported asf outbreaks, and in one of them, the farmer reported having had deaths on the farm as a result of asf just prior to our visit. the three pcr positive animals were seronegative and it is likely that the absence of seroconversion reflected sampling at an early stage of infection before clinical signs had developed and an antibody response had been mounted. a neighbouring farm also reported having had asf outbreak at the second sampling, which may suggest possible spread from either of the two farms given the management practices and risk factors mentioned earlier.

a number of studies have shown that pigs that survive asf, may have persisting infection, with detectable virus only in lymphoid tissues, and not in blood or serum, up to 2– <dig> months after infection . moreover, it has been demonstrated that pigs that survive infection have detectable levels of antibodies that persist for at least 1– <dig> years, with a half-life estimated at  <dig>  years  <cit> . a scenario with persistent infection only in lymphoid tissues in seronegative pigs has not been described to our knowledge. in this study, no pigs were sacrificed, and therefore lymphoid or other tissues could not be tested, but because no antibody positive pigs were found, we do not believe this has affected our results.

to confirm that any positive animals found during the first sampling were persistently positive, as would be expected from long-term carriers, our ambition was to resample the same animals during the second sampling round. this was in many cases not possible. however, given that no animals were positive, neither on pcr nor on elisa, during the first sampling round, and only three were pcr positive during the second , this did not affect the interpretation of our results nor the conclusion regarding presence or absence of potential long-term carriers in the study population.

the absence of detectable seropositivity in the study population is in accordance with several studies suggesting a very low seroprevalence of asf in domestic pig populations in eastern africa  <cit> . the low seroprevalence, in spite of a relatively high incidence of asf, reflects circulation of a highly virulent strain of asfv with high mortality, but is likely also a result of the common practice of selling off pigs for slaughter as soon as an outbreak of asf occurs, to salvage some income from the dying or in-contact pigs  <cit> . a recent publication from uganda, however, presents results from a combined slaughterhouse and on-farm study with sampling of apparently healthy pigs and reports a seroprevalence of above 50 %, indicating circulation of low virulent viruses and possibly development of natural resistance  <cit> . this is in vast contrast not only to our results, but also to those from the several other published studies from the region  <cit> . the serological analyses in the aforementioned study  <cit> , however, were performed using an in-house elisa based on the semipurified asfv antigen. this method is known to give a certain proportion of false positive test results, especially with poorly preserved samples as is often the case under african conditions due to the hot climate and not always functioning cold chain. therefore, unexpected positive results, such as in this case, should always be confirmed using an alternative test before conclusions can be drawn from the results  <cit> .

the vast majority of pig farms included in the study were small-scale  with a maximum of ten pigs while medium-scale farms  accounted for only  <dig>  %. there were high proportions of farms with pigs and piglets that were not housed. there were differences in the relative importance of risk factors and the extent of use of biosecurity measures between medium-scale and small-scale farms . this difference in distribution of asf risk factors and biosecurity measures between the two categories of farms agrees with the findings reported by costard et al  <cit>  in an earlier study in madagascar. on both categories of small and medium-scale farms, farmers reported improper disposal of carcasses which included selling of dead/dying pigs for slaughter, throwing carcasses in bushes and giving pork from diseased pigs to neighbours . these practices will certainly promote the spread of asf through movement of the infected pigs, contaminated carcasses and pork products especially during asf outbreaks. none of the risk factors were, however, significantly associated with asf outbreaks between the two visits, probably partly due to low power of the study, imprecise identifications of the risk factors, and to some extent missing values . however, the proportion of missing values was usually low , except for the question on contacts with wild pigs, and we believe that the missing answers would be non-differential thus only leading to a bias towards the null hypothesis.

CONCLUSIONS
our results indicate a high incidence rate of asf in the study area, and demonstrate that long-term carriers are not needed to explain the maintenance of the disease in the population. potential asf risk factors were present on both small and medium-scale pig farms, although small-scale farms exhibited a higher proportion with multiple potential risk factors and lacking any implementation of biosecurity measures. however, no risk factors were significantly associated with asf reports during the study.

