BACKGROUND
neurohypophysial hormones are an ancient family of structurally and functionally related nonapeptides, with representatives found in deuterostomes as well as in protostomes. vasopressin and oxytocin are mammalian neurohypophysial hormones with distinct activities: vasopressin has renal urine reabsorption  and blood-pressure raising  activities while oxytocin has uterus-contracting  and milk-ejecting  activities. vasopressin is a basic peptide while oxytocin is a neutral peptide, a characteristic determined mainly by the amino acid at the 8th position. all jawed vertebrates contain at least one vasopressin-family, basic peptide and one oxytocin-family, neutral peptide whereas only a vasopressin-family peptide has so far been identified in jawless vertebrates such as lamprey and hagfishes  <cit> . vasotocin is the vasopressin-family peptide in all non-mammalian vertebrates. oxytocin-family peptides, however, exhibit a wide diversity. the oxytocin homolog in non-eutherian tetrapods and lobe-finned fishes  is mesotocin and in ray-finned fishes is isotocin. the cartilaginous fishes  contain at least eight types of oxytocin-family peptides. they are asvatocin and phasvatocin in the spotted dogfish ; asvatocin and phasitocin in the japanese banded dogfish ; valitocin and aspargtocin in the spiny dogfish ; glumitocin in skates ; isotocin in the electric ray ; and oxytocin in a holocephalian chimaera, the ratfish  . it should be noted that these neuropeptides are named according to certain unique residues and their biochemical properties and not according to any phylogenetic grouping. for example, oxytocin molecule is present in placental mammals and in a cartilaginous fish, the ratfish. the presence of oxytocin in these distantly related vertebrates is the result of independent nucleotide substitutions in the two lineages.

adapted from  <cit> .

the neurohypophysial hormones are synthesized as part of a larger precursor molecule comprising a signal peptide, the nonapeptide hormone, and a neurophysin. the precursors of the vasopressin-family hormones and the isotocin hormone in teleost fishes contain an additional peptide, the copeptin, at the carboxyl terminal. in placental mammals, the genes encoding vasopressin and oxytocin are closely linked in a tail-to-tail orientation. nevertheless, the two genes are expressed in distinct magnocellular neurons of the supraoptic nuclei and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothalamus. in addition, vasopressin is expressed in the parvocellular neurons of the paraventricular nuclei and suprachiasmatic nuclei  <cit> . the cis-regulatory elements that mediate the hypothalamus-specific expression of the two genes have been shown to be located in their intergenic region  <cit> . in contrast to the tail-to-tail arrangement of vasopressin and oxytocin genes in placental mammals, their homologs in opossum, chicken, xenopus and coelacanth are located on the same strand of dna and are closely linked in a tail-to-head orientation . interestingly, although their homologs in pufferfishes  reside on the same strand of dna, they are arranged in a different order: isotocin gene is located upstream of vasotocin gene and separated by five unrelated genes   <cit> . these marked differences in the organization of the vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes in different bony vertebrate lineages raise questions about their origin and the organization of the ancestral vasopressin-family and oxytocin-family genes.

the cartilaginous fishes are the oldest group of living jawed vertebrates that diverged from bony vertebrates about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . the ancestor of jawed vertebrates split from jawless vertebrates about  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus has not been sequenced from either cartilaginous fishes or jawless fishes. characterization of the neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in these vertebrates should shed light on the origin and organization of the ancestral vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes. in this study, we have sequenced and characterized the neurohypophysial hormone gene loci in a cartilaginous fish, the elephant shark  and in a jawless vertebrate, the japanese lamprey . we have also identified and analyzed the neurohypophysial hormone gene in the recently completed genome sequence of the amphioxus , an invertebrate chordate which represents the most basal group of living chordates .

the cartilaginous fishes are divided into two groups: elasmobranchs  and holocephalians . the elephant shark is a holocephalian chimaera that inhabits the continental shelves off southern australia and new zealand at depths of  <dig> to  <dig> meters. we chose elephant shark as a representative cartilaginous fish because it has the smallest genome  among cartilaginous fishes  <cit> . like lungfishes and coelacanths, cartilaginous fishes conduct urea-based osmoregulation. cartilaginous fishes, particularly the marine species, maintain their plasma iso-osmotic or slightly hyper-osmotic to the seawater mainly through the retention of urea. in addition to the gut, kidney and gills, which are the major osmoregulatory organs in fishes, marine cartilaginous fishes contain a fourth osmoregulatory organ, the rectal gland that is devoted exclusively to sodium chloride excretion. interestingly, elephant shark does not contain a discrete rectal gland like the marine elasmobranchs. instead, its rectal gland comprises about  <dig> tubular structures located in the wall of post-valvular intestine  <cit> . however, elephant shark maintains its plasma levels of na  and urea  similar to those in marine elasmobranchs  <cit> .

RESULTS
neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the elephant shark
we probed an elephant shark bac library with a fragment of the elephant shark vasotocin gene and identified six overlapping bac clones. two of the bac clones, #191n <dig> and #208m <dig>  were sequenced completely to obtain  <dig> kb contiguous sequence . it contains sequences for vasotocin and oxytocin genes in addition to three other complete genes  and one partial gene  . oxytocin is typically only found in placental mammals and is involved in lactation, uterine smooth muscle contraction and maternal behavior. however, oxytocin had been previously purified from the hypothalamus of a holocephalian cartilaginous fish, the ratfish, the only non-mammalian vertebrate to contain oxytocin  <cit> . the presence of oxytocin gene in elephant shark indicates that oxytocin is most likely common to all holocephalian cartilaginous fishes. the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes are arranged tail-to-head like their homologs in coelacanth, xenopus, chicken and opossum. they each comprise three exons and two introns like their homologs in other vertebrates. the introns of elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes  are longer than their homologs in human  but comparable to that in coelacanth . the intergenic distance between the elephant shark genes is, however, shorter  than that between the genes in human  and coelacanth . overall, repetitive sequences account for  <dig> % of the elephant shark locus with lines and sines contributing  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively .

elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin precursors
the elephant shark vasotocin gene codes for a 163-amino acid protein comprising a signal peptide, the vasotocin nonapeptide, a neurophysin and a copeptin similar to vasotocin precursors in other vertebrates . an atypical tripeptide sequence, gly-arg-arg, links the hormone to the neurophysin and presumably acts as a signal for proteolytic processing and carboxyl-terminal amidation of vasotocin. all the cysteine residues that are considered important for the conformation of neurophysin are conserved in the elephant shark vasotocin neurophysin . the copeptin moiety at the carboxyl terminal includes an n-linked glycosylation site that is conserved in all vertebrates except teleost fishes and lamprey . it also includes a leucine-rich core segment similar to the copeptin of vasopressin-family precursors in all vertebrates .

the elephant shark oxytocin gene codes for a shorter 126-amino acid protein which includes a signal peptide, the oxytocin nonapeptide and a neurophysin . oxytocin is attached to the neurophysin via a typical tripeptide sequence gly-lys-arg that is known to act as a signal for proteolytic processing and carboxyl-terminal amidation of the nonapeptide. like the oxytocin-family precursors in tetrapods and coelacanth, the elephant shark oxytocin does not contain a copeptin . thus, these precursors are different from the oxytocin-family precursor in teleost fishes which contains a copeptin moiety. however, the teleost fish oxytocin-family precursor does not contain an arginine residue between the neurophysin and the copeptin , and therefore, the copeptin may not be cleaved into a separate moiety.

no evidence for gene conversion between elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes
the second exons of human and bovine vasotocin and oxytocin genes that encode the central region of the neurophysin exhibit an unusually high level of sequence identity . in the case of bovine genes, in addition to  <dig> bp of the exonic sequence,  <dig> bp of the preceding intron is also totally conserved. this observation had led to the hypothesis that the two genes have experienced a recent gene conversion event  <cit> . we have previously reported that the second exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes also show a high degree of sequence identity at the amino acid  and nucleotide  levels  <cit> . however, we have shown that these exons do not have a high gc <dig> content which is a signature of a gene conversion event, and therefore proposed that the high sequence conservation is the result of purifying selection acting on the nucleotide sequences rather than due to a gene conversion event  <cit> .

the second exons of the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes also exhibit a high level of sequence identity at the amino acid  and nucleotide  levels. moreover, the high level of sequence identity extends into  <dig> bp of the 5' intron and  <dig> bp of the 3' intron . to determine whether these exons have experienced a gene conversion, we estimated the gc <dig> content of all the three exons of the two genes. the gc <dig> content of the second exons of the two genes is in fact lower  than that of their homologs in mammals , and is comparable to that of their respective first exons  and third exons  . furthermore, the gc <dig> content of the second exons is comparable to that of the three exons of the single vasotocin gene in the japanese lamprey . together, these data suggest that there is no evidence for gene conversion between the second exons of the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes and that the gc <dig> content of the second exons of these genes merely reflects the gc <dig> content of the ancestral vasotocin gene in the lamprey. it is therefore likely that the high identity of the second exons of the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes is also due to purifying selection acting at the nucleotide level similar to that on the second exons of the coelacanth vasotocin and mesotocin genes. this implies that the second exons encode a functional element besides coding for amino acids. this conserved element may be involved in transcript stability, microrna binding  <cit> , enhancing splicing  <cit>  or regulation of transcription that requires the sequence to be highly conserved at the nucleotide level.

expression patterns of elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes
we determined the expression patterns of the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes by a semi-quantitative reverse transcription pcr. single strand cdna was prepared from about one microgram of total rna each from hypothalamus, brain , gills, heart, kidney, liver, muscle, ovary, pancreas, rectal gland, spleen, intestine, testis and uterus; and pcr was carried out using the same volume of cdna preparation from different tissues. the results therefore indicate the relative levels of expression of each gene between various tissues. interestingly, besides the hypothalamus, both vasotocin and oxytocin genes were found to express in some peripheral tissues indicating that they play a paracrine role in these tissues. vasotocin was found to express at relatively high levels in the ovary and at low levels in the kidney, rectal gland and intestine and oxytocin was found to express at moderate levels in the ovary . to the best of our knowledge, no such peripheral expression of neurohypophysial hormone genes has been reported in teleost fishes or in non-mammalian tetrapods. however, it is well known that these genes express in peripheral tissues in some mammals. for example, oxytocin gene is expressed in the uterine epithelium, placenta, amnion and intrauterine tissues in rats; in the amnion, chorion, decidua intrauterine tissues and cumulus cells surrounding the oocytes in humans; and in the corpus luteum and testis in cows  <cit> . the vasopressin gene is expressed in the aorta  <cit> , pancreas  <cit>  and testis in rats  <cit> . consequently, it has been proposed that these hormones play a paracrine role in mammals. the osmoregulatory system in marine cartilaginous fishes involves the kidney, gills, rectal gland and gastrointestinal tract. the kidney excretes water, salt and nitrogenous wastes such as urea and trimethylamine oxide; the gills eliminate nitrogen in the form of ammonia; and the gut epithelium reabsorbs water, salt and nutrients. the rectal gland is a highly specialized salt-secreting organ unique to marine cartilaginous fishes  <cit> . the expression of vasotocin gene in the elephant shark kidney, rectal gland and intestine suggests that vasotocin plays a paracrine role in the osmoregulatory functions of these tissues. in mammals, oxytocin is known to induce smooth muscle contraction in the ovary and uterus and thereby play a role in ovulation and parturition  <cit> . in addition, oxytocin synthesized in the human cumulus cells has been suggested to play a role in fertilization and early embryonic development  <cit> . in elephant shark, fertilization and partial embryonic development occurs internally . mating normally occurs before the spawning season and females store sperm is a special pouch until the eggs mature. eggs mature in batches and the stored sperm is used for fertilization as and when the eggs mature. during spring, females migrate into shallow bays and inlets and lay eggs in shallow soft sediment habitats. each female lays two fertilized eggs at a time every  <dig> to  <dig> days over a period of two to three months  <cit> . the elephant sharks for this study were collected in shallow waters during the peak spawning season. the expression of both oxytocin and vasotocin genes in the elephant shark ovary during this period suggests a role for these hormones in ovulation  and/or in 'parturition'  in this ovoviviparous vertebrate. in vivo and in vitro studies on the effects of vasotocin and oxytocin should provide evidence to support this hypothesis.

neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the japanese lamprey
the living jawless vertebrates are represented by the lampreys and hagfishes. so far only a vasotocin gene has been cloned in these vertebrates  <cit> . however, it is not known if they also contain an oxytocin-family gene. to determine this we sequenced the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in the japanese lamprey. we screened a japanese lamprey bac library using a probe for the vasotocin gene and identified one positive bac clone . this bac was sequenced completely. it contains a 90-kb insert  that encodes three complete genes: vasotocin, gnrh <dig> and ptpra. this locus contains only  <dig> % repetitive sequences, with lines and sines contributing to  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively . thus the amount of repetitive sequences in the lamprey locus is considerably lower than that in the homologous loci in the elephant shark  and coelacanth   <cit> . the lamprey vasotocin gene comprises three exons and two introns like the vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes in jawed vertebrates. the relative order and orientation of the three genes in the lamprey locus are identical to that of their homologs in elephant shark, coelacanth, xenopus, chicken, and opossum. however, the lamprey locus lacks an oxytocin-family gene in the intergenic region between the vasopressin-family gene and the gnrh <dig> gene that is present in these vertebrates . although there is a possibility that a oxytocin-family may be present elsewhere in the lamprey genome, previous screenings of cdna libraries from the japanese lamprey and hagfish  <cit>  were successful in identifying only a vasotocin gene in these vertebrates. we therefore conclude that jawless vertebrates do not contain an oxytocin-family gene present in jawed vertebrates.

neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in amphioxus
the living chordates are classified into three major lineages, the cephalochordates , urochordates  and vertebrates. the cephalochordates are the most basal group of chordates and the urochordates are the sister group of vertebrates  <cit> . recently a gene encoding a vasopressin-related peptide has been cloned in the urochordate, ciona intestinalis. this gene comprises three exons and two introns like the vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes in vertebrates. however, unlike the nonapeptides encoded by the vertebrate genes, the ciona gene codes for a 13-amino acid peptide hormone  that lacks a carboxyl-terminal amidation signal   <cit> . interestingly, in another urochordate, styela plicata, a gene encoding an oxytocin-like peptide has been cloned. this gene also comprises three exons and two introns but codes for a 14-amino acid peptide hormone . it however contains a typical carboxyl-terminal amidation signal. this prohormone is designated as styela oxytocin-related peptide   <cit> . to date no neurohypophysial hormone gene has been cloned in cephalochordates. recently, a whole-genome sequence of a cephalochordate, the amphioxus has been completed  <cit> . we searched for neurohypophysial hormone genes in the amphioxus genome assembly by tblastn algorithm using the elephant shark and lamprey neurohypophysial hormone precursor protein sequences as queries. only one gene with a high similarity to vasopressin-family peptide was identified. we annotated the coding exons based on homology to the elephant shark and lamprey neurohypophysial hormone genes, and refined the exon-intron boundaries by manual inspection. the amphioxus gene comprises three exons and two introns, with the positions and phases of introns being identical to that of the vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes in vertebrates. the 167-amino acid prohormone encoded by this gene consists of a signal peptide, a nonapeptide hormone, neurophysin and copeptin similar to the vasotocin and vasopressin prohormones in vertebrates . the nonapeptide is linked to the neurophysin molecule by a typical tripeptide sequence  that is known to act as a signal for proteolytic processing and c-terminal amidation of the hormone. the nonapeptide hormone, however, contains ile at the 4th position unlike the vertebrate vasotocin and vasopressin peptides which contain a gln at this position . we therefore designate the amphioxus peptide as vasotocin. the amphioxus copeptin does not contain an n-glycosylation site similar to the copeptin in teleost fishes and lamprey. it also lacks a leucine-rich core segment that is present in the copeptin of all vertebrates . the presence of a typical nonapeptide neurohypophysial hormone in amphioxus indicates that urochordates  are the only exception among metazoans that do not contain a typical nonapeptide hormone . the amphioxus vasotocin gene is flanked by rnr and st8sia <dig> genes, which are unrelated to the genes flanking the neurohypophysial hormone genes in vertebrates . the ciona neuropeptide gene, ci-vasopressin, is flanked by genes  that are unrelated to the genes flanking the neurohypophysial hormone genes in vertebrates as well as in amphioxus . thus, the synteny of genes in amphioxus is not conserved in ciona, and the synteny of genes in vertebrates is conserved neither in amphioxus nor in ciona.

origin and evolutionary history of vertebrate neurohypophysial hormone genes
neurohypophysial hormones are an ancient family of hormones with representatives found in diverse taxa among invertebrates and vertebrates. however, invertebrates contain either a vasopressin-family peptide or an oxytocin-family peptide  but seldom both peptides. although some invertebrates like octopus contain two peptides, cephalotoxin and octopressin, both are oxytocin-like peptides  <cit> . in contrast to invertebrates, all jawed vertebrates contain at least one member each of vasopressin- and oxytocin-family peptides. in jawless vertebrates, which occupy an intermediary position between invertebrates and jawed vertebrates, only a vasotocin gene has been cloned so far. in this study, we sequenced the neurohypophysial gene loci in a cartilaginous fish, the elephant shark, and a jawless vertebrate, the japanese lamprey. we also characterized this locus in the genome of amphioxus, a cephalochordate. our study shows that while both amphioxus and lamprey contain a single neurohypophysial hormone gene that encodes a basic vasopressin-family peptide, elephant shark contains both a vasopressin-family gene and a oxytocin-family gene that are closely linked tail-to-head . these data suggest that the two families of peptides arose in a common ancestor of jawed vertebrates through a tandem duplication of the ancestral vasotocin gene. the coding sequence of the duplicate gene has subsequently diverged to code for a neutral peptide thereby giving rise to the oxytocin-family of neurohypophysial hormone. the different patterns of expression of vasotocin and oxytocin genes in elephant shark also imply that, in addition to mutations in the protein coding sequence, the regulatory region of the duplicated gene has also undergone changes to confer a different pattern of expression to the two daughter genes. investigation of the expression pattern of vasotocin gene in lamprey should shed light on the ancestral expression pattern, and how it has diverged in the daughter genes. unfortunately, due to the unavailability of rna from various tissues of the japanese lamprey, we could not determine the expression pattern of the vasotocin gene in the lamprey.

the tail-to-head orientation of the elephant shark vasotocin and oxytocin genes indicates that this was the ancestral state of the two genes soon after the duplication of the vasotocin gene. the close linkage and organization of these genes have been conserved in coelacanth, xenopus, chicken and opossum genomes while the oxytocin gene has undergone a local inversion in human and rodent genomes . in contrast to these vertebrates, the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in pufferfishes has undergone extensive rearrangements. the isotocin gene in fugu has been translocated to a position upstream of vasotocin gene and the two genes are separated by five unrelated genes. in addition, the two genes located downstream of the vasotocin gene in fugu  are unrelated to the genes present at a similar position  in other vertebrates . a search for the neurohypophysial hormone genes in the genome assemblies of other teleost fishes such as the stickleback, medaka and zebrafish on the ucsc genome browser  <cit>  revealed that while the arrangements of isotocin and vasotocin genes in stickleback  and medaka  are similar to that in fugu, the two genes are located on separate chromosomes  in zebrafish. these data indicate that the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus has undergone extensive rearrangements in teleost fishes, in contrast to its well conserved synteny in other vertebrates including the jawless lamprey. these findings are consistent with previous observations that teleost fish genomes have experienced a higher rate of chromosomal rearrangements compared to other vertebrates . the rearrangements in teleost fishes might be related to the "fish-specific" whole genome duplication that occurred in the teleost ancestor  <cit> . the duplicated gene loci generated by this whole genome duplication might have facilitated rearrangements between paralogous chromosomal segments through homologous recombination.

we would like to add that our efforts to build a phylogenetic tree of invertebrate and vertebrate neurohypophysial hormone genes resulted in an anomalous gene tree in which the vasopressin- and oxytocin-family genes in fugu, elephant shark, coelacanth and mammals clustered with each other suggesting that the two genes originated independently in each lineage . this is highly unlikely and is an artifact of the phylogenetic analysis due to the highly conserved sequences of these two paralogous genes. for such paralogous genes, the conservation of synteny in different taxa is a much better indicator of their orthologous relationships.

CONCLUSIONS
we have characterized the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus in elephant shark , japanese lamprey  and amphioxus  and showed that amphioxus and lamprey each contains a single gene belonging to the vasopressin-family while elephant shark contains a vasopressin-family and an oxytocin-family gene that are closely linked in a tail-to-head orientation. these results indicate that vasopressin- and oxytocin-family peptides evolved in a common ancestor of jawed vertebrates through tandem duplication of the ancestral vasotocin gene. the vasotocin and oxytocin genes in elephant shark exhibit distinct expression patterns. thus, this is a classical example for the origin of a novel gene with a distinct function and expression pattern through duplication of an ancestral gene. the synteny and order of genes in the neurohypophysial hormone gene locus are conserved in lamprey, elephant shark, coelacanth and tetrapods, but disrupted in teleost fishes presumably due to the rearrangements facilitated by a whole genome duplication event in the teleost fish ancestor.

