BACKGROUND
traumatic brain injury  remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality, particularly in young people. in tbi, the injured brain may be damaged by primary impact, but secondary brain insults  following primary impact  are other important causes of damage to the brain  <cit> . in the past two decades, a great number of studies have been carried out on sbi. it is shown that sbi such as pre-hospital hypotension or hypoxia  <cit> , intraoperative hypotension  <cit> , and hypoxia and hypotension in the intensive care unit  <cit>  is consistently associated with poor outcomes. hypotension is one of the most significant sbi after head injuries  <cit> . the combination of hypotension and head injury is associated with increased mortality and morbidity in comparison with head injury alone  <cit> . despite encouraging animal studies, however, human trials assessing the use of pharmacological agents after tbi have all failed to show efficacy. therefore, current management strategies are directed towards providing an optimal physiological environment in order to minimize secondary brain insults and maximize the body's own regenerative processes.

two general mechanisms have been suggested for the increased sensitivity of the traumatized brain to sbi. first, trauma induces cellular processes that make the brain more sensitive to an additional insult. second, trauma impairs the ability of the brain to regulate cerebral blood flow  and results in secondary ischemic insults  <cit> . the underlying cellular processes seem to be related to many biological events. however, it is suggested that the metabotropic glutamate receptors  are involved in the complex pathophysiology of brain injury  <cit> . the mglurs are a family of glutamate-sensitive receptors different from the ionotropic glutamate receptors . so far, eight mglur subtypes  have been cloned from mammalian brain tissue, which are classified into three sub-groups: group i mglurs , group ii mglurs  and group iii mglurs   <cit> . we hypothesize that mglurs may also be involved in the cellular processes that make the brain more sensitive to an additional insult. to determine whether mglurs are involved in the cellular processes and whether hypotension, as an additional insult, exacerbates brain injury or neuronal injury by changing the expression of mglurs in the cerebral cortex, we studied the alteration of neuronal expression of mglurs after dbi and dbi coupled with sbi in a rodent diffuse brain injury  model.

RESULTS
mortality and physiological parameters of rats
no rats died in the normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups. twelve of sixty rats in the dbi group died between  <dig> minutes and  <dig> hour after injury. twenty-three of seventy-one rats in the dbi with sbi group died between  <dig> and  <dig> hours after injury. compared with the dbi alone group, the dbi with sbi group showed higher mortality . we also monitored the physiological parameters of the rats  <dig> hour after surgery. there were no changes among groups  in the measured physiological parameters including mean arterial blood pressure , core temperatures, blood gas analysis, and blood glucose.

a p <  <dig>  vs dbi alone group

the table shows the physiological parameters of the rats  <dig> hour after surgery. there were no changes among groups  in the measured physiological parameters during the experiment, including mabp, core temperatures, blood gas analysis, and blood glucose. and the table also shows that no rats died in normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups. twelve and  <dig> of the rats died in dbi and dbi with sbi group respectively. compared with that in dbi alone group, the mortality of rats in dbi with sbi group was higher .

neurological severity score  of rats
between-group comparisons indicated that there were no statistical differences in the nss of rats in the normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups . the nss of rats in the dbi alone and dbi with sbi group increased sharply compared with that of normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups . the nss of rats in the dbi with sbi group also significantly increased compared with that in the dbi alone group .

expression of mglurs
group i mglurs
there were no statistical differences in the number of group i mglur positive neurons among normal, sham-operated and sbi alone groups . in comparison with that of the normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups, the number of group i mglur positive neurons increased at  <dig> hours and peaked at  <dig> hours in the dbi alone group . when compared with that in the dbi alone group the number of group i mglur positive neurons increased significantly in the dbi with sbi group. .

group ii mglurs
no statistical significance in the number of mglur positive neurons among normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups was found . in contrast to the expression pattern of group i mglurs, the number of mglur <dig> positive neurons began to decrease  <dig> hours after injury and the lowest point occurred  <dig> hours after injury in the dbi alone group. the expression of mglur <dig> significantly decreased  <dig> hours post-injuries and the lowest point was at  <dig> hours after injury . in the dbi with sbi group, the changes in the number of mglur positive neurons were similar to that in the dbi alone group, but the number was much lower 

group iii mglurs
no statistical significance in the number of mglur positive neurons were found among normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups . in comparison with that in the normal, sham-operated control and sbi alone groups, the expression of mglur <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in the dbi alone group increased significantly  <dig> hour after injury, and reached the highest level after  <dig> hours . the expression of mglur <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> in the dbi with sbi group was even higher than that in the dbi alone group . however, there were no significant changes in mglur <dig> expression after injury.

discussion
in the present study, the alteration of neuronal expression of mglurs was studied on the marmarou's impact acceleration model of closed head injury and the sbi model similar to that described by ishige  <cit> . with the models, rats in the dbi with sbi group showed a higher mortality and nss compared with that in the dbi alone group. the excess deaths in the dbi with sbi group were most likely due to the existence of posttraumatic sbi  <cit> . this result supports the hypothesis that posttraumatic sbi such as hypoxia and hypotension exacerbates neuronal injury and leads to worse outcome in tbi  <cit> . in fact, apart from tbi, the clinical outcome of many neurologic diseases in critical condition may also be partly determined by the number of sbi  <cit> . therefore, research on posttraumatic sbi is of great value.

our study suggested that mglurs may be involved in the cellular processes after tbi and posttraumatic sbi. glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, and it was suggested that a wide variety of acute and chronic neurologic diseases may be mediated, at least in part, by a final common pathway of neuronal injury involving excessive stimulation of glutamate receptors  <cit> . however, due to the deficient properties of the molecules that entered human trials and to inappropriate design of clinical studies, glutamate n-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antagonists failed to show efficacy in clinical trials of stroke or tbi  <cit> . therefore, the expression of mglurs after tbi coupled with sbi should be studied to elucidate the mechanism and to find more powerful mglurs receptor antagonists and agonists. in our present study, we systematically observed changes in the expression of the mglurs after dbi and dbi with sbi in animals. although we observed a significant elevation in the expression of group i and group iii mglurs  and a decrease in the expression of group ii mglurs in the supraventricular cerebral cortex after dbi, the changes were more severe when dbi was coupled with sbi. it was indicated that sbi may exacerbate neuronal injury or brain injury by altering expression of mglurs, and more emphasis should be put on the prevention and treatment of sbi.

our previous study investigated the alteration of expression patterns of mglurs after dbi alone. we suggested that the damaged neurons utilize a self-protection first mechanism  <cit> , because mglur expression shows a characteristic time sequence , and the activation of group ii and iii mglurs has been reported to be neuroprotective both in vitro and in vivo  <cit> . however, the expression of group ii mglur decreased when the expression of group i and iii mglurs increased in our study. the exact reason for this is not clear, but it is similar to allen's study which suggested group ii receptors are not activated sufficiently in response to trauma to provide endogenous neuroprotection  <cit> . iversen's study even observed a decreased mrna levels for mglur <dig>  mglur <dig>  mglur <dig> and an unchanged mrna level for mglur <dig> in regions of rat brain after transient global ischemia  <cit> . after all, the present study further supports our previous suggestion in much more severe circumstances such as dbi coupled with sbi. it was indicated that a self-protection first mechanism of the damaged neurons was a spontaneous response of the neurons to trauma and was closely related to the severity of the brain damage. in our present study, the effect of protective group iii mglurs was followed by the more powerful effect of neuro-harmful group i mglurs, which may initiate or augment the biochemical cascades  <cit> . conceivably, the overall neuro-harmful effects of mglurs and the following destructive cascades on neurons might be closely associated with the higher mortality and nss of rats in the dbi with sbi group. although this needs to be further clarified, it may provide clues for the understanding of the mechanism of dbi with sbi. the antagonists of group i mglurs and agonists of group ii and iii mglurs may provide neuroprotection against such brain injuries in selected conditions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study suggest posttraumatic sbi exacerbates neuronal injury or brain injury by altering expression of mglurs, and more emphasis should be put on the prevention and treatment of sbi.

