BACKGROUND
retroviral vector systems are routinely used as delivery vehicles for efficient and stable gene transfer into mammalian cells  <cit> . since their inception more than  <dig> years ago, retrovirus vectors have been developed to transfer various genetic elements for varied purposes: stable expression of cdna for gene studies and therapy; efficient expression of short hairpin rna  to trigger rna interference; integration of splice donor sequences for gene trapping; generation of gene reporter cell lines  <cit> . in spite of the accommodating nature of the retroviral genome, there are inherent limitations in the retroviral life cycle that constrain vector design and impede full utilization of the system  <cit> . the retroviral genome must be produced by rna polymerase ii in the nucleus of the packaging cell, edited  and transported to the cytoplasm for assimilation into a mature virion at the plasma membrane. hence sequences that interfere with nuclear export or express products detrimental to packaging cell function or survival will not yield virus. extraneous post-transcriptional processing signals present in the vector sequence will produce incomplete genomic transcripts  or be removed prior to packaging and not transferred   <cit>  . frequently, vectors are designed with an internal promoter to drive high transgene expression which leads to "promoter interference" with the retroviral long-terminal repeat  and severely compromises viral titer  <cit> .

RESULTS
in spite of the popularity of retroviral vectors, little has been done to address these limitations. we recently developed a simple approach that dramatically expands the range of genetic elements transferable by retroviral vectors  <cit> . the system employs in vitro generated rna to nucleate retroviral virions, completely circumventing packaging cell genomic transcription and translation .

to demonstrate the utility of this innovation, we endeavoured to create a high expression retroviral vector using a known optimal constellation of genetic elements predicted to be incompatible with current systems. indeed we show that a retroviral vector with substantially higher transgene expression in primary human cells can be constructed using the in vitro transcribed retroviral genomic rna approach, while the same gene cassette prohibited the production of virus by the conventional system.

a series of retroviral vectors were constructed to carry a standard strong gfp expression cassette comprising egfp cdna flanked by an optimized intron, and a potent late sv <dig> polyadenylation signal under the control of the cytomegalovirus immediate early  promoter  <cit> . this expression cassette was cloned in both orientations into a standard retroviral vector  or into a retroviral vector designed to allow in vitro transcription of the retroviral genomic rna  . pt is similar to conventional retroviral vectors except that the u <dig> region of the 5' ltr has been replaced by the binding site for bacteriophage t <dig> rna polymerase, positioned so that transcription initiates at the correct nucleotide. the u <dig> region of the 3'ltr, which contains the natural polyadenylation signal, is replaced by  <dig> a's to mimic a polya tail followed by a site for the restriction enzyme mlui to allow linearisation of the vector. as controls, we used the gfp open reading frame alone  cloned into both conventional  and t7-transcribed  retroviral vectors. on integration into the target cell genome, these vectors are expected to produce essentially identical sequences.

when transfected into packaging cells, the standard retroviral vectors  produced high levels of gfp expression as measured by flow cytometry . however, the presence of the internal cmv-expression cassette completely abrogated production of infectious virus . the complete loss of infectious virus in both pc-cgreen and pc-neergc is primarily due to the presence of the strong, bidirectional sv <dig> polyadenylation site  <cit> . however, competition between the internal cmv promoter and the 5' ltr cmv promoter is also likely to contribute to the loss of titer  <cit> .

in contrast, in vitro transcription system based vectors  carrying the same cmv expression cassette readily generated infectious virus following transfection of in vitro transcribed rna genomes into packaging cells. the pt vectors produced no detectable gfp expression in the packaging cells, due to the lack of requisite translation signals  on the rna transcripts, a notable advantage of the system . primary human umbilical cord endothelial cells  were readily infected with viral supernatants generated by the pt-vectors carrying the strong gfp expression cassette  and expressed markedly higher  levels than obtained with the conventional ltr-driven  vectors . the reverse orientation cassette  consistently gave higher expression than the forward orientation cassette  . the reason for this is unknown but presumably reflects a more favorable context for cmv-driven expression proximal the 3' ltr compared to near the packaging sequence .

CONCLUSIONS
in this report we demonstrate how in vitro-transcribed retroviral rna genomes can be utilized to transfer a high-level expression cassette which includes genetic elements not compatible with commonly used retroviral packaging systems. using this cassette we observe an increase in expression level of up to  <dig>  times in primary human cells, reflecting the provision of an intron and the use of strong enhancer/promoter and polyadenylation signals. the ability to circumvent packaging cell transcription, post-transcriptional editing and translation of the vector genome, while maintaining assembly into virions, effectively addresses the shortcomings of current retroviral systems. thus, this approach is based on standard molecular biology techniques, yet allows virtually any genetic sequence constellation to be manifested by the integrated retroviral provirus: strong enhancers/promoters, introns and polyadenylation signals for boosting gene expression; gene reporters that encompass multiple exon-introns; post-transcriptional signal sequences to improve gene trapping; cytotoxic gene expression or shrna expression cassettes that target essential genes.

