BACKGROUND
the development of high-throughput technologies such as microarrays, allowing for the parallel analysis of the expression of thousands of genes from a tumor in one single experiment, has provided new tumor biological knowledge. in breast cancer, for example, microarrays have been suggested to be useful for predicting clinical outcome and for tailoring treatment strategies for individual patients  <cit> . this approach may also increase the ability to identify new targets for more specific therapies. studies using this technique have furthermore revealed differences in gene expression profiles between different subgroups of breast cancer, e.g. between hereditary and sporadic breast cancer, and between estrogen receptor  positive and er negative tumors  <cit> .

microarrays were first described by schena and co-workers in  <dig>  <cit> . the different parts of this technique involve rna extraction, control of rna quality, hybridization, and data analysis. extraction of rna is a long process, often in the presence of contaminants and ribonucleases that may degrade rna. rna is sensitive and can hence easily be degraded at room temperature. the most common technique for controlling the quality of rna is the characterization with agarose gel electrophoresis and/or using a uv spectrophotometer. however, these techniques are not sensitive enough and are easily influenced by contaminants in the sample. therefore new techniques have been developed, e.g. the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer  <cit> . the bioanalyzer is based on a lab-on-a-chip micro-fluids technology, and the software generates an electropherogram and a gel-like image. with this new technique data can be evaluated in different ways, either manually by inspecting the electropherogram, or by calculating the 28s/18s ratio. recently a new feature in the bioanalyzer software has been implemented, the rna integrity number   <cit> . furthermore, auer and co-workers have developed a mathematical model for quantitative characterization of rna degradation, the degradometer  <cit> . no generally accepted recommendations exist, however, regarding which technique or evaluation method is the best choice for downstream applications requiring high quality rna. moreover, to our knowledge, no study has previously systematically evaluated to what extent the rna quality influences the interpretation of gene expression profiling for routinely collected frozen breast cancer samples.

in the present study we have focused on 1) different ways of evaluating the quality of rna, 2) how the quality of rna influences microarray-based gene expression analyses, and 3) which type of gene categories that are affected by decreased rna quality.

the results indicate that the manual and rin methods are superior to the ratio method for evaluating rna quality in fresh frozen breast cancer tissues. the objectively obtained measurement of the rin method is, in addition, clearly an advantage. furthermore, the inclusion of samples with degraded rna can profoundly influence gene expression profiles, and hence clustering of samples as well as absolute expression levels of individual genes.

RESULTS
rna quality
we analyzed the rna quality using three different methods; manual, ratio and rin, respectively . visual inspection of the bioanalyzer electropherograms showed that of the six samples included, the majority were degraded at room temperature, but after different lengths of time . three examples are shown in fig.  <dig>  based on manual evaluation, the manual method, sample  <dig> was degraded at  <dig> minutes, sample  <dig> at  <dig> minutes, whereas sample  <dig> was not affected at all within the  <dig> minute time-frame .

similar results were obtained using the ratio method. according to the ratio method however, sample  <dig> was considered good at  <dig> minutes , whereas samples  <dig> and  <dig> were considered poor at  <dig> minutes  and 2– <dig> minutes , respectively. the rin method, on the other hand, yielded results almost identical to the manual method. one exception was, however, noted; sample  <dig>  was considered good with the manual method, but not with the rin method.

the electropherograms from one of the samples , showed an unexpected appearance over time . it was degraded at  <dig> and  <dig> minutes, but at  <dig> minutes, the rna was considered partly degraded with the manual method and good with the ratio and rin methods.

in summary, pair-wise comparisons of the methods revealed that manual vs. ratio showed concordance in 20/ <dig>  manual vs. rin in 23/ <dig>  and ratio vs. rin in 21/ <dig> samples. all three methods showed concordant results in  <dig> of the  <dig> samples.

gene expression
our hypothesis was that if the rna quality of the sample was good for all four time periods, the corresponding gene expression profiles should be similar and the samples should consequently cluster together. conversely, upon rna degradation, changes in gene expression profiles would cause the sample replicates to cluster apart. using unsupervised hierarchical clustering to assess which samples clustered together, we noted that the samples clustered into two separate groups, one including most of the good samples  and one including most of the degraded samples, irrespective of evaluation method .

when using the manual method, all samples but one  clustered as we hypothesized. the corresponding number of samples, clustering in an unexpected way with the other two methods  was five  and two , respectively.

concentrating on rin values we assigned the data into two groups: rin ≥  <dig> or rin <  <dig> and compared the gene expression profiles of these two groups to see whether there was a significant difference for any given reporter × between the two groups. we performed a gene score analysis in bio array software environment   <cit>  to find statistical significance in terms of false discovery rates , and a permutation test was performed to obtain an estimate of the rate of differentially expressed reporters. out of  <dig>  reporters,  <dig>  distinguished the two groups with an fdr of 5%. with an fdr of  <dig> %,  <dig> reporters were able to distinguish between the two groups. the top ten most differentially expressed genes are shown in fig.  <dig>  all but one showed decreased gene expression levels in the rin <  <dig> compared to the rin ≥  <dig> group. similar results were obtained when a t-test and a mann-whitney test were used to calculate probabilities .

gene ontology  mapping using gominer  <cit> ,  revealed deoxyribonuclease activity, go:  <dig> ; collagen, go:  <dig> ; regulation of cell adhesion, go:  <dig> ; cytosolic ribosome , go:  <dig> ; and nadh dehydrogenase activity go:  <dig>  to be the five most affected categories, .

discussion
good rna quality is essential for obtaining reliable result from microarray experiments. the inclusion of samples with degraded rna may influence the statistical analysis and hence the interpretation of gene expression levels in relation to biological and/or clinical data. results should reflect true biological differences and not differences due to poor rna integrity.

in the present study, three different evaluation methods were compared, one manual and two objective . in 20/ <dig>  samples, all three methods came to the same result . the manual and rin methods were concordant in 23/ <dig>  samples, whereas the ratio method showed discordant results with the other two methods in four and three samples, respectively. in some of the discordant samples, the discrepancy could be explained by values near the cut-off. the results indicate that the manual and rin methods are more similar to one another than the ratio method is to either. this finding is in line with the evaluation principles. while both the manual and rin methods take the whole electropherogram into consideration, manually or objectively, the ratio method relies only on the ratio between the 28s and 18s peaks. furthermore, the ratio calculation is based on area measurements and is heavily dependent on the definitions of the start and end of the peaks. in addition, small peaks make this measurement even more uncertain, which is often the case with partly degraded samples. therefore, the ribosomal ratio may not be sufficient to evaluate rna degradation efficiently in all instances. copois and co-workers, using colorectal cancer, liver metastases, and normal colon, compared the ratio method with the computer-based rin and degradometer methods, as well as with an in-house "rna quality scale" method, and came to the conclusion that the 28s/18s ratio resulted in misleading categorization  <cit> . to address this issue, sotiriou and co-workers used an arbitrary cut-off of 15% of the total rna area, and 28s/18s >  <dig>  in their investigation of the correlation between histological grade and gene expression profiles in breast cancer  <cit> .

imbeaud and co-workers obtained similar results in their study including both cell lines and different normal tissues, demonstrating ambiguity with the ratio method  <cit> . when ribosomal ratios were calculated from identical samples, a large degree of variability was observed. manual evaluation of the rna quality through visual inspection, on the other hand, provided consistent data. in general, there was a good agreement between the manual classification, the degradation factor and the rin method, but not with the ratio values  <cit> .

in concordance with the above-mentioned studies, the results of our investigation demonstrate that the gene expression profiles change considerably upon rna degradation. we hypothesized that if the rna quality in different samples from the same breast tumor was good, the corresponding gene expression profiles should be similar, and the samples should consequently cluster together. in contrast, when rna is degraded, changes in gene expression profiles would cause the samples to cluster apart. our findings indicate that the results of the rna quality evaluation using the manual and rin methods were more concordant with the results of the clustering analyses than when using the ratio method. while only one  and two  sample replicates clustered apart, five samples clustered in an unexpected way when the ratio method was used, i.e. samples considered to be of good rna quality clustered with degraded samples or vice versa. these results indicate that the manual and rin methods are more concordant and superior to the ratio method for evaluating rna quality in fresh frozen breast cancer samples. an advantage with the rin method in comparison with the manual method is that it yields an objective measurement, whereas the subjective interpretation of the manual method, especially for the partly degraded group, may show both intra- and inter-individual variation. in order to validate the cut-off of  <dig> for the rin method, we also tested  <dig> or  <dig> as cut-offs. the number of samples clustering in an unexpected way was thereby increased to three and seven, respectively. the use of  <dig> as a cut-off was also strengthened when the rin values were compared to the pearson correlation coefficients of the association between the gene expression of the samples for the different time points  and the gene expression after  <dig> seconds.

one sample showed an unexpected appearance over time, as the rna quality appeared superior after extended exposure to room temperature compared to shorter time periods when it was deemed degraded . this surprising observation may be explained by tumor heterogeneity.

of the top ten most differentially expressed genes, all but one showed decreased gene expression levels in the rin <  <dig> compared to the rin ≥  <dig> group , suggesting degradation of rna transcripts to occur as rna quality deteriorates. furthermore, gene ontology mapping using gominer revealed deoxyribonuclease activity, collagen, regulation of cell adhesion, cytosolic ribosome, and nadh dehydrogenase activity to be the five categories most affected by rna quality. one may speculate that genes belonging to these categories could potentially be used as markers for rna quality in gene profiling studies using fresh frozen breast cancer tissue. it would be interesting to evaluate if this strategy could be used as a potential qualification approach for already collected gene expression data sets, and to investigate whether clustering analyses are influenced due to the inclusion of degraded transcripts belonging to these ontological categories.

our results demonstrate that rna was degraded at room temperature, but the rna in the six samples showed variable sensitivity. this variation may be explained by different sensitivity to room temperature due to e.g. differences in tissue composition. some samples may be rich in fatty tissue, whereas others may be rich in epithelial cancer cells. furthermore, the amount of connective tissue may also influence the amount and quality of extracted rna. another explanation for the differences between samples may be that the time period from surgical excision until the sample is placed at -80°c varies and that they are collected from several pathological departments, with different routines. the tissue composition and suboptimal sample collection procedures may also explain the relatively low ratio values obtained in breast cancer, in comparison with other tissue materials. in a recent publication from our group  <cit> , we had approximately the same percentage of samples with poor rna quality  in comparison with other studies using similar criteria for evaluation of the rna quality   <cit> .

from the electropherograms it was, furthermore, demonstrated that rna degradation is a gradual process. not all rna follows the same pattern during degradation; however, the larger ribosome is typically degraded first, resulting in a decrease and broadening of this peak. consequently, as degradation proceeds, there is a decrease in the 28s to 18s ribosomal ratio and an increase in the baseline signal between the two ribosomal peaks.

CONCLUSIONS
the results indicate that the manual and rin methods are superior to the ratio method for evaluating rna quality in fresh frozen breast cancer tissues. the rin method gives an objective measure of rna quality, while the manual method may be subject to inter-, as well as intra-observer variation. in addition, the inclusion of samples with degraded rna may affect the outcome of the study, as the levels of gene expression are highly dependent upon rna integrity. based on our experience, we recommend rin values ≥  <dig> to be used for fresh frozen breast cancer tissue.

