BACKGROUND
the global comparison of protein sequences or structures is one of the most used computational tools in the analysis of newly discovered proteins  <cit> . these methods can highlight evolutionary relationships. however, due to possible events of divergent evolution in the functional site/s, they cannot always allow the "guilt by association" inference of a protein function.

the vast majority of known functions  are encoded by a relatively small set of residues located in a conserved geometry both in the protein sequence and in the protein structure. 3d motifs  <cit>  can thus be used, in different forms, for analyzing and inferring molecular functions when the global similarity is not conserved .

local similarities in the context of a global non-similarity, are generated by phenomena of divergent  <cit>  or convergent evolution. the latter are uncommon and few are described in the literature, well-known examples being represented by the shd catalytic triad in serine proteases  <cit>  or by the region surrounding the ploop in many nucleotide-binding proteins  <cit> .

methods for the identification of local structural similarities alone are not sufficient to spot cases of convergent evolution. here we applied a new approach that consists of an exhaustive search for local structural similarities between known protein structures, followed by a selection of structural similarities coming from different regions and located in a different order in the sequence of the protein families sharing the site.

we analyzed the results of an all-versus-all local comparison in an ensemble of protein functional sites, searching for 3d matches characterized by sequence inversion events. non-collinear matches which also have a strong statistical significance were manually analyzed and a few cases of convergently evolved sites were identified and are discussed below.

RESULTS
structural comparison experiment
starting from a non-redundant structural dataset of about  <dig> protein chains, we identified  <dig> surface cavities. about  <dig> of those cavities were defined as functional since they contain a consistent fraction of residues associated to a prosite  <cit>  pattern or a known ligand binding site . we performed an all versus all structural comparison of the functional clefts with the whole dataset of  <dig> clefts in search of significant structural similarities.

for the cavities comparison, the sequence-independent query3d algorithm  <cit>  was used. we set highly stringent parameters to detect only strong similarities and selected only 3d matches comprising of at least 50% of known functional residues . we obtained a total of about  <dig> structural matches among protein cavities ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> residues in size. in table  <dig> the distribution is reported of the number of matches with respect to their length.

selection of non collinear and significant matches
we selected only those matches whose matching residues are non-collinear in the corresponding protein sequences. to do so, the list of matches has been searched for non-collinearity between the paired residues, see methods. table  <dig> reports the number of matches that are collinear and the matches that are not collinear, for each match length.

we calculated a significance value for each one of these matches in the form of a z-score. only matches longer than  <dig> residues and with a z-score higher than  <dig> were analyzed. this threshold is considerably stringent, as can be deduced from different tests performed in other massive structural comparison experiments  <cit> . this stringency in statistical significance strongly supports the hypothesis that only real structural similarities have been considered.

analysis of non collinear matches
a total of  <dig> non-collinear structural matches were selected within these stringent thresholds and manually analyzed .  <dig> matches were identified as common cases of non-collinearity deriving from events of circular permutations of protein sequences  <cit> .

of the remaining  <dig> cases, three are already known in the literature and involve: the n- <dig> cytosine-specific methyltransferase pvu ii and catechol o-methyltransferase  <cit>  ; udp-glucose dehydrogenase and l-alanine dehydrogenase  <cit>  ; d-ala ligase and human glutathione synthetase  <cit>  . for details on these matches see figure  <dig> 

a new case of sequence inversion
the fourth case , see figure 1d, involves one member of the abc transporters family and a bacterial hpr kinase/phosphorylase protein . this 3d similarity belongs to the category of inverted structural matches  and cannot have arisen from simple events of sequence rearrangements, therefore identifying a true and almost unique case of convergent evolution.

the atp binding subunit of a bacterial histidine permease belongs to the abc transporters family  <cit> , whose members are widespread into different phyla, from bacteria to humans. some of the abc transporters are known to be involved in several human disorders, such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, adrenoleukodystrophy, stargardt disease and others. the bacterial hprk/p  <cit> , on the other hand, is a bacterial sensor enzyme that plays a major role in the regulation of carbon metabolism and sugar transport, controlling the expression of numerous catabolic genes; it catalyzes the atp- as well as the pyrophosphate-dependent phosphorylation of ser- <dig> in hpr, a phosphocarrier protein of the phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent sugar phosphotransferase system .

the nucleotide binding site of the atp-binding subunit of the histidine permease from salmonella typhimurium and the phosphate binding active site of the hpr kinase/phosphorylase from lactobacillus casei are built through the juxtaposition of three distinct residue stretches : i) the ploop; ii) a pair of negatively charged residues  and iii) a catalytic histidine followed  or preceded  by three hydrophobic residues on a beta filament . the third stretch proposes the residue side-chains in very similar positions in 3d, but encoded in opposite order in the protein sequence . the two structures look quite different after superposing the conserved residues , but they share a very similar core composed of  <dig> beta filaments and one helix . one of the filaments and the helix respectively precede and follow the ploop structure; two of the three remaining beta strands follow the same direction but are oppositely oriented . this finding can support the hypothesis that the structural context is necessary for the stability and function of the described atp/pp binding site, even if some of the participating sses share opposite directions.

in both proteins, the residues identified belong to a well-studied functional site, described in detail below. the co-crystallized molecules  neatly superpose the corresponding phosphate atoms, in support of a functional meaning of the 3d similarity. this quite unique situation accounts for the fact that this striking similarity has not been highlighted so far.

a multiple alignment of members of the two protein families derived from the corresponding superposition of the functional sites is shown in table  <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
an exhaustive search has been performed for significant 3d similarities between protein functional sites containing residues that are non-collinear in the respective protein sequences. from a non-redundant set of protein structures, an ensemble of about  <dig>  cavities were defined, one fourth of which could be associated to a known molecular function using prosite patterns and/or bound ligands.

the local comparison produced more than  <dig> thousand 3d matches. in this list, a relatively low number of matches appeared to involve non-collinear residues. all matches were evaluated for their statistical significance using the z-score. cases with z-score >  <dig> were carefully analyzed and manually inspected in the graphics.

four interesting cases were identified, three of which were already known in the literature as cases involving a permutation in one of the protein families comprised in the structural match.

the fourth case involved a member of the abc transporter family and a bacterial hprk/p . three regions in the two protein sequences are involved in the structural match: their location in the respective sequences is 1-2- <dig> versus 3-1- <dig>  this is compatible with a circular permutation in one of the protein families. but in one of the regions  the residues are located in inverse order in the two sequences, therefore suggesting that a case of convergent evolution has occurred.

interestingly, a structural core composed of  <dig> beta filaments and one helix is conserved in the two structures , but two of the beta filaments are oriented in opposite directions. this finding can be relevant both for a better understanding of structure-function relationships and for medical significance, since members of the abc transporter family are involved in several human diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, muscular distrophy, adrenoleukodystrophy, stargardt disease and others. this analogy might help in suggesting experimental strategies to devise new classes of inhibitors, peptides or compounds.

