BACKGROUND
malaria is one of the most prevalent disease in the world, infecting  <dig> million people every year, and causing  <dig>  million deaths, mainly children under  <dig> years  <cit> . plasmodium falciparum, the main causative agent of this parasitic disease, develops drug resistance and no effective vaccine is available. of the  <dig>  <dig> coding genes of p. falciparum , about 60% do not have sufficient similarity to proteins in other organisms to warrant provision of functional assignments. thus, almost two-thirds of the proteins appear to be specific to p. falciparum, a much higher proportion than observed in other enkaryotes  <cit> . however, this is likely exacerbated by the high evolutionary distance between p. falciparum and other sequenced eukaryotes, so homology detection is a hard task. because of the extreme at bias , the high amino acid bias  and the presence of a large number of low complexity repeat regions that are believed to form non-globular segments  <cit> , standard sequence comparison methods based on blast  <cit>  or hmmer  <cit>  could be ineffective  <cit> . non-homology methods are thus needed to obtain functional clues for these uncharacterized genes  <cit> .

methods based on post-genomic data  have been proposed. these are commonly called guilt by association  methods. contrary to sequence homology which involves inter-species annotation transfers, i.e. genes characterized in other species are used to annotate genes of the newly sequenced genome, gba approaches involve intra-species annotation transfers: the genes already characterized in the genome, e.g. by wet experiments or using sequence homology, are used for the annotation of the other genes . gene expression data are often used, since genes with similar transcriptomic profiles likely share common functional roles  <cit> . in the same way, protein interaction data are also used since proteins that share common interactors likely share common functions  <cit> . these methods provide functional predictions for the uncharacterized genes, and new clues to be compared with the predictions achieved by homology.

part of these new post-genomic methods work in a non-supervised way: first a gene clustering algorithm is run on the post-genomic data to cluster the genes into several groups. then, in each cluster and for each potential function, a statistical test is applied to compare the proportion of genes annotated with this function in the cluster with that in the complete set of genes. functions that appear to be over-represented in one cluster are used to annotate the uncharacterized genes that belong to this cluster. several genome-scale studies have been conducted using this principle, e.g.  <cit> .

some other gba methods work in a supervised way: first, based on the post-genomic data of already characterized genes, a supervised learning algorithm is run to learn a predictor, i.e. a function that takes post-genomic measurements of a given gene as input, and outputs one or several functional predictions for that gene. this predictor is then used to annotate the uncharacterized genes. typical examples of this approach are, e.g.  <cit> . zhou et al.  <cit>  presented opi, a supervised method that predicts gene ontology annotations using gene expression profiles and was applied on p. falciparum. alternative methods work in a semi-supervised way  <cit> ; these use gene clustering as in the non-supervised approach, but clustering is not fully unsupervised as the function of the already characterized genes is used to define the clusters.

in this paper, we present plasmodraft , a database of gene ontology  annotation predictions for p. falciparum achieved by applying a gba predictor named gonna  on several transcriptome , proteome  and protein-protein interaction data. the gonna system involves:  a supervised k-nearest-neighbor predictor that proposes predictions on the basis of each data source;  a cross-validation procedure that estimates the confidence of the predictions achieved with each data source;  a procedure that combines the results achieved with the different data sources to estimate a global confidence value of each prediction for each gene. the plasmodraft database provides all of these predictions along with their confidence values in a friendly interface that allows easy browsing and querying.

methods
gonna proposes annotation predictions in the go framework. the go consortium  has developed a systematic and standardized nomenclature to annotate genes in terms of their associated biological processes , cellular components  and molecular functions , in a species-independent manner. each ontology describes generalization relationships between hundreds of terms. the most general term is at the top of the ontology, while the bottom terms are the most specific ones. a gene may be annotated with several go terms of the same ontology. moreover, due to the generalization relationship, when a gene is annotated with a term t, then it is also annotated with all upper terms that generalize t . in plasmodraft, the specificity of a term is evaluated by its prior probability, i.e. the proportion of already characterized genes of p. falciparum that belong to this term. in this way, the leaves of the ontologies are the most specific terms with low prior probabilities, while the root of the ontology is the most common term with a prior probability of  <dig>  gonna uses the go annotations available on plasmodb and provided by genedb as prior knowledge database to propose new annotations. the go consortium distinguishes between curator-assigned annotations and automatically-assigned annotations. curator-assigned annotations involve annotations that come from experimental data , or that have been inferred by sequence similarity and curated by an expert . automatically-assigned annotations involve all electronically inferred annotations  that have not been reviewed by an expert . here, due to the scarcity of the curator-assigned annotations for p. falciparum , all available go annotations are considered, without regard to their evidence code . every gene with an annotation in the considered ontology  is then referred as "characterized".

the predictor
gonna uses a k-nearest neighbor approach  <cit> . it takes as input two positive integers k and k' ≤ k , one ontology , and one postgenomic data source d . with this data source, gonna computes a function sd that measures the similarity sd  of every gene pair . for example, if d is a transcriptomic data set then sd measures the similarity of profiles using the pearson correlation coefficient. when asked for the go categories of a gene g, gonna uses the sd function to search for the k genes already characterized in the selected ontology by genedb, which have the highest level of similarity with g. then, for each go term t of the ontology, gonna looks at these k genes, and if at least k' are associated with t, then g is predicted to be also associated with t; otherwise g is not considered to be in t. note that when looking at the terms associated with the neighbor genes, gonna considers all the upper terms generalizing the direct annotations .

some choices are critical to insure that gonna provides relevant and accurate predictions. the first critical choice is related to the similarity measure, which has to capture the "signature" of the gene functions in the data set at hand. when two genes appear to be similar, this should imply that they share common functions. for transcriptomic  and proteomic  data, we use the pearson correlation coefficient that gives high similarity to genes with correlated transcriptomic/proteomic profiles. other similarity measures, as the classical euclidean metric, could be possible, but the pearson correlation measure has been shown to perform well to detect functional links in several analyses  <cit> . for the protein-protein interaction data, we use the czekanovski-dice metric  <cit> , which gives high similarity to pairs of genes that share many interactors, and has been shown to perform well to predict biological functions  <cit> .

another critical choice is related to the k and k' values. k should be neither too large  nor too low . with k' the problem is different. if k' is high , then the proportion of good predictions is likely to be high, but only a few predictions could be achieved on the most specific terms of the ontology, and most of the predictions would involve the most general  terms. conversely, if k' is low, then the proportion of good predictions declines, but more predictions are made on the most specific terms. in plasmodraft, we use two pairs of parameters  for each postgenomic data source: one stringent pair  is used to achieve, for each go term, a first set of predictions that usually has a high proportion of good predictions . next, a second, non-stringent pair  is used to come up with, for each go term, another set of predictions that cannot be achieved with the stringent setting, but which usually contains a lower proportion of good predictions.

this k-nearest neighbor predictor has several appealing features. it is a direct and simple implementation of the gba principle, which allows the predictions to be explained by exhibiting the k' genes annotated by genedb that support each prediction . in fact, gonna uses a basic principle similar to gene expression mining tools as g:profiler  <cit> , which help users to make their own predictions. these tools search for genes with expression profile correlated with that of the studied gene, look for go terms enriched in the neighboring gene list, and then predict the selected go terms for the studied gene. gonna can thus be viewed as a systematic and automatic implementation of this natural principle, combined with confidence estimation and data source aggregation . moreover, gonna can be used with any present and future postgenomic data source, as long as there is a relevant similarity measure. next. gonna is consistent with the structure of the ontology. this important property means that if any gene is predicted in a go term t, then it must be predicted in all terms that generalize t. finally, gonna has low computing time, which enables intensive use of the cross-validation procedure to assess the confidence of the predictions.

assessing the predictions
cross-validation  is a well known procedure to estimate the error rate of supervised classification methods  <cit> . the leave-one-out version of cv, which we use here, involves:  running gonna on each gene already characterized in genedb as if it were an uncharacterized gene, and  comparing the predictions to the true annotations. since no functional information on this gene is supplied to gonna for the predictions, this procedure provides an unbiased estimate of the method performance  <cit> . for a given go term t, the correct predictions in cv involve the genes predicted in t, which are already annotated by this term in genedb ; the wrong predictions involve the genes predicted in t which are already annotated in the ontology under consideration  but not with t . genes without any annotation in the selected ontology are not taken into account. it is convenient to present all of these quantities in tabular form . for example, pa denotes the number of genes predicted in the go term t which are annotated with t in genedb, while nn denotes the number of genes not annotated with t which have not been predicted in t in cv. then, the true discovery rate  associated with this go term  is estimated by

  tdr = pa/. 

for example, a go term with a tdr of 80% means that when gonna predicts that a gene belongs to this term, this prediction has 80% chance of being correct. note that due to the incompleteness of the annotations, the above formula may be a conservative estimate of the tdr, because some predictions considered as wrong may actually be correct. moreover, when the sample size  is low. this tdr estimate may not be fully accurate. so, we also compute the p-value of achieving by chance pa or more correct predictions  if the true tdr were equal to the prior probability of the term. if this p-value is higher than 5%, then the tdr is not considered to be significantly higher than the prior probability. plasmodraft reports the tdrs of the predictions with a color code that ranges from red  to light green  via yellow , while non-significant tdrs appear in gray . as described above, two sets of predictions are achieved for each go term and data source using two parameters k'. therefore, one tdr is estimated for each of these sets: the first tdr reports the accuracy of the predictions achieved with the stringent predictor, while the second tdr reports the accuracy of the predictions achieved with the non-stringent predictor but which are not supported by the stringent one. as expected, the first tdr is usually higher than the second one. when neither the stringent predictor nor the non-stringent one apply, the gene is said to be "non predicted in t".

pa and pn denote the number of genes predicted in the go term t which are, and are not, annotated with t in genedb, respectively. na and nn denote the number of genes not predicted in t which are. and are not, annotated with t, respectively.

the advantage of estimating the tdr of each go term rather than estimating a global performance on the whole ontology is that it allows to differentiate go terms that appear well suited for applying a gba approach with the considered data source. indeed, all go terms cannot be predicted with the same accuracy. first because some terms are more general than others . but also because some functions  have a more apparent signature than others in the considered data source. for example, while they have a similar prior probability , go terms antigenic variation  and post-translational protein modification  get 90% and 15% tdrs with the microarray data of  <cit> , respectively.

combining the data sources
when each data source has been used to produce predictions, and tdrs have been estimated for each go term and each source, gonna combines all of these results to propose a global degree of belief  for each prediction. if gene g has been predicted to be associated with go term t by one or several sources, gonna computes the gdb of this prediction in the following way. let  <dig> ..., n and n +  <dig> ..., m denote the data sources that support, and do no support, the prediction of g in t, respectively. we use the notation di and ¬dj to indicate that data sources i and j support and do not support the prediction of g in t, respectively. we first compute a global confidence score that is a rough estimate of the probability that the prediction is correct, given that it is supported by data sources  <dig> ..., n but not by data sources n +  <dig> ..., m. using bayes theorem, this probability can be written as

 p=p×pp. 

p is the prior probability of term t . p is the probability that data sources  <dig> ..., n and data sources n +  <dig> ..., m support and do not support the prediction of g in t when g belongs to t, respectively. we use the conditional independence assumption  <cit>  to estimate this latter term and the probability p:

 p≃p×⋯×p×     p×⋯×p, 

 p≃p×⋯×p×     p×⋯×p, 

and

 p=pp+     pp. 

terms p, p, p, and p are estimated with the quantities computed in the cv and displayed in table  <dig>  for example, p is the probability that data source i supports t when the gene belongs to t; it is estimated by the ratio pa/. p is the probability that data source i does not support t when the gene does not belongs to t; it is estimated with nn/.

thus, from the three above equations, the conditional probability of t can be roughly estimated and it constitutes our global confidence score. this score reflects the likelihood of the predictions: genes with high  confidence scores are more likely to be associated with t than genes with low  confidence scores. however, due to the independence assumption, this score cannot be interpreted as the probability of t. hence, it is discretized in  <dig> score categories . the true discovery rate associated with each category is estimated by way of a last cross-validation procedure: this is done by computing the proportion of successes among already characterized genes that have been predicted in the considered go term with a confidence score in this category. these cross-validated true discovery rates then represent our gdb. for example, a prediction associated with a gdb of 80% means that 80% of the predictions belonging to the same score category in this go term are correct in the cv procedure. as for the tdrs, we also compute the p-value of the gdbs. if this p-value is higher than 5%, then the gdb is not considered to be significantly higher than the prior probability of the term, and it appears in gray in plasmodraft.

the discretization procedure we use, sometimes known as the equal interval width method, could be replaced by other methods, such as the equal frequency interval method or more sophisticated methods based on entropy minimization  <cit> . however, it is a classical and simple method that has shown to give good performance on numerous data sets  <cit> .

the independence assumption is often used in statistical machine learning, and forms the basis of the "naive bayes" predictor, which was shown to be fairly accurate in a number of applications  <cit> . one interesting feature of this predictor  is that it is not much affected by irrelevant or poor quality data sources  <cit> . indeed, when a source i is not relevant for a specific go term t, either because it has not been designed for screening this type of information or because of the poor quality of the data, terms p and p tend to be equal. therefore, the numerical quantities related to this data source tend to cancel in the numerator and denominator pairs of the confidence score. this prevents the gdb from pollution by irrelevant or too noisy data sources.

RESULTS
data
to produce the plasmodraft database, gonna has been applied to most publicly available postgenomic data sources we were aware.  <dig> transcriptomic ,  <dig> proteomic , and  <dig> protein-protein interaction data sets were used. below is a short description of each data set, indexed by the name used in plasmodraft.

• le03: le roch et al.  data set  <cit> . a transcriptomic data set that covers  <dig> stages of the entire cycle of strain 3d7:  <dig> asexual intraerythrocytic stages, plus the merozoite, gametocyte, and salivary gland sporozoite stages. measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• yo3d7: young et al.  data set  <cit> . a transcriptomic data set that covers the sexual developmental cycle  of strain 3d <dig>  measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• yonf54: young et al.  data set  <cit> . same data set as y03d <dig>  for strain nf <dig> 

• llhb3: llinas et al.  data set  <cit> . a transcriptomic data set that covers  <dig> h of the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle of strain hb <dig>  measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• lldd2: llinas et al.  data set  <cit> . same data set as llhb <dig>  for strain dd <dig> 

• ll3d7: llinas et al.  data set  <cit> . same data set as llhb <dig>  for strain 3d <dig> 

• da06: dahl et al.  data set  <cit> . a transcriptomic data set that covers two  <dig> h life cycles of doxycyclin treated parasites. measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• sh07: shock et al.  data set  <cit> . a transcriptomic data set analysing mrna decay during the intraerythrocytic developmental cycle. measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• le07: a transcriptomic data set analysing the parasite response to choline analog t <dig> during the intraerythrocytic life cycle. see series gse <dig> in the ncbi gene expression omnibus . measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• le04: le roch et al.  data set  <cit> . a proteomic data set that covers  <dig> stages of the entire cycle of strain 3d7: the ring, trophozoite, schizont, merozoite, gametocyte, gamete, and salivary gland sporozoite stages. measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

• la05: lacount et al.  data set  <cit> . a protein-protein interaction data set. measurements for ~ <dig>  <dig> genes.

the gene ontology file  and the gene annotations file  were downloaded from the go website.

accessing the database
users can access the predictions by browsing the database or querying for a specific gene, go term, or keyword. results are displayed using three types of views: a global view, a gene view, and a go term view. in each view, tdrs and gdbs are represented with a color code that ranges from red  to light green  via yellow ; non-significant tdrs or gdbs  are in gray.

the global views
there is one global view for each gene ontology . a global view  shows all go terms of the selected ontology where predictions are made. these are represented in a hierarchical way which respects the ontology structure. each term is followed by its prior probability, the best gdb found for a gene predicted in this term, and the best tdr associated with each data source for this term.

the go term view
the go term views show all genes that are predicted in any given term by gonna . two views are available for each go term: one for uncharacterized genes that have no annotation in genedb for the ontology at hand, and the other one for genes that are already annotated in this ontology in genedb . for the latter, a '+' symbol after the gene name indicates that the gene is already annotated by the term. additional information about predictions is provided by clicking on a specific tdr. this opens a new window presenting the k genes that support, or do not support, the prediction for the corresponding data source, along with their associated profiles . a link towards the amigo website  allows the user to quickly retrieve additional information on this term.

the gene view
the gene view displays the different go terms that are predicted for each gene by gonna. these terms are shown in a hierarchical way which follows the ontology structure . there are three gene views for each gene, which correspond to the three go ontologies. each term is followed by its prior probability, the gdb of the prediction, and the tdrs associated with all data sources that support it. moreover, for genes that already possess genedb annotations in the selected ontology, a ' + ' symbol after the term name indicates that this term already annotates this gene in genedb. as for the term view, clicking on a specific tdr opens a new window that provides additional information about the corresponding prediction. a link to plasmodb allows the user to quickly retrieve additional information on this gene. note that tdrs and gdbs associated with the terms usually increase when scrolling toward the top of the ontology, because the prior probabilities of the terms increase. however, they may also decrease sometimes: if a go term t is a generalization of one term t' with a good postgenomic signature  and one term t" with a poor signature , genes predicted in t" may have an unfavorable impact on the tdr estimation of t which may be lower than that of t'.

discussion
annotation quality
quantity and quality of the available annotations used in the prior knowledge database to generate the predictions is a key point of any gba approach. for p. falciparum, both quantity and quality are questionable. for example, in the bp ontology, of the  <dig> genes  possessing annotations, only  <dig>  have annotations with experimental evidence; annotations of the  <dig> remaining genes come from sequence similarity with proteins of other organisms , and for  <dig> genes  these annotations have iea code, indicating that they have not been reviewed by a curator. moreover, of the  <dig> different bp go terms associated with the p. falciparum genes when considering all annotations,  <dig>  are associated with iea annotations only. for example, all annotations involving bp go terms atp biosynthetic process , immune response  or methylation , as well as their descendants terms, possess iea code only. hence, we decided to consider all available go annotations when generating the plasmodraft database. removing all non-curated annotations from the prior knowledge database would eliminate not only numerous characterized genes, but also numerous go terms, which would render impossible any new prediction in these parts of the ontology.

experiments on a well annotated organism
in these conditions, it was relevant to check the method on a well annotated organism, using only experimental evidence code annotations as input for the predictions and for estimating the tdrs. to this end, we applied gonna on the transcriptomic data set published by spellman et al.   <cit> , which monitors the expression level of yeast genes along the cell cycle. the same parameters as for p. falciparum were used, i.e. neighbor genes were selected using the pearson correlation coefficient and we used two sets of parameters :  and . all annotations different from iea, iss and rca were used , which involves  <dig>  <dig> genes characterized in the bp ontology, and a total of  <dig>  <dig> different go terms. the tdrs were estimated for each go term by cross-validation. figure  <dig> represents the tdrs associated with all bp go terms where predictions are proposed by gonna, as a function of the prior probability of the terms. we see that for numerous terms, predictions are made with a tdr significantly higher than the prior probability of the term, which shows the potential of the approach to decipher biological functions from gene expression data. for comparison purpose, the same experiment was achieved on p. falciparum with the time series of bozdech et al.   <cit>  using all available bp annotations . while, as expected, the number of go terms where predictions are made is lower than for yeast, numerous go terms are also predicted with high tdrs. though the reliability of these predictions could depends on the prior  annotations, the similarity of figures  <dig> and  <dig> is quite encouraging and shows that p. falciparum annotations are globally consistent, as they are mostly recovered using a transcriptomic data set.

contents of the database
by browsing the plasmodraft database, several predictions clearly involve rare go terms  with high tdrs or gdbs. for example, in the bp ontology,  <dig> uncharacterized genes are predicted in establishment of localization  ,  <dig> uncharacterized genes are predicted in rosetting  , and  <dig> uncharacterized genes are in pathogenesis  . similarly ,  <dig> uncharacterized genes are predicted in ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process  , and  <dig> uncharacterized genes are in biopolymer catabolic process  . moreover the best tdrs are not always achieved with the same data source. for example, for the antigenic variation  term, the le <dig> data  <cit>  provides more accurate predictions than the llhb3/lldd2/l13d <dig> series  <cit> , may be because this function has a more apparent expression signature when considering the entire life cycle of the organism. for functions such as dna packaging  however, the highest tdr is achieved with the llhb <dig> data set  <cit>  because the function is better monitored at the cell cycle level.

we estimated the amount of new information provided by plasmodraft in a systematic way. for the bp ontology, plasmodraft proposes significant annotations on go terms of low prior probability  for  <dig>  <dig> genes, among which  <dig>  <dig> have no bp annotations in genedb. with cc and mf ontologies,  <dig>  <dig> and  <dig>  <dig> uncharacterized genes are annotated by plasmodraft on low prior probability go terms, respectively. the interest of these annotations of course depends on the associated gdb. thus, given a gdb threshold  and an ontology, for each uncharacterized gene in this ontology we searched the go term with the lowest prior probability wherein the gene is predicted with a statistically significant gdb above the threshold. figure  <dig> summarizes these results on the three ontologies. from this figure we see, for example, that for the bp ontology  <dig> uncharacterized genes in genedb are predicted with a gdb above 75%  on a go term with a prior probability below  <dig> . in the same manner,  <dig>  <dig> uncharacterized genes are predicted with a gdb above 50%  on a go term with a prior probability below  <dig> . for the cc and mf ontologies,  <dig> and  <dig> genes are predicted with a gdb above 50% on a go term with a prior probability below  <dig> , respectively. note that only genes without any annotation in genedb in the selected ontology are considered in this measure, while the plasmodraft database also provides additional annotations for many genes that are already annotated in this ontology. by comparing the results achieved on the different ontologies, we see that the bp ontology provides the best results. this is not surprising, as the signature detected in the postgenomic data by gba methods are mostly characteristic of biological processes  <cit> . however, by an information propagation phenomenon, the bp signatures may sometimes help for predicting annotations in the two other ontologies. this happens, for example, when many genes with a given molecular function  are involved in a biological process with a strong signature. for example. go term host cell plasma membrane  in the cc ontology is associated with high gdb , because most genes belonging to this term are also associated with the biological process defense response  which is well recognized.

a similar approach can be used to estimate the amount of new information provided by each data source independently. for example, figure  <dig> reports the number of uncharacterized genes in the bp ontology that can be annotated with a tdr above 75%, 50% and 25% by the transcriptomic data of bozdech et al.   <cit> , and by the interactomic data of lacount et al.   <cit> . we can see that more than  <dig> genes are associated with a go term of prior probability below 10% with a tdr above 50% using the transcriptomic data, while  <dig> genes only are predicted with the same thresholds using interactomic data. this indicates that the interactome tends to provide less functional signal than the transcriptome, partly because less genes are monitored.

assessment of the gdbs
tdrs and gdbs are estimated by cross-validation by applying gonna on the already characterized genes. this procedure produces unbiased estimates of the method accuracy, provided that the uncharacterized genes share approximately the same distribution as the characterized ones  <cit> . however, since tdrs and gdbs are sometimes estimated on small numbers of predictions, users should be aware that for some specific go terms, the accuracy on the uncharacterized genes may differ from the reported tdrs and gdbs. nonetheless, these measures provide valuable indications on the potential functions of genes by pointing out the most likely go terms. to assess this point, we compared the plasmodraft predictions proposed for the uncharacterized genes to the annotations of their homologous genes in yeast when these are known. we looked on the  <dig> genes without bp annotations that have been predicted with high gdb  on specific bp terms . as expected, few genes among these  <dig> can be associated with a characterized orthologous gene in s. cerevisiae. however, a reciprocal best hit procedure using blastp with an e-value cutoff of 10- <dig> allows to find s. cerevisiae orthologues for  <dig> genes. among these  <dig> orthologous pairs,  <dig>  have "concordant" annotations with the high gdb predictions. here we consider that annotations are concordant if at least half of the terms with prior probability below 25% are shared by the s. cerevisiae orthologue. as expected, this proportion decreases when using plasmodraft predictions with lower gdbs. for example,  <dig>  <dig> genes without bp annotations are predicted with a gdb between 25% and 50% on a go term with prior probability below 25%. among these,  <dig> can be associated with s. cerevisiae orthologues by reciprocal best hit, and  <dig>  have concordant annotations.

comparison with the predictions of zhou et al.   <cit> 
during the writing of this article, another database  <cit>  of gene function predictions based on the opi method described in reference  <cit>  was published. briefly, opi is a supervised method that works as follows. for each go term, opi uses a set of "seed" genes already annotated with this term to construct an average expression profile. next, all genes  are ranked according to their similarity to this average profile and a statistical test is used to identify the rank cutoff that includes the largest number of seed genes within the smallest cluster size. all genes before this cutoff are then considered as potentially related to the go term under consideration. the database  <cit>  exploits a single new transcriptomic data set covering all life cycle stages of the parasite and combining gene expressions from both p. yoelii and p. falciparum. as both the methods and data sources are different, this database and plasmodraft provide different and complementary information. opi provides bp annotations for  <dig>  <dig> different genes, among which  <dig>  <dig> have no bp annotations in genedb. when looking at the plasmodraft predictions with gdb above 50% , only  <dig> also have bp predictions in opi. however, when both methods propose bp predictions for a gene, the predictions are often similar. indeed, of the  <dig> common genes,  <dig> have concordant predictions – i.e. at least half of the predictions of one of the methods involving terms with a prior probability below 25% are also predicted by the other method. differences in specificity of opi and plasmodraft can also be observed by comparing the gdb and fdr  estimates associated with a given go term by plasmodraft and opi, respectively. recall that the gdb is actually the tdr associated with the predictor that combines all data sources. moreover, by definition, the fdr equals  <dig> minus the tdr on this term. while fdrs of opi are not estimated by cross-validation, we can nevertheless get a rough idea of which method provides the best results for a given go term. for example, opi obtains the highest tdrs on terms like entry into host , or mitochodrion organization and biogenesis  , while for terms like interaction between organisms  or rosetting , plasmodraft obtains the best results . on the whole, it thus appears that the two databases use quite different data sources and provide interesting information on different types of functions and different genes, so the community will likely benefit from both.

CONCLUSIONS
we presented plasmodraft, an extensive database of go annotation predictions that are achieved by guilt by association using most postgenomic data available to date for p. falciparum. all predictions come with a confidence estimate computed by cross-validation. the database is presented in a friendly interface that allows easy browsing and querying, and proposes high confidence annotations for several hundreds of genes without any annotations, as well as additional annotations for many already characterized genes. one prospect is the integration of compendiums of gene expression data sets as new data sources in plasmodraft. these data, obtained by concatenation of several data sets of diversified biological conditions, have shown to often provide strong biological function signatures  <cit> . however, predictions based on these data may be difficult to interpret for biologists, and their integration opens new issues in data selection and combination.

as mentioned in the methods, one advantage of gonna concerns its genericness that allows its use on any new data, as long as a relevant similarity measure can be computed; a set of scripts then enables regeneration of the database to integrate the new data set in a fully automated way. this also holds for the go annotations used as prior knowledge, and the new annotations provided by the community in the future will be easily integrated. most notably, we are aware that a collegiate effort for re-annotating p. falciparum proteins should provide new/curated functional annotations in the near future. this should improve both the quantity and the quality of the plasmodraft predictions. in the same way, while in the current version of plasmodraft all go annotations are considered  due to the scarcity of curated annotations, it is possible that the re-annotation effort will enable the use of only curator-assigned annotations in the subsequent versions of plasmodraft. thanks to these new advances, plasmodraft should become more and more accurate and useful to the community.

availability and requirements
plasmodraft is freely available at 

authors' contributions
lb conceived, designed and implemented the method, carried out the analyses, designed the database and drafted the manuscript. jfd designed and developed the database. og initiated the project, designed the method, participated in the analyses, designed the database and revised the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

