BACKGROUND
while most genes are expressed from both the paternally and maternally derived allele, imprinted loci show parent-of-origin-dependent gene expression such that either the paternal or the maternal allele only is expressed  <cit> . this monoallelic pattern of gene expression is usually caused by differential methylation of the paternal and maternal allele  <cit>  and results in phenotypic differences between the two heterozygotes  at a given locus  <cit> . since the discovery of genomic imprinting over twenty years ago  <cit> , to date over  <dig> imprinted genes and their associated phenotypic effects have been identified and described in mice . many imprinted genes have been shown to directly or indirectly affect resource transfer between mother and offspring  <cit>  and thus individual development and growth. the traits affected by genomic imprinting are widespread and are found predominantly in mammalian systems, suggesting that imprinting has evolved for different reasons at different loci, or may be maintained by selection because it serves different functions at different stages in development and in different tissues  <cit> . among traits affected by imprinting are weight-related  <cit>  and body composition traits  <cit>  cognitive abilities  <cit>  and associated disorders , and obesity  <cit> , highlighting the impact of epigenetic sources to variation in complex traits.

sex-dependent genetic effects
previous research has demonstrated that patterns of genetic variation such as additive and dominance effects  of loci can show considerable differences depending on the sex of the individual  <cit> . such sex-dependent genetic effects have been reported for a number of different traits, including blood pressure  <cit> , longevity in humans  <cit>  and drosophila  <cit> , bodyweight  <cit> , and morphology in mice  <cit> , and various disease-related traits in humans  <cit> . however, we are not aware of any study that has explored whether autosomal sex-specific genomic imprinting effects exist, although sex-dependent imprinting effects have been suggested for the x chromosome  <cit>  as a potential explanation for disorders such as turner syndrome and autism  <cit> . thus, we currently know very little about the likelihood and patterns of differences in imprinting effects in males and females.

evolutionary and genetic significance of sex-dependent imprinting effects
sex-dependent imprinting effects are of interest both from a genetic and an evolutionary perspective. for example, analyses of sex-dependent imprinting effects might reveal loci that either show imprinting in only one sex but bi-parental expression of alleles in the other sex. alternatively, loci could be imprinted in both sexes but show different patterns of imprinting . such loci would suggest flexibility in expression patterns and possibly the underlying imprinting mechanism that may not be expected from current models of imprinting. it is also possible that some loci might show sex-dependent imprinting because they exhibit strictly sex-limited expression, where expression is limited to either males or females. given that the sexes across taxa often differ considerably but are virtually genetically identical except for the sex chromosomes, sex-dependent gene expression has been predicted to be a relatively common phenomenon and its existence has been demonstrated in a number of different systems  <cit> . therefore, we may expect a priori that some imprinted loci would show sex-dependent expression.

from an evolutionary perspective, sex-dependent imprinting effects are of particular interest because theory predicts the existence of such differences in imprinting between the two sexes  <cit>  when selection acts differentially on traits expressed in males versus females . specifically, day and bonduriansky  <cit>  predict silencing of the allele derived from the sex that does not experience selection. for example if males are under selection for increased body size but females are not, loci affecting body size are predicted to show paternal expression in males. moreover, sex-dependent imprinting effects might act in same manner as has been suggested for sex-dependent genetic effects  to help maintain genetic variation because selection may favour alternative alleles or imprinting patterns in males and females.

aims
in this study, we set out to explore whether sex-dependent imprinting effects on complex traits exist in mice by investigating sex differences in the imprinting effects of quantitative trait loci  in males and females. we characterize the phenotypic patterns caused by genomic imprinting in males and females separately and also determine whether such loci exhibit sex-specific additive or dominance effects. furthermore, we estimate the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by sex-dependent imprinting effects. results demonstrate that genomic imprinting effects can be different between the sexes and reveal the existence of  <dig> qtl with such patterns located on  <dig> autosomal chromosomes.

RESULTS
overall, we detected a total of  <dig> qtl on  <dig> chromosomes affecting both body and organ weight measures that showed a significant interaction of sex and genomic imprinting effect . for all qtl, we confirmed that these sex interactions were true genomic imprinting effects rather than maternal genetic effects .

nine of the ten measured weekly bodyweights were affected by an interaction between sex and imprinting as was postweaning growth . in addition, the qtl exhibiting sex-dependent imprinting effects also significantly affected reproductive fatpad, spleen, kidney, heart and liver weights . two loci  were found to affect all weight traits except for week  <dig> and week  <dig> weight, whereas six other sbiqtl affected between one and seven weight traits each. four sbiqtl influencing organ weights, by contrast, showed an effect on only one specific trait. focusing on the traits themselves, we found that week  <dig> body weight was modulated by the highest number of sbiqtl  followed by week  <dig> weight . organ weights were generally affected by fewer sbiqtl. while liver weight was affected by two sbiqtl, all other organ traits were found to be influenced by three loci.

sex-dependent genomic imprinting effects
for most loci, the interaction effect was due to the imprinting effect occurring in one sex only. at three loci, the imprinting effect was restricted to females for all affected traits and in five other loci this effect was found in males only. for example, sbi <dig>  showed a bipolar imprinting pattern in males but has no imprinting effect in females  whereas at sbi <dig>  no imprinting effect occurred in males but only in females with a paternal expression pattern . at several loci, no significant imprinting effect in either sex was found for some or all traits despite the fact that the locus shows a significant interaction effect . in these cases, the estimated imprinting effects are opposite in sign to each other in the two sexes but not strong enough in either sex to be significant. sbi <dig>  showed a somewhat different pattern where the imprinting effect occurred in both sexes for separate traits. while the sex by imprinting interaction effect was very strong for many traits for this locus , the imprinting effects in the separate sexes were often only marginally significant.

interestingly, the fact that an imprinting effect occured in one sex only is not necessarily due to the overall inactivity of the locus in the other sex . rather, at four loci that do not show an imprinting effect in males, we found a significant additive or dominance effect in males . the reverse was found in females only at two loci. another indication that overall sex-specific expression of the locus does not sufficiently explain the occurrence of sex-dependent imprinting effects is given by the fact that three loci displayed a significant main additive effect in both sexes but the imprinting effect was restricted to either males or females.

imprinting patterns and variance explained
the imprinting patterns found at a locus can generally be classified into three canonical categories , parental expression , bipolar dominance and polar over- or underdominance  <cit> , depending on the pattern of variation among the four ordered genotypes at a locus . parental expression occurs when the genotypes sharing the same allele inherited from the same parent have the same phenotype. for example, with paternal expression, individuals that inherited the same paternal allele show the same average phenotype. bipolar dominance is defined as the pattern when the two heterozygotes are significantly different from each other but the two homozygotes are not, such that the genotypic value of one heterozygote is larger than that of the homozygotes while the other is smaller. finally, polar over- or underdominance is defined by the pattern where one of the two heterozygotes is significantly different from the three other genotypes , which are not significantly different from each other. where imprinting appeared in only one sex, we found paternal and maternal expression, polar under- and overdominance and bipolar expression . among the loci that showed imprinting in males only, four showed paternal expression, three bipolar dominance and one polar overdominance where the sl heterozygote was larger than all other three genotypes. imprinting patterns in females were paternal expression for three loci, and polar over- and underdominance as well as bipolar dominance once each in females.

the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by the imprinting and sex interaction ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % depending on the trait . for example, the interaction at sbi <dig>  accounted for  <dig> % of phenotypic variance of week  <dig> body weight but this value decreased to just  <dig> % for week  <dig> body weight.

discussion
the most important results emerging from our study are firstly that genomic imprinting effects on complex traits can depend on sex and, secondly, that new loci can be found in sex-specific analyses that may escape detection in searches for imprinting effects in the population as a whole. our analysis of sex-dependent imprinting effects on complex traits uncovered a total of  <dig> sbiqtl where often the imprinting effect was restricted to one sex only. comparing the locations of these sbiqtl with previously-detected imprinted qtl, i.e. those that exert a significant main effect on a given trait  <cit> , many qtl found here are novel loci with the exception of sbi <dig>  and those located on the proximal region on chromosome  <dig>  which are within the confidence regions of previously described loci. this is a particularly important result since it suggests the existence of more imprinted loci that would remain undetected if males and females were not differentiated.

imprinting patterns
our study also showed interesting imprinting patterns in the separate sexes. at five loci, imprinting effects were detected in males only while at three loci such effects were found in females only. in the vast majority of cases, the sign of the imprinting effect was opposite in the two sexes at loci in which the imprinting effect occurred in one sex only . overall, the imprinting effect patterns for a given sex were diverse, ranging from parental  expression to bipolar dominance and polar over- or underdominance. we note that when an imprinting effect was limited to one sex only, other genetic effects  may still have an effect in the other sex or in both sexes. this suggests that the overall expression of the locus is not sex-specific but rather that the imprinting effect alone is sex-dependent.

comparison with genetic effects
compared to the occurrence of sex-dependent additive and dominance effects reported in the f <dig> sm/j × lg/j cross  <cit> , sex-dependent imprinting effects were more common for weight and growth traits but each individual locus was found to affect fewer traits. vaughn et al.  <cit>  report five qtl on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> that showed significant sex-specific additive and dominance interactions for  <dig> different weight and growth traits with a total of  <dig> traits affected by all loci . this compares with eight sbiqtl affecting a total of nine weight and growth traits where seven loci affected two or more traits each. of the five loci with sex-dependent additive or dominance effects found by vaughn et al.  <cit> , four had an additive and dominance effect in males and were not expressed in females at all  whereas on chromosome  <dig> there was a male-specific qtl at the proximal part of the chromosome and a female-specific qtl on the distal portion of the chromosome. vaughn et al.'s  <cit>  findings differ from ours in that a locus that does not show an imprinting effect in one sex can still have additive effects in the same sex or even both sexes. this latter result may be somewhat surprising, because it suggests that such loci do not show simple sex-specific expression in the sense that overall expression is restricted to one sex. rather, it appears that the imprinting mechanism is not acting in one sex. perhaps differential methylation at the locus in males and females accounts for this observation, or there may be some trans control of expression that depends on sex.

genome locations of sbiqtl
with the exception of sbi <dig>  the locations of our detected sbiqtl do not map to regions where currently known imprinted genes are located http://www.geneimprint.com, although we note that the confidence intervals of sbi <dig>  and sbi <dig>  are just outside of a large imprinting cluster on chromosome  <dig> and the region containing peg <dig> on chromosome  <dig> . the confidence region for sbi <dig>  on chromosome  <dig> is close to a cluster with several imprinted genes, amongst them paternally expressed gene  <dig>  and sgce  <cit> . in the light of our finding that imprinting effects can be sex-dependent it might be worthwhile to investigate whether known imprinted genes such as the aforementioned show similar effects, perhaps by comparing male and female phenotypes of knock-out mutants separately or by looking for differences in expression levels.

it should be noted that the primary objective of this study was not to find imprinted loci per se  but rather to search specifically for sex by imprinting interaction effects. in a simulation study, luedi et al.  <cit>  predicted a total of  <dig> imprinted genes across the genome. while some congruence of our confidence intervals and the locations of predicted genes might be expected by chance, the loci identified in this study may yield novel candidate gene locations that could be identified in fine mapping or gene expression studies.

the evolution of sex-dependent imprinting effects
one possible mechanism underlying our findings involves the role of modifier loci that regulate the expression of imprinted loci affecting the measured traits. in this scenario, the expression of the modifier locus is sex-specific  is bipolar dominance in males. thus, at present it seems rather more difficult to assess the predictions made using our data, in particular in the absence of clear evidence for differential selection in males and females in the founding lines.

CONCLUSIONS
results of our study showing sex-dependent imprinting have not been previously reported to our knowledge. nonetheless, existing data could be analysed to investigate whether such effects occur in other populations. for example, at the phenotypic level one could compare the growth of male and female individuals carrying a mutation at an imprinted locus  to the growth of the wildtype and explore whether the growth difference is proportionally greater in one sex than the other. it may also be possible to directly compare differences in expression levels of imprinted genes in both sexes in a given tissue.

we furthermore demonstrate that candidate imprinted loci can be found by analysing sex-specific imprinting effects as opposed to pooled data because the sign of effect can be opposite in the two sexes and phenotypic patterns can be different. the latter also has important implications for research on disease-related phenotypes associated with dysfunctional parent-of-origin-dependent effects and future research in this area should consider sex-dependent imprinting effects.

further theoretical studies are required to investigate whether sex-specific imprinting effects can be predicted as a result of asymmetrical fitness effects on patrilineal versus matrilineal relatives as outlined by the currently favoured hypothesis for the evolution of imprinting, the conflict or kinship theory of genomic imprinting  <cit> . in addition, our results should encourage future theoretical work to address the unresolved issue of whether sex-dependent imprinting effects might play a role in the maintenance of genetic variation.

