BACKGROUND
microarray platforms for practical diagnostics have been developed for identification of human/animal- and plant-pathogenic species. these have been primarily designed as taxa-specific chips, and have required extensive knowledge of sufficiently discriminatory genes such as the cytochrome oxidase  <dig>  or the cytochrome b genes for insects and mammals  <cit> ,  <dig> s rdna, rpob, groel or gyrb for bacteria  <cit> , or coat-protein genes for viruses  <cit> . probe selection with adequate specificity to identify organisms at the genus, species, and less frequently subspecies  entails labour- and time-intensive sequencing. substantial effort and resources must be invested to compensate for inherent intra-group genetic variation of diagnostic dna fragments, demanding sequencing of a representative number of individual organisms or isolates in order to detect all potential variations  <cit> . diagnostics in clinical, animal or plant health demand exclusion of a broad-spectrum of unknown but related taxa that are inconsequential for therapeutic or regulatory purposes, while rapidly and sensitively detecting select-agent and/or pathogenic organisms. achieving identification at a high level of taxonomic resolution such as strains and/or pathovars typically requires incorporation of multiple target regions, each of which requires individual design and validation steps  <cit> .

inadequacy of available sequence information for many taxa of interest poses a fundamental problem in probe selection during diagnostic microarray design. a panel of candidate probes must be evaluated by trial-and-error since most do not hybridise as anticipated. even though many probes hybridise to correct target sequences, often hybridisation is weak or produces stronger signals for mismatch targets  <cit> . in gene expression studies using chips carrying oligonucleotide probes that target thousands of genes, this aspecificity phenomenon is usually masked by the massive data output, and thus it has only recently received attention  <cit> . this problem was identified earlier with diagnostic chip analysis since these carry far fewer probes than transcriptomic microarrays. false hybridisations on diagnostic chips result in a lack of specificity and incorrect identifications. hybridisation performance of probes cannot be predicted accurately, therefore, multiple  as opposed to single candidate probes must be designed for each target, each requiring evaluation of specificity 'on-chip', in order to validate performance reliability.

with few exceptions, diagnostic microarrays have thus far been developed for identification of organisms within narrow taxonomic groups  or are limited to a few organisms that can be expected to occur on a single host. our objective in this study was to develop a broad spectrum chip that would facilitate identification of bacteria regardless of taxa and without requiring a priori knowledge of sequence targets, based solely on complete genome hybridisation patterns. the high-density chip we designed incorporates short oligonucleotide probes of random sequence, and requires neither a priori sequence information nor species-specific probe design or and validation. a database comprised of hybridisation type-patterns for reference target organisms is required, as has been established for other 'gold-standard' diagnostic technologies, but no sequencing is needed throughout the entire process. species identification will then be assessed based upon match of their hybridisation pattern with this pre-established taxon-specific database. thus, this strategy does not allow unambiguous identification of taxa not present in the database. our chip carries  <dig>  unique 13-mer probes assembled on-chip by nimblegen® system inc. this large number of small oligomers theoretically enables hybridisation of circa  <dig>  probes per bacterial genome having a few mb genome size. performance and reliability of this chip applied for discrimination of bacteria at the species and strain level is presented.

RESULTS
we set out to develop a genome chip for discrimination of bacteria without prior knowledge of gene targets or specific probe design. our aim was to obtain reproducible hybridisation patterns specific at the deepest possible taxonomic level .

hybridisations were performed at low temperature  which enhanced reproducible probe capture of specific targets, similar to a previous report with a short-oligonucleotide diagnostic microarray for differentiation of xanthomonas citri pathovars  <cit> . although the low hybridisation temperature might increase the number of false positive hybridisation , our results were highly reproducible as demonstrated by high correlation coefficients between replicates . these values range from  <dig>  up to  <dig>  between strain replicates  and were generally lower between different strains/species . this demonstrated that species and even strain dependent hybridisation patterns were obtainable. in fact, there were more hybridised probes observed than expected based on the assumption that hybridisation would occur only on perfect-match probes with small genome organisms such as bacteria. this indicates that hybridisation also occurred with probes containing mismatches.

hybridisation behaviour of perfect-match probes
to assess the hybridisation behaviour of perfect match probes, we studied the e. coli k <dig>  and salmonella lt <dig> strains whose genomes have been sequenced  <cit> . e. coli k <dig> dna  showed a perfect match to  <dig>  probes in blast analysis, and salmonella lt <dig>  to  <dig>  probes. this corresponds to the expected coverage toward bacterial genomes of oligomers with random probe sequence. closer study on the hybridisation behaviour of these genome-specific probe sets showed a broad range from no or low-level hybridisation to saturated hybridisation levels  for either the e. coli k <dig> samples or the salmonella lt <dig> samples. since most of these probes had only one perfect match on their respective genome, there was no bias induced by the frequency of the sequence in the genome on the hybridisation level. unexpectedly, a large number of probes not belonging to the perfect match sets were showing high hybridisation signals. thus, while some targets do not hybridise at all to perfect match probes, others hybridise to mismatch probes. in fact we found that irrespective of the applied background noise level, only 12-17% of all hybridised probes were perfect match probes and the remaining were mismatch probes. for example, using the  <dig>  lowest hybridisation intensity probes that do not occur in the e. coli k <dig> genome as background level, we found  <dig>  e. coli k <dig> perfect match probes with a positive hybridisation signal. the total number of positive hybridisation signals was  <dig>  probes, indicating a large fraction of mismatch hybridisation. however, our results provide strong evidence that mismatch hybridisation was as reproducible as full match hybridisation. for our strategy, mismatch hybridisation therefore delivers the same information content as perfect match hybridisation, and contributes to the discrimination power of the assay.

similar hybridisation results were obtained using the e. coli k <dig> perfect-match probe set with e. coli b, e. coli k <dig>  p. agglomerans, p. vagans and p. stewartii strains, and x. arboricola pathovars, as reflected by high correlation values  and low class prediction percentage of  <dig> % . no discrimination was possible apart from the salmonella dt <dig> and lt <dig>  x. campestris and translucens and m. luteus replicates. stronger hybridisation signals were even obtained with this probe set for strains different from e. coli k <dig>  including the gram-positive strain m. luteus. similar hybridisation results and low class prediction  percentage  were obtained with the salmonella lt <dig> probe set .

hybridisation behaviour of the complete probe set
with the complete probe set, correlation values between samples from the same species  or from the same genera  were sometimes higher than between strain replicates . this was reflected by the low cp percentage of  <dig> % . due to the large number of probes, it was expected that many probes would hybridise across related species which likely explained the high similarity of patterns between close relatives. therefore, species-specific hybridisation patterns should be defined without these aspecific probes.

evaluation of different discriminatory probe sets
taxon-specific hybridisation patterns , were established by entering prior information on group affiliation of the replicate hybridisation experiments into the data analysis software. based on this prior information, we identified discriminatory probes showing similar hybridisation signals between slide replicates but differences between the thirteen species/strains/variants by means of anova performed in genespring gx v <dig> . <dig>  decreasing p-values between  <dig>  and  <dig>  were tested for the anova using the benjamini and hochberg false discovery rate as a multiple testing correction procedure to obtain different probe sets. the use of this correction parameter increases the confidence that the obtained probe sets were selected due to high reproducibility of hybridisation results. best discriminatory probe lists were then determined by cross-validation  with the class prediction analysis tool of genespring gx v <dig> . <dig>  the percentage of correct prediction for the different probe selections ranges from  <dig> -100% . the probe sets obtained were finally used for grouping by cluster analysis based on spearman's rank correlation with average linkage and confidence levels determined by boot-strapping. using the first probe set , the cluster obtained roughly corresponded to the expected hierarchical phylogeny. all enterobacteriacea formed a large cluster from which the replicates of microccocacea m. luteus and xanthomonas pathovars were excluded. the two e. coli strains clustered together, as did the pantoea species. however, one p. stewartii subsp. indologenes grouped together with the p. vagans c9- <dig> samples within the pantoea sub-cluster instead of its respective strain sub-cluster and x. arboricola pv. pruni samples were not discriminated from the x. arboricola pv. juglandis ones . the salmonella strains dt <dig> and lt <dig> did not cluster together  but they clustered within the escherichia group or to the pantoea group, respectively. similar results were obtained with p-values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  , but with the two salmonella strains linked as independent sub-clusters to the pantoea group. correct clustering of each strain was obtained with a p-value of  <dig>   but prediction reached only  <dig> %; only the p. agglomerans strains and variants were not sub-clustering in the expected phylogenetic manner. decreasing the p-value to  <dig>   resulted in 100% correct cp , correct group allocation as shown in figure  <dig> and high correlation coefficients between replicates . similar cp results were obtained with p-values of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  which all had prediction results of 100% ; only the two latter did not show the same clustering performance as the others as x. arboricola pv. juglandis could not be distinguished from x. translucens pv. translucens . the sets obtained with p-values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  correspond to the optimal range for species, strain and variant discrimination for our strain panel as both correct class predictions and cluster representations were obtained. lower performance for discriminating the xanthomonas species were observed when decreasing the significance level to p-value of  <dig>  corresponding to  <dig> probes . hybridisation patterns of the pantoea strains and xanthomonas pathovars were highly similar to each other indicating the limitations of the chip at its current state of development and under the given conditions.

finally, it is important to note that when anova was performed based on random group allocation of taxa, no probe list could be determined that would discriminate these groups. this confirms that, despite the huge number of probes, the observed taxon-specific patterns were obtained because they reflected the underlying genomic sequences rather than just statistical noise.

discussion
we have developed a high-density genome chip and experimental conditions for identification of bacterial pathogens at the species and subspecies level, based on genomic hybridisation patterns. the main advantages of our strategy using a genome chip are that i) no a priori knowledge of the genome is required, ii) the genetic markers cover the entire genome, and iii) due to the large number of probes, the hybridisation patterns and hence the derived taxon identifications are very robust. this strategy could potentially be applied to a broad range of bacterial strains of health or economic interest, and extended to many living organisms. our approach is a modification of a strategy originally developed in our laboratory since  <dig> using many anonymous markers to fingerprint genomes  <cit> . the basic concept of generating many anonymous markers from a genome to produce a specific pattern was conceived in the early  <dig> s and realized in the form of rapd-pcr for species identification  <cit>  and marker search  <cit> . agarose gels were used to detect rapd-pcr amplicons but this technique suffers from lack of reproducibility. with the advent of microarrays it became obvious that attempts should be made to exploit these new tools for fingerprint-based taxon characterisation. eventually, a strategy similar to the one developed at our laboratory with a microarray containing  <dig>  anonymous probes was successfully applied to identify bacterial and other genomes  <cit> . together with the data shown here this supports our conclusion that fingerprint-based species identification is a powerful tool.

observed hybridisation patterns were robust and highly reproducible, and they enabled differentiation at the deepest taxonomic level used in our experiments. for example, we achieved discrimination of strains within the same serovar , of different pathovars within the same species  and at the subspecies level with a strain-variant cured of a single plasmid . grouping of the different species was a close match to phylogenetic expectations. the problematic/non-phylogenetic positioning of salmonella enterica typhimurium strains using our chip may be explained by the genetic diversity observed within this serovar  <cit> , which has recently been considered for differentiating salmonella serovars into genovars  <cit> . however, phylogenetically "incorrect" clustering of strains did not interfere with taxon identification enabled by the determined probe sets with their high class prediction rates .

hybridisation patterns we obtained were not sequence specific sensu stricto . however, the hybridisation patterns were highly reproducible among replicates within the same strain. the off-target hybridisation phenomenon has been recently taken into account with oligonucleotide microarrays used for gene expression studies and can lead to incorrect interpretations of biological issues  <cit> . it is critical for diagnostic chips based on sequence-specific probes to eliminate such non-specific hybridisation. however, in our study, we took advantage of mismatch hybridisations by considering these probes as informative as perfect-match probes provided the results were reproducible between replicate samples.

CONCLUSIONS
this work provides a foundation for building a fingerprint database containing important bacterial species that can be hybridised on this broad spectrum chip. probes that do not give reliable results may eventually be discarded to streamline the chip design. however, sufficient probes have to be retained to ensure sufficient fingerprint polymorphism for other bacterial species to be identified, such as more gram-positives which were only represented by m. luteus in our panel. this should eventually enable selection of a reduced probe set capable of comprehensive species and strain identification. in terms of strain fingerprinting and microbial source tracking, this genome chip offers a potential alternative to current technology based on rflp, microsatellite or mlst approaches  <cit> . starting with low amounts of genomic dna followed by whole genome amplification could overcome problems of cultivation and facilitate the identification process, mostly when starting from unknown material.

