BACKGROUND
fungi exhibit great metabolic flexibility in the diversity of carbon and nitrogen sources they can use. we have been especially interested in their nitrogen sources, most recently urea  <cit> . in a previous study  <cit> , a dichotomy was observed with regard to urea utilization in fungi. hemiascomycetes  possess the urea amidolyase  genes whereas all other fungi examined possess the nickel-containing urease sequences. urea amidolyase is an energy dependent biotin-containing enzyme. it is encoded by the dur <dig>  gene and was first characterized in the yeast candida utilis, now known as pichia jadinii  <cit> . the activity of this enzyme was also detected in green algae such as asterococcus superbus and chlamydomonas reinhardii. urease and urea amidolyase activities were not observed together in the same green algal species; it was either one or the other  <cit> . this cytoplasmic, biotin-dependent enzyme  <cit>  consists of a single polypeptide chain with regions for urea carboxylase  and allophanate hydrolase  activity. two adjacent genes  were originally considered to encode the two enzymes; but later they were renamed as a single gene, dur <dig>   <cit> .

urea amidolyase breaks down urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide in a two-step process, while urease  does this in a one-step process  <cit>  as shown in the following equations:         

there are two forms of urea amidolyase proteins. figure  <dig> shows the domain structure of urea amidolyase and related proteins. a shorter form of urea amidolyase is known as urea carboxylase, and has no amidase domain attached to it. this protein is found in several fungal species  <cit> , green algae  <cit> , and has been also characterized in bacteria  <cit> .

the urea carboxylase protein  is further divided into sub-domains: the biotin-carboxylation domain, allophanate hydrolase subunit  <dig>  domain, allophanate hydrolase subunit  <dig>  domain, and the biotin-lipoyl domain . the function of the ahs <dig> and ahs <dig> domains is still unknown. the biotin-carboxylation domain and the biotin-lipoyl domain of urea carboxylase are commonly found in various other carboxylases including pyruvate carboxylase , methylcrotonoyl-coa carboxylase , acetyl-coa carboxylase , and propionyl-coa carboxylase   <cit> .

in navarathna et al.  <cit> , we suggested that urea amidolyase likely arose before the divergence of the hemiascomycetes and the euascomycetes , c.  <dig> -  <dig> million years ago, by insertion of a gene encoding allophanate hydrolase into a methylcrotonyl coa carboxylase  gene, thus creating dur <dig>  and inactivating mcca. this suggestion was made because of the corresponding dichotomies: the hemiascomycetes have dur <dig>  but do not have mcca whereas the rest of the fungi have both urease and mcca  <cit> . the present paper investigates the evolutionary origin of dur <dig> , the urea amidolyase gene, more thoroughly. we studied the distribution of urea amidolyase, urea carboxylase, and urease proteins in various species across all kingdoms, and biotin-carboxylation domain containing proteins, i.e., acc <dig>  pyc, pcca, and mcca, in various fungal species. contrary to our previous speculation, an ancestral urea amidolyase gene likely arose in bacteria and then appeared in the fungal lineage before the divergence of the subphyla pezizomycotina and saccharomycotina by prokaryote-to-eukaryote horizontal gene transfer. there have been studies indicating such bacteria-to-fungi horizontal transfers . our study adds yet another important example showing evolutionary interplays between bacteria and fungi and how plastic and opportunistic the fungal genome evolution can be.

RESULTS
urea amidolyase is unique to the kingdom fungi among eukaryotes
we have previously shown that long and short forms of urea amidolyase are present in fungi  <cit> . the urea amidolyase protein of the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  is  <dig>  amino acids  long. as shown in figure  <dig>  the first 632-aa region in the n-terminus of the protein consists of the amidase domain. the remainder of the sequence is the urea carboxylase domain, which consists of four smaller sub-domains. as mentioned before, the shorter form of urea amidolyase lacks the amidase domain and the urea carboxylase domain exists as a whole protein. this urea carboxylase sequence  has been identified from a filamentous fungus aspergillus nidulans . using these protein and domain sequences, we first examined if these two forms of urea amidolyase exist in eukaryotes outside of the fungal kingdom.

as shown in table  <dig> , urea amidolyase is absent in non-fungal eukaryotic genomes we examined. blastp similarity search against the ncbi non-redundant  database also showed no sequence similar to urea amidolyase from any other eukaryotic species. however, urea carboxylase and amidase genes are present in all four green algae we examined. in three of the four green algae, the amidase genes are located near the urea carboxylase genes but not adjacent to them. the distance between these two genes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  bp in these green algae . the absence of urea amidolyase gene but the presence of urea carboxylase and amidase genes in c. reinhardtii suggests that the activity of urea amidolyase seen previously in this species  <cit>  is not due to the urea amidolyase protein but the combined activity of urea carboxylase and amidase proteins. although we did not find sequences similar to urea carboxylase from any of the metazoan genomes we examined, similarity search against ncbi nr database turned up two sequences from hydra . one of them, however, was found actually to be a sequence of a putative bacterial symbiont. these hydra sequences are discussed further later. no amidase sequence was found from hydra or any other eukaryotes other than fungi and green algae.

asee additional file  <dig> for the sequence sources.

bsee figure  <dig> for the enzyme name abbreviations. the number of sequences found from each genome is shown. '-' indicates that no similar sequence was found.

cthe amidase gene located close to the urea carboxylase gene  is indicated with +. see additional file  <dig> for the distance between the genes.

dblastp similarity search against the downloaded rice genome showed no sequence similar to urease. however, similarity search against ncbi nr database found a sequence highly similar to urease from oryza sativa.

urease was found in both plant genomes we examined: arabidopsis thaliana  and oryza sativa . similarity search against ncbi nr database also showed a wide distribution of urease in higher plants. while none of the green algal genomes we examined had urease , it was identified in distantly related and more ancestral types of green algae  by searching against ncbi nr database. on the other hand, in metazoa, urease was found only in a limited number of genomes. in addition to nematostella vectensis , only three metazoan urease sequences were found in the ncbi nr database . these observations are not consistent with what we observed earlier in fungi, where all fungi that lack urea amidolyase seemed to possess urease .

distribution of urea amidolyase and other related proteins among fungi
we searched  <dig> fungal genomes for urea amidolyase, urea carboxylase, and amidase. for selected  <dig> fungal genomes, we further searched urease as well as proteins that share the biotin-carboxylation and the biotin-lipoyl domains . these searches were conducted to examine the earlier hypothesis of navarathna et al.  <cit>  that the fungal urea amidolyase may have been formed by the extension of a biotin carboxylation gene that was already present in fungi.

our search results are summarized in table  <dig> and additional file  <dig> . the results are also mapped on the current consensus of the fungal phylogeny  <cit>  in figure  <dig>  among the fungi we examined, only the class sordariomycetes  and the class saccharomycetes  had the urea amidolyase sequences. in one species, yarrowia lipolytica, there were two copies of urea amidolyase. urea carboxylase was found in many but not all of the species in the pezizomycotina while being completely absent from the saccharomycotina. interestingly, except for fusarium graminearum , the species belonging to the order hypocreales  had both the urea carboxylase and the urea amidolyase sequences. many of these species are found in soils and associated with plants  <cit> . dothideomycetes species did not have urea amidolyase, but many contained amidase as well as urea carboxylase sequences. however, the location of these two genes  was not near each other in their genomes. they were located in different scaffolds or supercontigs .

asee additional files  <dig> and  <dig> for the sequence sources.

bthe phylum/subphylum  and class are given.

csee figure  <dig> for the enzyme name abbreviations. the number of sequences found from each genome is shown. '-' indicates that no similar sequence was found.

dthe amidase sequences that are a part of the urea amidolyase sequences are shown in parentheses.

consistent with the earlier observation  <cit> , the urease protein was present in all the fungal species examined except for those of the saccharomycotina. two species  had two copies of this protein. previously only two sordariomycetes species  were observed to possess both of urease and urea amidolyase. we now confirmed that all sordariomycetes species except for n. crassa and closely related species have both of these enzymes.

why do the saccharomycetes species use the energy-dependent, biotin-containing urea amidolyase system and abandon the urease that accomplishes the same overall reaction in a simpler process? this question becomes even more germane when we consider that all strains of c. albicans are biotin auxotrophs  <cit> , and it has long been known that  <dig> to  <dig> times as much biotin is required for maximum growth of s. cerevisiae on urea, allantoic acid, or allantoin as sole nitrogen sources  <cit> . however, the dichotomy in distribution of urease and urea amidolyase among some fungal lineages coincides precisely with that for the ni/co transporter , which is present in those fungi that use urease and absent in those that do not  <cit> . in navarathna et al.  <cit> , we suggested that the selective advantage of using urea amidolyase over using urease is that it allowed the saccharomycetes species to jettison all ni2+ and co2+ dependent metabolisms and thus to have two fewer transition metals whose concentrations need to be regulated. however, while reasonable for the saccharomycetes, such selective advantages may not be great enough to abandon the use of urease particularly in the sordariomycetes species. further investigation is needed to elucidate whether retaining two types of urea degradation enzymes in the sordariomycetes species is in fact selectively advantageous rather than redundant.

we also examined the distribution of biotin-carboxylation domain containing enzymes. acc <dig> and pyc were present in all the fungal species we examined. mcca was absent almost completely from the saccharomycetes and schizosaccharomyces pombe , but was present in the rest of the fungi we examined. pcca was present in fewer species than mcca was, and was completely absent from the classes saccharomycetes and sordariomycetes. mcca was present along with urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase in three species , and along with only urea amidolyase in three other species . a phylogenetic analysis using the biotin-carboxylation domains of pyc, acc <dig>  mcca, pcca, urea amidolyase, and urea carboxylase from fungi showed that these domain sequences were highly diverged. bootstrap analysis did not show any significantly supported clustering of urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase with any of the other four enzymes . urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase appear to have no clear direct origin among the other biotin-carboxylation domain containing proteins. or such divergence may have happened such a long time ago that we can no longer identify the origin.

distribution of urea amidolyase and other related proteins among eubacteria
in order to elucidate further the origin of long and short forms of urea amidolyase found in fungi: whether they share a common evolutionary origin or arose independently, we performed extensive similarity searches using these protein and domain sequences among  <dig> bacterial genomes. as shown in table  <dig> , the longer form of urea amidolyase  was found only in one bacterium, pantoea ananatis . this bacterium, which previously belonged to the genus erwinia but was recently reclassified into the genus pantoea, is a well-known plant pathogen with a reported case of it also being a human-pathogen  <cit> . this bacterium and its related species are usually isolated from soil, fruits, and vegetables  <cit> . urea carboxylase , the shorter form of urea amidolyase, was found in bacterial species scattered among a wide range of groups. almost all bacteria with urea carboxylase also had amidase. these two enzymes are encoded in two different genes in bacteria, but are located next to each other in most of the bacterial genomes we examined . in two species , the two genes were not adjacent to each other but only  <dig> bp and  <dig>  bp apart, respectively, while in another cyanobacteria species , the two genes were located far apart . sorangium cellulosum  and nitrosomonas europaea  had urea carboxylase but lacked amidase. three gammaproteobacteria species have two urea carboxylase genes, only one of which lies next to the amidase gene. p. ananatis, a gammaproteobacteria, which has urea amidolyase , also has urea carboxylase . furthermore, p. ananatis has no independent amidase gene. the only amidase sequence present in this bacterium is the domain of the urea amidolyase gene. it seems reasonably likely that fusion of the amidase and urea carboxylase genes occurred in p. ananatis to generate the long form of the urea amidolyase gene similar to those found in fungi.

asee additional file  <dig> for the sequence sources.

bsee figure  <dig> for the enzyme name abbreviations. the number of sequences found from each genome is shown. '-' indicates that no similar sequence was found.

cthe amidase gene located next to  the urea carboxylase gene is indicated with *. the amidase gene located close to  but not next to the urea carboxylase gene is indicated with +. see additional file  <dig> for the distance between the genes. the amidase sequences that are a part of the urea amidolyase sequences are shown in parentheses.

dfor urease, the search results for three subunits  are shown. β/γ indicates that the β and γ subunits are fused into one gene.

the urease protein in bacteria occurs as a trimer of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits encoded by separate genes forming a gene cluster, whereas in eukaryotes a single gene encodes the urease protein, a fused protein representing the three bacterial subunits  <cit> . in some bacteria, beta and gamma subunits are fused and encoded by one gene  while in others either beta- or gamma-subunit gene was missing. as shown in table  <dig>  existence of these urease-subunit genes was scattered throughout the bacterial groups. of  <dig> bacterial genomes we examined,  <dig> had either or both of urease and amidase/urea carboxylase . only seven of  <dig> bacterial species had all three genes. consistent with what we observed in fungi, there appears to be a certain degree of dichotomy in possession of urease genes or amidase/urea carboxylase  genes among bacterial genomes.

phylogenetic analysis of amidase domain sequences
in order to elucidate the evolutionary origin of eukaryotic urea amidolyase proteins, we performed phylogenetic analysis among amidase, urea amidolyase, and urea carboxylase identified across kingdoms. phylogenies were reconstructed using amidase and urea carboxylase sequences separately.

bacterial amidase sequences also cluster into two groups . amidases from four gammaproteobacteria species  and one betaproteobacteria species  form a cluster . notably, the amidase sequence of p. ananatis is part of the urea amidolyase, and the amidase genes of the other three gammaproteobacteria species lie immediately adjacent to their urea carboxylase genes . these bacterial amidases cluster with fungal amidases from urea amidolyase with a strong bootstrap support . compared to the fungal stand-alone amidases , the fungal amidase-domain sequences from urea amidolyase  are clearly more closely related to the bacterial amidases, especially to those from p. ananatis and a small number of gamma- and betaproteobacteria species .

phylogenetic analysis of urea carboxylase domain sequences
we also see two separate and strongly supported clusters of urea carboxylase sequences in fungi. one cluster is of the urea carboxylase domain from urea amidolyase  whereas the other cluster is of the urea carboxylase protein sequence . it shows that the urea carboxylase sequences in the two groups have independently evolved over a long period of time. since urea carboxylase was found in the phylum basidiomycota  and it clustered with other urea carboxylase proteins, the divergence between urea carboxylase and urea amidolyase in fungi must have preceded the ascomycota-basidiomycota divergence. as we discuss in the next section, the formation of urea amidolyase with acquisition of the amidase domain seems to have happened most likely in a bacterial lineage. note that the urea carboxylases from green algae clustered with the fungal urea carboxylases  rather than with the fungal urea amidolyases. this clustering pattern is consistent with what we observed in the amidase phylogeny  where green algal genes clustered with the stand-alone version of the fungal amidase genes rather than with the amidase-domain sequence of urea amidolyase. although in some green algae, amidase and urea carboxylase genes are located relatively closely , their evolution is completely independent from urea amidolyase genes found in fungi.

as mentioned before, two hydra urea carboxylase sequences were found from the ncbi nr database search. one of them was actually found to be a sequence of a putative bacterial symbiont, curvibacter  . phylogenetic analysis clearly showed that this sequence belongs to the bacterial urea carboxylase  group . the other hydra sequence clustered with urea carboxylase sequences from green algae and fungi .

bacterial origins of the fungal urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase
our phylogenetic analysis did not support the previous hypothesis that the fungal urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase sequences are formed from fungal biotin-carboxylation domain containing proteins such as mcca or pcca. instead, our conclusion is that the urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase genes currently found in fungi and green algae, as well as in hydra, are the results of horizontal gene transfer events from bacteria. this is based on observations such as the abundant distribution of the shorter form of urea amidolyase, i.e., urea carboxylase, as well as the single occurrence so far of urea amidolyase  in bacteria, coupled with the rarity of both forms of urea amidolyase in eukaryotes except in the fungal kingdom, in some green algae, and in hydra.

phylogenetic analysis of amidase and urea carboxylase sequences across kingdoms showed that the urea carboxylase domain in urea amidolyase and the urea carboxylase protein itself have undergone extensive independent evolution. fungal urea amidolyase proteins are more closely related to one of the two groups of bacterial urea carboxylase. furthermore, one of these bacteria  has a unique urea amidolyase gene, a product of amidase/urea carboxylase gene fusion. the direction of the horizontal gene transfer seems to be from a bacterial lineage to a fungal lineage, since in bacteria other than p. ananatis, urea carboxylase and amidase exist as two independent genes although they are located next to each other. inspection of introns in fungal urea amidolyase genes corroborates this hypothesis further. fungal urea amidolyases are either single or double-exon genes . all saccharomycetes species except for y. lipolytica have single-exon urea amidolyase genes. while in the three sordariomyetes species  the single intron was inserted towards the end of the urea carboxylase domain, in the duplicated y. lipolytica genes the single intron was inserted at the beginning of the amidase domain. these observations indicate that the introns in these fungal urea amidolyase genes must have been acquired independently during their evolution as fungal genes. therefore, fusion of the two genes appears to have happened in the ancestral bacterial species close to p. ananatis, and this fused gene must have been transferred to a fungal lineage.

since so far we found the urea amidolyase protein only in one bacterial species, it is probable that the fusion of urea carboxylase and amidase to form bacterial urea amidolyase is a recent event specific to this bacterial lineage. if this is the case, the fusion event in p. ananatis could be also independent from those that produced fungal urea amidolyases. however, we did not find any unfused fungal urea carboxylase sequences clustered with urea amidolyase in our phylogenetic analysis , nor did we find any unfused fungal amidase sequences clustered with urea amidolyase . therefore, if the fusion happened in fungal lineage, it must have happened soon after the two bacterial genes  were acquired by an ancestral fungal species. regardless of the timing of the fusion event, association between the amidase and urea carboxylase sequences for the urea amidolyase function and subsequent divergence of these sequences from the other paralogous set must have started in bacterial lineage.

compared to urea amidolyase, urea carboxylase genes in fungi have a wider range in the number of exons, 1- <dig> exons, implying again their independent evolution as well as a greater number of accumulated changes. note that the single introns found in the urea carboxylase genes of n. haematococca and f. oxysporum are both at the beginning of the genes and of similar lengths . it indicates that the common ancestor of these species acquired a single intron in the urea carboxylase gene and it happened independently from the intron acquisition in n. haematococca urea amidolyase. interestingly, the number of introns in urea carboxylase and amidase genes in green algae is much higher than the number of introns in the fungal orthologues. this is in agreement with the observation that the chlamydomonas reinhardtii genome has much higher percentage of genes with introns and a much greater number of exons per gene  as compared to s. cerevisiae  and s. pombe   <cit> .

there have been studies presenting cases of bacteria-to-fungi horizontal gene transfers. for example, hall et al.  <cit>  found ten potential such cases in s. cerevisiae and one in ashbya gossypii. fitzpatrick et al.  <cit>  reported two candida parapsilosis genes as bacterial origin. garcia-vallvé et al.  <cit>  showed that many glycosyl hydrolase genes in the rumen fungus orpinomyces joyonii were acquired from bacteria. schmitt and lumbsch  <cit>  showed that the polyketide synthase in lichen-forming fungi were results of ancient horizontal gene transfer from actinobacteria. a recent study, the largest of its kind, by marcet-houben and gabaldón  <cit>  detected  <dig> transferred genes in  <dig> fungal genomes. therefore, horizontal gene transfers from bacteria to fungi do not appear to be rare events. we identified yet another such example.

proposed model for the urea carboxylase and urea amidolyase evolution
the other bacterial urea carboxylase gene  may have also been acquired by fungi, green algae, as well as hydra. since our phylogenetic analysis did not show independent origins for these urea carboxylase genes, the acquisition of this enzyme into fungi, green algae, and hydra must have happened around the time of divergence among these groups of organisms. it may have been by a single event, likely before the divergence of these organisms. then we cannot eliminate the possibility that what we observed in the urea carboxylase genes is the result of simple vertical evolution from bacteria to eukaryotes. either way, however, many eukaryotes including the entire metazoa and land plants must have lost these genes. as we mentioned before , even within fungi, the urea carboxylase gene is not retained in many species. considering that either scenario requires such a high number of loss events, there would be other possible scenarios. one group of organisms  may have acquired a urea carboxylase gene from bacteria first. later this gene may have been transferred to other organisms. although this scenario requires fewer loss events, the main question is how such horizontal gene transfers can happen between green algae, hydra, and fungi, or among any of their ancestral organisms.

in fungi, the introduction of the urea carboxylase gene happened earlier than that of the urea amidolyase gene as shown in figure 5b. the urea carboxylase gene  was acquired in fungi before the divergence of the phyla ascomycota and basidiomycota. the acquisition could have been after the divergence of the phylum zygomycota or alternatively the gene was lost from the zygomycota lineage. some basidiomycota species subsequently lost the gene . in the phylum ascomycota, this gene was again lost in the subphyla taphrinomycotina  and saccharomycotina. further losses of this gene happened in some species of the subphylum pezizomycotina. the urea carboxylase gene appears to become easily dispensable in many species, which may be related to the genomic and metabolic environment of the organisms. the same seems to be the case with mcca and pcca. the introduction of the urea amidolyase gene  in fungi took place before the divergence of the subphyla pezizomycotina and saccharomycotina but probably after the divergence of the subphylum taphrinomycotina . within the subphylum pezizomycotina, the urea amidolyase gene was lost in many groups but retained in almost all species in the class sordariomycetes . the urea amidolyase gene was retained in all saccharomycotina species, and even recently duplicated in y. lipolytica.

CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a possible scenario of horizontal gene transfer of the urea amidolyase and urea carboxylase genes from bacteria to fungi. plastic and opportunistic genome evolution in bacteria and fungi and their evolutionary interplay must have allowed the saccharomycetes fungi to abandon the use of nickel-containing urease. it contributed to optimizing these organisms toward ni2+ -independent cellular metabolisms. further detailed studies of a wider range of gene families would reveal the importance of acquisition of bacterial genes in fungal evolution.

