BACKGROUND
it is believed that circadian timekeeping mechanisms underlying rhythmic processes provide adaptive advantage to organisms , and this has prompted studies employing a variety of strategies to examine the adaptive benefits of possessing functional circadian clocks. surgical ablation of the mammalian ‘master circadian clock’ - suprachiasmatic nucleus  <cit> , and genetic manipulation of circadian clocks in fruit flies drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  which are known to drive loss of rhythmicity in several key circadian behaviors result in reduced survivorship . environmentally induced or naturally occurring circadian dysfunction has also been reported to reduce longevity in d. melanogaster  <cit> . beaver et al.  <cit>  reported that d. melanogaster strains carrying loss-of-function mutation in two core clock genes exhibit reduced reproductive output. in addition, studies on organisms inhabiting different latitudes, as well as those living in constant conditions reported large variation in circadian phenotypes in accordance to their local habitats, suggesting that the underlying clocks may have evolved as an adaptation to the presence or absence of cyclic environmental conditions . nevertheless, conclusions drawn from such studies are limited by the lack of adequate information about the ancestry, population size and history of the environmental conditions pertaining to the organism’s ecology  <cit> .

the eclosion waveform of d. melanogaster comprises a primary peak at dawn  or around night-day transition  which gradually reduces through the day with little or no eclosion occurring at night . this restriction/gating of eclosion primarily around dawn is hypothesized to be an adaptation to avoid desiccation of pharate adults by high temperature and low humidity prevailing during the rest of the day  <cit> , partly supported by the results of a recent study  <cit> . laboratory selection approach has been previously adopted to study how circadian clocks evolve in response to selection for time/phase of eclosion. selection for ‘early’ and ‘late’ emerging strains of drosophila pseudoobscura and moth pectinophora gossypiella under ld12: <dig>  resulted in the evolution of divergent phase of eclosion   <cit> . as a correlated response, the early flies in both studies evolved longer circadian clock period while the late flies evolved shorter period. however, these studies suffered from some major shortcomings such as lack of population level replication, details of population ancestry and selection protocols employed  which are known to considerably modify the evolutionary trajectories in response to selection; and thus might have led to misinterpretation of the observed responses to selection . although these studies suggest that circadian clocks might have evolved to ensure temporal order in behavior and physiology thus enhancing darwinian fitness , our understanding of how selection for timing of clock controlled behaviors influence life-history traits remains nominal.

to explore the evolutionary trajectory of circadian clocks in response to selection for timing of eclosion, we initiated a long-term study on d. melanogaster populations by imposing selection for eclosion during early morning and late evening hours, which is in contrast to the usual time of eclosion in this species. from a set of  <dig> ancestral control populations we derived  <dig> populations -  <dig> replicate early populations using flies that eclose early in the morning and  <dig> replicate late populations using flies that eclose late in the evening . consequently, the early1- <dig> and the late1- <dig> populations evolved significantly higher morning and evening eclosion respectively relative to the control1- <dig> populations, and exhibited several properties analogous to the well-known ‘morning/early’ and ‘evening/late’ chronotypes in humans. similar to the ‘early’ and the ‘late’ human chronotypes , the early and the late drosophila populations evolved shorter and longer clock periods respectively with the control populations exhibiting intermediate period  <cit> , and also exhibited diverged photic phase response curves  for both eclosion  <cit>  and activity/rest rhythms  <cit> . these results indicate that circadian clocks of the two sets of populations ‘entrain’ differently to ld cycles, or in other words, they are differentially sensitive/interact differentially with ld cycles. this is corroborated by the results of a previous study which reported that the early populations are sensitive to light primarily in the evening while the late populations are sensitive to light primarily in the morning  <cit> . collectively, these studies suggest that divergent coevolution of circadian clocks in the early and the late populations might mediate differential interaction/entrainment to regulate time of eclosion.

in the present study, we used the early and the late populations to examine genetic correlations between mechanisms that underlie eclosion at a specific time of the day and that of various pre-adult  as well as adult life-history traits . as discussed earlier, the early and the late eclosion chronotypes have been shown to be associated with different circadian clock period and differential entrainment to ld cycles, and pre-adult traits such as egg-to-adult duration is known to be correlated with circadian clock period. therefore, to assess the relative contribution of circadian clock period and differential entrainment to ld cycles in driving life-history trait differences between the early and the late populations, we performed some of our experiments under both ld12: <dig> as well as constant darkness . the rationale being that if differences in life-history traits between the early and the late populations are solely determined by circadian clock period as can be observed under dd when the clock is not under the influence of ld cycles, such differences would either decrease or cease to exist because clock period of all the populations would be held at 24 h in ld 12: <dig> by virtue of entrainment  <cit> . persistence of differences between populations under both light regimes would imply that the observed life-history trait differences are also driven by clock independent mechanisms.

as mentioned earlier, since d. melanogaster eclose predominantly during ‘dawn’, eclosion at other times of the day is considered to be maladaptive . if this is true, then the proportion of individuals which normally eclose early in the morning in the control populations might also differ in terms of fitness from those that eclose late in the evening. to test for such a possibility, one generation before the assays we derived  <dig> additional populations from the controls ─  <dig> populations comprising individuals emerging early in the morning, referred to as the early-control, and similarly,  <dig> populations comprising individuals emerging late in the evening, referred to as the late-control. also, the early-control and the late-control populations are likely to reveal whether the observed differences in fitness measures between the early and the late populations  are indeed evolved responses to the selection imposed on the timing of eclosion, or are merely environment-driven.

we report that the late populations have evolved significantly longer median egg-to-puparium duration leading to longer egg-to-adult duration, are more fecund around day  <dig> post-emergence which is the usual day for egg collection as per the selection protocol , and also exhibit reduced median longevity as compared to the early populations, whereas the early-control and the late-control populations did not differ in the aforesaid life-history traits thus suggesting that the observed differences between the selected populations  are evolutionary responses to selection for timing of eclosion. also, even though the early populations differed significantly from the late populations, they were similar to the control populations for most of the traits assayed, the possible reasons for which are discussed later.

RESULTS
egg-to-puparium duration
anova on median egg-to-puparium duration showed statistically significant effect of population, light regime and population × light regime interaction . across light regime comparisons revealed that egg-to-puparium duration for all the populations was significantly longer  in ld12: <dig> as compared to that in dd thus highlighting the delaying effect of ld cycles on egg-to-puparium duration .table  <dig> summary of results of anova on  median egg-to-puparium duration,  arc-sine square root transformed egg-to-puparium survivorship,  median egg-to-adult duration,  arc-sine square root transformed egg-to-adult survivorship,  dry-weight at pupariation, and  dry-weight at eclosion values of all populations under ld12: <dig> and dd light regimes. summary of results of anova on  average eggs laid/female,  dry-weight at pre- and post fecundity assay stages,  log transformed fecundity per unit dry-weight loss, and  median longevity of virgin males and females of all populations under ld12:12

df
f
p
fig.  <dig> percentage pupariation as a function of time  from egg-collection in a ld12: <dig> and b dd for the early , the early-control , the control , the late-control  and the late  populations. the black and white bars at the bottom represent night and day respectively. c median egg-to-puparium duration  of all populations in ld12: <dig> and dd, and d percentage egg-to-puparium survivorship values in ld12: <dig> and dd. error bars for panels c and d indicate 95 % confidence intervals calculated by method of tukey’s hsd. bars sharing same letters do not differ statistically while those with different letters are significantly different from each other



in ld12: <dig>  the late populations had a significantly longer  egg-to-puparium duration  as compared to all other populations  while that for the remaining four sets of populations did not differ among each other .

in dd, the late populations took significantly longer  to pupariate  as compared to the early  and the control  populations but did not differ from the early-control  and the late-control  populations, whereas none of the other sets of populations differed among each other .

egg-to-puparium survivorship
anova on egg-to-puparium survivorship revealed that the effect of population, light regime and population × light regime interaction was statistically not significant , indicating that the populations did not differ in their egg-to-puparium survivorship both within and across light regimes.

the average egg-to-puparium survivorship across populations was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  %  in ld12: <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  %  in dd .

egg-to-adult duration
anova on median egg-to-adult duration revealed statistically significant effect of population, light regime and population × light regime interaction . as observed for egg-to-puparium duration, the egg-to-adult duration in ld12: <dig> was also significantly longer  for all the populations as compared to that in dd .fig.  <dig> percentage of flies eclosing as a function of time  from egg-collection in a ld12: <dig> and b dd for the early , the early-control , the control , the late-control  and the late  populations. the black and white bars at the bottom represent night and day respectively. c median egg-to-adult duration of all populations in ld12: <dig> and dd, and d percentage egg-to-adult survivorship values of all populations in ld12: <dig> and dd. all other details are same as in fig. 1




in ld12: <dig>  egg-to-adult duration of the late population  was significantly longer  than all populations  except the control  populations whereas that of all other populations  did not differ significantly among each other .

under dd, the late populations exhibited a significantly longer  egg-to-adult duration  as compared to all other populations  except the controls .

egg-to-adult survivorship
anova on egg-to-adult survivorship revealed statistically significant effect of light regime and population × light regime interaction but not of population . however, post hoc multiple comparisons using tukey’s hsd did not reveal any statistically significant difference in egg-to-adult survivorship either across ld12: <dig>  and dd  light regimes or across populations within a light regime .

dry-weight
since the late populations exhibited significantly longer egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult duration, we further tested if this lengthening of pre-adult developmental duration translated to higher dry-weight at pupariation and eclosion.

anova on pupal dry-weight revealed statistically significant effect of population and light regime but not of population × light regime interaction . in accordance with the difference in egg-to-puparium duration between light regimes, the pupal dry-weight was found to be significantly higher  in ld12: <dig>  as compared to that in dd  whereas no difference was observed between populations within either of the light regimes.fig.  <dig> dry-weight per individual at a pupariation, and b eclosion for the early , the early-control , the control , the late-control  and the late  populations in ld12: <dig> and dd light regimes. all other details are same as in fig. 1




anova on dry-weight at eclosion reported statistically significant effect of light regime but not of population or population × light regime interaction . in accordance with egg-to-adult duration differences across light regimes, dry-weight at eclosion was found to be significantly higher  in ld12: <dig>  as compared to that in dd  whereas the populations did not differ among each other in either of the light regimes.

fecundity
anova on average fecundity data revealed a statistically significant effect of population . fecundity of the late populations  was significantly higher  as compared to that of the other populations , whereas none of the other populations differed significantly among each other .fig.  <dig> 
a average fecundity per female on day  <dig> , b dry-weight per female at pre- and post-fecundity stages, and c fecundity per unit dry-weight loss  for the early , the early-control , the control , the late-control  and the late  populations in ld12: <dig>  error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals calculated by method of tukey’s hsd. d pearson correlation of average fecundity/female with that of dry-weight lost during the fecundity assay . the data points for correlation were obtained by pooling values across all  <dig> populations. the dotted line indicates 95 % confidence interval. fecundity and dry-weight measurements assays were performed only in ld12: <dig>  bars sharing same letters do not differ statistically while those with different letters are significantly different from each other



pre- and post-fecundity assay dry-weights
anova on female dry-weight measurements at pre- and post-fecundity assay stages showed statistically significant effect of stage  and population × stage interaction but not of population . post hoc multiple comparisons revealed that post-fecundity assay dry-weight of all the populations was reduced by about  <dig>  μg  as compared to the pre-fecundity assay dry-weight. pre-fecundity assay dry-weight did not differ statistically between populations  but post-fecundity assay dry-weight of the late populations  was significantly lower  as compared to that of all other populations .

fecundity per unit loss in dry-weight
when normalized by the dry-weight lost , fecundity per unit dry-weight lost did not differ statistically across populations , suggesting that although the late populations were more fecund they lose more dry-weight due to the higher number of eggs laid. as an additional confirmation of this, we performed a linear correlation between egg output and dry-weight loss by pooling data from all the populations, and found that the two were significantly positively correlated .

longevity
anova on median longevity reported statistically significant effect of population, sex and population × sex interaction . with the exception of the late populations where individuals of both the sexes had an average median longevity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  days , the average female longevity of all the other populations  was ~7 % higher than that of the males .fig.  <dig> survivorship curves of a virgin males and b virgin females of the early , the early-control , the control , the late-control  and the late  populations in ld12: <dig>  c median longevity  of virgin males and females of all populations in ld12: <dig>  all other details are same as in fig. 1




within sex comparisons revealed that females of the late populations exhibited significantly shorter  median longevity as compared to females of the other populations with the exception of the late-control females which did not differ statistically from the late populations. the median male longevity was not observed to differ statistically across populations .

discussion
we observe that the late populations evolved longer egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult duration as compared to the early populations thus highlighting an association between eclosion chronotype and pre-adult developmental duration . under ld12: <dig>  the difference in median egg-to-puparium duration between the late and the early populations is ~7 h, which is reduced to ~3 h at eclosion . one possible reason for this might be a genotype dependent effect of light on pupal development as also suggested by the median egg-to-puarium duration of the late populations which differs from all other populations under ld12: <dig> but not dd . alternatively, under ld cycles, timing of eclosion is known to be governed by a circadian clock component as well as a clock independent masking response to lights-on as discussed with respect to the same populations in a previous study  <cit> . thus, in addition to the clock determined time of eclosion, masking response to light, which results in an additional burst of eclosion immediately following lights-on might have reduced the median pre-adult duration. this is further supported by our observation under dd that ~4 h difference in egg-to-puparium duration between the late and the early populations increases to ~7 h at eclosion . thus, the observed reduction in median egg-to-adult duration under ld12: <dig> may be a result of the combination of both  artefact of masking response to lights-on which is clearly absent under dd and  differential effect of light on pupal development, which remains to be addressed further. in addition to the divergent eclosion chronotypes, the early and the late populations have also evolved shorter and longer clock periods differing by 40 min  <cit>  which suggests a correlation between emergence chronotype and circadian clock period. such correlations have been reported earlier in the melon fly, bactrocera cucurbitae  <cit> , and between clock period and egg-to-adult duration in fruit flies d. melanogaster , suggesting that clock period differences influence pre-adult developmental rates. in dd, egg-to-puparium duration of the late populations was  <dig>  h  and egg-to-adult duration was  <dig>  h  as opposed to  <dig>  h  and  <dig>  h  respectively of the early populations. if the pre-adult duration of the early and the late populations was entirely driven by circadian clock period difference, under dd the early and the late populations would drift apart by  <dig>  h  every day, and consequently the two populations would exhibit a  <dig>  h difference in egg-to-puparium duration  and  <dig>  h difference in egg-to-adult duration  which is considerably smaller than that observed empirically . since eggs for the egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult duration assays were collected from all populations at the same time , the observed differences in pre-adult duration between the early and the late populations are unlikely to be due to the differences in the age of eggs. moreover, the time of egg-collection or the age of eggs does not alter the difference in egg-to-adult duration between the early and the late populations  <cit> . taken together these results suggest that difference in pre-adult developmental rates of the early and the late populations is not entirely circadian clock driven, and may also involve clock independent mechanisms which might drive differential interaction with ld cycles .

furthermore, light mediated enhancement in the pre-adult developmental rates is apparent as both egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult duration of all the populations was 7- <dig>  % longer in ld12: <dig> as compared to dd . while effect of light on pre-adult duration has been documented earlier  <cit> , precise mechanisms underlying such effects remains to be explored. the timing of eclosion in drosophila is believed to depend upon a number of factors including the developmental state of the fly, the phase and period of circadian rhythm, hormonal cascade, and environmental condition  <cit> . the ld cycles interact with the circadian clock controlled gate of eclosion such that even if flies have completed development, they are allowed to eclose only during certain time of the day and not merely in accordance with their developmental state, and consequently the time of eclosion is delayed in ld12: <dig> as compared to dd . additionally, the time of eclosion on a given day is also a function of the circadian clock period such that individuals with shorter period eclose earlier than those with longer clock period  <cit> . this further supports the notion that pre-adult development in d. melanogaster is probably mediated by the interaction of circadian clocks with ld cycles.

differences in pre-adult developmental rates of the early and the late populations do not seem to influence their egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult survivorship; nor do the light regime mediated differences affect pre-adult survivorship . this might be due to the magnitude of difference in egg-to-puparium or egg-to-adult duration between the populations not being large enough to influence egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult survivorship.

although the late populations have evolved longer pre-adult developmental duration, their body-weight at pupariation and at eclosion did not differ from that of all the other populations . however, dry-weight of puparia and adults were found to be significantly higher for all the populations in ld12: <dig> as compared to dd  which is not surprising as egg-to-puparium and egg-to-adult duration is significantly enhanced in ld12: <dig> as compared to dd .

coevolution of pre-adult life-history traits in response to selection for timing of eclosion is intuitive, as changes in pre-adult stages can directly affect the time course and waveform of eclosion. it would be interesting to know whether selection for eclosion at different time of the day also led to correlated changes in adult life-history traits that may not necessarily influence eclosion time but would highlight the underlying genetic correlation. in this regard, we observed that the late populations exhibited a significantly higher fecundity as compared to all other populations . in d. melanogaster, pre-adult developmental duration is known to be correlated with fecundity, and delayed development is associated with higher dry-weight, and in turn with higher fecundity . this does not appear to be the case in the late populations since neither their dry-weight at eclosion nor pre-fecundity assay dry-weight differed from the other populations . however, post-fecundity assay dry-weight of the late populations was significantly lower as compared to that of the other populations , but when normalized by the loss of dry-weight , fecundity per unit dry-weight lost was similar for all populations . therefore, a significant reduction in post-fecundity assay dry-weight in the late populations appears to be a consequence of higher number of eggs laid as also substantiated by a significant correlation observed between the number of eggs laid and dry-weight lost . therefore, contrary to the well-known positive correlation between pre-adult developmental duration, dry-weight and fecundity, our results suggest that the observed higher fecundity in the late populations is not due to higher dry-weight attained because of the delay in the timing of eclosion but may be due to other mechanisms such as pleiotropy or mutation accumulation  <cit> . alternatively, higher fecundity in the late populations might have evolved as an artefact of the nature of selection protocol employed. for instance, to ensure that the number of adults in all populations is ~ <dig>  every generation we collect larger number of eggs for the late populations followed by relatively smaller number of eggs for the early populations as compared to the control populations  which is  <dig> vials per replicate population for the early populations,  <dig> vials for the late populations as opposed to  <dig> vials for the control populations with each vial housing approximately  <dig> eggs. therefore, the number of eggs collected from the late populations  is approximately twice that of the early  and thrice that of the control  populations. this might have led to an inadvertent selection for higher fecundity in the late populations, and also, possibly as a consequence of higher effective population size  the late populations might experience relatively lower extent of inbreeding depression followed by the early populations, with the control populations experiencing highest degree of inbreeding depression. if this were to be true, then the early populations would also be expected to exhibit higher fecundity as compared to the control populations, but that does not seem to be the case. therefore, it is unlikely that this reasoning can account for the evolution of higher fecundity in the late populations even though it cannot be entirely disregarded. however, the possibility of such a scenario can also be clarified by a cross experiment between the early and the late populations. additionally, given that fecundity in drosophila is not constant across lifespan, the difference in fecundity between the populations observed on days 10- <dig> post-eclosion might also vary across different ages. for instance, in light of the results from a previous study  <cit> , it is also possible that the early populations which exhibit significantly lower fecundity on days 10- <dig> might otherwise exhibit higher fecundity at an earlier stage and vice versa for the late populations. however, since the fly populations used in the current study are maintained on a non-overlapping 21 day generation cycle  wherein eggs laid only on the day  <dig> of adulthood are used for the next generation, only eggs laid around this day determines the populations’ fitness in this regime. therefore, fecundity during other life-stages is irrelevant under the currently discussed regimen but nevertheless will be interesting to examine.

further, we found that females of the late populations live significantly shorter as compared to those from the early and the control populations, while no difference in longevity was observed between males . the reduction in longevity of the late females as compared to the early and the control females was consistently observed in four replicate populations maintained under similar environmental conditions. in light of fecundity and dry-weight results, the observed reduction in longevity of the late females appears to represent the classic trade-off between fecundity and adult lifespan due to the antagonistic pleiotropic effects of the underlying genes . however, since the results presented here are on virgins, the observed reduction in longevity cannot be explained entirely by such a trade-off. therefore, even though higher reproductive output may have evolved as an artefact of the selection protocol, reduced longevity in the late females as compared to the early and the control females may have evolved as a correlated response to selection for late evening eclosion and not directly as a consequence of higher fecundity. interestingly, we also observe that the reduced longevity in the females of the late populations is primarily a consequence of early death  and not during the later life-stages, and a similar trend is also observed in the males. however, the possible reason for such observations remains to be explored.

thus, we report that selection for late evening eclosion in fruit flies d. melanogaster is associated with the coevolution of several life-history traits in the late populations, while no difference was observed between the early, the early-control and the late-control populations. such correlations between chronotypes/circadian clocks and life-history traits have been reported earlier. notably, yadav and sharma  <cit>  demonstrated that selection for faster pre-adult development leads to the coevolution of shorter clock period, and that the faster developing populations evolve reduced dry-weight, body size, fecundity, starvation and desiccation resistance, and longevity. similarly, in a separate study on the melon fly bactrocera cucurbitae, selection for egg-to-adult duration resulted in the coevolution of divergent phase of activity/rest and mating rhythms  <cit> . most differences observed in our study, however, correspond to the late populations relative to the control populations, while very little difference was observed between the early and the control populations. also, most of the life-history traits assayed in the late populations differed by a small magnitude varying from 2-10 % as compared to the early and the control populations. this is not surprising considering the larger time difference between the selection window of the late populations from the eclosion peak of the control populations, and proximity of the selection window of the early populations from the eclosion peak of the control populations . since evening eclosion is not predominantly seen in the control populations, the late populations would experience a much stronger selection pressure as compared to the early populations which in turn might drive faster coevolution of life-history traits.

in summary, selection for late evening eclosion leads to lengthening of pre-adult duration without any increase in body-weight at eclosion, increased fecundity associated with greater post-fecundity assay dry-weight loss and reduced virgin female longevity. the observed life-history traits in the late populations being evolved responses to selection is further supported by our observation on the early-control and the late-control populations. that life-history traits of the early-control and the late-control populations did not differ significantly from each other but were different from that of the early and the late populations  suggests that the observed life-history trait differences between the early and the late populations are evolutionary response to the imposed selection and are not merely environmentally driven. furthermore, although the pre-adult and adult life-history traits studied here are known to be highly correlated, enhanced fecundity in the late populations does not seem to be a consequence of higher biomass attained by lengthening of egg-to-adult duration. thus the differences in adult traits do not seem to be associated with pre-adult trait differences and appear to be driven by independent mechanisms that might have evolved as a consequence of selection.

CONCLUSIONS
thus, in contrast to studies which demonstrated the effect of direct manipulation of circadian clock on fitness aspects , we report coevolution of life-history traits in independently evolved replicate populations of d. melanogaster exhibiting early and late eclosion chronotypes, suggesting that the genetic architecture underlying eclosion at specific times of the day  is genetically correlated with several life-history traits, and these correlations appear to encompass both circadian clock-dependent and clock-independent mechanisms. thus the extent of circadian clocks’ influence in the observed trait differences, and the underlying genetic architecture remains to be explored.

