BACKGROUND
small non-coding rnas  are involved in regulation of gene expression, rna based immunity and activity of transposable elements  and their remnants. in d. melanogaster two small rna silencing pathways, small interfering rnas  and pirna , regulate gene expression by silencing specific genes and tes both in germline and soma  <cit> . in dipteran insects sirnas represent a population of small rna 21-nucleotides  in length. sirna is originated from exo- and endogenous double stranded rna , which is processed by the rnase iii enzyme dicer- <dig>  into 21-nt sirna duplexes. once produced and loaded into rna-induced silencing complex , sirnas guide in sequence-specific manner the recognition and cleavage of the target rna molecules by the argounate- <dig>  containing risc. similarly to d. melanosgaster, the ago- <dig> expression in mosquitoes is required for antiviral defence. depletion of ago- <dig> in an. gambiae and ae. aegypti mosquitoes respectively infected with o’nyong-yong virus and sindbis virus resulted in increased virus replication  <cit> .

pirnas represent a population of small rnas ranging from  <dig> to 30-nt in length, that are specifically expressed in gonads of metazoans and provide genome integrity over generations  <cit> . in insects the major source of pirnas is transposable genetic elements that are considered as selfish or parasitic elements of the host genome. pirnas post-transcriptionally silence te expression through the pirna-guided cleavage of the transposon mrna  <cit> . in addition, pirnas can mediate transcriptional control of te activity  <cit> . the pirna-mediated rna silencing requires an association with ago family members ago- <dig>  aubergine  and piwi  that operate at the heart of the pirna silencing pathway  <cit> . in contrast to sirnas, pirnas are produced in dicer-independent manner from a long single-stranded rna transcribed from repetitive elements or genomic loci known as pirna clusters. this transcript is processed into primary pirnas that are usually antisense to te transcript. these primary pirnas direct to cleave sense te transcripts and initiate a reciprocal amplification cycle so-called “ping-pong” amplification loop  <cit> . piwi-class members exhibit strand specific interaction with pirnas, piwi and aub are associated with antisense te-pirnas; while ago- <dig> is associated with sense te-pirnas  <cit> . the hallmarks of the ping-pong mediated amplification of pirnas are strong u <dig> bias for aub-associated pirnas and a <dig> of ago-3-associted pirnas. in flies, aub and ago- <dig> are not expressed in the ovarian somatic sheet  cell line and as a result primary pirnas lack a ping-pong signature, yet showing strong bias for 5′ u  <cit> . in addition to the function of pirnas in controlling te activity, the pirna pathway is involved in antiviral response in d. melanogaster and mosquito cell lines  <cit> . altogether, the pirna-mediated pathway constitutes an adaptive immune response that recognizes and silences invading parasitic genetic elements  <cit> .

tes represent a large part of dispersed repetitive elements, recognized as one of the major cause of intra-genomic variation and genome diversification. the vertically transmitted tes can disperse rapidly into populations  <cit> . de novo te remobilization and insertion are capable of significantly influencing genome stability, host gene transcription, splicing or rna editing. subsequent te invasion, dispersion, inactivation and deterioration forms a unique genome landscape and represents a process of “molecular domestication” of mobile elements  <cit> . tes spread over genome via an rna or a dna intermediate and have been classified accordingly into two classes, class i  and class ii . class i is composed of long terminal repeat  retrotransposons and non-ltr  retrotransposons that are structurally similar to retroviruses and require a reverse transcription step for retrotransposition. class ii tes includes dna transposons with i) cut-and-paste mechanism of transposition, ii) rolling-circle dna transposons  and iii) self-synthesizing dna transposons   <cit> . in an. gambiae, tes constitute about 12-16% of the euchromatic regions and more than 60% of the heterochromatic regions of the genome  <cit> . overall more than  <dig> different transposon families have been identified in the genome of an. gambiae, the most abundant are ltr-retrotransposons, short interspersed nuclear elements  and miniature inverted transposable elements  superfamilies  <cit> .

it has been reported that hematophagous arthropod vector mosquitoes produce virus-derived small rnas in the soma in response to viral infection  <cit> . furthermore, these mosquitoes produce endogenous sirnas and pirnas that map to tes and protein coding genes  <cit> . the precise function of endogenously produced sirnas and pirnas remains largely unknown in mosquito species. both the sirna and pirna pathways represent an important aspect of genetic variation, which might have a strong impact on evolution of the host genome landscape and influence the fitness and vector competence in the malaria mosquito. using previously reported deep sequenced small rna libraries  <cit>  we examined the expression of endogenous sirnas and pirnas produced in adult an. gambiae females. we identified a large set of te- and gene-associated sirnas and pirnas, which might be involved in the regulation of transposable element activity and gene expression in soma and germline in an. gambiae. detailed sequence analysis revealed that an. gambiae pirnas were produced by both “ping-pong” dependent and “ping-pong” independent mechanisms. we also found that regular and infectious blood feeding modulated the expression levels of the endogenous small rna populations and the core components of the sirna and pirna pathways in an. gambiae.

RESULTS
small rna sequencing
we performed analysis of small rna populations recovered from the deep sequenced small rna libraries published in  <cit>  to determine i) diversity of the mixed germline/somatic endogenous sirnas and pirnas in an. gambiae adult females ii) how endogenous sirnas and pirnas respond to blood feeding and plasmodium berghei infection. we used a combined strategy  <cit>  following the annotation of pirnas and sirnas by analysing sequence signature characteristics of pirnas/sirnas and performing a validation by a homology-based analysis of the identified sequences to known pirna and sirna loci in d. melanogaster and ae. aegypti. we filtered out the known mirnas, rrnas, trnas and snornas  from the libraries for further analysis. the reference strain, pest , which segregates into two different haplotypes  for certain regions of the genome  <cit>  was used to map small rna reads to the an. gambiae genome. the analysed genome of the susceptible an. gambiae g <dig> strain  is divergent from the pest genome, therefore we allowed 2-nt mismatching for mapping. the analysis of the small rna populations ranging from  <dig> to 44-nt in length from sugar, blood and p. berghei-infected mosquito libraries, revealed that sequences of 20-23-nt lengths  and 24-30-nt  were predominantly recovered . sequences in the 21-nt and 24-30-nt size range, not annotated as a previously known non-coding rnas, and passing the cut-off at least  <dig> read uniquely mapped per individual endo-sirna or endo-pirna were classified accordingly as candidate sirnas and pirnas. additionally to the 21-nt and 27-nt peak lengths we also detected a large number of other small non-coding rnas peaking at  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt . analysis of the an. gambiae genome complexity revealed that protein coding genes constitute 7% of the genome, tes – 12-16% and total intergenic regions ~78%  <cit> . we found the following distribution of 21-nt reads in sugar-fed mosquito libraries,  <dig> % mapped to the protein coding genes, 31% mapped to intergenic regions and  <dig> % mapped to repetitive and transposable elements . the 24-30-nt read distribution showed a similar tendency mapping to protein coding genes  and intergenic regions ; 60% were originated from repetitive elements and tes . moreover, we observed a similar frequency for genic 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in mosquitoes after regular blood feeding , whereas te-associated number of reads was increased relatively to the levels in sugar-fed females. interestingly, we also noticed higher density of the te-associated and genic 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in mosquitoes after infectious blood feeding . overall, in our libraries more than 55% of all 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads mapped to known tes . importantly, te-associated 24-30-nt reads exhibited a strong bias towards the antisense strand recapitulating the sequence signatures of pirnas produced via ping-pong dependent pirna pathway . a similar pattern for pirnas has been previously reported for d. melanogaster and ae. aegypti  <cit> . furthermore, some an. gambiae endo-pirnas matched to known ae. aegypti pirnas  <cit>  indicating identification of bona fide pirnas.figure  <dig> 
sequencing summary of sirna and pirna populations in
an. gambiae
. size distribution for the total number of sequence reads  and for unique sequence reads  in an. gambiae cdna libraries derived from sugar , blood-fed  and p. berghei infected  mosquitoes. the cdna libraries from replicate were collapsed; the length and abundance of small rna reads in an. gambiae cdna libraries are as indicated.  read frequency for sirnas  and pirnas  mapped to repetitive elements, consisting largely of tes, coding genes and other sequences  in an. gambiae cdna libraries.
te-pirnas and te-sirnas in
an. gambiae
.  read frequency for a sirna population  and a pirna population  associated with various classes of tes in an. gambiae .  read frequency for pirnas mapped to class i superfamilies .  small rna read frequency and distribution mapped to various families of tes. distribution of reads uniquely mapped to an. gambiae genome  and reads mapped to the genome five and more times . n indicates the number of reads; sense reads  and antisense reads  are shown as indicated.  genomic profile of the 21-nt , 24-30-nt  and pirna “ping-pong” paired  reads mapped to the sense and antisense strand of gypsy transposon  and a cluster of truncated and solo-ltr copies ) in the an. gambiae genome.
sequence properties of te-pirnas and te-sirnas in
an. gambiae
.  sequence compilations showing relative nucleotide frequency per position for the sirna population  and the pirna population  associated with tes , coding genes and remaining sequences in an. gambiae . in all graphs, n indicates the number of reads.  schematic representation of overlapping sequence offsets for sirna and pirna pairs.  nucleotide composition of all te-derived reads of length 21-nt  and 24-30-nt  mapped to the sense and antisense strand of the an. gambiae te dataset. the overlap analysis offsets of sirnas and pirnas, sense reads and antisense reads are shown as indicated.



te-specific sirna and pirna expression in an. gambiae
repetitive and transposable elements represent the major source of endogenous pirnas and sirnas in dipteran insects and other animals  <cit> . the genome landscape of an. gambiae is represented by members of both classes, class i  and class ii   <cit> , which constitute  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively of the total an. gambiae genome size  <cit> . we analysed genomic distribution and density of endo-sirnas  and endo-pirnas  sequence reads mapped to the collection of repetitive and mobile elements from the genome of an. gambiae using ensemblmetazoa database in sugar-fed mosquitoes . mapping of 21-nt reads to the class i and class ii of tes revealed that  <dig> % and 86% of total endo-sirna reads were associated with retrotransposons and dna transposons respectively. besides, ~67% of the total endo-pirna reads  were derived from retrotransposons and 21% from dna transposons. the distribution of the small rna reads derived from unique genomic loci was consistent with the distribution of the multiply mapped 24-30-nt reads ; moreover, the uniquely mapped 21-nt reads showed a redistribution of read frequencies  compared with the total and multiply mapped 21-nt reads .

recent analysis of the te distribution revealed that class i constitutes two-third and class ii - one-third of the total tes identified in the genome of an. gambiae   <cit> . therefore, we further analysed in detail the class i ltr and nltr-derived sirnas and pirnas . the class-i ltr-tes are represented by three retrotransposon superfamilies: copia , pao-bel  and gypsy   <cit> . they constitute approximately 4%, 35% and 52% respectively of the total te number in the genome of an. gambiae  <cit> . the distribution of the total 24-30-nt read frequency revealed that  <dig> % of te-pirnas were associated with copia, 30% with pao-bel and 64% with gypsy, indicating that copia, pao-bel and gypsy were likely the most actively transcribed ltr-retrotransposons in our libraries. next, we analysed the density and distribution of uniquely and multiply mapped 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads derived from these ltr-tes . the pool of multiply mapped 21-nt and 24-30-nt  were considered respectively as sirnas and pirnas derived from dispersed copies of the ltr-tes. we found that copia produced uniquely mapped sirnas and pirnas with a bias towards antisense orientation . besides, among multiply mapped pirnas, only class of 27-28-nt reads exhibited a mild antisense bias. gypsy and pao-bel generated a high proportion of uniquely and multiply mapped pirna reads with a strong antisense bias . in d. melanogaster gypsy produced abundantly both classes of te-associated small rnas, sirnas and pirnas  <cit> . an. gambiae gypsy abundantly produced pirnas, predominantly 26-27-nt reads in length and a very low number of sirnas unlike drosophila gypsy . gypsy elements represent the most abundant and diverse ltr superfamily in the an. gambiae genome  <cit> . in total, 42% and 15% of gypsy copies represent remnants of the gypsy full-length transposon, so-called solitaire solo-ltr and truncated copies respectively  <cit> . the sense and antisense distribution of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads along the sequence of gypsy revealed a multiple hot spots of gypsy-specific sirnas and pirnas that were spread along the te sequence and ltrrs .

class-i nltr-retrotransposons is composed of  <dig> superfamilies in the an. gambiae genome  <cit> . the nltrs represent the most abundant and diverse type of tes in an. gambiae  <cit> . we noticed that the total abundance of nltr-pirnas and sirnas was low relative to its size  probably due to extremely low proportion of full-length elements in nltrs in comparison to ltrs  <cit> . jockey, cr <dig>  rte and outcast elements represent the most abundant superfamilies . we found that 44% of the total nltr-pirna reads were derived from jockey, cr <dig>  rte and outcast retrotransposons in the analysed small rna libraries . we also observed that the sinex- <dig> family, which represents a large part of the total nltr-tes  <cit>  was associated with a low number of sirna and pirna reads in our small rna libraries .

in the an. gambiae genome, dna transposons are represented by most heterogeneous sets of heavily deteriorated sequences or their remnants in the analysed class ii families. overall, the mite-like elements, which are lacking any coding capacity, represent 60% of the class ii transposons  <cit> . the most abundant class ii-superfamilies are tc1-mariner , p element , hat , harbinger  and novel unknown elements ~32%  <cit> . in our small rna libraries, members of harbinger, tc1-mariner, p element, gambol elements and unknown te <dig> transposon were the major sources of 21-nt reads and 24-30-nt reads derived from class ii dna transposons .

overall, we observed that transcriptional activities of the class i-derived sirnas and pirnas correlate with the abundance of the ltr- and nltr-retrotransposons  in our small rna libraries . we also noticed a similar tendency for the class ii-derived sirnas . besides, the total abundance of the dna transposon-derived pirnas was low relative to the size of class ii dna transposons in the an. gambiae genome.

next we analysed the relative nucleotide frequencies in the an. gambiae te-sirnas. the sequence analysis revealed a bias for 5′-end c at position  <dig> in the total 21-nt reads and in the 21-nt reads that mapped to sense strand of tes . a similar bias was observed in d. melanogaster endogenous sirnas that often began with c  <cit> . in addition, we noticed a bias for 5′ u at position  <dig> for 21-nt reads derived from antisense te strand . the nucleotide composition across individual d. melanogaster te families showed 5′ u bias in 21-nt reads mapped to antisense strand and no bias in 21-nt reads mapped to sense strand  <cit> , this is consistent with the 5′ u preference for the 21-nt antisense reads mapped to specific tes in an. gambiae . next we performed an overlap analysis of sense-antisense 21-nt paired reads. we used  offset to detect 21-nt sirna duplex with the 3′-end 2-nt overhangs produced by rnase iii enzyme dcr- <dig> . the nucleotide composition analysis revealed a bias at position  <dig> for 5′ c/g in sense and 5′ c in antisense strand . in d. melanogaster tes produce sirnas in the almost equivalent ration between sense and antisense orientation with a slight antisense bias  <cit> . unlike in drosophila, in our small rna datasets the an. gambiae te-sirnas showed a strong sense bias. the bias was introduced by the 21-nt reads mapped to unknown te <dig> transposon , which produced the vast majority of 21-nt sense reads in our libraries. te <dig> belongs to class ii dna transposons  and is represented by more than  <dig> copies in the an. gambiae genome. non-random distribution and precision of the 5′- and 3′-ends of the te104184-derived 21-nt reads ruled out the possibility that these reads might represent the incidental degradation fragments .

in contrast to the an. gambiae te-sirnas, the te-pirnas exhibited a strong over-presentation of antisense reads with 5′ u bias . we analysed in details the occurrence of sense-antisense pirna arrangements and their nucleotide composition for i) non-paired neighbour pirnas, ii) overlapped pirna ping-pong pairs and iii) overlapped pirna ping-pong pairs with phased arrangement considering a plausible under-representation in our small rna libraries using 0-nt; +10-nt and  offsets respectively . there was a 5′ u bias for antisense te-pirna reads in all analysed offsets and a strong bias for a at position  <dig> for reads derived from sense strand in +10-nt and  offsets . these results implied that vast majority of the te-specific pirnas exhibited the classical hallmarks of ping-pong amplification and most likely were produced by the ping-pong dependent mechanism in an. gambiae.

given the functional association of the core factors of the sirna pathway  and pirna pathway  in te silencing, we analysed expression of the most abundant ltr-retrotransposon, gypsy and nltr-retrotransposon, cr <dig> in rna silenced adult female mosquitoes . the an. gambiae piwi family genes ago- <dig> , piwi2/aub  and piwi1/aub  were identified by sequence similarity with the d. melanogaster ago homologs  <cit> . rnai directed against dcr-2/ago- <dig> and piwi-class genes reduced their transcript levels approximately ~30-50% according to the qpcr-based measurement . we observed consistent mild de-silencing of cr <dig> in piwi1-aub silenced mosquitoes, indicating rnai-dependent degradation. besides, expression of the gypsy element was not substantially affected in rna silenced mosquitoes and was varied significantly between biological replicates  probably due to variegating expression of numerous truncated copies as a result of some subtle differences in mosquito rearing condition.

genic sirna and pirna loci in the genome of an. gambiae
given that 9-29% of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads mapped to protein coding genes in our small rna libraries , we analysed the association between protein coding genes and small rna sequences  in order to better understand the role of endo-pirnas and endo-sirnas. distribution of the total 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads that mapped to coding genes showed a sense bias for genic pirnas and sirnas . the overlap analysis of sirna pairs revealed almost equivalent sense and antisense distribution in 21-nt reads with a mild antisense bias for  offset. the 24-30-nt pirna paired reads showed a slight sense bias in the  <dig> nt and + <dig> nt offsets, whereas antisense bias  was detected for  offset pirna pairs . in addition, we observed consistently 5′ a preference for antisense 21-nt reads and 5′ u for antisense 24-30-nt reads. we also noticed presence of a at position  <dig> for total 24-30-nt reads in sense orientation . however, this signature was missing in the  offset paired sense reads, suggesting a ping-pong independent mode of pirna biogenesis for pirnas produced by coding genes. importantly, we did not find in the sirna pool derived from the protein coding gene any “ping-pong” like signatures meaning that they do not belong to a subset of the pirna-like small rnas. it is worth noting that we also observed a production of endogenous pirnas and sirnas from intergenic regions in an. gambiae genome . the intergenic 21-nt and 24- <dig> nt reads also showed a strong 5′ u and 5′ u/a bias respectively .figure  <dig> 
sequence characterization of gene-specific pirnas and sirnas in
an. gambiae
. sequence properties of sense and antisense sirna  and pirna  populations mapped to protein coding genes in an. gambiae . the offsets for sirna and pirna pairs are shown in . n indicates the number of reads.  distribution of unique matching reads mapped to agap <dig>  agap <dig> and agap <dig> ; sense reads ; antisense reads .  genomic profiles showing density of the 21-nt , 24-30-nt  and pirna “ping-pong” paired  reads mapped to the sense and antisense strand of agap <dig>  agap <dig> and agap <dig> 




next we analysed the frequency and distribution of the most abundant 21-nt reads and 24-30-nt reads mapped to specific an. gambiae genes . the analysis of small rna density revealed that two genes agap <dig> and agap <dig> produced one-third of total 21-nt reads in our libraries . the agap006442-associated 21-nt reads mapped to both sense and antisense strands , whereas agap003387-derived 21-nt reads were predominantly in sense orientation. among the top abundant small rna producing genes, agap <dig> produced 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in almost equivalent proportion from both strands with a sense bias ; whereas agap004586-associated 21-nt reads and 24-30-nt reads showed a strong antisense bias . both agap <dig> and agap <dig> were producing paired 24-30-nt reads with “ping-pong” signatures . the most abundant genic source of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in our libraries was agap <dig>  which encodes a protein with unknown function and has a single ortholog in a. quadriannulatus - aqua <dig>  putative lipoprotein . interestingly more than 50% of 24-30-nt reads in sugar- and blood-fed mosquitoes and more than 75% in p. berghei-infected mosquitoes were associated with agap <dig> . this gene produced small rna reads predominantly in a sense orientation including two classes of the most abundant reads, 27-nt and 29-nt in length . genomic profiling of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads that mapped to agap <dig> showed asymmetric distribution with the highest read density at the 3′ end . importantly, the ping-pong pirna pairs were not detected within the agap003387-derived population of 24-30-nt reads . the 3′ end pirna profile associated with agap <dig> might be similar to the profile of genes producing pirnas from their 3′ utr in d. melanogaster  <cit> .

the vast majority of endogenous sirnas and pirnas originate from transcription of tes, cis-natural antisense transcripts  or long inverted repeat transcripts . the genomic organization of agap <dig> and agap <dig>  which produced the most abundant genic sirnas, does not show any 3′-end transcript overlapping . similarly to those, agap <dig> is a stand-alone gene, no other known rna transcripts within a  <dig> kb genomic window has been annotated , yet we cannot rule out the existence of unknown cis-nat transcripts in the analysed genomic region. agap <dig> exhibits convergent arrangement with its neighbour gene showing tail-to-tail organization with agap <dig>  the most abundant an. gambiae endo-sirnas were not associated with convergent transcripts, similarly to ae. aegypti, which produced the majority of endo-sirnas from non-overlapping regions  and only  <dig> % from tail-to-tail adjacent transcripts  <cit> . interestingly, the detailed examination of the an. gambiae loci producing the most abundant classes of genic small rna reads revealed that 80% of the analysed protein coding genes were framed by nested or clustered repetitive elements or tes in the surrounding distal and proximal regions.

we also analysed the effect of rna silencing of piwi-class and dcr-2/ago- <dig> genes on the agap <dig> and agap <dig> transcript levels using qpcr. the expression level of agap <dig> mrna was not associated with a significant desilencing; whereas, level of agap <dig> transcript was increased in piwi-class silenced mosquitoes . correlation analysis of the genic 3′ utr pirnas revealed that highly expressed transcripts tend to generate more pirnas  <cit> . curiously, the increased level of agap <dig> transcript in blood-fed and infected mosquitoes did not correlate with pirna levels in our libraries measured at  <dig> h after feeding . however, the transcriptional level of agap <dig> detected  <dig> h after infectious blood feeding was significantly lower than after a regular blood feeding . this might reflect the delayed kinetics of the pirna-mediated silencing.

multiple negative feedbacks regulating the core components of small rna silencing pathways have been reported  <cit> . to identify sirnas and pirnas involved in negative feedback circuits in the sirna and pirna networks in an. gambiae, we analysed 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads that mapped to the main components of the sirna and pirna pathways . we noticed that the core components of the sirna biogenesis dcr- <dig>  its cofactors r2d <dig> and loqs- <dig> were associated with extremely low read numbers  mapped to the sense strand. we also observed a similar tendency for the rna helicase spindle e , dead-box helicase ddx <dig>  and rm <dig>  which are known to be implicated in rna biogenesis, microrna and viral rna processing in drosophila  <cit> . in the an. gambiae genome four putative rm <dig> orthologs were predicted by orthodb; among them only agap <dig> was associated with a substantial number of 24-30-nt reads mapped in a sense orientation . interestingly, the core components of the microrna pathway, which produces endogenous small rnas involved in repression of partially complementary mrnas, drosha, pasha and dcr- <dig> were not enriched for 21-nt or 24-30-nt reads . besides two main effectors of the risc, ago- <dig>  and ago- <dig>  were associated with higher density of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in a sense orientation.table  <dig> 
genic sirnas and pirnas associated with the core components of the small rna silencing pathways in
an. gambiae



small rna pathway
sirnas
pirnas

21-nt read number
24-30-nt read number

sirna
loqs-2
agap009781
r2d2
agap009887
dcr-2
agap012289
ago-2
agap011537

pirna
ago-3
agap008862
aub-piwi2
agap009509
aub-piwi1
agap011204
zucchini
agap006233
armitage
agap006939
tudor
agap005672
vreteno
agap010722
shutdown
agap011458
pimet/hen1
agap005646
tj
agap010030
mael
agap002022
spne
agap002829
rm <dig> 
agap003663
agap004912
agap005652
agap012045

mirna
dcr-1
agap002836
drosha
agap008087
pasha
agap002554
ago-1
agap011717


in addition, the core components of the pirna biogenesis were not associated with genic sirnas and pirnas in our libraries . the exception was agap <dig>  one of the tudor-domain containing orthologues that are known to be involved in the regulation of various small rnas. two genes, traffic jam  and maelstrom , have been reported to be implicated in the pirna biogenesis and pirna production in d. melanogaster and in ae. aegypti  <cit> . unlike ae. aegypti and d. melanogaster, the an. gambiae orthologs of tj and mael showed extremely low frequency for the associated genic 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads. overall, we observed that in adult an. gambiae mosquitoes i) genic-sirnas were expressed at much lower levels than te-sirnas in all analysed libraries, ii) genic pirnas were generally lacking ping-pong sequence signatures and most likely produced by “ping-pong” independent mechanism, iii) the core components of the sirna and pirna biogenesis were under avoidance of the negative feedback regulatory loop.

clustering sirnas and pirnas in the genome of an. gambiae
in drosophila, the majority of pirnas  derive from uni- and dual-strand pirna clusters that occupy only  <dig> % of the fly genome and consist largely of transposon sequences  <cit> . the genomic loci producing clustering pirnas are often associated with clustering sirnas  <cit> . we analysed the genomic pirna and sirna cluster distribution in collapsed sugar-fed mosquito libraries by scoring for clustering of the uniquely and multiply mapped 21-nt reads and 24–30-nt reads . we found that the chromosome  <dig> was highly enriched for total abundance of both uniquely and multiply mapped clustering pirnas and sirnas . a detailed analysis of transcriptional activity of the clustering small rnas revealed that the most abundant pirna and sirna clusters were associated with te clusters on chromosomes x and 2r, respectively . in drosophila the most abundant pirna cluster size ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> kb and in aedes mosquitoes - from  <dig> to  <dig> kb  <cit> . in an. gambiae the size of the most abundant genic pirna and te-pirna clusters was  <dig> kb and  <dig> kb respectively , suggesting that an. gambiae pirna clusters cover greater genomic distances then in the genome of d. melanogaster or ae. aegypti. we also noticed that pirna clusters produced more than 90% of the detected pirnas in an. gambiae; similarly to 84% of the observed pirnas produced by the pirna clusters in a. agypti  <cit> . in an. gambiae, clustering te-pirnas predominantly mapped to the antisense strand, whereas genic clustering pirnas were in sense orientation . in addition, clustering sirnas were mapped preferentially to the sense strand of both, protein coding genes and tes in our libraries.table  <dig> 
the top  <dig> abundant te-associated pirna clusters in
an. gambiae



chr
start
end
length
unique read number
total read number
s unique read number
as unique read number
s total read number
as total read number
s - sense orientation with respect to the genomic coordinates, as - antisense orientation with respect to the genomic coordinates.
pattern of clustered sirna and pirna transcriptional activity in
an. gambiae
. graph showing hot spots of clustering sirnas and pirnas in respect to genomic distance in the an. gambiae genome. sirnas , pirnas  and “ping-pong” pirna pairs  in the clustering loci are shown as indicated.




a number of studies in an. gambiae have reported that blood meal intake induces massive changes in transcript levels  <dig> h after feeding compared to non-blood fed mosquitoes  <cit> . to determine how endogenous sirnas and pirnas respond to blood feeding and p. berghei infection, we analysed small rna expression in mosquitoes  <dig> h after regular and infectious blood feeding. we quantified and assessed the differential expression of 21-nt and 24-30-nt reads in our libraries using the deseq <dig>  package  <cit> . we detected very few sirnas and pirnas with statistically significant changes in their levels in p. berghei-infected and blood-fed mosquitoes . it has been shown that biotic stress triggered by pathogen infection can induce de novo production of endogenous sirnas and pirnas in mosquitoes  <cit> . in our analysis p. berghei infection was not associated with de novo production of te-sirnas or te-pirnas. however, blood feeding induced more than ten-fold changes in the expression levels of the under-represented  21-nt and 24-30-nt reads mapped to dna transposons . additionally, we detected only a few de novo produced genic pirnas and sirnas in the presence of p. berghei and a few genic pirnas were induced by regular blood feeding  that became a source of additional pirnas in adult females. overall, we observed mild changes in the expression levels of endogenous sirnas and pirnas in adult blood-fed and p. berghei-infected mosquitoes that may represent a general stress response to blood feeding and infection.

expression of the core components of the piwi and sirna pathways in an. gambiae
while the relevance of the pirna and sirna pathways in adult an. gambiae mosquitoes requires additional functional validation, we performed a detailed analysis of the pirna and sirna pathways gene expression in an. gambiae. we examined expression of the core components of the pirna  and sirna  pathways in adult whole body and organs composed of somatic and germline cells . the qpcr-based measurement revealed that the piwi-class transcripts were mainly expressed in adult gonads, ovaries and testes , suggesting an essential and conserved role in germline development and maintenance. besides, we did not observe any specific enrichment for dcr- <dig> and ago- <dig> in any of the analysed samples . to determine whether the core components of the pirna and sirna pathways respond to blood feeding and p. berghei infection, we analysed the gene expression after regular and infectious feeding in mosquito females . the infectious blood feeding had only a mild effect on the transcript levels measured at  <dig> h time point . interestingly the dcr- <dig> and ago- <dig> transcript levels were specifically up-regulated in infected female guts . in addition, we observed a significant up-regulation of the piwi-class transcripts  <dig> h after regular blood feeding .figure  <dig> 
quantitative rt-pcr analysis of
dcr-2
,
ago-2
and
piwi
-class transcripts in
an. gambiae
.  transcript expression profiling in adult somatic and germline organs and tissues. transcript levels were normalized to rpl <dig>  and shown as a fold change above the level in one-two day old female  and male  whole body respectively.  analysis of dcr- <dig>  ago- <dig> and piwi-class transcripts  <dig> h after infectious feeding and  <dig> h after regular blood feeding in whole female body. the transcript levels are shown as a fold change above the level in sugar-fed females.  developmental profiling showing the transcript levels in embryos , 1st instar larvae , 2nd-3rd instar larvae , 4th instar larvae , male and female pupae , one-two day old male adults. transcript levels were normalized to rpl <dig> and shown as a fold change above the level in one-two day old female whole body.



given the important requirement and function of the pirna pathway during early development, we also performed a developmental profiling of the piwi-class genes in an. gambiae . there was a significant increase in the piwi-class transcript expression during early stages compared with adult stage we examined. we found two peaks of the piwi-class transcript expression at embryonic and l <dig> stages ; the first peak might be consistent with zygotic expression of the piwi-class transcripts; the second peak was detected at the late larval stage . both peaks coincided with gonad development and formation during embryonic and larval stages in an. gambiae.

discussion
both the sirna and pirna pathways are known to be involved in the control of te activity and gene expression. here we examined the diversity and abundance of the mixed somatic/germline pirnas and sirnas in an. gambiae adult mosquitoes. the vast majority of an. gambiae pirnas and sirnas were produced from tes in all analysed libraries. the an. gambiae te-derived sirnas mapped predominantly to class ii tes and pirnas mapped to class i tes; this is consistent with the previously published observation in ae. aegypti  <cit> . the an. gambiae te-associated pirnas showed “ping-pong” sequence signatures and were most likely produced via “ping-pong” dependent mechanism. we found that more than 90% of the te-derived 24-30-nt reads were associated with three ltr transposons, gypsy, copia and pao-bel that represent the most transcriptionally active te-pirnas in mosquito species . among them, gypsy was the most abundant source of endogenous pirnas that mapped predominantly to the truncated or solo-ltr copies in the an. gambiae genome. overall, our results showed that te-pirna production in an. gambiae shared the basic features of pirna biogenesis, which is conserved among insect species  <cit> . it is worth noting that the relationship between the abundance of te-pirnas and pirna-mediated silencing is complex and likely depends on both transcriptional and posttranscriptional mechanisms of silencing, which might differ among tes  <cit> . interestingly, a number of gypsy insertions are associated with a set of known immune genes in an. gambiae and plausibly influence the expression of the targeted genes  <cit> .

pirnas are generally produced from a long primary rna precursors uni- and bidirectionally transcribed from pirna clusters containing transposon sequence in random orientation  <cit> . interestingly, the orientation of the primary pirna transcript can be regulated throughout development  <cit> . we found that more than 90% of clustering endogenous pirnas were produced by tes in an. gambiae, similarly to d. melagaster. in mosquito species, large differences have been observed in genome size and content of tes. in contrast to an. gambiae, ae. agypti has an expansion of the pirna biogenesis genes and a large te load that constitutes 47% of the genome and produces only 19% of the total pirnas  <cit> . nevertheless, the te-derived pirnas represent an important aspect of robust control of te activities and associated with a low rate of te remobilization in ae. agypti  <cit> . in an. gambiae, we observed a correlation between te transcription and antisense production of pirnas similarly to ae. agypti. in addition, the association of clustering pirnas with te-derived sequences was statistically significant in an. gambiae, in contrast to ae. agypti. curiously, a significant proportion of the endogenous pirna population was derived from protein coding genes in both an. gambiae and ae. agypti species  and mapped predominantly to the sense strand of host genes within gene boundaries in an. gambiae. we showed that a majority of the an. gambiae genic pirnas were missing the ‘ping-pong” sequence signatures and most likely produced via “ping-pong” independent mechanism. interestingly, the core components of the pirna biogenesis were not targeted by endogenous sirnas and pirnas in the an. gambiae adult mosquitoes, unlike ae. agypti. altogether, these findings suggest that some aspects of the pirna biogenesis and pirna-mediated regulation might differ between distinct mosquito species.

it has been shown that in the presence of exogenous and endogenous genetic elements the production of endo-pirnas and endo-sirnas were induced in drosophila and mosquitoes  <cit> . furthermore, arbovirus infection of cells derived from natural vector a. albopictus and ae. aegypti induced de novo production of virus-specific small rnas and endogenous pirnas mapped to tes  <cit> . an. gambiae is a principal malaria vector in sub-saharan africa of a high medical importance. we found that blood feeding induced de novo production of genic pirnas and pirnas mapped to dna transposons that became a source of additional pirnas in adult an. gambiae females. however, in the presence of p. berghei parasite we did not detect de novo produced endogenous pirnas. an. gambiae is also known as a primary vector of the alphavirus o’nyong-yong. it has been shown that antiviral defence against systemic o’nyong-yong infection in an. gambiae requires ago- <dig> activity for efficient rna silencing  <cit> . yet the detailed analysis of small rna repertoire in the infected an. gambiae mosquitoes using deep sequencing has been not performed so far.

mosquito piwi family members exhibit both germline specific expression restricted to gonads and somatic expression resulting in functional rnai activity  <cit> . in our study, the core components of the sirna and pirna pathways were up-regulated after blood feeding in an. gambiae female guts and gonads respectively. recently, the expression profiles of piwi-class transcripts have been reported in the closely related an. stephensi species  <cit> . both anopheles species showed gonad specific enrichment for piwi-class transcripts and up-regulation of their expression levels after blood feeding .

te-dependent chromosomal rearrangements are known to be involved in the shaping of genome landscapes and creating new gene blocks that influence ecological adaptation, plasticity, behaviour and vector capacity in the pan-african malaria vector, an. gambiae  <cit> . in the genome of an. gambiae the sex chromosome and autosomes have different genome landscapes and distinct enrichments by tes. the distribution of tes is higher overall near centromeres in the euchromatic regions, near the telomeres and in addition differs by chromosome arms  <cit> . the highest te density is associated with the fastest evolving chromosome x, where the majority of fixed inversions were found. importantly, the x chromosome is enriched for genes that are known to play a role in reproductive isolation and specification in anopheles. a large number of autosomal paracentric polymorphic inversions has been reported on the 2r chromosome, which is associated overall with the lowest transposon and repeat densities  <cit> . interestingly, the majority of the 2r arm inversions are associated with clustered segmental duplications and insertions of remnants of repetitive sequences including class i and ii transposable elements  <cit> . in addition, it has been reported that the breakpoints for the chromosomal inversion 2la appear to be enriched for ltr transposons  <cit> . these inversions are associated with population structure, conferring ecological adaptation and altering mosquito adaptive fitness  <cit> . further study is required to determine the precise role of the endogenous sirnas and pirnas in the evolution of regulatory and functional genome landscape of an. gambiae. chromosomal aberration with a deleterious effect on viability and reproduction could be introduced artificially to reduce the size of the vector population, therefore representing a potential vector control strategy based on manipulation of the an. gambiae genome and fitness.

CONCLUSIONS
we analysed the endogenous sirna and pirna populations in the african malaria mosquito an. gambiae. like ae. agypti, vast majority of an. gambiae pirnas and sirnas were produced by tes from class i and class ii transposons respectively. the most abundant an. gambiae te-associated pirnas were 26-27-nt in length and most likely produced by a “ping-pong” dependent mechanism; whereas the majority of genic pirnas were 29-nt in length and were missing the ‘ping-pong” sequence signatures. vast majority of the detected pirnas were produced from te-associated clusters in an. gambiae, similarly to d. melanogaster. overall, te-sirnas and te-pirnas were expressed at much higher levels than genic sirnas and pirnas. the main components of the sirna and pirna biogenesis were under avoidance of being targeted by endogenous sirnas and pirnas in adult an. gambiae mosquitoes. importantly, an. gambiae adult gonads were highly enriched by piwi-class transcripts indicating the existence of a conserved mechanism, which controls the expression and function of piwi-class genes in mosquitoes. in addition, the piwi-class transcripts and two core components of the sirna pathway, dcr- <dig> and ago- <dig> were up-regulated after regular and infectious blood feeding in the anopheles female body and infected female guts respectively. moreover, blood feeding and p. berghei infection induced de novo production of genic pirnas that became a source of additional pirnas in adult females. the mild changes in the expression levels of endogenous sirnas and pirnas were observed in response to blood feeding and p. berghei infection, which might represent a general response to biotic stress.

