BACKGROUND
micrornas are small non-coding, single stranded rna of ~ <dig> nucleotides in length that are abundantly found in eukaryotic cells  <cit> . the complementarity is between seed regions of mature mirnas and their target messengers, enabling mirna-mrna interactions to occur. these interactions are crucial for post-transcriptional regulation of target gene expression by obstructing the mrna translation or stability in the cytoplasm, and depend on both the expression levels of mirnas and target mrnas  <cit> . some mirnas are reported as oncomirs which could function as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors  <cit> . for example, mir- <dig> decreased tumor suppressor pdcd <dig> expression and promoted invasion, intravasation and metastasis in colorectal cancer  <cit> . mir- <dig> also regulated pten-dependent pathway and affected cell growth, migration and invasion of hepatocellular cancer  <cit> . moreover, mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> were significantly associated with cancer metastasis and patients with higher mir- <dig> or mir- <dig> expression levels had worse survival  <cit> . mir- <dig> was found to be up-regulated during innate immune response and autoimmune disorders as well as in various malignancies. in addition, mir- <dig> targeted tumor suppressor wee <dig> homolog-s. pombe  and caused gene alternation required for cancer development and progression  <cit> . on the other hand, let- <dig> decreased cell proliferation and migration of glioblastoma and reduced tumor size in xenograft model  <cit> . let- <dig> prevented early cancer progression through suppressing embryonic gene high mobility group, a <dig>  expression  <cit> . metastatic gastric cancer cells secreted let- <dig> via exosomes into the extracellular environment to maintain their oncogenesis  <cit> .

recently, many reports showed that they successfully identified mirna targets using mirna expression profiles  <cit> . huang et al. used rna expression data to identify  <dig> high-confidence target predictions for  <dig> human mirnas and further verified let-7b was down-regulated in retinoblastoma and cdc25a and bcl7a were targets of let-7b using qrt-pcr and microarray profile. li et al. combined sequence complementarity, mirna expression level, and protein abundance to identify mirna targets for elevating their predictions. they also found that translational repression of targets by mirnas was dominant mechanism in mirna regulation. moreover, sequence-based computational methods have been broadly used to predict putative mirna targets  <cit> , and can reach pretty good prediction rate, including cancer-related mirnas  <cit> . previous report has also indicated that computational prediction should take into account the expression profiles of both mirna and mrna  <cit> . therefore, the development of an integrative approach that incorporated expression data to facilitate the identification of condition-specific targets of mirnas becomes increasingly important.

microrna can obstruct the translation of mrna, thereby directly affecting protein abundance  <cit>  and pins  <cit> . for example, yu et al. analyzed correlations between transcription factors  and mirnas and further discovered that different regulatory networks formed by mirna and tfs were involved in different biological functions  <cit> . additionally, liang et al. found global correlation between mirna repression and protein-protein interactions and elucidated the related biological processes of mirna-regulated pins  <cit> . pins are sets of interactions formed by two physically interacting proteins, which are fundamental to most biological processes  <cit> . with the accumulation of ppi data, it is becoming increasingly possible to understand the architecture and function of the cellular network by computational approaches  <cit> . recently, we characterized the global properties of mirna regulation in human pin and proposed possible mechanisms of how these mirnas regulate pins  <cit> . additionally, previous studies have demonstrated that mirnas can affect specific biological functions which are involved in tumorigenesis and cancer progression through the regulation of a small number of genes within biological networks, such as pins  <cit> . thus, assessing how mirnas affect pins could facilitate the discovery of potential mirna-related networks and allow the characterization of associated biological functions.

in this study, we proposed an integrative analysis which suggested that mirna-regulated pins could be identified based on the combination of down-regulated mirnas and up-regulated mrnas. the procedure for mirna-regulated pin identification and analysis is illustrated in figure  <dig>  we subsequently showed that the networks that were modulated by these down-regulated mirnas in tumors tended to be activated in gastric cancer. among these was the mir-148a-regulated pin, which was involved in metastasis-related biological processes that were associated with tumor suppression. in particular, mir-148a was shown to inhibit tumor invasion, migration, adhesion and cell growth, and prolonged patient survival. these findings suggest that mir-148a is not only a potential prognostic marker that can be used for the detection of human gastric cancer, but it can also suppress gastric cancer progression through the regulation of its associated network.

RESULTS
microrna-regulated pins in gastric cancer
although micrornas are known to reduce the levels of their target mrnas  <cit> , expression of a mirna target may not always co-vary, in the reverse direction, with its mirna regulator, due to the presence of primary tf regulation. a reverse correlation in expression profiles between a mirna and corresponding predicted targets increases the confidence of the conditional mirna-target interaction . based on these observations, we combined differentially expressed mirnas and target genes, down-regulated  mirnas versus up-regulated  targets, to identify the mirna-regulated pins in gastric cancer. the mirna-regulated pins were established according to the proteins encoded by differentially expressed target genes and their interacting partners in the human pin. however, only  <dig> significantly down-regulated mirnas and no significantly up-regulated mirnas were found . consequently, we identified  <dig> pins that were modulated by  <dig> down-regulated mirnas in gastric cancer. furthermore, the activities of mirna-regulated pins in normal and tumor tissues, activated or inactivated, were investigated on the basis of the enrichment of co-expressed ppis  in the network . among the  <dig> down-regulated mirna-regulated pins, 70%  of them were activated in tumors . on the other hand, 51%  of the remaining  <dig> unchanged mirna-regulated pins were inactivated in both tumor and normal tissue . considering that hprd pin was incomplete, we randomly removed some proportions of ppis, from 5%  to 20% , and evaluated the effects on the activities of mirna-regulated networks. most of the mirnas remained activated in tumor  with  <dig> repeated random removal tests , indicating that the results were robust against missing ppis. thus, we conclude that 16/ <dig> networks are activated in gastric cancer and that these networks are modulated as a result of down-regulated mirnas expression. therefore, we suggest that the  <dig> down-regulated mirnas act as oncomirs and function as tumor suppressors.

additionally, we assessed the discrimination power of mirna expression levels to classify normal and tumor samples by calculating the receiver operating characteristic  curves and the area under the curve . among the  <dig> down-regulated mirnas, the one that provided the best discrimination was mir-29c , which gave an overall correct classification of 77%. moreover, of the  <dig> oncomirs, mir-29c, mir-768-3p, mir-26a, mir- <dig> and mir-148a were found to give an auc of more than  <dig>   individually. when all the  <dig> oncomirs were combined, the overall correct classification was elevated to 93% . among the remaining  <dig> down-regulated mirnas, only mir- <dig> and mir- <dig> were found to have an auc of more than  <dig> . when these  <dig> mirnas combined, the overall correct classification was 82%  . taken together, the  <dig> oncomirs showed greater discrimination between tumor and normal tissues than the remaining  <dig> down-regulated mirnas.

we also investigated the relationship between the expression levels of the  <dig> down-regulated mirnas and survival rates. the median was used as a cut-off value and as a result, the expression levels for each mirna were divided into two groups; high and low expressed. the maximum of the difference in survival rates  between high and low groups was further calculated . our findings indicated that the dmax among the  <dig> oncomirs was more significant  than that in the remaining  <dig> down-regulated mirnas . these results suggest that the  <dig> oncomirs may act as better prognostic markers for gastric cancer in comparison to the remaining  <dig> down-regulated mirnas. therefore, we conclude that the  <dig> oncomirs have the potential to suppress tumor biogenesis.

the potential functions of oncomir-regulated pins
a key question is whether the  <dig> oncomirs regulate tumor progression-related biological processes in gastric cancer. to address this, we developed a pin-based approach to reveal the possible functional roles of mirnas . our findings showed that union of mirna-regulated targets  and their interacting partners  displayed the most enriched go functional terms and trees on average . the low coverage of l <dig> genes  , indicated that the functional relationship between l <dig> genes was weak. however, the high coverage of union genes   suggested that there was a very strong functional relationship between these genes. additionally, our previous analysis on mirna regulation in human pin  <cit>  also suggested that mirna-regulated genes and their interacting partners jointly showed significantly higher modularity than mirna-regulated genes alone. based on these results, analysis of regulatory mechanisms of mirnas in the context of the pin enables a more accurate prediction of the potential functions of mirnas.

applying this pin-based approach to  <dig> oncomirs, the enriched biological processes of their regulated pins can be discovered . it was observed that most of the enriched biological processes were related to tumor progression. for instance, mir-142-3p- and mir-768-3p-regulated pins were related to apoptosis and cell cycling, respectively. interestingly, the mir-148a-regulated pin was the only network that was associated with cancer metastasis-related functions, such as integrin-mediated signaling, cell-matrix adhesion and wound healing. therefore, mir-148a was chosen for the further studies.

mir-148a-regulated pin and its potential functions in gastric cancer
to further confirm the abundance of mir-148a in tumor tissues, we performed qrt-pcr in  <dig> paired tumor and normal tissues and found its expression levels in tumor tissues were significantly lower than those in normal tissues  , which was consistent with our mirna microarray data. additionally, the impact of mir-148a expression levels on the prognosis of gastric cancer patients by kaplan-meier survival analyses was studied in the  <dig> paired tissues. patients with high mir-148a expression levels showed significantly higher 5-year overall survival rates  compared with patients with low mir-148a levels . univariate analysis showed that mir-148a and early stages correlated with better survival, whereas peritoneal and vascular invasion predicted very poor outcomes. on multivariate analysis, mir-148a retained an independent prognostic power on overall survival  . a roc curve was also used to evaluate mir-148a as a diagnostic marker for gastric cancer. the auc was then used as an indicator of the capacity of mir-148a to act as a diagnostic marker, with higher auc values reflecting a higher diagnostic potential. roc curve analysis of mir-148a showed that it had an auc of  <dig>  . these results indicate that mir-148a could discriminate between normal and tumor tissues and serve as an effective prognostic marker for gastric cancer. based on these results, we conclude that mir-148a is highly associated with gastric cancer. the mir-148a-regulated pin was visualized in figure 2d and the enriched biological processes of this network are shown in figure 2e. the significantly over-represented go functional terms were separated into three functional groups, including cell-matrix adhesion , wound healing  and cell surface receptor linked signal transduction . these three enriched go functions suggest that mir-148a is related to cancer metastasis and is likely to regulate these three functions through its regulated pin.

pai- <dig>  itgb <dig>  vav <dig> and itga <dig> are oncogenes and direct targets of mir-148a
four target genes of mir-148a were identified to be up-regulated within its regulated pin, including pai- <dig> , itgb <dig> , vav <dig> and itga <dig> . to further explore whether mir-148a affected cancer metastasis through its regulated pin, a luciferase reporter assay was performed to analyze the relationship between mir-148a and these target genes. mir-148a over-expression significantly reduced the expression levels of these target genes, while their expression levels were significantly elevated in anti-mir-148a inhibitor-transfected tumor cells . we carried out luciferase assay for site mutant to further ensure the correlations between mir-148a and these four genes . we constructed each putative mir-148a target sites or its site mutation in sequences corresponded to seed sequence of mir-148a into a pmir-report luciferase expression vector  and analyzed reporter assays . our results showed that the repressions by mir-148a in these four genes were completely abolished. these results suggest that these four genes are direct targets of mir-148a. these observations suggest that mir-148a plays a significant role in affecting the biological functions of gastric cancer cells by regulating the expression of target genes within its regulated pin.

in addition to being markers for the detection and prognosis of many types of cancers  <cit> , these four genes have previously been reported to be implicated in the promotion of cell invasion, migration, adhesion, growth and angiogenesis, which suggests a possible role for these genes in the regulation of tumor oncogenesis and progression. to determine whether these genes played a role in the oncogenesis of gastric cancer, their expression levels in tumor tissues were measured by immunoblotting. all four genes showed higher expression levels in tumor tissues compared with normal tissues , indicating that they might have potential oncogenic functions and were likely to be key downstream effectors of mir-148a in this network.

the correlation between mir-148a and clinicopathological factors
to evaluate the clinical significance of mir-148a in gastric cancer, the relationship between mir-148a expression levels in tumor tissues and the degree of metastasis was analyzed . clinical analyses revealed that high expression levels of mir-148a significantly correlated with a reduction in distant metastasis , organ invasion  and peritoneal invasion  . the relationship between mir-148a levels and all clinical factors was shown in additional file  <dig>  table s <dig>  these results suggest that mir-148a reduces the aggressiveness of gastric cancer. interestingly, our findings revealed that several functions, including migration  and adhesion, were identified within the mir-148a-regulated pin and were also associated with an aggressive tumor phenotype. this indicates that mir-148a likely plays an important role in regulating the malignant progression of tumor cells.

t: tumor; n: normal. a t-test analysis. b one-way anova analysis. *p <  <dig> .

mir-148a inhibits cell invasion, migration, adhesion and growth
in vitro invasion assays were performed to examine whether mir-148a suppressed more aggressive forms of tumors. human gastric cancer ags, sc-m <dig> and mkn- <dig> cell lines were transfected with a mir-148a precursor or an anti-mir-148a inhibitor. the results showed that over-expression of mir-148a in these cell lines significantly reduced tumor cell invasion, while anti-mir-148a-treated tumor cells showed elevated tumor cell invasion . to determine whether mir-148a over-expression also affected tumor progression, migration, adhesion and proliferation assays were performed on mir-148a-transfected tumor cells. our findings indicated that over-expressed mir-148a significantly reduced tumor cell migration and adhesion, while anti-mir-148a-treated tumor cells showed significantly elevated migratory and adhesive abilities . additionally, tumor cell growth was observed to be reduced in response to mir-148a over-expression , but elevated in response to anti-mir-148a inhibitor treatment . taken together, these observations indicate that mir-148a can inhibit cell invasion, migration, adhesion and growth, thereby acting as a potent regulator of tumor suppression.

discussion
mirnas are known to function as gene silencers and their expression profiles have been reported to be negatively correlated with those of their target genes  <cit> . in particular, up-regulated target genes were found to be specific targets of down-regulated mirnas in gastric cancer. in order to reveal the possible roles that these mirnas play in gastric cancer, the predicted target genes of mirnas were analyzed within the human pin and it was shown that a stronger functional correlation existed for mirna targets that were linked to specific ppi partners than for mirna targets alone. thus, this method provides us to understand the biological functions of mirnas.

to find out the mirna-regulated pins in gastric cancer, the expression profiles of mirnas were integrated and analyzed within the human pin. twenty three down-regulated mirna-regulated pins were identified based on their up-regulated target genes in gastric cancer. among these, sixteen pins were activated. the results suggest that repressing these mirnas in gastric cancer can activate their regulated pins. this may be due to mirna-mediated regulation of pivot genes, such as hubs  <cit> , or differentially expressed genes in the biological networks. therefore, we suggest that these  <dig> down-regulated mirnas act as oncomirs and function as tumor suppressors. additionally, these  <dig> oncomirs were associated with increased tumor suppression potential and increased survival rates compared with the  <dig> remaining down-regulated mirnas, suggesting that these oncomirs can be effective markers for the diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.

among  <dig> down-regulated mirnas, we found that the mir-148a is down-regulated in gastric cancer and its regulated pin was associated with tumor metastasis-related functions, such as integrin-mediated signaling, cell-matrix adhesion, wound healing and blood coagulation. these findings were validated by over-expressing mir-148a in ags, sc-m <dig> and mkn- <dig> gastric cancer cell lines. while mir-148a over-expression led to a significant reduction in the invasive, migratory, adhesiveness and growth properties of gastric cancer cells, mir-148a inhibitor-treated tumor cells enhanced these effects. lujambio et al. found mir-148a inhibited metastasis formation in xenograft models  <cit>  and chen et al. showed that expression level of mir-148a in human gastric cancer was significantly lower than that in their matched nontumor adjacent tissues  <cit> . these results support our findings, mir-148a regulates malignant progression in gastric cancer. additionally, patients with high mir-148a expression levels exhibited a significantly better overall survival rate than those with low mir-148a levels, suggesting that mir-148a might function as a tumor suppressor and could potentially serve as a diagnostic and prognostic marker for gastric cancer.

we next ascertained whether mir-148a-mediated down-regulation of pai- <dig>  vav <dig>  itga <dig>  and itgb <dig> expression resulted in the inhibition of malignant progression of tumor cells. these genes were identified as up-regulated targets of mir-148a within its regulated pin and have been reported to have a high oncogenic potential and are associated with aggressive tumor cell phenotypes  <cit> . herein, we showed that their expression levels were reduced in response to mir-148a over-expression but elevated in response to anti-mir-148a inhibitor treatment. overall, these results suggest that mir-148a influences the tumor progression-related biological functions of cancer cells by regulating a small subset of cancer-relevant genes within its regulated pin.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, a novel integrative network-based approach was used to demonstrate the dynamic and conditional nature of mirna-regulated gene expression and to discover the potential functions of these mirnas in gastric cancer. furthermore, this approach facilitated the identification of  <dig> activated oncomir-regulated pins which might be used as possible diagnostic and prognostic markers of gastric cancer. in particular, mir-148a was identified as a potential prognostic marker in gastric cancer patients, with the ability to function as a tumor suppressor through its regulated pin. this study not only provides an insight into the mirna-regulated pins that are involved in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer; it also shows that a network-based approach can be used to identify novel diagnostic and prognostic markers of disease.

