BACKGROUND
cryptosporidium is one of the most common enteric protozoan parasites infecting both humans and animals  <cit>  through water. recently, the association of cryptosporidium with biofilms in water bodies was shown to be responsible for frequent sporadic cryptosporidium outbreaks  <cit> . studies have also shown that cryptosporidium oocysts incorporate readily into biofilms  <cit> , and concerns have been expressed over the sudden sloughing of biofilms from water pipes with an accumulated aggregation or ‘bolus’ of oocysts that dramatically increase the infective dose needed to cause infection  <cit> . in addition, the association among biofilm communities is believed to influence the propagation of cryptosporidium through both environmental and water treatment systems  <cit> . however, the behaviour of cryptosporidium within a nutrient-rich biofilm is still not well defined  <cit> .

as cryptosporidium was believed to be an obligate intracellular parasite and, therefore, lacking the capability to proliferate within biofilms  <cit> , initial studies focused only on the association of the oocyst stage within biofilms  <cit> . however, the notion that cryptosporidium is an obligate intracellular parasite has been challenged following the observation of extracellular multiplication of cryptosporidium in in-vitro and cell free cultures  <cit> , and there is increasing evidence that cryptosporidium is able to multiply extracellularly or in the absence of a host cell  <cit> . with this, quantitative polymerase chain reaction  data have shown that cryptosporidium can multiply within aquatic biofilms, with a 2– <dig> fold increase in cryptosporidium numbers observed over a  <dig> day period  <cit> .

to gain more detailed information about the dynamics and developmental biology of cryptosporidium after exposure to biofilms, we have examined stages of cryptosporidium produced in biofilms using confocal microscopy and scanning electron microscopy . direct correlation between confocal and sem data was performed  to both confirm that the observed structures were cryptosporidium life stages, and to describe their structure in greater detail. additionally, because excysted oocysts have a distinctly different morphology from that of intact oocysts and can be distinguished readily by flow cytometry  <cit> , we have used flow cytometry to track morphological changes to oocysts after exposure to an artificial biofilm system.

RESULTS
confocal microscopy
from day  <dig>  fluorescent oocysts containing internal sporozoites  and free sporozoites  with a rounded posterior and a pointed tapered anterior end were routinely observed. by day  <dig>  well formed, individual trophozoites  were routinely observed, and occasionally, aggregations of trophozoites were also seen . at day  <dig>  microgamonts  presumably containing masses of microgametes were identified, confirming that the process of merogony had occurred within the aquatic biofilm environment. interestingly, gamont-like cells were observed in the  <dig> day-old biofilms . this gamont-like stage in biofilms was also blunt-ended and rod-shaped , which complements the description by hijjawi et al.  <cit> . the internal structure of the cell was intensely labelled by sporo-glo™ antibody .figure  <dig> 
micrographs of
cryptosporidium
within
cryptosporidium-
exposed biofilms.  oocyst containing sporozoites;  free sporozoites;  individual trophozoites;  aggregated trophozoites.  confocal images;  superimposed confocal and brightfield images. scale bars = a & g:  <dig> μm; c:  <dig> μm; e:  <dig> μm.
micrographs of a
cryptosporidium
microgamont.  confocal image;  superimposed confocal and brightfield images. scale bar =  <dig> μm.
cryptosporidium
gamont-like cell identified within  <dig> day-old
cryptosporidium-exposed biofilms.  confocal image;  superimposed confocal and brightfield images. scale bars =  <dig>  μm.



scanning electron microscopy
in addition to confocal microscopy, high resolution imaging of cryptosporidium extracellular stages was performed using sem. similar to our confocal microscopy observations, empty oocysts with a wide opening and rough membrane  and free sporozoites  were observed from day  <dig>  by day  <dig>  trophozoites  and several large gamont-like cells  similar in size to type i and ii meronts observed previously by koh et al.  <cit> , were observed. these gamonts were further characterised as meronts when several unreleased type ii merozoites were detected within a single type ii meront . not surprisingly, free type i  and ii merozoites  were also frequently identified. the microgamonts within biofilms were also large  and contained a large number of microgametes. although these microgametes appeared to bud off from the microgamont, the identity of the sausage-like structures could not be determined. furthermore, extra large gamont-like cells with an unknown role were detected .figure  <dig> 
scanning electron micrographs of
cryptosporidium
within
cryptosporidium-exposed biofilms.  empty oocysts with a rough membrane appearance;  free sporozoite;  trophozoite;  large gamont cells  identified within  <dig> day-old biofilms;  type ii meront containing type ii merozoites within ;  free type i merozoites;  free type ii merozoites;  microgamont;  extra-large gamont. scale bars = a & b:  <dig>  μm; c & f:  <dig> μm; d & e:  <dig> μm; g:  <dig> nm; h:  <dig> μm; i:  <dig> μm.



to further support and consolidate our identification of cryptosporidium extracellular stages in biofilms, cryptosporidium-infected hct <dig> cells were also imaged for comparison. very similar morphological structures that were observed in biofilms were also observed in cell culture, including empty oocysts with a wide opening and rough membrane , sporozoites , rounded trophozoites , free circular shaped type i merozoites , free spindle shaped type ii merozoites , microgamonts with microgametes , and large gamont cells .figure  <dig> 
scanning electron micrographs of various
cryptosporidium
stages identified from
cryptosporidium
infected
in-vitro
cell culture showing complementary stages to that seen in biofilms.  empty oocyst;  various shaped individual trophozoites;  aggregated trophozoites;  type i merozoites;  type ii merozoites;  microgamonts;  large gamont-like cell. scale bars = a:  <dig> μm; b:  <dig>  μm; c-d & f-g:  <dig> μm; e:  <dig> μm; h:  <dig>  μm; i:  <dig> μm.



in addition to various developmental stages, the formation of a parasitophorous vacuole  by cryptosporidium was observed in biofilm environments . cryptosporidium with pv structures were observed in the biofilm systems from day  <dig>  the morphologies of these closely resembled pvs that were formed by cryptosporidium in hct <dig> cell culture , with the presence of radial folds and a button-like dense band area.figure  <dig> 
parasitophorous vacuole formation.  scanning electron micrograph showing evidence of parasitophorous vacuole formation by cryptosporidium in a biofilm environment.  magnified region depicted in a.  parasitophorous vacuole formation by cryptosporidium in hct <dig> cell culture, included for comparison.  magnified area depicted in c. arrows indicate radial fold and arrowheads indicate dense band area. scale bars = a:  <dig>  μm; b & d:  <dig> μm; c: 2μm.



correlative studies
correlative studies imaging the same cells by both confocal microscopy and sem further clearly identified that the extracellular stages observed in flow cell biofilms belonged to cryptosporidium. several key developmental stages representing both asexual and sexual reproduction were successfully correlated, including trophozoites, meronts, and merozoites. figure  <dig> shows structures that intensely expressed sporo-glo™ antibody when examined under confocal microscopy were trophozoites  and merozoites . under confocal microscopy, a group of type i merozoites were also detected . however, sem revealed that this group of cells were not free merozoites, but rather were residing within a meront that was not fluorescently labelled by sporo-glo™ antibody  and, therefore, not visible in the confocal image.figure  <dig> 
direct correlation of
cryptosporidium
stages using confocal microscopy  and sem .  superimposed confocal and sem images;  single trophozoite;  free type ii merozoites;  type i meront containing type i merozoites. scale bars = a:  <dig> μm; d:  <dig>  μm; g:  <dig> μm.



throughout the study, confocal microscopy revealed several large membrane-bound cellular structures . both the membrane and internal structures were fluorescently labelled. when these image data are presented in 3-dimensions , an undulated contour membrane structure can be clearly observed , and this was further confirmed with sem imaging . these undulations closely resemble the pv outer membrane described by landsberg and paperna  <cit>  from cryptosporidium infecting a fish. based upon the cell size  as observed in this study, these cells were presumed to be meronts.figure  <dig> 
correlation of a meront completely enveloped by a pv  under confocal microscopy  and sem . b) the three dimensional z-stack images of image a. d) magnified area depicted in image c showing undulating membrane peaks . scale bars = a & c:  <dig> μm; d:  <dig> μm.



flow cytometry analysis
cryptosporidium oocysts in biofilms
after exposure of unexcysted oocysts to pseudomonas biofilms for up to  <dig> days, no distinct oocyst population could be detected from the flow cell biofilm . conversely, several distinctive fluorescently labelled populations were observed from the waste samples . these included intact oocyst populations, which indicates, not surprisingly, that not all oocysts were accumulated within the biofilm. for the oocysts that were trapped and released back into the medium flow, it was evident that some of them had undergone excystation within the immature biofilm from as early as day  <dig> . this population was similar to the excysted oocyst population seen in the cell-free culture . as the biofilms matured from day  <dig> to day  <dig>  it also appeared that more oocysts had undergone excystation .

additionally, after both  <dig> and  <dig> days, a prominent biofilm population was identified within the flow cytometry profile. this biofilm population was similar to the population found in the biofilm-only controls , which suggests crypt-a-glo™ antibody may label some unknown component in the biofilm. interestingly, an unknown population that could only be observed in  <dig> day-old cryptosporidium-exposed biofilms was identified . the population expressed lower fluorescence intensity but had similar cell sizes to that of intact oocyst populations. the exact identity of this population remains unknown, but we suggest that these may be non-viable oocysts or oocysts that no longer expressed particular surface antigens after prolonged exposure to the biofilm environment.

when similar batches of unexcysted oocysts were introduced into the biofilm-free system, only intact oocyst populations were identified over the  <dig> day period . neither excysted oocysts nor other fluorescent populations such as matrix or unknown populations were detected within the samples. these observations confirmed that oocysts did not excyst in the absence of a biofilm.

observation of morphological changes to oocysts in cell-free culture
to further support our observation in the biofilm system, flow cytometry and confocal microscopy were used to observe morphological changes in cultured oocysts during excystation and to correlate this with the observed oocyst populations in cryptosporidium-exposed biofilm samples. flow cytometry showed that only unexcysted oocysts were present before excystation with acid water . immediately after the excystation procedure, a small population of excysted oocysts were identified in the flow cytometry profile . following further incubation in maintenance medium for  <dig> min or  <dig> h, the amount of fluorescent from excysted oocyst population increased . confocal and bright field microscopy revealed populations of oocysts in varying states and exhibiting variable sizes, which coincided well with the flow cytometry profile .

discussion
by using a combination of correlative techniques, including confocal microscopy, sem and flow cytometry, the findings described here demonstrate that cryptosporidium can not only excyst within aquatic biofilms, but also develop and multiply extracellularly without an epicellular association with a host cell. these stages include sporozoites, trophozoites, large meronts, merozoites, microgamonts, gamont-like cells, and extra-large gamont-like cells. the observation of these extracellular stages has served to emphasise that the extracellular capability of cryptosporidium cannot be disregarded.

traditional methods of confocal microscopy and immunolabelling were performed to reveal the subsequent fate of cryptosporidium after exposure to biofilms. overall, we showed that excystation occurred from day  <dig>  similar to other cell-free cultures studies  <cit> , aggregated trophozoites were commonly observed in the biofilms. these trophozoites may have fused together by a syzygy-like process, as described previously by borowski et al.  <cit>  and hijjawi et al.  <cit> .

by day  <dig>  developmental stages of cryptosporidium were much more prominent and easily identified, including the presence of a gamont-like stage. since this stage has not been commonly observed in the cryptosporidium life cycle, woods and upton  <cit>  suspected that the presence of this stage in both cell-free and in-vitro cultures was due to contaminating debris or fungal infection, resembling bipolaris australiensis and colletotrichum acutatum. however, the intense immunofluorescent labelling of the internal structures in this case, which resembled merozoites or trophozoites, counters this argument. our observations suggest that the role of this stage is to generate trophozoites and merozoites so that more new oocysts can be produced without host encapsulation.

in addition to our confocal observations, sem analysis not only revealed detailed surface structural data for several stages, such as sporozoites, trophozoites, free and encapsulated type ii merozoites, type i and ii meronts, and microgamonts, but also demonstrated that cryptosporidium has the ability to form a parasitophorous vacuole  independent of a host. the formation of a pv within biofilms is intriguing as a pv has not previously been reported in cell-free cultures  <cit> . this may be due to the fact that it is difficult to identify pvs using optical microscopy and hence the formation of a pv in cell-free culture has gone undetected. the pvs observed here  were very similar to those observed in previous in-vitro and in-vivo studies  <cit> , but these studies also believed that the undulated membrane was derived from the host microvillus. the formation of a pv in our host free system is consistent with the proposal by pohlenz et al.  <cit>  that cryptosporidium does not require host encapsulation to form a pv.

besides pv formation, the identification of large meronts and extra large gamont-like stages suggests that biofilms can modify and influence cryptosporidium developmental stages in aquatic environments. although the identity and the role of extra large gamont-like cells are still unknown, similar cell sizes and morphologies have been observed in the closely related gregarines  <cit> . therefore, it is suspected that they may also have a role in producing infective stages of cryptosporidium in biofilms. in addition, the correlative imaging of a large meront showed that apart from type i merozoites located within the cell producing fluorescence, no other part of the parent cell fluoresced. the inability to label these gamont stages and meront walls with sporo-glo™ antibody suggests surface epitopes that bind sporo-glo™ were not expressed by these stages in the biofilms. the observations made in this study shows that sporo-glo™ antibody does not label all extracellular stages in biofilms and a new antibody that targets more of the cryptosporidium developmental stages is needed to further investigate the life cycle of cryptosporidium in biofilms.

similar to the observations of wolyniak et al.  <cit> , our flow cytometry analysis also revealed that oocyst populations were observed throughout the experiment. however, the flow cytometry data further demonstrate that these oocysts were actually present as two different oocyst populations - excysted and intact oocysts. in addition, parallel confocal microscopy observations of cell-free culture experiments confirmed that the excysted oocyst populations consisted of excysted oocysts of variable sizes, and not degraded oocysts. furthermore, a previous study by king et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that the hydrodynamics of the flow resulted in empty oocysts collapsing, causing them to be much smaller and more refractive. nevertheless, the absence of excysted oocyst populations in the biofilm-free samples demonstrates that cryptosporidium does not excyst in the absence of a biofilm in an artificial aquatic environment.

CONCLUSIONS
the observation of extracellular developmental stages in this study further supports suggestions that classification of cryptosporidium as an obligate intracellular apicomplexan may require revision  <cit> . as this study used diluted tryptic soy broth medium in our pseudomonas biofilm system, the public health significance of these extracellular stages in relation to waterborne outbreaks has to be determined. these risks will be dependent on a range of factors including whether development can occur in natural biofilms, if the lifecycle can be completed through to oocyst stage, the infectivity of these extracellular stages, and their susceptibility to disinfectants. undoubtedly, the interaction between cryptosporidium and biofilms warrants further investigation.

