BACKGROUND
inflammation can be detected following trauma, even in the absence of infection, due to a global ischemia/reperfusion injury resulting in the systemic inflammatory response syndrome . sirs is diagnosed clinically when patients have more than one of the following clinical findings: significant changes in body temperature, tachycardia, tachypnea, or white blood cell count of > <dig>  cells μl- <dig> or < <dig>  μl- <dig> <cit> . this hyper-inflammatory response can be further characterized by increased expression of inflammatory mediators such as pro-inflammatory cytokines, acute phase proteins, and complement that result in leukocyte activation and extravasation from the vascular compartment into surrounding tissues . additionally, numbers of neutrophils in the periphery increase, as does the priming of these cells  <cit> . increased neutrophil numbers and activation can lead to bystander tissue damage with increased complications upon subsequent infection  <cit> . recently, key structural elements of priming have been identified. priming results in the formation of supramolecular complexes, which can include an array of receptors, structural proteins, and components of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate  oxidase. these form on detergent-resistant membrane fragments called rafts, which are specialized membrane elements enriched in glycosphingolipids, cholesterol, and anti-apoptotic active akt  <cit> . this proximity allows for close coupling of receptor mediated signaling, effector function, and crosstalk between surface receptors and downstream signaling systems  <cit> .

the compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome  is proposed to follow sirs in trauma patients. in the innate arm of the immune system, cars can be characterized in patients exhibiting reductions in monocyte hla-dr expression or ex vivo tumor necrosis factor alpha production  <cit> . in the adaptive arm of the immune system, cars is characterized by a blunted response to infections due to decreased t cell numbers as well as mitogen unresponsiveness  <cit> . t cell apoptosis is responsible for declining t cell numbers following trauma  <cit> . mitogen unresponsiveness after injury results in both reduced t cell cytokine production and decreased protein phosphorylation following t cell receptor-mediated stimulation  <cit> . altogether, decreases in t cell numbers and responsiveness are thought to predispose trauma patients to nosocomial infections, sepsis, and multiple organ dysfunction  <cit> .

these studies strongly suggest that trauma-induced changes to the immune system can predispose the patient to subsequent adverse clinical events, especially in the event of an infection. currently, there are multiple therapies known to up or down regulate inflammation and the immune system  <cit> . ideally, therapies should protect all cellular host defense compartments from hyper-inflammation, as well as from anergy. however, the response to trauma is dynamic and there exists a need to effectively monitor the immune status of patients in order to properly modulate inflammation.

in recent years there has been recognition that new approaches are needed for determination of the immune capacity of patients following trauma. here, we enrolled a cohort of blunt trauma patients that was relatively homogenous in terms of sex, age, severity of injury, and mode of injury. we concurrently examined cells in both the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system in these patients in terms of absolute leukocyte numbers and function. further, mechanisms underlying cell functionality were investigated. to our knowledge, this is the first report of a homogeneous cohort of trauma patients used to concurrently examine the function and mechanisms of both the innate and adaptive immune systems.

RESULTS
blunt trauma patient characteristics
there was no significant age difference between male blunt trauma patients enrolled in this study  and healthy controls . a mean injury severity score  of  <dig>  for all patients was calculated. 59% of patients requiring blood transfusion due to traumatic injury received an average of  <dig> ml  packed red blood cells . 27% of patients were intubated at some point during their hospital stay  and remained mechanically ventilated for an average of  <dig>   days. more than 85% of patients involved in this study underwent at least one surgical intervention. those patients receiving at least one operation underwent an average of  <dig>   interventions during their admission. total hospital length of stay for all patients in this study was  <dig>   days. further characteristics of the patient population, including mean admission vital signs and lab values, are described in table  <dig> 

neutrophil numbers and function are increased following blunt trauma
it has been observed that following trauma the proportion and absolute numbers of peripheral leukocytes can be altered. here, in figure 1a, we observed a 2- <dig> fold increase in circulating neutrophils out to five days post-trauma. additionally, using β2-integrin  as an activation marker, we observed significantly increased neutrophil activation as compared to controls  out to four days post trauma. thus, neutrophil numbers and activation are significantly higher following blunt trauma.

although we determined that neutrophils demonstrated an activated phenotype, we further investigated whether the neutrophils had increased functionality. therefore, oxidative burst was evaluated in trauma versus control patients that were representative of those in figure  <dig> in terms of iss and age . here, neutrophils from the blunt trauma patients had a significant increase in fmlp-stimulated activity versus those neutrophils from controls. additionally, we directly observed via confocal microscopy the increased oxidative burst in fmlp treated cells isolated from trauma patients as compared to healthy controls . thus, neutrophils isolated from trauma patients showed increased activation and functionality.

following trauma, there is an observed increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines, which may act to prime neutrophils. it has been reported that neutrophil priming involves the localization of activated cd11b within lipid rafts as well as increased phosphorylated akt <cit> . to investigate if this occurred within our cohort of patients, we isolated raft and non-raft fractions from purified neutrophils and probed for active cd11b . here, we found significantly more cd11b in neutrophil rafts from trauma patients as compared to controls. additionally, we observed increased phosphorylated-akt, but not -erk or -p <dig>  in neutrophils isolated form trauma patients . these data indicate the neutrophils of trauma patients are primed, functionally more activated, and likely more resistant to apoptosis as compared to controls.

t cell numbers and function are reduced following blunt trauma
the studies above investigated the innate response of the immune system to blunt trauma. here, we continued our investigations by concurrently examining the response of the adaptive immune system in the same cohort of male blunt trauma patients and healthy controls. flow cytometric analysis revealed that absolute numbers of peripheral naïve cd <dig> and cd <dig> t-cells from trauma patients were significantly decreased as compared to controls . temporally, the naive subtypes were observed at approximately 50% of the control values. additionally, significant differences were observed in non-naïve t cells, though percentage differences were less stark than those of the naïve t cell populations. thus, in a homogeneous cohort of blunt trauma patients, peripheral t cell numbers are rapidly decreased and remain decreased for at least  <dig> days following injury.

ifn-γ is a potent activator of neutrophils and macrophages, and plays a key role in combating infections  <cit> . in our present study, we activated equal numbers of peripheral leukocytes isolated from blunt trauma patients 40- <dig> hours after injury together with age- and sex-matched controls using t cell specific mitogens for  <dig> hours and analyzed for ifn-γ accumulation . here, we found trauma patients had significantly decreased ifn-γ production as compared to healthy controls.

in figure  <dig>  we show that t cells from trauma patients have reduced immune function. previous reports have suggested that deficiencies in tcr-mediated signaling may result in decreased t cell-specific cytokine production  <cit> . the recent availability of phosphorylation-specific antibodies adapted for flow cytometry allowed us to determine on a single cell basis early activation events. the tcr-αβ or tcr-γδ and cd <dig>  form the tcr-cd <dig> complex, which allows for antigen recognition and effective immune system functionality. the activation of this complex can be observed by the phosphorylation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif  tyrosines that are located on the tcr-ζ chain . analysis of ifn-γ accumulation data demonstrated two distinct groups within our blunt trauma cohort that we stratified as those with low ifn-γ production and those not significantly different from healthy controls. we next wanted to determine whether these differences might be due to alterations in tcr mediated signaling. the phosphorylated cd <dig>  expression was determined in these three subgroups . here, we demonstrate that pcd <dig> expression was approximately 30% lower in the low ifn-γ producing group as compared to the other two groups. thus, in patients whose t cell ifn-γ production is decreased, reduced tcr-mediated signaling is also demonstrated.

discussion
in our present study, we generated a cohort of trauma patients that was homogeneous in terms of sex, age, severity of injury, and mode of injury. additionally, we concurrently investigated cells in the innate and adaptive arms of the immune system in this cohort of patients by determining the cell absolute numbers as well as function. further, the mechanism underlying the function was determined. we believe that the combination of these three aspects make this a unique study.

in general, the immunological response to trauma has been modeled as a systemic inflammatory response followed sequentially by compensatory anti-inflammatory response. in our study, one aspect of sirs, the increase in neutrophil priming and numbers, was observed up to  <dig> hours following trauma. one characteristic of cars is reduced t cell numbers and impaired immune function. we also observed this phenomenon. however, this was seen almost immediately and up to  <dig> hours following trauma. thus, aspects of sirs and cars were seen concurrently for a fairly prolonged period of time. altogether, we believe that presence of both hyperactive neutrophils and anergic t cells needs to be considered when attempting to modulate the immune system following trauma so to beneficially modulate the subsequent response to adverse clinical events such as acute respiratory distress syndrome , vap and opportunistic infections.

this and previous studies  <cit>  have demonstrated that trauma can lead to a decrease in the t cell numbers. while possible reasons for this decline include the effects from transfusion, dilution from resuscitation and movement from periphery, based on numerous studies, we feel apoptosis is the underlying cause of the decline  <cit> . the end result of massive naïve t cell apoptosis would include immunosuppression due to a loss of the tcr repertoire able to respond to subsequent infections, along with production of anti-inflammatory mediators by macrophages during phagocytosis of apoptotic bodies  <cit> . further, the loss of t cell-mediated ifn-γ production serves to limit the activation of the innate immune system.

initial events in tcr-mediated activation can have profound effects on t cell function. within the tcr/cd <dig> complex are itams which become phosphorylated during antigen-driven t cell activation. however, the degree of phosphorylation determines the degree of t cell activation. for example, a single itam phosphorylation activates shp  <cit> . shp expression is increased following trauma and its actions are known to be inhibitory  <cit> . yet, two itam phosphorylations will result in full t cell activation  <cit> . thus, we believe the differences observed in cd <dig> phosphorylation are, in part, responsible for the differences in ifn-γ production. whether these differences are due to increased phosphatase activity or decreased gene expression is currently under investigation.

the t cell specific studies indicate that of the patients tested for ifn-γ production and cd <dig> phosphorylation, there were two fairly distinct groups. when compared to healthy controls, one group showed no significant differences in ifn-γ production and cd <dig> phosphorylation, while the other group showed significant decreases in each. both groups had no significant differences in injury severity scores  or age . however, the hospital length of stay was trending towards an increase for those patients with poor t cell function . whether or not these assays will be more predictive of adverse clinical events is an ongoing investigation.

our data show that the function and numbers of neutrophils are increased following blunt trauma . associated with this is increased phosphorylated akt . active akt is known to both decrease apoptosis as well as increase the oxidative burst  <cit> . the excessive number of these hyperactive cells can lead to excessive tissue damage, further worsening the condition of some trauma patients. additionally, it has been shown that phosphorylated akt can be prognostic for poor clinical outcomes  <cit> . we hypothesize that akt has increased phosphorylation due to increased systemic il- <dig> observed following trauma. increased il- <dig> can lead to increased tyrosine kinase activity by jak- <dig> and - <dig>  <cit> . a potential tyrosine phosphorylation target of jak- <dig> is pp2a  <cit> . when tyrosine- <dig> is phosphorylated, pp2a assembly as well as activity might selectively be inhibited  <cit> . this is important, as akt is known to be de-phosphorylated by pp2a . although other mediators can activate jak <dig>  we believe il- <dig> represents a likely candidate for future studies.

although this study demonstrates new insights regarding the response of human t-cells to blunt trauma, it has limitations. first, we may not be measuring the whole of the immune compartment through our current methodology. for example, t cell numbers were not measured in the thymus, spleen or lymph nodes. secondly, blunt trauma is wide-ranging and the effect of different mechanisms may play a role in the changes seen in this study. even patients with non-significant differences in injury severity scores can have vastly different outcomes based on mechanism.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our study demonstrates that there is a complex response of the innate and adaptive immune system quickly following trauma. we believe that this report distinguishes itself from other reports in that a very homogeneous cohort of patients was used. additionally, both the innate and adaptive responses were numerically, functionally, and mechanistically examined concurrently. altogether, these results demonstrate that there is a simultaneous and divergent immunological response to trauma. this consists of a hyper-inflammatory response by the innate arm of the immune system, while there is a hypo-inflammatory response by the adaptive arm. we believe that this concurrent divergence will need to be taken in consideration for therapeutic interventions.

