BACKGROUND
the himalaya was first colonised by modern humans approximately  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . spanning tibet, nepal, india, pakistan and bhutan, the region is home to a vast number of ethnic groups residing at altitudes between  <dig>  and  <dig>  m above sea level.

nepal is a “multi-ethnic” country, with  <dig> ethnic groups recorded in the  <dig> nepalese census  <cit> . reflecting this diversity, nepal has a complex demographic history and has long served as a region of asylum due to its landlocked position between asia and india. the first documented tribe in nepal was the kirats, a tibeto-burmese group that arrived in the region approximately  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . evidence suggest the kirats first resided in kathmandu but were forced to migrate to the high altitude terrain of the khumbu valley, eastern nepal, around the 4th century following invasion by an indian clan, the licchavais  <cit> . the khumbu valley at the tibet-nepal border presents a challenging physical landscape and harsh environmental stresses to its residents. despite this, it remains a well-populated region of nepal and is native to the physiologically adapted ethnic group, the sherpa. it is thought that the sherpa migrated from the salmo-gang district of kham, eastern tibet, to the solu-khumbu region of eastern nepal approximately 400– <dig> years ago due to political tension between kham and their northern neighbours- in mongolia .

previous studies have applied mitochondrial dna  and y-chromosome genetic systems as tools to reconstruct historic demographic events in nepal. these studies have pointed to significant genetic structure across populations dwelling in nepal. for example, a south-central european origin has been attributed to y chromosome haplotypes prevalent in the nepalese newar population, interpreted as suggesting gene flow from india into nepal. in contrast, haplotypes observed in the nepalese tamang population are commonly observed in tibetan populations, suggesting ancestry from the north of the himalaya . these distinct patterns have also been reproduced using mtdna-based systems  <cit>  and imply differing ancestral contributions from tibet, india and bordering regions to contemporary nepalese populations. collectively, these results suggest considerable admixture in the nepalese population.

the study of autosomal genetic variation appears to support the theory of admixture in nepalese populations. a recent survey of multiple nepalese and burmese populations pointed to significant genetic differentiation between populations residing within the himalaya. this differentiation appeared to be structured according to the principal linguistic phyla in the region-tibeto-burman and indo-european, suggesting that both language and geography were influencing gene flow in the region  <cit> . however, the number of autosomal loci studied by the authors was limited relative to current approaches. further, the origin of gene flow from south of the himalaya to nepal has not been described.

a recent study, using dense autosomal genotype data, explored the genetic history of tibetans and sherpa residing at high altitude  <cit> . the study identified a common ancestral component shared between these two high altitude populations, which was absent from lowland south or central asian populations. the proportion of this ‘high altitude’ ancestral component was highly enriched in the sherpa while the tibetans exhibited admixture of this, and an east asian component enriched in the contemporary han chinese. a recent study using mtdna and y-chromosome markers also revealed strong affinities between the sherpa and tibetans  <cit> . the authors alluded to homogeneity of particular haplogroups within the sherpa suggesting a founder effect from a small number of migrants from a tibeto-burman source population  <cit> . despite in depth analysis of the genetic origins of the sherpa, there has been no investigation into the genetic structure of the sherpa in the context of their current residence in nepal.

we set out to describe fine-scale population structure and admixture of the sherpa and their neighbouring nepalese populations using dense genomic datasets. we performed a detailed investigation of the genetic architecture of seven sherpa villages located in the khumbu region of eastern nepal and five nepalese ethnic groups, which collectively represent the majority of the nepalese population.

RESULTS
population substructure reflects geographical boundaries of the himalaya
we performed principal component analysis  , to provide a broad overview of population structure across the himalaya . four broad population clusters were apparent; 1) a ‘northern himalayan’ cluster consisting of han chinese, tibetans and the sherpa, 2) a ‘northwestern’ cluster consisting of populations of the pamir mountain range, 3) a ‘southwestern’ cluster consisting of pakistani and indian populations and 4) a ‘central himalayan’ cluster consisting of the nepalese.fig.  <dig> genes mirror the geography of the greater himalayan region. legend fig.  <dig>  pc <dig> and pc <dig> explain genetic distance between populations as directions of variance. this was performed on a thinned dataset of  <dig>  snps. each dot represents an individual in the dataset. each population is represented by a shape, tibetans , sherpa , han , nepalese , indian , pakistan  and the pamir populations . each of the indian ancestral groups as described in basu et al.,  <dig>  are indicated as follows;  ani, + asi, * aaa, ** atb. the nepalese appear as an admixed population between the northern himalayan cluster  and the southern himalayan cluster , with clear genetic variance between ethnic subgroups




the nepalese as a whole appear as a potentially admixed population on the pca, lying between the ‘southern’  and ‘northern himalayan’  clusters. interestingly, the distinct nepalese ethnic subgroups  would appear from pca to have different proportions of gene flow from the ‘northern’ and ‘southern’ himalayan regions. it is noteworthy from the pca, that the sherpa show, virtually zero genetic influence from southern populations, clustering with the tibetans and the han . these results are consistent with previous reports of gene flow in a north to south direction over the himalayan barrier into nepal, with limited gene flow in the opposite direction  <cit> .

to investigate the extent of population substructure between the seven nepalese sherpa villages in the khumbu valley, pca was performed on sherpa individuals only. genetic substructure was evident across the sherpa villages, with individuals from the village of thame separating on pca from members of other villages. the patterns observed from the pca map well to the geography of the region .

genetic distance and admixture proportions of himalayan populations reflect the demographic history of the region
to further our understanding of potential admixture events in the nepalese subpopulations, we next conducted a model-based qualitative assessment of ancestry using the software admixture  <cit> . based on information provided by the pca analysis, we restricted the admixture analysis to the sherpa, nepalese, tibetans, han chinese and indians. results indicate the sherpa are a homogenous population, relative to the nepalese who appear admixed for ‘northern’ and ‘southern’ himalayan ancestry. at k =  <dig>  the best fit of the data, we observed two ancestral components  specific to individuals from tibet and nepal, including the sherpa. one of these components is enriched in the sherpa  and found to be at higher proportions in tibetans from lhasa and the tuo tuo river. the second is enriched in tibetans, but is also present in the nepalese and sherpa . we believe these two components broadly reflect the ‘ancestral high altitude component’ previously reported by c jeong et al.,  <cit> . we also note the sherpa from thame as being enriched for the red component, while the sherpa from the remaining nepalese villages show admixture of the two ancestral components specific to highlanders.fig.  <dig> fine scale analysis of the nepalese and sherpa. legend fig.  <dig>  admixture results for k =  <dig> were plotted for the best fit of the data. the x-axis labels each ethnic group or village . the labels above the plot indicate the main population groups; the indian ancestral groups are defined as in basu et al.,  <dig>  ani , asi , aaa , atb . the red component reflects the ‘ancestral high altitude component’ previously reported by jeong, alkorta-aranburu . our nepalese cohort shows similar ancestral components to indians of tibeto-burman ancestry . 




a recent study of indian population structure described four ancestral components associated with contemporary mainland indian populations  <cit> . given the apparent indian ancestry in the nepalese populations studied here, we asked which of these four indian ancestral components were most prevalent in the nepalese populations. we began by identifying the four indian ancestral components in the admixture analysis, using the same dataset as the original report  <cit> . the vast majority of the nepalese populations we studied associated most closely  with the tibeto-burman indians  located in northeast india. the exceptions are the sherpa  and the indo-aryan, who show affinity with the ancestral north india  group. we note that the ‘ancestral high altitude component’ is present within atb ancestry , indicating a significant influence on the northern indian genepool from ancestral populations dwelling on the himalayan plateau.

we next calculated a 3-population fst  to quantify population differentiation across the himalaya observed by pca and admixture . increased f <dig> values indicate recent shared ancestry between a pair of populations. f <dig> results correlate well with the patterns observed via pca. the largest f <dig> values were observed between the han and tibetans, and the sherpa and tibetans, reflecting the recent common ancestry of these pairs of populations  <cit> . we performed a fine-scaled 3-population fst between indian and nepalese ethnic groups . interestingly the nepalese in general appear closer genetically to the tibetans than to indian populations, suggesting strong tibetan origins of at least some of the indigenous nepalese ethnic groups. weir and cockerhams pairwise fst was then calculated on a micro scale to measure genetic variance between the five nepalese ethnicities and the sherpa of the khumbu valley. this identified the rai, followed by the magar and tamang as the genetically closest nepalese ethnic groups to the sherpa . it is noteworthy that the magar are believed to have originally migrated from the same region of tibet as the sherpa  <cit> .

subpopulations of nepal show various degrees of admixture
to determine which indian ethnic subgroup was the strongest contributor to the ‘southern’ component observed in the nepalese population as a whole , we performed a 3-population test using two source populations, tibetans  and each of the four ancestral indian ethnic groups  . we identified significant signals of admixture  in the nepalese for northern and southern himalayan ancestry, the most significant admixture event being between the ani and tibetans . we did not detect a significant signal of admixture in the sherpa, but we did confirm the well-established han admixture in tibetans.

to confirm this proposed admixture event in the broad nepalese population we modeled a maximum likelihood tree between our populations of interest using the software tool treemix. results show the nepalese, sherpa and tibetans to be closely related populations, with gene flow from ani into the nepalese population .fig.  <dig> modelling gene flow in nepal. legend fig.  <dig>  to infer patterns of population mixture in nepal, we plotted a maximum likelihood tree using the software tool treemix, allowing three migration events. migration events are indicated by the arrows and coloured according to their weight corresponding to the coloured bar on the left. populations from india are labelled in blue; ani , asi , aaa  and atb 




we then applied the d-statistic test to inform on whether tibetan ancestry in nepalese populations was the result of gene flow from tibet in to nepal, or rather nepal into tibet. results suggested much stronger gene flow from tibet in to nepal, rather than from nepal in to tibet .

next, we quantified the proportions of admixture in the nepalese ethnic groups using the f4-ratio estimation. we assigned the tibetans and the ani as ancestral source populations for the nepalese, based on 3-population test results. the newar appeared as the most admixed nepalese ethnic group, with similar proportions of tibetan and ani ancestry . the rai, magar and tamang showed 92%, 82% and 79% tibetan ancestry, respectively. the indo-aryan showed 93% ani ancestry. these ancestral proportions are consistent with results from our pca and admixture analysis. these admixture proportions reported here across nepalese subpopulations also concur with demographic literature of nepal and previous mtdna and y-str studies   <cit> .table  <dig> f4-ratio quantifying admixture in nepalese ethnic groups

legend table  <dig>  we used the f <dig> ratio to quantify the proportion of admixture in each of our nepalese populations. population x is being tested for admixture. alpha is the proportion of population b ancestry in population x, while  <dig> – alpha is the proportion of population c ancestry in population x. see additional file 2: figure s <dig>  a phylogeny, for further explanation




the  admixture events were then dated in the admixed nepalese subgroups  using rolloff  <cit> . results correlate well with the documented arrival dates of these ethnic groups to nepal  <cit> . assuming a generation time of 30 years, our analysis dated an admixture event to have occurred in the newar  <dig>  ybp , which correlates well with historical records that have suggested the newar have resided in nepal since the early 4th century  <cit> . we dated admixture events for the tamang and magar as  <dig> ybp  and  <dig> ybp  respectively. these dates correlate well will historical records that suggest the tamang’s arrival in nepal around the 8th century, and the magar’s in nepal in the 12th century  <cit> .

patterns of homozygosity suggest recent consanguineous unions in a number of sherpa and nepalese subgroups
we investigated the extent of homozygosity in populations across the himalaya to shed further light on the demographic history of the region. elevated levels of runs of homozygosity  can be used to inform on isolation and consanguinity within a population  <cit> . we measured roh for a number of threshold lengths which can be used to infer the degree of shared parental ancestry, including roh ≥ 1mb which are suggestive of ancient relatedness and ≥ 16mb , which are suggestive of recent inbreeding  <cit> .

notably elevated levels of roh <dig> were also observed in the sherpa and nepal cohorts , despite the fact that consangiunous kinships are traditionally not permitted in these populations  <cit> . we next measured roh for each of the sherpa and nepelase subpopulations independently to determine if particular groups were driving the elevated roh signal . we observed considerable variability in homozygosity levels across subpopulations of the sherpa and nepalese. the nepalese indo-aryan stand out as having the longest roh detected across all thresholds tested. elevated levels of roh were also detected in all the other nepalese groups , and sherpa from the villages of thame, lukla, namche, forte and solukhumbu, suggesting both ancient and recent shared ancestry as a cause of elevated homozygosity in these subgroups. the observed patterns of homozygosity across the roh thresholds for the sherpa from khumjung and kunde indicates ancient shared parental ancestry, most likely due to isolation and small ne, with little recent consanguinity .fig.  <dig> levels of homozygosity in sherpa and nepalese populations. legend fig.  <dig>  the x-axis represents the thresholds set for defining a roh . the y-axis is the mean total roh length calculated for that population. we detected elevated proportions of roh <dig> in the nepalese indo-aryan, magar, newar, rai, tamang, and the sherpa from forte, solukhumbu, lukla and thame




to test for consanguinity within the nepalese and the sherpa subgroups that showed elevated roh <dig>  we compared identity by descent  segments between pairs of individuals within a population, to roh within individuals from the population. where recent consanguinity is present, one would expect a significant increase in roh within, compared to ibd between, members of that population. we set an ibd segment threshold of 16 mb as indicative of a recent common shared ancestor between a pair of individuals. results are illustrated in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  we found roh <dig> to be significantly greater than ibd <dig> for the nepalese indo-aryan supporting consanguinity as an explanation for observed roh patterns in that population, despite unions between biological kin being prohibited  <cit> . although roh <dig> was also greater than the ibd <dig> for all other nepalese ethnic groups tested, the results were not significant. despite the high levels of homozygosity previously detected in a number of the sherpa subgroups, significant differences between ibd <dig> and roh <dig> suggest this is an artifact of population isolation rather than the practice of consanguineous unions.

discussion
our findings reveal that geography has influenced the shaping of genetic structure in the himalaya at both a macro and micro level. the observation from pca of four broad population clusters across the himalaya is consistent with recent reports  <cit> . the micro-level influence of geography is apparent from the pca results at the sherpa village level. we confirm significant admixture in the nepalese population as a whole, resulting from the mixing of populations from north and south of the himalaya. we observed differential proportions of ancestry across the nepalese subgroups we studied. we noted the sherpa as remarkable in the nepalese context, in that they have experienced little or no admixture with other nepalese populations.

we have illustrated the presence of a himalayan ancestry component in contemporary indian populations, specifically those defined as ancestral tibeto-burman  by basu et al.  <cit> . it is interesting to note the large ‘east-asian’ component in the atb population, relative to the himalayan component , suggesting the origin of the himalayan component in atb is via a more easterly route  rather than from tibet. in any case it is clear that ancestral populations dwelling on the himalayan plateau have had a clear impact on the northern indian gene pool.

large mountainous regions can be expected to influence favourable directional gene flow between frontiers. physiological stress imposed by high altitude may restrict gene flow from areas of low altitude to high altitude  <cit> . however, directional migration may also be an effect of economic factors or political instability. results presented here would suggest a greater penetration of himalayan ancestry into the north indian gene pool rather than vice-versa. we confirmed high levels of gene flow into nepal from north of the himalayan watershed by d-statistic analysis, but not in the opposite direction.

although it is well established that the nepalese are a highly admixed population, the extensive structuring of admixture across subpopulations has not previously been described. we identified the rai, magar and tamang to carry the greatest proportions of tibetan ancestry, respectively. these three nepalese ethnicities have been recognized to have tibetan origins, and all speak tibeto-burman languages  <cit> . the indo-aryan, an indo-european nepalese ethnic group, strongly resemble the ani populations given their large component of north indian ancestry identified by admixture and the f4-ratio.

despite the sherpa’s residence in nepal for the past 400– <dig> years, the sherpa remain as an isolated homogenous population with little or no gene flow from their immediate nepalese neighbours or any populations south of the himalaya. the sherpa genome is enriched for the previously reported ‘high altitude ancestral component’  <cit>  , reflecting common ancestry with tibetans and migration from tibetan before the more recent movement of northern populations in to tibet. as an isolated and relatively small community, drift will play a major role in shaping the sherpa genome.

we detected considerable levels of autozygosity within the sherpa and their neighboring nepalese populations. the patterns of roh we observed across the majority of sherpa and nepalese subpopulations indicate both ancient and recent parental relatedness. ibd analysis confirmed that the nepalese indo-aryan appear to be the only significant consanguineous subgroup. we believe the elevated ibd <dig> in the sherpa reflects a history of population isolation due to the remote location of high altitude villages in eastern nepal and is also suggestive of founder effect  <cit> . this can be supported by recent findings identifying internal homogeneity for particular mtdna and y chromosome haplogroups during the origin of the sherpa  <cit> .

we note an important limitation of our study: that of the  <dig> recognized ethnic groups in nepal  <cit> , we only considered a subset. thus, whilst our results inform on ethnic groups to which the majority of the population are members, we have studied a minority of the ethnic groups present in nepal.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, analysis presented here illustrates the impact of broad himalayan geography on genetic structure in the region. significant gene flow from north of the himalaya to nepal is clearly evident, with relatively little gene flow in the opposite direction. ethnic subgroups within nepal show distinct genetic structure, reflecting differing histories of admixture and isolation. the sherpa appear as a remarkably isolated population, with little gene flow from surrounding nepalese populations.

