BACKGROUND
in recent years, genome sequencing projects have enormously increased our molecular understanding of biological capabilities of organisms. for many research areas, such as biotechnology and biomedical research, the metabolic capacities of cells are highly relevant. on the basis of the functional annotation of predicted genes, genome-scale metabolic networks can be reconstructed  <cit> . an increasing collection of methods is available to analyze the properties of these networks, both from a graph-theoretical point of view  <cit>  as well as from a metabolic engineering point of view . genome-scale metabolic networks are also increasingly being used in integrative bioinformatics  <cit> . as a metabolic network consists of associations between genes and metabolic reactions, it can be used to study the cellular properties of the organism by integrating functional genomics data, such as gene expression and proteomics . the importance of integration has recently been shown in various studies on the topology, dynamics and evolution of metabolic networks  <cit> .

unfortunately, the reconstruction process can be very time-consuming. to a certain extent the effort depends on the level of detail that is required for the purpose of the reconstruction. a metabolic network can be used as an encyclopedia in order to present enzymes in their metabolic context  <cit> . in this particular case it is not essential to include the exact reaction stoichiometry to analyze functional genomics data . extensively curated metabolic encyclopedias can be found in the so-called biocyc collection, including ecocyc and the recently developed lacplantcyc  <cit> . on the other hand, the reaction stoichiometry is important for most quantitative modeling purposes, such as flux balance analysis , in which constraints are defined by the stoichiometry and are used to optimize for a certain flux . in the past few years, several of such metabolic networks for modeling purposes have been constructed  <cit> .

the metabolic network reconstruction procedure usually starts with functional annotation of genes encoded on the genome of a certain species of interest . functional annotation is mainly done by homology searches against protein/enzyme databases  <cit> . several computational methods, such as pathologic , have been developed to automate the reconstruction procedure by linking reactions and pathways to the annotated genes   <cit> . as a consequence, the quality of such an automatically generated metabolic network will highly depend on the quality of the annotation. recently, methods have also been developed to automate the functional annotation and network reconstruction for unannotated genomes  <cit> . in spite of the promising work on developing computational methods to automate the reconstruction of  metabolic networks, in all cases manual curation is still needed, which is the most time-consuming part  <cit> .

incomplete ec-codes and annotation errors in protein databases are likely to be the main cause of errors that arise from homology based computational methods  <cit> . it is, therefore, important to correct these errors by manual investigation of the predictions. pathologic, for example, is specifically designed to predict as much metabolic information as possible for a given species, with the idea to curate the predictions afterwards  <cit> . in order to validate the predictions by computational methods, existing manually curated metabolic networks can be used. the main advantage of these curated metabolic networks is that errors caused by misannotation in protein databases and thereby incorrect or incomplete labeling of metabolic function, have been corrected. moreover, specific gene function annotations , specific reactions  and potentially protein complex definitions are other promising features of manually curated networks which can be used as a source to predict and/or to validate metabolic networks.

here, we describe a semi-automatic approach to accelerate the process of genome-scale metabolic network reconstruction by taking full advantage of already manually curated networks. the developed method, referred to as the autograph-method , is applied to the annotated genome of lactococcus lactis il <dig>  to evaluate the autograph-method, we compared predicted gene-reaction associations with a manually curated and published metabolic network of l. lactis il <dig>  which we will refer to as the oliveira network  <cit> . the autograph-method recovered most of the gene-reaction associations  and we predicted many additional gene-reaction associations. the results illustrate the predictive power of the autograph-method, which may also be applied to unannotated genomes.

RESULTS
we applied the autograph-method  to the genome of lactococcus lactis il <dig>  <cit>  using three manually curated metabolic networks as input, i.e. a network from escherichia coli k <dig>  <cit> , lactobacillus plantarum wcfs <dig>  and bacillus subtilis  <cit> . in total, we predicted  <dig> genes of l. lactis to be associated to  <dig> different reactions . to validate these results we compared the predicted metabolic network with the oliveira network  <cit>  by examining gene-reaction associations in both networks.

autograph versus oliveira network
we could recover  <dig> genes from the oliveira network , involving  <dig> gene-reaction associations. gene-reaction associations are one-to-one relationships between genes and metabolic reactions. one single gene can be involved in multiple gene-reaction associations, as certain gene products  are able to catalyze multiple reactions . we found that  <dig>  of the oliveira gene-reaction associations were also predicted by the autograph-method .  <dig> were not predicted by autograph. therefore, we investigated and categorized these associations into three groups:  l. lactis genes that are organism-specific compared to e. coli, b. subtilis and l. plantarum . as a consequence, it is not possible to predict orthologs and metabolic reactions.  predicted orthologs were lacking reaction associations in the input networks of e. coli, b. subtilis and l. plantarum . absence of metabolic reactions within the input networks is related to specific choices made by curators during modeling studies. a lack of detailed experimental evidence is one reason to exclude reactions. for example, the aspartate aminotransferase of l. lactis  is orthologous to yfbq of e. coli, but yfbq has not been incorporated within the e. coli metabolic network due to a lack of experimental evidence .  additional reactions were associated to genes in the oliveira network compared to the equivalent genes in the input networks . for example, the l. lactis aromatic amino acid aminotransferase  is an enzyme with broad substrate specificity, which has been experimentally verified  <cit> . in total, the enzyme is able to catalyze  <dig> different reactions of which two have been included within the l. plantarum source metabolic network .

besides the  <dig> confirmed gene-reaction associations, we also predicted  <dig> additional associations with autograph for the genes that were already present in the oliveira network. by manually investigation of the additional gene-reaction associations we found that the majority involved metabolic reactions that are highly similar to the reactions within confirmed associations: differences were found on the level of cofactor assignment or a different substrate . nevertheless, the additional reactions with different cofactors are still relevant within network reconstruction, as curators have investigated these in their metabolic modeling studies.

an explanation for the prediction of many additional gene-reaction associations is that we explicitly included recent gene-duplicates in the analysis . recent gene-duplicates are likely to catalyze very similar metabolic reactions  <cit> . as a consequence, in some cases the reaction associations of two  genes are transferred to a single l. lactis gene. it is very well possible that the l. lactis genes are able to catalyze the different reactions, but the availability of substrates or cofactors will determine whether or not these reactions will occur. moreover, we found that 31% of the additional associations involved metabolic reactions that were already present in the oliveira network, indicating that also a single metabolic reaction can be associated to multiple genes . such associations are especially of interest in integrative functional genomics studies .

by examination of the orthologs and their associated metabolic reactions, we observed that all three metabolic networks contributed to the total number of predicted gene-reaction associations . to certain extent the three networks overlap in terms of gene-reaction associations, but we also derived 22% of the confirmed associations from single networks . this indicates that by increasing the number of metabolic networks for the autograph-method we could positively affect the number of  predicted gene-reaction associations . on the other hand, an increase in the number of input metabolic networks also increases the number of additional gene-reaction associations , causing an increasing need for manual curation .

additional predictions for genes not present in oliveira network
in the comparison between the predicted metabolic network and the oliveira network, we also found many gene-reaction associations involving genes that were not present in the oliveira network . in order to explore the value of these additional predictions, we manually investigated the genes that were associated to reactions. in total,  <dig> additional genes were found to be associated to  <dig> different reactions. we categorized the genes into three groups:  transport: all genes associated to transport reactions,  specific: incorporation of these genes and their associated reactions would potentially lead to additional biochemistry and hence possibly different model predictions and  choice: these genes and associated reactions would lead to a higher resolution of the network, i.e. would specify reactions that are lumped into an overall reaction in the oliveira network. the majority of genes  were classified into the group of specific. for example,  <dig> genes were predicted to be associated to vitamin biosynthesis reactions. we analyzed whether the associated metabolic reactions were already present in the oliveira network or whether the reactions were new and could therefore add new metabolic capabilities to the network. overall we found  <dig> new metabolic reactions associated to the  <dig> investigated genes . these reactions included potentially important metabolic routes, such as glycogen metabolism and the phosphoketolase reaction. the latter enzyme is involved in pentose catabolism in many lactic acid bacteria   <cit> .

of the remaining  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes appeared to encode for transport system components and  <dig> genes were categorized into the group of choice. the group of choice included the genes that will contribute to a higher level of detail to metabolic pathways which already existed  in the oliveira network. for example, the group of choice included all amino acid trna-ligases which were not included in the oliveira network because protein synthesis was considered as a lumped reaction starting with the individual amino acids as precursors, and protein as product  <cit> . the genes and the associated metabolic reactions in this group would not alter model predictions, but they are useful extension to the model when it is used for functional genomics data integration and analysis. thus, the incorporation of this group of genes is a matter of choice and depends on the specification and final purpose of the metabolic network.

autograph versus pathologic
as various automatic approaches exist to predict gene-reaction associations for a metabolic network, we also compared the autograph-method to one well established approach called pathologic, which is part of the pathway tools software  <cit> . the pathologic algorithm takes annotated genomes as input and predicts gene-reaction associations based on name-matching and ec-codes. the ec-code approach to link metabolic information to genes is similar to other methods, such as identics and metashark  <cit> . pathologic is the first step in the construction of a so-called pgdb  which consists of gene-reaction associations. several organism-specific pgdbs have been constructed and manually curated  <cit> . in order to perform a reliable comparison between the autograph-method and pathologic, we specifically selected two manually curated pgdbs, i.e. ecocyc  <cit> and lacplantcyc  <cit>  as a source to predict gene-reaction associations by orthology for l. lactis il <dig>  we predicted a total of  <dig> l. lactis genes to be associated to one or multiple reactions. of these,  <dig> showed an overlap with the l. lactis metabolic network predicted automatically by pathologic . therefore,  <dig> additional genes were exclusively predicted by autograph to be associated to one or multiple reactions. in contrast, only  <dig> metabolic genes were exclusively predicted by pathologic.

the  <dig> additional predicted genes included specific metabolic genes as well as a relatively high fraction  of transport system components. absence of transporters was to be expected because transporters do not have an ec-code and are therefore not considered by the pathologic algorithm: transport reactions need to be added manually to the automatically predicted pgdbs. the results demonstrate the strength of the autograph-method being complementary to pathologic. both methods can thus be combined to predict organism-specific metabolic networks.

metabolic network reconstruction and protein complexes
in this study we mainly focused on the automatic prediction of gene-reaction associations for a metabolic network of l. lactis. another factor which is of importance in metabolic network reconstruction, especially in relation to functional genomics data analysis , is the incorporation of protein complexes. therefore, we explored the possibilities to predict protein complexes based on the available curated genome-scale metabolic networks which include both protein complexes and detailed metabolic reactions. methods have been developed to predict biochemical networks on the level of protein interactions , but these lack the detailed metabolic reaction networks  <cit> . however, the relationship between genes, proteins and their metabolic functions can be many-to-many, making the predictions very difficult. we confined our analysis to testing whether or not all components of protein complexes defined in the metabolic networks of e. coli, l. plantarum and b. subtilis, were also encoded on the genome of l. lactis . we excluded those protein complexes from the analysis that involved isoenzymes, as the possibilities for complex definition in such cases can be rather large and are often ambiguous. the analysis revealed that a relatively high fraction of protein complexes defined for l. plantarum were completely conserved in l. lactis , and are therefore reliable candidates to be automatically incorporated in the l. lactis metabolic network .

to study a possible relationship between the number of predicted  protein complexes and the phylogenetic relationship between considered species, we predicted protein complexes for the annotated genome of pseudomonas aeruginosa pao <dig> . in this case, we specifically took p. aeruginosa because it is, together with e. coli, taxonomically classified as a proteobacterium. as expected, we observed a higher number of conserved  protein complexes between p. aeruginosa and e. coli, compared to p. aeruginosa and the gram-positive bacteria . on the other hand, we observed a higher number of conserved protein complexes between the gram-positive bacteria  and l. lactis, in contrast to l. lactis and the more distantly related e. coli. these observations suggest a correlation between the number of complete  protein complexes and the phylogenetic relationship between two species.

discussion
we have developed a procedure which exploits the availability of well-curated metabolic networks to predict gene-reaction associations. as we believe that high-quality metabolic reconstructions always need careful manual curation  <cit> , the objective of this study was not to develop a method for fully automated reconstructions, but to develop a method that optimally benefits from existing, well-curated reconstructions. we explicitly focused on developing a method to accelerate decision steps for the incorporation of gene-reaction associations in a metabolic network. this can be achieved by presenting for each query gene its orthologs from manually curated metabolic networks . the main advantage of transferring information from curated networks is the fact that unannotated genomes can be used as input and thereby avoiding misannotation caused by errors in protein databases or incomplete labeling . moreover, specific annotations within the metabolic context can be transferred from these networks allowing the interpretation of organism-specific choices such as reaction stoichiometry and cofactors .

our method is based on evolutionary concepts  for gene function prediction. rather than using bidirectional best hits alone, we used inparanoid for the orthology definition  <cit> . inparanoid has a relatively high resolution and is able to predict recent gene duplicates : these are genes from a single species that are all orthologous to one or multiple genes in another species  <cit> . inparalogs are likely to have retained the same or very similar molecular function, and are probably functionally differentiated on the biological process level  <cit> . the orthology definition therefore allows the transfer of metabolic reactions  also in the case of gene duplicates.

in our study we derived gene-reaction associations from metabolic networks of e. coli, l. plantarum and b. subtilis, by predicting orthologs between these three species and l. lactis. we have shown that the number of confirmed  gene-reaction associations for l. lactis, for the genes that are present in the published oliveira network, was relatively high . the coverage of 74% is calculated with the highest stringency, as we distinguished reactions with different cofactor usage and different  substrates. exact cofactor definitions, however, are frequently ignored in studies on the topology of metabolic networks   <cit> . when ignoring cofactor usage, i.e. considering the reactions that differ only in cofactors as identical, the coverage of our method is much higher . nevertheless, cofactor utilization is still important in modeling approaches such as constraint-based modeling  <cit> .

we predicted many additional gene-reaction associations for the genes that were already present in the oliveira network. as one might consider the additional predictions as over-predictions, we investigated the additional gene-reaction associations in more detail. we found that the majority of the additional associated reactions were mainly  variations to the reactions in the oliveira network . in many cases the reactions slightly differed in terms of substrates and cofactors . therefore, the additional predictions should not directly be considered as an over-prediction, as the level of metabolic detail in a network  also depends on the exact purpose.

importantly, we also predicted  <dig> genes that were absent from the oliveira network, of which  <dig> were annotated as hypothetical. a major fraction of these additional gene-reaction associations involved specific metabolic reactions, which could be useful additions to the metabolic network. even though the actual choice whether or not these specific gene-reaction associations should be included, might depends on the exact goal of the  study, new associations are useful information for further improvement of the model. especially in the context of integrative bioinformatics, any new gene-reaction association allows that specific gene to be studied in its metabolic context, and in that respect the new associations found with the autograph-method should be very useful.

besides the specific gene-reaction associations we also found many transport system components that are absent from the oliveira network. although transporters could also be considered as specific reactions, we have classified them into a separate group, because their substrate specificity is in general difficult to predict based on sequence data alone . contextual information, such as genome context, can be used in respect to the prediction of gene-reaction associations for transport system components. if this has been done in curated metabolic networks, transfer of function by high-resolution orthology becomes possible . although transporters may not in all cases be essential in modeling studies, e.g. when growth on specific substrates is studied, they are important for a complete picture of the metabolic capacity of a species.

in the comparison between autograph and pathologic, we found a relatively large overlap in terms of genes associated to reactions, but we also established many additional genes, including many transporters. both methods can be combined to predict gene-reaction associations with high coverage, as both predicted a unique set of additional metabolic genes . besides the prediction of gene-reaction associations, pathologic also associates genes to pathways using the pathway information from metacyc   <cit> . this is one of the major advantages of the approach  <cit> , but it also causes much redundancy, as many variations exist in single pathways . over-predictions of this type have been removed in many curated organism-specific pgdbs which were initially constructed by pathologic . therefore, when using the autograph approach, redundancy in pathway association can be controlled by the number of curated pgdbs used as input. increasing the number of input databases  will increase coverage, but also increase the number of possible over-predictions .

when we studied the possibility to predict protein complexes, we found that the number of automatically predicted  protein complexes depends on the phylogenetic relationship between species, although it should be noted that we may not have sufficient species to establish a strong correlation . we also observed complexes for which not all constituent proteins were found on the genome of l. lactis. the reason for the prediction of these incomplete protein complexes is likely to be the result of  variations in complexes for the different species  or a lack in orthology detection. the incomplete protein complexes therefore need to be manually curated to investigate if 'missing' components are absent due to a lack in orthology detection or that components are absent due to physiological differences between the species. also, specific choices from curators can lead to differences in complex definition, which consequently could influence complex prediction. the presented autograph-method is a possible first step to automate the prediction of protein complexes integrated with a detailed metabolic reaction network.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a method to accelerate genome-scale metabolic network reconstruction by using orthology and existing manually curated metabolic networks to predict gene-reaction associations. in this study we focused on the prediction of a metabolic network for l. lactis il <dig>  we recovered most of the gene-reaction associations  that were present in a published metabolic network of l. lactis il <dig> . moreover, we identified over  <dig> additional genes associated to reactions that are potentially relevant for either metabolic modeling or integrative bioinformatics. we are, however, aware of the fact that the quality of a metabolic network derived from our developed method depends on the availability and quality of manually curated metabolic networks, and on the orthology detection. this, however, also holds for the annotation in protein databases. we developed the method with the goal to accelerate the process of metabolic reconstruction, by minimizing the adjustments needed during curation, and by giving the curator an overview of the decisions made previously by other curators. we expect that in the future it will become possible to select a substantial number of species which are closely related to  query species, because there is a rapid increase in the number of reconstructed genome-scale metabolic networks by ongoing functional genomics projects.

