BACKGROUND
the chloroplast genomes of higher plants range in size from  <dig> to  <dig> kb and encode fewer than  <dig> proteins, most of which function in photosynthesis  <cit> . fluorescence microscopy using the dna fluorochrome 4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole  reveals a condensed form of the chloroplast dna , the nucleoid, that varies in size, number, and location during early leaf development  <cit> . replication of cpdna in meristematic cells leads to an increase during leaf development in the amount of cpdna per chloroplast and per leaf cell and the fraction of total cellular dna present as cpdna  <cit> . for arabidopsis, the number of genomes per plastid in the first leaf increases about 15-fold  during the period from  <dig> to  <dig> days after germination  <cit> . as leaf cells expand and mature, the amount of cpdna declines in arabidopsis  <cit>  , barley, spinach, pea, rice, maize, medicago truncatula, and tobacco  <cit> . the reduction in cpdna has been attributed to either cpdna degradation and/or to dilution of a constant amount of cpdna by chloroplast division following the cessation of cpdna replication, depending on the species.

recent studies report a constant amount of cpdna during leaf development in arabidopsis and tobacco, as determined by blot-hybridization of restriction-digested dna  <cit>  and also by real-time quantitative pcr  for arabidopsis  <cit> . these authors proposed that the decline in dna per plastid observed for arabidopsis  <cit>  resulted from an artifact associated with the isolation of plastids before quantification of cpdna. if the amount of dna per chloroplast were actually constant during this period of leaf expansion, then arabidopsis and tobacco would be atypical among the plants for which such data have been reported, and would not serve as good models for certain aspects of chloroplast development. thus, it seemed necessary to revisit this contentious issue.

we previously reported that the amount of dna per chloroplast declined only during the expansion of older  leaves in tobacco  <cit> . we concluded that tobacco exhibited the greatest degree of cpdna preservation during leaf development among the eight plants investigated. in the present study, we assess the amount and molecular integrity of cpdna for arabidopsis by several methods: dapi-staining of leaf sections as well as individual isolated chloroplasts, qpcr with dna prepared from total tissue as well as from isolated chloroplasts, fluorescence microscopy of ethidium-stained dna molecules prepared in gel from isolated plastids, and blot-hybridization of restriction-digested total tissue dna. with each of these methods, we find a reduction during development in the amount of dna per chloroplast and the fraction of cellular dna represented by cpdna. this reduction cannot be attributed solely to dna dilution caused by chloroplast division. since the data demonstrate that the loss of dna from plastids during leaf development does not result from an artifact of plastid isolation, we conclude that dna is degraded in vivo as arabidopsis plastids mature.

RESULTS
decline in cpdna content is not an artifact of chloroplast isolation
to test whether the isolation process affects the amount of cpdna present in arabidopsis chloroplasts, hand sections of leaves were prepared and immediately fixed with glutaraldehyde. the sections were then stained with dapi and observed using fluorescence microscopy. nucleoids were clearly visible in chloroplasts of the 9-day-old first rosette leaf , which was 20% of its maximum length. however, chloroplasts of the mature, fully expanded first rosette leaf at  <dig> days post germination  and the yellowing 45-day-old senescent  rosette leaf rarely had clearly visible nucleoids and often had no observable dapi-dna fluorescence. most  of the chloroplasts of the young rosette leaf exhibited strong dapi-dna staining, compared with only  <dig> % of those of mature leaves and none of the chloroplasts of the senescent rosette leaf . accordingly, the percentage of chloroplasts exhibiting weak and no dapi-dna fluorescence was much higher for the mature rosette leaf  than the young rosette leaf . the proportion of chloroplasts exhibiting weak  and no dapi-dna fluorescence  for the senescent rosette leaf indicates a slight decline in cpdna content as mature leaves senesce.

we also examined glutaraldehyde-fixed hand sections of cauline leaves at three stages of development. the second cauline leaf at  <dig> days post germination was about 20% of its maximum length. like the young rosette leaf, nearly all chloroplasts of the young cauline leaf had clearly visible nucleoids . at  <dig> days post germination, the second cauline leaf was about 70% of its maximum length, and nucleoids were still visible in nearly all chloroplasts . nucleoids were still visible  in most of the second cauline leaf chloroplasts at  <dig> days post germination when the leaf had reached its maximum length. for young and intermediate cauline leaves, most  chloroplasts exhibited strong dapi-dna staining . however, most  of chloroplasts from the mature cauline leaf exhibited weak dapi-dna staining. as the young leaf develops to its maximum length , the cpdna decline is greater for the rosette than for the cauline leaf .

we conclude that the reduction in dapi-dna fluorescence observed in isolated chloroplasts occurs in planta and not as a consequence of the isolation process. the same conclusion was reached for analogous data for maize  <cit> .

changes in structural form of individual cpdna molecules during leaf development
dna in chloroplasts of some plant species is initially present as complex, branched linear molecules that become progressively simpler and smaller as leaves develop  <cit> . we previously observed that complex forms were generally present in younger leaves of arabidopsis  <cit>  and absent from older leaves. it is possible that chloroplasts do not exhibit detectable dapi-dna staining because cpdna is present as dispersed small molecules incapable of generating a strong signal. in this and the following section, we further characterize the changes in structure of cpdna molecules during arabidopsis leaf development in order to examine this possibility.

chloroplast dna molecules were classified according to their structural complexity . complex forms  were observed in all tissues examined. most of the cpdna forms observed from the first and second rosette leaves of 9-day-old plants  were found in class i. some of the class i forms were very large, consisting of many fibers connected to multiple cores . class i forms were observed less frequently among cpdna molecules from whole 20-day-old plant tissue  and the third rosette leaf of 31-day-old plants . the frequency of class iii forms  was highest for the mature rosette leaf tissue. we conclude that cpdna in arabidopsis progresses from complex branched forms to simpler, fragmented forms during leaf development.

assessment of plastid dna content by fluorescence microscopy and real-time quantitative pcr 
if the reduction of dapi-dna fluorescence in chloroplasts during development occurs because of a reduction in cpdna molecular size rather than a reduction in cpdna amount, we would expect different results when estimating the dna content per plastid using dapi-dna fluorescence compared with a method that does not rely on fluorescence microscopy. in one method, we measured the dapi-dna fluorescence and calculated the number of genomes per plastid using vaccinia virus particles as a standard  <cit> , and we used qpcr in the other method. for qpcr, the amount of dna obtained from a known quantity of plastids was determined using a standard curve of cpdna amounts.

as determined by dapi-dna fluorescence, the number of genome equivalents per plastid in immature tissue  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . plastids from mature leaves  exhibited a smaller range . the mean plastid area for the mature was significantly larger  than that for the immature tissue sample .

the mean genome copy number per plastid for the immature tissue was  <dig> ±  <dig> determined by dapi-dna fluorescence and  <dig> ±  <dig> determined by qpcr . mean genome copy number per plastid for the mature tissue was  <dig> ±  <dig> by dapi-dna fluorescence and  <dig> ±  <dig> by qpcr. the two methods gave similar values for the mean genome content, and a reduction in dna content per plastid between the immature and mature tissues was observed in both cases. thus, the reduction in dapi-dna fluorescence is attributed to a reduction in cpdna amount, rather than solely a reduction in molecular size.

changes in cpdna amount determined by blot-hybridization
using several methods, we have seen that the amount of cpdna per plastid declines during leaf development. however, a reduction in dna content per plastid does not necessarily result in a reduction in the fraction of cellular dna represented by cpdna, as a constant amount of cpdna may be diluted by chloroplast division  <cit> . blot-hybridization of restriction-digested dna extracted from entire tissues demonstrates a change during development in cpdna as a fraction of the total dna . the hybridization with an 854-bp probe consisting of part of the chloroplast peta gene has a quantified signal that is about five-fold more intense for younger tissue samples  than for mature leaf samples . figure 7b shows blot-hybridization of a 1050-bp fragment of the nuclear gene drt <dig> for the same restriction-digested dna samples shown in figure 7a. in contrast, there is little difference in the hybridization of the nuclear dna probe between young and mature tissues. these results indicate a decline in the amount of cpdna as a fraction of cellular dna during development.

relative number of plastid genomes , chloroplasts per cell, and frequency of cell types
we have now compared the amount of cpdna present at the level of individual chloroplasts, as well at the whole tissue level. in order to assess how the amount of cpdna varies with development at the cellular level, we employed qpcr to assess the plastome copy number relative to nuclear genome copy number and obtain a ratio of these two dnas. if all the cells are diploid and a single copy nuclear gene is used, multiplying this ratio by  <dig> gives the number of plastid genomes  per cell. for arabidopsis however, ploidy level varies from cell to cell and also varies during development  <cit> .

thus, it was necessary to first assess the ploidy level of various tissues during development using flow cytometry . cells in young leaves are mostly diploid. ploidy level generally increases as the tissues develop, and an increase in proportion of nuclei exhibiting the highest ploidy levels  is seen in mature leaves . the mean ploidy level increases from  <dig>  at the youngest stage to  <dig>  at the oldest stage, according well with slightly higher mean ploidy reported for arabidopsis tissues at similar developmental stages  <cit> .

1: youngest leaves  from 18-to-19-day-old plants. 2: first and second leaves from 12-day-old plants. 3: 16-day-old seedling shoots. 4: first and second leaves from 19-day-old plants. 5: third and fourth leaves from 36-to-37-day-old plants. 6: first and second leaves from 36-to-37-day-old plants. values are means ± standard deviation.

the ratio of plastome copy number to nuclear genome copy number was assessed using the chloroplast psba gene and both a multiple-copy nuclear gene  and a single copy nuclear gene . using real-time pcr with the single copy nuclear gene roc <dig>  the number of 18s copies per haploid nuclear genome was determined to be  <dig> ±  <dig>  which is similar to the  <dig> ±  <dig> value reported previously  <cit> . the ratio of chloroplast to nuclear dna is higher for immature tissues  compared with older tissues , regardless of whether a single copy or multiple copy gene was used for the nuclear dna. taking into account the number of copies of 18s per haploid nuclear genome and the average ploidy of the cells , we calculated the number of plastomes per cell . we similarly calculated the number of plastomes per cell for data collected using the roc <dig> gene . in both cases, the number of plastomes per cell was lowest in the youngest tissue . the rest of the tissues varied between  <dig> ±  <dig> and  <dig> ±  <dig> plastomes per cell without any obvious developmental trend. zoschke et al.  <cit>  similarly observed  that the number of plastomes per cell varies from  <dig> to  <dig> without developmental correlation. a conclusion that seems to follow from these results is that the cpdna content per cell does not decline during development, as it does for individual chloroplasts  and the fraction of total dna represented by cpdna . this conclusion requires that the stability of cpdna is the same among cells irrespective of nuclear ploidy level, a matter discussed below.

we prepared protoplasts from 10-day-old , 12-day-old , and 24-day-old  first and second rosette leaves. the number of chloroplasts per cell was greater for the intermediate than the young leaves . however, there was no statistically significant difference in the chloroplast number per cell between intermediate  and mature  rosette leaves. the number of genomes per chloroplast is two-fold higher for the intermediate 12-day-old than for the mature 20- or 26-day-old plants . thus, the decline in cpdna as leaves mature  cannot be due only to dilution as chloroplasts divide, but must be primarily due to the degradation of cpdna.

young: first and second leaves from 10-day-old plants. intermediate: first and second leaves from 12-day-old plants. mature: first and second leaves from 24-day-old plants. superscript letters indicate means that are significantly different from one another . values are means ± standard error.

the first and second rosette leaves of ten-day-old  and twenty-six-day-old  plants were embedded in technovit™ resin and sliced into 8-μm-thick sections . the frequency of cell types observed for the young and mature leaf tissues was similar. the mesophyll and palisade cells, containing most of the photosynthetic plastids, comprise only 48% of all cells present in arabidopsis leaves, and this information will be used below when considering the cpdna content per cell.

discussion
as leaves develop, profound changes occur in every measurable property of the plastid, including size, color, anatomy, physiological function, biochemical composition, and gene expression. for six species of flowering plants, a decrease in plastid genome copy number during leaf maturation shows that cpdna can be added to this list. measurements of cpdna per plastid showed that arabidopsis and tobacco were similar to the other six. but in other reports on tobacco and arabidopsis, it was concluded that the amount of cpdna remained constant as leaves matured. as discussed below, however, one report relied on non-quantitative data to reach a quantitative conclusion regarding cpdna, and the other relied on the assumption that the computation of cpdna per cell using qpcr and flow cytometry is an accurate representation. furthermore, in both of these reports, only one method was used to assess cpdna amount during development. our data, obtained by multiple methods, show that arabidopsis is typical with respect to cpdna loss during leaf development.

we have evaluated alternative hypotheses for the decline in cpdna amount during development in arabidopsis. li et al.  <cit>  and zoschke et al.  <cit>  proposed that the reduction in cpdna content reported for mature leaves is an artifact that results from the loss of cpdna during chloroplast isolation. our present data, however, contradict this proposal because we find a decline in cpdna for chloroplasts within cells as observed in leaf sections. furthermore, kato et al.  <cit>  found that plastids of white sectors of the yellow variegated <dig> mutant contain more dna than those of green sectors, as evidenced by staining leaf sections and protoplasts with dapi and hoechst dyes. the data presented by these authors were also obtained for plastids within cells and suggest that dna content declines during plastid differentiation in vivo.

under a second hypothesis, the reduced dapi fluorescence of mature chloroplasts is not due to a reduction in dna amount, but is due to a reduction in the size of cpdna molecules. although our moving pictures do show that cpdna molecules become smaller and more fragmented during development , dna content of chloroplasts measured by both dapi fluorescence and by qpcr was about two- to three-fold higher in immature tissues than in mature tissues , consistent with the two- to seven-fold change in cpdna reported previously for a broader developmental range of tissues  <cit> . thus, low levels of dapi fluorescence in mature chloroplasts accurately reflect low dna contents. furthermore, examination of individual chloroplasts by dapi-staining reveals the range of dna contents among plastids, as well as the dna distribution within the plastid and plastid size, parameters that cannot be assessed by qpcr.

a reduction in the amount of dna present in an individual chloroplast can result from either cpdna degradation or dilution during chloroplast division  <cit> . a third hypothesis, therefore, is that the observed decline in cpdna content occurs only because of dilution. we observed a reduction in cpdna amount between intermediate and mature stages of plant development without an increase in the number of chloroplasts per cell over this period. thus, division alone cannot explain the low level of dna present in mature chloroplasts.

we found that the proportion of total cellular dna represented by cpdna declines during development, using blot-hybridization as the method of assay . li et al.  <cit>  concluded that cpdna levels remained constant throughout development in arabidopsis . however, these authors neglected to discuss the data presented in their figure 3b , which showed a seemingly greater amount of cpdna in a young leaf than a mature leaf. in addition, they did not use a nuclear dna probe in blot-hybridization in order to determine whether equal amounts of dna were loaded in the lanes to be compared, further confounding the qualitative interpretation of hybridization signals. lastly, the developmental age of the tissue was not clearly defined. we show that cpdna amount does remain constant after the decline has occurred . it is possible that the tissues showing no apparent change in signal have already passed the stage during which cpdna levels decline. li et al.  <cit>  also concluded that cpdna remains constant during tobacco leaf development using visual inspection of blot-hybridization signals from cpdna and ''promiscuous'' cpdna in the nucleus. we found that dna per tobacco chloroplast increases during early leaf development and then decreases, but does not reach undetectable levels  <cit> . since li et al.  <cit>  did not specify the age of their tobacco plants, we cannot determine whether their data conflict with ours for tobacco. since for both tobacco and arabidopsis, the well was not included in the image of the blot-hybridization, the extent of restriction digestion cannot be assessed. for arabidopsis, however, our quantitative data  show that cpdna declines during leaf development when the blot-hybridization assay is used, in agreement with inspection of lanes  <dig> and  <dig> of figure 3b of li et al.  <cit> , and the lack of hybridization in the well indicates a complete restriction digest.

we found that the ratio of chloroplast-to-nuclear dna  in young tissues was two- to three-fold higher than in mature tissues. a two- to three-fold reduction of this ratio was also reported by zoschke et al . we used the ratio of chloroplast-to-nuclear dna to calculate the number of plastomes per cell based on the mean nuclear ploidy . the calculated number of plastomes per cell did not appear to vary substantially during development. this result apparently contradicts our data showing a decline in cpdna during development. we now evaluate the assumptions in the method used to calculate plastomes per cell in order to resolve this contradiction.

a reduction in the ratio of chloroplast-to-nuclear dna can result from either an increase in nuclear dna  or a decrease in cpdna. it is clear that the amount of nuclear dna increases during development . we did not observe a slight decrease in mean nuclear ploidy at late stages of leaf development, as was reported by zoschke et al.  <cit> . mean ploidy at these stages was reduced only 20–25% and the authors found an overall trend of increasing ploidy with leaf age. this increase does not occur uniformly among all cells, however, as evidenced by the increase in the proportion of cells in the highest ploidy classes at the later stages of leaf development . thus, some cells experience more rounds of endoreduplication than others. in addition, the decrease in cpdna content may not occur uniformly among cells. chloroplasts exhibit both a larger range in dna content and a higher mean dna content in seedling shoots and intermediate-aged leaves than in mature leaves . however, many of the chloroplasts from the immature tissues contain a similarly low amount of dna as chloroplasts from mature leaves . thus it is likely that a substantial proportion of chloroplasts have already undergone a reduction in dna even at an immature stage, indicating that not all cells initiate the reduction process at the same time. furthermore, in some cells the cpdna content may not change during development. for the leaves of wheat, miyamura et al.  <cit>  reported that the dna content of non-photosynthetic plastids remains low, never approaching the high levels seen in developing chloroplasts. thus, cells containing non-photosynthetic plastids, such as those found in the epidermis  <cit>  and vasculature, may undergo endoreduplication, but may not contribute to the changes in dna content observed for plastids obtained from leaves. such cells comprise about half of the cells in arabidopsis leaves .

we propose that the calculation of plastomes per cell, which is based on the ratio of chloroplast-to-nuclear dna and the mean nuclear ploidy, leads to the erroneous conclusion that cpdna per cell remains constant during development because not all cells participate equally in endoreduplication and reduction of cpdna . let us consider the change in dna amounts between immature and mature tissues. on average, the mean amount of dna per plastid is reduced about two- to three-fold  and the mean amount of nuclear dna increases by the same amount . the number of chloroplasts per cell remains constant during this period , so that the decrease in mean amount of dna per plastid results in a two- to three-fold decrease in the proportion of total dna represented by cpdna. we now consider two types of cells: those in which nuclear dna increases, but cpdna does not decrease  and those with no increase in nuclear dna but a decrease in cpdna . in type  <dig> cells, the amount of dna per plastid and the number of plastids per cell remain constant, but the ratio of chloroplast-to-nuclear dna decreases because the nuclear ploidy increases. cells containing non-photosynthetic plastids or those containing photosynthetic plastids that have already undergone a reduction in cpdna at the immature stage may be type  <dig> cells. in type  <dig> cells, plastids per cell is also constant, but the decrease in dna per plastid leads to a decrease in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio. these type  <dig> cells may be cells containing photosynthetic plastids that undergo a reduction of cpdna between the immature and mature stages of leaf development. the net change for the population of cells  is a decrease in the amount of dna per plastid, a constant number of plastids per cell, an increase in nuclear dna amount, and a decrease in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio.

when calculating the number of plastomes per cell, we can only measure the change in nuclear dna amount  and the change in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio  for the whole population of cells . the fold increase in ploidy for the whole population is similar to the fold decrease in chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio. one interpretation of these results is that the decrease in the chloroplast-to-nuclear ratio occurs only because the nuclear dna copy number is increasing and that cpdna amount does not decline during development. however, this interpretation is contradicted by our data for individual chloroplasts, considering that chloroplasts are not dividing during this time . furthermore, if the calculated number of plastomes per cell were correct, then chloroplasts from intermediate-aged leaves would be expected to have an average of only  <dig> genomes per chloroplast , which is also contradicted by our measured values . another interpretation is that all cells do not participate equally in endoreduplication and cpdna reduction. under this interpretation, a reduction in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio is due to an increase in nuclear dna only for some cells  and is due to a decrease in cpdna for others . type  <dig> cells make a large contribution to the net increase in mean ploidy and a much smaller contribution to the net reduction in cpdna because these cells contain a small amount of cpdna. type  <dig> cells do not contribute to the net increase in ploidy, but contribute greatly to the net reduction in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio. thus, the net increase in nuclear ploidy of about two- to three-fold approximates the net decrease in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio. the calculation of plastomes per cell is based on only these two parameters, giving the impression that there is no change , and this interpretation is consistent with all of our data. if it were possible to analyze the change in nuclear ploidy and the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio for individual cells, a net decrease in plastomes per cell would be evident  because a change in the chloroplast-to-nuclear dna ratio could be directly ascribed to a change in either chloroplast or nuclear dna amount for a given cell.

CONCLUSIONS
we find that the amount of cpdna declines during development of arabidopsis leaves and that cpdna is degraded in vivo. this conclusion is supported by each of the several methods we employed, with each elucidating a different aspect of that decline. examination of dna at the level of individual plastids shows changes in the average amount of cpdna, its location within the plastid, and the range of dna content among plastids. visualizing individual cpdna molecules reveals the change in their size, complexity, and structure. these data are consistent with our previous conclusion  <cit>  that whereas the average dna content per plastid declines only several-fold, the dna of individual plastids can decline to undetectable levels. calculation of plastomes per cell by combining data obtained from qpcr and flow cytometry can be used to assess cpdna change per cell for tissues with a nuclear dna content that is constant during development. for maize, a species without endoreduplication in shoot tissues, we found that qpcr-based calculation of plastomes per cell reflected the same decline in cpdna amount obtained with individual plastids  <cit> . for species like arabidopsis with a high degree of endoreduplication, however, the calculation can be misleading because the cpdna for an average cell is computed from data obtained from a mix of different cell types and would not accurately reflect cell-to-cell variation  <cit> . if all cells do not participate equally in endoreduplication and decline of cpdna, this method cannot be used to determine whether the amount of dna per chloroplast is changing during development. to avoid confounding variables such as endoreduplication, plastomes per cell can also be calculated using methods that do not rely on nuclear dna. individual chloroplasts from intermediate-aged leaves of arabidopsis contain  <dig> genomes on average . as there are about  <dig> chloroplasts per cell , this gives  <dig> plastomes per cell. in comparison, there are  <dig> –  <dig> plastomes per cell in mature tissues. in summary, we have demonstrated that the amount of dna per chloroplast declines in vivo during development in arabidopsis, at least for the environmental conditions and tissues examined. whether cpdna per cell declines depends on the method used to calculate the amount of cpdna per cell.

