BACKGROUND
the notion that neighbouring species negatively impact on one another through competitive interactions has long been the key component of many classic ecological theories and is still the prevailing view amongst plant ecologists. naturally, plant neighbour relationships take several forms. while there is no doubt that competition plays a fundamental role in shaping plant communities, it has become increasingly recognised that facilitative or positive interactions are also ubiquitous  <cit>  and the influence of facilitation is equally important in regulating the composition and diversity of communities  <cit> . indeed, many plants are very good companions and literally facilitate each other  <cit>  by improving growth  <cit> , fixing nitrogen  <cit> , nurse cropping  <cit> , controlling pests  <cit>  or attracting beneficial organisms such as insects  <cit>  or mycorrhizae  <cit> .

much of our current understanding of the mechanisms underlying these facilitative interactions amongst plants has been primarily focused on the effects of light , chemical signalling or physical proximity and contact. for example, we know that the shade of perennial canopies may benefit young seedlings and smaller species by protecting them from temperature extremes and excessive water loss, and providing favourable soil texture and chemistry  <cit> . and analogously to animal systems such as the case of small abalone juveniles finding shelter amidst the spines of adult sea urchins, some plants associate with benefactor species that can physically protect them from predation by virtue of their spine-covered stems  <cit> . furthermore, the recent literature is replete with examples of plants associating with benefactor species that protect them through visual or olfactory concealment by interfering with the ability of an herbivore to find and feed on them  <cit> . in all of these examples of facilitation, the mechanism through which the benefit is conferred from one plant to another is relatively clear and mediated through recognised pathways.

in a recent study, we demonstrated that plants are able to sense and/or affect their neighbours and using some alternative pathway beyond light, chemical signals or physical contact  <cit> . specifically, we showed that seeds and seedlings of chilli plants  are able to discriminate between the presence of an adult conspecific and a fennel plant, known anecdotally to negatively impact on the growth of neighbouring plants through aggressive competitive interactions and hence purposely chosen as the ‘bad neighbour’. specifically, the volatile chemicals of fennel hindered the germination rate of chilli seeds; however germination rate of chilli was accelerated in treatments where fennel was present but its signals were partially or totally blocked. this demonstrated that plants were able to sense their neighbours even when all known communication channels are blocked  and most importantly, recognise the potential for the interfering presence of a ‘bad neighbour’ and modify their growth accordingly. the question remains open, though, whether such alternative means of communication occur amongst ‘good neighbours’. by adopting the same experimental design described in  <cit> , we tested whether the presence of a ‘good’ neighbouring plant could positively influence germination rates of chilli seeds when all known signals are blocked . for this purpose, we chose the basil plant , because of its well-known capacity to produce a large number of secondary and organic volatiles inhibiting germination and root growth of common competitive weeds  and functioning as effective natural insecticides . besides, gardeners commonly regard it as the ideal companion to chilli plants by virtue of its ability to keep the soil moist and act as organic living mulch. hence, we wanted to test whether the presence of basil would positively enhance germination rates of chilli seeds, both when open contact was allowed and when all known signals were totally blocked. we found that this is the case, indicating that both competitive and facilitative interactions between plants are mediated by signalling modalities that remain to be identified.

RESULTS
for the basil neighbour experiment, there was an overall difference between treatments . germination in the masked and the open treatment was greater than in the control treatment , and germination in the masked treatment did not differ significantly from the open treatment . germination also varied significantly over time , with generally low rates in the absence of a neighbouring plant.

in the chilli neighbour experiment, there was an overall difference between treatments . germination in the masked was not significantly different to that in the control treatment  but germination in the open treatment was greater than in the control treatment . germination also varied significantly over time , with generally low rates in the absence of a neighbouring plant.

discussion
the presence of basil positively enhanced germination rates of chilli seeds, validating the claims of many gardeners who recognise the beneficial effect of basil on the growth of chilli plants. interestingly, this was true even when all known signals from the basil were blocked, indicating that the facilitative interaction observed between these two species is mediated through a signalling modality other than those studied thus far . most importantly, the fact that germination of chilli seeds did not differ between the masked and open treatment indicates that light, touch or chemical signals may be important but clearly not necessary for chilli seeds and basil plants to sense each other’s presence. the observed differences in germination between treatments were relatively small, but even small differences in germination are likely to have significant effects on competitiveness and thus on fitness. in fact, carryover effects associated with different germination responses to the surrounding environment can be responsible for a large amount of the variation in growth and reproductive performance among older individuals . over multiple generations, such differences in competitiveness and relative fitness resulting from small differences in germination will have increasing cumulative effects on selection. from an evolutionary perspective, it could also be argued that there is likely to be some adaptive competitive advantage to these responses, for them to have evolved in the first place. overall, our findings highlight the existence and importance of alternative signalling modalities in plants and invites further investigation on the generality and ecological role of this phenomenon.

intriguingly, chilli seeds in the chilli neighbour experiment did not appear to discriminate between the control and the presence of an adult conspecific when this was masked, but did so in the open treatment when light and chemical signals, for example, were accessible. these findings are particularly significant for two reasons. firstly, they demonstrate that signalling mediated by chemicals and light is an important modality amongst conspecifics. but most notably, they indicate that the alternative signalling channel, which does not rely on light, chemicals or touch is particularly important when the neighbouring plant is not a conspecific. because the presence and specific identity of neighbours influence germination timing and success, the existence of an adaptive mechanism that allows a plant to detect its neighbours , and hence to regulate its developmental responses accordingly at the very onset of its life  is clearly advantageous. by operating as a general indicator of the presence of a heterospecific, this signalling modality may indeed be such a strategy enabling seeds to detect the presence of a neighbour prior to engaging into a more fine-tuned response  tailored to the specific identity of the neighbour .

CONCLUSIONS
previous authors have pointed out that facilitation can be an important interaction and one that has not received enough attention from ecologists. we further demonstrate the importance of facilitation between plant species and most interestingly, we provide the first evidence for facilitation occurring via novel communication means other than the established pathways that have already been elucidated. while no mechanistic explanation of how plants may perform the observed feat is available yet , it is becoming clearer that some of the underlying conditions required for such a channel to function as described here include the emission of a signal that not only propagates rapidly to convey real-time information about neighbouring plants but also can be analyzed quickly. we have previously suggested that acoustic signals may offer such a mechanism for mediating plant-plant relationships  <cit>  and proposed that the such signals may be generated in plants by biochemical processes within the cell, where nanomechanical oscillations of various components in the cytoskeleton can produce a spectrum of vibrations  <cit> . the present findings further support the hypothesis of acoustic communication, and hence extends our understanding on how plants may employ this modality to selectively mediate facilitative as well as competitive interactions with surrounding heterospecific neighbours.

