BACKGROUND
programmed cell death in plants
programmed cell death  is the regulated death of a cell within an organism  <cit> . in plant systems, developmentally regulated pcd is thought to be triggered by internal signals and is considered to be a part of typical development. examples of developmentally regulated pcd include, but are not limited to, deletion of the embryonic suspensor  <cit> , xylem differentiation  <cit> , and leaf morphogenesis  <cit>  as is seen in the lace plant  and monstera obliqua. the mitochondrion is known to function in pcd in animal systems and the role of the organelle has been largely elucidated within this system; conversely, less is known regarding the mitochondria and pcd in plants  <cit> .

the role of the mitochondria during developmental programmed cell death 
within animal systems, mitochondria appear to undergo one of two physiological changes leading to the release of internal membrane space  proteins, allowing for the membrane permeability transition , inevitably aiding in pcd signaling. one hypothesized strategy involves the permeability transition pore , a multi-protein complex consisting of the voltage dependent ion channel , the adnt, and cyclophilin d   <cit> . the formation of the ptp can be initiated by a number of factors including, but not limited to: cell injury  <cit> , oxidative stress  <cit> , the accumulation of calcium  in the cytosol or mitochondrial matrix  <cit> , increases in atp, ros, and phosphate, as well changes in ph  <cit> . in addition, evidence suggests that cyclosporine a  can act in disrupting the ptp by displacing the binding of cyd to adnt  <cit>  within animal systems. the theory that csa can inhibit ptp formation has lead to key advances in understanding the second pathway through which mitochondria can release ims proteins.

the second strategy is proposed to involve the bcl- <dig> family of proteins and utilizes only the vdac. the bcl- <dig> family can be divided into two distinct groups based on functionality: the anti-apoptotic proteins including bcl- <dig> and bcl-xl, and the pro-apoptotic proteins including bax, bak, bad and bid  <cit> . if the amount of pro-apoptotic bcl- <dig> proteins increase or the amount of anti-apoptotic bcl- <dig> proteins decreases, the vdac will then work independently to release ims proteins to aid in pcd signaling.

the lace plant and programmed cell death
the aquatic freshwater lace plant  is an excellent model system for the study of developmental pcd in plants. it is one of forty species in the monogeneric family aponogetonaceae, and is the only species in the family that forms perforations in its leaves via the pcd process  <cit> . the leaves of the plant are very thin and transparent, facilitating long-term live cell imaging of the cell death process. a well-developed method for sterile culture of the plant also provides plant material with no microbial contamination   <cit> .

perforation formation within the plant is also predictable, with perforations consistently forming in areoles of photosynthetic tissue, between longitudinal and transverse veins over the entire leaf surface . on a whole plant level, leaf development can be divided into five stages   <cit> . initially, stage  <dig>  involves longitudinally rolled, often pink leaves where no perforations are present. this pink coloration is due to the pigment anthocyanin, which is found in the vacuole of the mesophyll cells . stage  <dig>  is characterized by distinct transparent regions in the centre of the vascular tissue, due to the loss of pigments such as chlorophyll and anthocyanin . stage  <dig>  involves the degradation of the cytoplasm and the cell wall of the cell, resulting in the loss of transparent cells in the centre of the window . stage  <dig>  is characterized by the expansion of the perforation within the areole . lastly, stage  <dig>  results in a completed perforation   <cit> ; these tiny perforations will continue to increase in size as the leaf blade grows.

organelles involved in developmental programmed cell death  within lace plant leaves
the mechanisms of developmentally regulated pcd at a cellular level within the lace plant have begun to be elucidated. common characteristics of pcd have been previously described during leaf morphogenesis in the lace plant and include: the loss of anthocyanin and chlorophyll, chloroplast degradation, cessation of cytoplasmic streaming, increased vesicle formation and plasma membrane blebbing  <cit> . preliminary results indicate indirect evidence for the up-regulation of etr <dig> receptors, as well as for the involvement of caspase 1-like activity during the pcd process in the lace plant . to date, little research has been conducted on transvacuolar strands and no research has been conducted specifically on the mitochondria within this developmentally regulated cell death system  <cit> .

objective
the following paper will aim to elucidate the role of mitochondrial dynamics with relation to other organelles, during developmentally regulated pcd in the novel model species a. madagascariensis, using live cell imaging techniques.

RESULTS
within a stage  <dig>  or window stage leaf , developmental pcd is least advanced at the leaf blade edge and most advanced closest to the midrib   <cit> . in order to further elucidate organelle changes during pcd, an individual areole within a window stage leaf has been subdivided into three different areas based on the progression of cell death. non-pcd cells  line the inside border of a window and consist of cells will never undergo cell death; these cells are normally markedly pink in color due to the pigment anthocyanin. this area is denoted in figure 2c, and consists of all cells between the white and red lines. the cells adjacent to the npcd cells will die via pcd, but are in the earliest stages of pcd . they generally contain no anthocyanin and are green in color due to aggregations of chloroplasts within the cells, sometimes surrounding the nucleus. these cells are denoted in figure 2c, and consist of all cells between the red and green lines. the next delineation of cells are those found in the center of the window that are at the latest stage of cell death . these cells are represented in figure 2c, and consist of cells within the green lines. the presence of these differing stages of pcd within one areole provides a convenient gradient of cell death through which whole leaf observations are facilitated.

mitochondrial distribution and motility
following the determination of optimal dye loading concentrations and incubation time periods, leaf sections were incubated in  <dig>  μm mitotracker red cmxros  for  <dig> hour at room temperature in the dark. following an intensive rinsing procedure, leaf pieces stained via this method displayed intense mitochondrial staining with little background staining, although it can be noted that a small amount of cmxros dye is sequestered to the cell wall despite the presence or absence of mitochondria. this staining allowed the distribution of mitochondria to be easily identified within the cells, also permitting for the analysis of changes in mitochondria motility. analysis of mitochondrial motility was completed by selecting still images from time-lapse videos of single epidermal cells at time  <dig> sec and  <dig> sec. mitochondria at time  <dig> sec remain red, while mitochondria at time  <dig> sec were false colored green. these images were then overlaid to provide information on mitochondrial movement.

within a single areole of a stage  <dig>  leaf, mitochondrial dynamics were delineated into four categories  based on the gradient of pcd. it is important to note that although these stages are seen simultaneously in a window stage leaf areole, if one was to examine a pre-perforation  window, in which no cell death is yet visible, only stage m <dig> mitochondria would be present . stage m <dig> mitochondria were consistently found in healthy, npcd cells . these mitochondria were generally seen individually, appeared to have intact membranes and cristae, and illustrated active streaming within the cytosol . stage m <dig> mitochondria were generally found within epcd window stage cells , surrounding the interior border of the npcd cells. these mitochondria were generally seen clustered into several small aggregates, with individual mitochondria in the surrounding cytosol . the movement of stage m <dig> mitochondrial aggregates  was more sporadic, random and quicker than m <dig> stage mitochondria . stage m <dig> mitochondria were generally found within lpcd window stage cells . these mitochondria were again seen in aggregate with few to no individual mitochondria within the surrounding cytosol . m <dig> mitochondria begin to display degraded cristae and unclear inner and outer membranes . stage m <dig> mitochondrial aggregates also showed little to no movement as compared to m <dig> and m <dig> stage mitochondria . lastly, stage m <dig> mitochondria were also generally located within lpcd cells, but closest to the center of the areole  and showed absolutely no staining . these mitochondria appeared to have dramatically degraded cristae and nearly indistinguishable membranes via tem imaging and also displayed no movement .

decrease in mitochondrial ΔΨm
window stage leaf pieces stained with cmxros were also used to make inferences regarding mitochondrial ΔΨm during developmentally regulated pcd. a reduction in ΔΨm is hypothesized to allow subsequent release of ims proteins and the continuation of pcd signaling. this shift in ΔΨm can be visualized via changes in cmxros fluorescence. stage m1-m <dig> mitochondria displayed vivid cmxros staining, providing indirect evidence of the intact ΔΨm . stage m <dig> mitochondria showed little to no mitochondrial staining, and are thus expected to have undergone the mpt . it should be noted that despite the lack of mitochondrial fluorescence in m <dig> stage mitochondria, a ruptured inner or outer mitochondrial membrane was not observed.

terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dutp nick-end labeling 
further analysis of mitochondrial dynamics during developmentally regulated pcd was completed by the execution of a tunel assay and counter staining with propidium iodide  to aid in co-localization . previously it has been shown tunel-positive nuclei are present in stages 2- <dig>  of leaf development  <cit> . when examining a single areole within a stage  <dig>  leaf, there appeared to be a gradient of tunel-positive nuclei that corresponded with the progression of mitochondrial death . npcd cells that contained m <dig> stage mitochondria showed no tunel-positive nuclei . epcd cells that contained m <dig> stage mitochondria also contained no tunel-positive nuclei . lpcd cells that contained m <dig> stage mitochondria showed tunel-positive nuclei . lpcd cells that contained m <dig> stage mitochondria consistently showed intense tunel-positive staining .

mitochondrial movement and transvacuolar strands
our results indicate that mitochondria, as well as associated chloroplasts, appear to be moving on transvacuolar strands , possibly allowing for more rapid and organized movements within the cell. figure  <dig> illustrates still images taken from a successive z-stack progression through an epcd stage single cell. mitochondria and chloroplasts appear to have distinct associations with one another, and in most instances appear to be congregated around the nucleus . these images also illustrate both mitochondria and chloroplasts moving in clear lines with a trajectory towards the nucleus, along what appears to be transvacuolar strands . at this stage the cells are still healthy and do not show any sign of plasma membrane shrinkage. transvacuolar strands were examined in npcd, epcd and lpcd window stage leaf cells. there appeared to be several transvacuolar strands present in npcd cells , an increase in transvacuolar strand occurrence in epcd cells  and a dramatic decrease in transvacuolar strands in lpcd cells .

cyclosporine a treatment
qualitative analysis
quantitative analysis
the glm anova revealed significant differences in the ratio of number of perforations per cm of leaf length between the csa treated plants at  <dig> μm  and  <dig> μm  compared to control plants . there was no significant difference in the ratio of number of perforations per cm of leaf length between csa treated plants at  <dig> μm  and  <dig> μm  compared to control plants . csa treatments at  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm differed significantly from csa treatments at  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm . the analysis also revealed that there was no overall significant difference in leaf length between control and any csa treated plants .

mitochondrial dynamics following csa treatment
following the conclusion that  <dig> μm was the optimal concentration to prevent pcd and perforation formation within the lace plant, csa treated leaves were stained with cmxros to examine mitochondrial dynamics . mitochondrial dynamics were again examined within one areole, between vascular tissue, where pcd would have occurred in control leaves. mitochondria were examined in areas that would be equal to npcd, epcd and lpcd areas within a control window stage leaf. csa treated mitochondria appeared to remain individual, rounded, and evenly distributed from npcd-lpcd cellular areas . several small aggregates did appear in some lpcd cells, but were not consistent in every cell. the mitochondria also appeared to remain actively streaming in the cytosol, and showed no loss of membrane potential within similar cellular areas examined within window stage leaves 

discussion
developmentally regulated programmed cell death
the unique and predictable system of developmentally regulated pcd within the lace plant offers an excellent model for the study of organelle changes during this process. within this study, we showed the importance of the mitochondria within the early stages of pcd. in addition, we have illustrated the possible strong correlation between the mitochondria and other organelles including the chloroplasts, nuclei and transvacuolar strands.

variation in mitochondrial distribution, dynamics and ΔΨm
the observation that the chloroplasts formed a ring formation around the nucleus in the lace plant in the mid to late stages of pcd has been reported previously by wright et al.   <cit> ; however, this is the first report of the association of mitochondria with these chloroplasts surrounding the nucleus. the reasons for the above are not known, however, it is possible they congregate due to a structure-function relationship, to aid in the pcd process. given the active movement of mitochondria and chloroplasts on transvacuolar strands towards the nucleus, as seen through live cell imaging  we can confirm that this association is not due to plasma membrane shrinkage, given none is present. a phenomenon noted in cucumber, pea and rye plants following induced cell death with ethylene illustrated that mitochondria located in parenchyma cells were attracted to the nuclear envelope during pcd. authors reported that this attraction led to the condensation of chromatin at the sites where the organelles were in contact, and was thus considered to be a structural mechanism for pcd promotion  <cit> .

the aggregation of mitochondria appears to be the first visible shift in mitochondrial dynamics during developmentally regulated pcd in the lace plant. this aggregation of mitochondria has also been demonstrated during induced cell death systems by scott and logan   <cit> , yao et al.   <cit>  and gao et al.   <cit>  in arabidopsis protoplasts, and also by lord and gunawardena   <cit>  in lace plant protoplasts. the reason for the formation of aggregates is unknown. previous studies report that these mitochondrial aggregates during pcd in arabidopsis  <cit> , lace plant  <cit>  and tobacco protoplasts  <cit>  are located in the cytosol of the cells. however, recent data  from the gunawardena lab suggest that this aggregate may be inside the vacuole at later stages of pcd. these recent findings, along with the rapid and random movements of the aggregate, suggest that this aggregate may move from the cytosol to the vacuole during late pcd, possibly to be degraded. also, this study never observed the aggregates moving along tvs, suggesting that they may be in the vacuole at this time. previous studies by wright et al.,  <dig>  <cit>  in developmental pcd in the lace plant provide evidence of similar aggregates, containing chloroplasts and possibly mitochondria, inside the vacuole undergoing brownian motion during the later stages of pcd . however, whether these aggregates are first in the thin layer of cytoplasm and then move into the vacuole requires further investigation.

following aggregation, mitochondria displayed a subsequent reduction in streaming. this cessation of streaming has also been demonstrated in mitochondria during several induced cell death examples in arabidopsis protoplasts  <cit> , arabidopsis leaf discs  <cit> , tobacco by- <dig> cells  <cit> , and lace plant protoplasts  <cit> . this impairment of mitochondrial movement is commonly seen following the induction of cell death, and is thought to be highly correlated with the acute change in cellular redox status, as well as the remainder of the cell death process  <cit> .

following mitochondrial aggregation and cessation of streaming, they appear to undergo the mpt, characterized by a loss of cmxros staining. the decrease in ΔΨm appeared to occur between m <dig> and m <dig> mitochondria, possibly indicating that this is the first visible indication of membrane transition, and thus, possibly the first release of ims proteins. the release of these ims components at this time would correlate with the apparent degradation of the inner mitochondrial structure at this stage of pcd. this decrease in mitochondrial ΔΨm has been noted as a key characteristic of cell death in animal systems, and has also been demonstrated in a variety of other plant examples including induced cell death in arabidopsis protoplasts  <cit> , isolated oat mitochondria  <cit> , lace plant protoplasts  <cit>  and also during developmentally regulated cell death in isolated zinnia treachery element  cells  <cit> .

terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase mediated dutp nick-end labeling 
a trend was noted within a single areole of a stage  <dig>  leaf; cells that contained tunel-positive nuclei were generally correlated with cells that contained m <dig> and m <dig> stage mitochondria. tunel-positive nuclei were not seen in npcd cells that contained stage m <dig> mitochondria; this result was expected given that these cells are not pre-disposed to undergo cell death. tunel-positive nuclei were also absent in epcd cells that contain stage m <dig> mitochondrial aggregates. this result clearly indicates that mitochondrial changes have begun prior to the fragmentation of nuclear dna leading to tunel-positive nuclei. tunel-positive nuclei were consistently seen within lpcd cells that contained either m <dig> or m <dig> stage mitochondria. this trend also allows us to conclude that mitochondrial changes, particularly those seen in stage m <dig> and m <dig> stage mitochondria, including the cessation of mitochondrial movement and complete loss of ΔΨm are probably occurring simultaneously with the fragmentation of nuclear dna, as noted by the presence of tunel-positive nuclei within these areas.

transvacuolar strands
an increased number of transvacuolar strands was noted in window stage leaf cells that were in the early stages of pcd . this increased instance of transvacuolar strands is a common characteristic of pcd and has been noted previously during developmental cell death in the lace plant  <cit> , in induced cell death in lace plant protoplasts  <cit> , and also during induced cell death by osmotic stress in tobacco suspension cultures  <cit> . increases in transvacuolar strands could aid in the movement of organelles such as chloroplasts and mitochondria within plant cells. within this system, both of these organelles have been seen traveling along thin strands spanning the vacuole of the cell and sometimes appearing to be moving towards the nucleus. the appearance of these strands decreases as pcd progresses, with few to no transvacuolar strands present in lpcd stage cells.

cyclosporin a
the application of the ptp agonist csa to the lace plant system marks the first time, to our knowledge, that this inhibitor has ever been applied in vivo. the inhibitor has been previously used during induced cell death examples on cell cultures  <cit> , isolated protoplasts  <cit> , and isolated mitochondria  <cit> . the only other developmentally regulated pcd example in which csa had been employed was during te differentiation in zinnia, but this example is considered in vitro due to the cells being isolated from the plant prior to csa treatment  <cit> .

the application of csa to lace plants in magenta boxes led to a reduction in perforation formation in leaves produced following the addition of the inhibitor. this significant decrease in perforation formation within the lace plant via csa application indirectly indicates that the ptp pathway may play a role in cellular death within this system. although the involvement of the ptp in animal pcd is well supported, it is controversial if a similar complex has a role in the release of ims proteins in plant pcd, as shown by the following authors. studies examining tobacco protoplasts  <cit> , sycamore cells  <cit>  or mitochondria isolated from either winter wheat  <cit>  or potato tubers  <cit> , as well as developing tracheary elements  <cit>  provide evidence suggesting that csa effectively inhibits or delays pcd; this, arguably, suggests a role for the ptp in plant pcd. however, there have also been studies that demonstrate the insensitivity of plant pcd to csa  <cit> . lin et al.,  <dig> report a delay or reduction in pcd, and suggest that this may provide evidence for the alternate pathway. in animal systems, there is an alternate pathway for the release of ims proteins that involves the bcl- <dig> family of proteins, however, to date there is no direct evidence of bcl- <dig> family proteins in plants. inhibitor experiments, however, provide indirect evidence for bcl-2-like family protein activity in plants  <cit> . in contrast to this study, our experiment reports a significant reduction in pcd following csa pre-treatment, suggesting the absence of an alternative pathway in this system. this provides indirect evidence for the role played by the ptp in lace plant pcd. however, further studies are required to examine the role of the ptp in the release of the ims proteins from the mitochondria into the cytosol.

csa concentrations in the lower range  did not result in a significantly lower amount of perforations as compared to the controls . this observation was expected, given that the inhibitor is dissolved in liquid and being applied to whole plants; therefore, higher concentrations may be required in order to affect the ptp. csa at  <dig> μm significantly reduced the amount of perforations in the lace plant as compared to the control, but also maintained a healthy leaf appearance. the observations that no perforations formed at the  <dig> μm concentration, but did form in the controls, and that some transient leaf clearing occurred, indicates that this may be the lower limit of toxicity for csa in the lace plant. the  <dig> μm csa treatment resulted in brown and/or cleared leaves and therefore this concentration was considered very toxic and was not included in the subsequent statistical analysis. overall, for further research it has been concluded that  <dig> μm csa is the ideal concentration to inhibit the opening of the ptp during lace plant developmentally regulated pcd. this concentration has also been utilized as an optimal concentration in other plant examples, including sycamore cells  <cit> .

for this reason,  <dig> μm csa treated leaves, four days following their emergence from the sam, were chosen for examination; these leaves were therefore a similar developmental age as window stage leaves examined previously. csa treated leaves depicted numerous, round mitochondria, which generally remained individual within the cytosol, and formed few aggregates in all cell types equal to npcd-lpcd. these mitochondria also remained streaming within the entire areole and did not appear to undergo a membrane permeability transition causing loss of membrane potential and cmxros staining. given that treatment with csa is hypothesized to block the release of ims proteins from the mitochondria, we would anticipate variations in mitochondrial dynamics within this system. intense mitochondrial fluorescence was anticipated, as this drug is hypothesized to inhibit the ptp and possibly the subsequent mpt. a round, and or swollen appearance of mitochondria following csa treatment was also noted, although the reason behind this is unknown and needs to be further investigated. overall csa treated mitochondria display characteristics that most closely resemble m <dig> mitochondrial dynamics, where no pcd is occurring.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented here elucidate organelle dynamics, focused on mitochondria, during developmentally regulated pcd in the lace plant a. madagascariensis. developing leaves in which pcd was initiated  were stained with the mitochondrial membrane potential sensitive dye cmxros and were examined via live cell imaging and confocal fluorescent microscopy. observations of mitochondrial aggregation, motility and ΔΨm lead to the classification of mitochondria into one of four stages  based on their location in a window stage leaf areole. our findings also indicate that within a single areole of a stage  <dig>  leaf a gradient of tunel-positive nuclei staining exists. tunel-positive nuclei were not seen in cells containing m <dig> and m <dig> stage mitochondria and were seen in cells with m <dig> and m <dig> stage mitochondria. these correlations suggest that the mitochondrial aggregation occurs prior to dna fragmentation, whereas cessation of mitochondrial streaming and the membrane permeability transition resulting in complete loss of ΔΨm, based on cmxros staining, probably occurs concurrently with the fragmentation of nuclear dna. mitochondria and chloroplasts were examined via live cell imaging, highlighting the role of transvacuolar strands in the movement of the organelles into a ring formation around the nucleus. the function of the mitochondrial ptp during pcd in developing lace plant leaves was also indirectly examined via csa pre-treatment. examination of csa treated mitochondria revealed individual organelles, continued mitochondrial streaming and no loss in membrane potential over the same cellular areas  within one areole. overall, results presented here detail organelle dynamics during developmentally regulated pcd in whole lace plant tissue and suggest that the mitochondria plays an important role in the early stages of pcd.

