BACKGROUND
clinically validated biomarkers are highly valued in cancer pathology for diagnostic and prognostic purposes  <cit> . biomarker sets are also used in clinical trials as early indicators of drug efficacy and toxicity  <cit> . molecular profiling technologies have the potential to enable high-throughput candidate biomarker identification. use of oligonucleotide or spotted cdna microarrays allows for the quantification of the mrna concentration of thousands of gene products simultaneously  <cit> . although measurement of the entire proteome is not yet possible  <cit> , advances in mass spectrometry and chromatography provide similar capabilities at the protein level. molecular profiling approaches have been applied towards the study of chronic diseases, including muscular dystrophy  <cit> , diabetes  <cit> , arthritis  <cit> , cardiovascular disease  <cit>  and cancer  <cit> . microarray studies, in which the class or phenotype  of all samples is known, can be used to identify discriminative features  that are statistically associated with class distinction  <cit> . these features can be used as potential biomarker sets to determine the phenotype of new samples and guide therapy appropriately.

detection of candidate biomarkers from high-dimensional molecular datasets entails separation of signal from noise. as such, techniques adapted from signal processing and machine learning can be applied. the goal of machine learning is to reliably predict the class, or phenotypic state, of a new sample given only a set of measured input variables. the definition of a function that equates input variables to response is called supervised learning. in general, supervised learning consists of three steps: feature selection, decision rule specification and estimation of generalization error  <cit> . feature selection is the identification of informative features from noisy or uncorrelated features in the dataset. decision rule specification involves selection of a classification algorithm and definition of algorithm parameters by cross-validation  <cit> . feature selection and decision rule specification produce a classifier through the use of cross-validation on training data. in this process, there is a risk of overfitting the training data, in which the classifier is trained to recognize noise and not class distinction. the estimation of generalization error, or the misclassification rate expected when the classifier is applied to new samples, can be used to investigate the likelihood of overfitting. an unbiased estimate of the generalization error can only be obtained from independent test data  <cit> .

feature selection is particularly important in gene expression profiling, in which the number of features  is much larger than the number of observations . identification of discriminative features eases the process of data interpretation and communication, decreases computation time for training, and, in biomarker identification, enables the development of reliable clinical assays. numerous feature selection algorithms can be found in the literature, most of which rank features in a univariate manner, sorting them on the basis of correlation with class distinction  <cit> . in molecular profiling studies, univariate methods are used more often than multivariate feature selection methods  <cit>  due to their intrinsic simplicity and the higher computational cost of multivariate methods.

application of supervised feature selection methods in microarray analysis identifies a set of genes whose expression patterns, or profiles, are most correlated with response. however, discriminative feature sets identified in multiple microarray studies of the same disease state or biological condition typically share few common genes  <cit> , indicating perhaps that multiple gene subsets can be used as effective biomarker panels in disease classification. many genes cluster into similar expression profiles and may have similar roles in signalling or metabolic pathways. variation between studies can also be partially attributed to biological variations between sample populations and technical variations, such as the microarray platform , protocol and analytical techniques used  <cit> . moreover, selection of discriminative genes within a given dataset is dependent on the selection of training set arrays  <cit> .

given the presence of multiple, generally exclusive expression profiles of disease states such as metastatic breast cancer, it is appropriate to ask whether feature selection identifies expression profiles that classify better than is expected by chance, i.e. better than gene subsets selected randomly. it is also important to determine to what extent technical and biological variability between studies affects the generalization error of classifiers trained on expression profiles. in this study, we analyzed a multitude of publicly available microarray datasets consisting of expression data linked to clinical data for breast cancer, renal cancer, and lymphoma  <cit> . expression profiles, composed of features associated with response, were created using supervised, univariate feature selection algorithms  <cit> . our analysis considered multiple microarray technologies , normalization, feature selection and classification methods. our results point to the efficiency of gene subsets randomly selected from known disease-related genes in the accurate classification of cancer samples according to molecular phenotypes. results also point to the challenges of predicting relapse directly from microarray data annotated with clinical outcome.

RESULTS
simulated datasets confirm the performance of classification algorithms
analysis of simulated gene expression datasets indicated the effectiveness of the feature selection and classification algorithms used in this study to predict in binary endpoints. simulated datasets consisting of  <dig> observations and  <dig> features were designed to approximate a binary classification problem  <cit> . expression values were drawn from a multivariate normal distribution with mean equal to  <dig>  differentially expressed genes were simulated from a mixture of the original distribution with a second multivariate normal distribution with mean equal to  <dig>  our computations, presented in figure  <dig>  produced highly discriminative decision rules on simulated expression data. elimination of differential expression, simulated by generating all values from the same distribution, resulted in classifiers with poor classification performance .

univariate feature selection is a poor predictor of relapse in breast, lymphoma and renal cancers
computations with breast cancer microarray datasets from four independent cohorts of patients  indicate the poor potential of univariate feature selection in predicting relapse-free survival. figure  <dig> shows the classification error metric e  as a function of the number of features used for classification. columns  <dig> and  <dig> in this figure correspond to classification with respect to er-status and relapse-free survival, respectively. dark gray bars indicate univariate feature selection whereas light and medium gray bars correspond, respectively, to random selection from either the entire gene set or from an a priori gene set. error bars indicate the variance over one hundred iterations of the machine learning algorithm. as the figure shows, decision rules trained on relapse-free status classify test samples with low accuracy. analysis of diffuse large b-cell lymphoma  and conventional renal cell carcinoma  datasets similarly yielded high errors in the prediction of relapse-free status . survival time is a multi-factorial response variable with many potential confounding factors  that may affect gene expression. the influence of these confounding factors may result in tumor classes that are highly heterogeneous in regards to gene expression. these results indicate the difficulty in predicting relapse-free status in several forms of cancer from microarray data with the use of univariate feature selection.

a. no restrictions

b. lymph-node negative

c. no adjuvant therapy

d. <  <dig> cm in diameter

e. < =  <dig> years at diagnosis

f. no previous history of cancer

univariate feature selection as well as randomly chosen features from a priori knowledge set classifies microarray data according to molecular phenotype
in contrast, machine learning methods were able to classify microarray datasets according to molecular phenotype with high accuracy . in analysis of breast cancer datasets, figure  <dig> shows that decision rules trained on er status classified test samples more accurately than decision rules trained on relapse-free status. these results agree with previous studies in that the expression profiles of many genes seem to be correlated with er status  <cit> . estrogen receptor is a hormone-activated transcription factor  <cit>  and also participates in cellular signalling by heterodimerization with membrane-bound receptors such as the endothelial growth factor receptor  <cit> . loss of estrogen receptor expression inhibits er-responsive gene transcription and signaling in downstream pathways and therefore can be expected to affect the expression of downstream genes in a similar manner across tumors. consistent with the analysis of breast cancer data, lymphoma datasets exhibited low errors in the prediction of bcl- <dig> status. bcl- <dig> is a zinc-finger protein that functions as a transcriptional repressor  <cit>  and is expressed in germinal center b cells  <cit> . in dlbcl, bcl- <dig> expression, assessed by both immunohistochemistry and rt-pcr, has been associated with better survival in several studies  <cit> . univariate feature selection may be successful in predicting molecular phenotype due to the fact that expression profiles of many genes are correlated with changes in expression of these transcriptional modulators.

to determine whether gene sets identified with supervised feature selection are uniquely correlated with response, the classification performance of expression profiles was compared with the performance of decision rules created without feature selection  or a list of known disease related genes ) . random selection of subsets of n genes gives a baseline error rate expected for classification based on decision rules with n features. a priori selection provides a baseline error rate based on the known pathology. in figure  <dig>  we demonstrate that decision rules that incorporate supervised feature selection classify test samples more accurately than decision rules using a priori selection or random selection. however, in molecular phenotype prediction, the difference in prediction error decreases drastically as the number of features increases. this indicates that the power of univariate supervised feature selection methods lies in identifying small sets of discriminative features. low prediction error resulting from classification based on multiple, exclusive gene sets has been demonstrated previously by investigating the classification potential of feature sets found down the list of genes ranked by their association with response  <cit> . consistent with these previous observations, we demonstrate that randomly selected gene subsets classify molecular phenotype much better than the 50% error rate expected from random classification. in addition, limiting the feature space to genes that have demonstrated disease-relevance in the experimental setting improves classification performance of randomly selected gene sets. these results suggest that the presence of multiple, mostly exclusive biomarker sets identified from different studies  <cit>  can be partially attributed to the large number of combinations of discriminative feature sets  <cit> .

error in predicting relapse is insensitive to normalization and classification algorithms
our computations indicate that classification error is only weakly dependent on normalization, feature selection, classification and training/testing partition. breast cancer dataset gse <dig> was used to assess the effects of these classification parameters on predicted error. figure  <dig> shows that these parameters have little effect on prediction for relapse-free survival whereas pre-processing methodologies may have a small impact on the prediction error for er status.

leave-one-out cross-validation scheme may lead to overfitting
it has been shown that decision rules based on microarray data are capable of clearly differentiating tumors by outcome when all data is used for feature selection in a leave-one-out cross-validation scheme. our findings validate previous results in the literature concerning, for example, the prediction of relapse in lymphoma  <cit> . in their study, shipp et al.  <cit>  used a machine learning procedure consisting of feature selection with the signal to noise ratio, classifier training by a weighted voting algorithm and leave one out cross-validation on a cohort of  <dig> lymphoma patients linked to clinical outcome. importantly, the final geneset was selected from the consensus of all  <dig> leave-one out models of the data. using kaplan meier analysis  <cit> , shipp et al. demonstrated a significant difference in survival between the classes predicted by machine learning. we replicated their calculations in this study using a larger microarray dataset  and found similar results using both their and our methods of feature selection and classification . next, we divided the data in gse <dig> into a learning set  and test set  and computed kaplan meier survival curves. results shown in row  <dig> of figure  <dig>  demonstrate the diminished capacity to identify groups of tumors with different survival rates when complete separation of training and testing sets is maintained in the computations. thus, when feature selection was included in the cross-validation procedure, such that features selected only from training data were applied to the test data, the difference in survival time between predicted classes decreased. these results suggest the possibility of overfitting in previously reported classifiers based on microarray data linked to clinical outcome.

molecular phenotype prediction is maintained in across dataset cross-validation on the same microarray platform
next, we tested whether prediction error calculated by within dataset cross-validation holds when decision rules trained on one dataset are applied to arrays from other datasets profiling similar populations. within dataset cross-validation may be biased according to the degree of non-specific correlation between the training and test data. non-specific correlation can be described as technical noise that arises in sample preparation, hybridization and scanning and results in data collected from the same lab being more highly correlated than data collected in different labs  <cit> . to investigate this issue further, we used the affymetrix dataset gse <dig> for developing decision rules for er status prediction and applied these rules to arrays profiled on either the same  or different microarray platforms . there was no need to test validation of relapse prediction across datasets since our results showed poor prediction capacity even for within dataset cross-validation. figure  <dig> illustrates the results of this analysis in the form of ellipses whose size and shape indicate the distribution of prediction errors. the column on the left  belongs to computations using univariate feature selection and the column on the right  indicates results corresponding to random selection from an a priori dataset. the figure shows that the prediction error and its variance were much lower on test datasets profiled on the same platform  in comparison to test datasets using different platforms . the same trend held true when the decision rule was based on feature selection from a random set chosen with a priori knowledge . these results suggest that decision rules obtained for classification do not accurately predict molecular phenotype in microarray data obtained using different platforms, possibly due to different strategies in probe design, or shortcomings in the matching of probes using probe set annotations  <cit> . overall, these results demonstrate that bias resulting from non-specific correlation is negligible when samples are analyzed on the same platform. results also validate the use of feature selection algorithms to identify small, discriminative feature sets that can be adapted for use in biomarker panels for identifying molecular phenotypes.

CONCLUSIONS
biomarker sets derived from different global gene expression datasets for the purpose of predicting molecular phenotype or relapse in cancer contain very few common genes  <cit> . in a typical microarray experiment, expression values of many genes are correlated with response  <cit>  and therefore, one could predict that multiple biomarker sets could accurately predict the classification of arrays into defined phenotypes. in this study, we used an iterative machine learning approach to determine the prediction potential of biomarker sets chosen using univariate feature selection from training sets selected randomly. on simulated gene expression data, this approach generated several highly discriminative decision rules. similarly, multiple expression profiles capable of classifying tumors by molecular phenotype were identified in both breast cancer and dlbcl datasets.

we also compared the prediction error resulting from supervised feature selection vs. features selected randomly from either the entire set of genes represented on the microarray or an a priori defined subset of disease-relevant genes. overall, univariate feature selection led to more accurate classification; however, the difference in prediction errors decreased as the number of features increased. similar results were also observed in the application of decision rules to samples from other gene expression datasets profiled on the same microarray platform. from this, we conclude that the presence of multiple biomarker sets in the prediction of molecular phenotype arises from the large number of genes correlated with response.

in contrast, decision rules trained on the basis of relapse-free status classified samples with relatively high prediction errors in breast cancer, dlbcl and crcc datasets. specifically, prediction error was approximately 40% in all cases that were studied regardless of the method used for feature selection. overall, these results indicate the difficulty of developing biomarker sets predictive of cancer relapse using a single microarray dataset. our results do not apply to meta-analytical approaches, in which cancer relapse predictions are obtained by integrating data from multiple microarray datasets prior to machine learning  <cit> . in addition, combined use of clinical information and gene expression data may result in decision rules with better accuracy in predicting relapse  <cit> .

