BACKGROUND
animal eyes have long been considered a classic example of convergent evolution. in recent decades, this view has changed due to the discovery of shared developmental regulatory genes for eye formation. several genes, such as pax-6/eyeless   <cit> , eyes absent  <cit> , dachshund  <cit> , and sine oculis  <cit> , together with their orthologs in metazoan animals, are able to induce the formation of ectopic eyes in flies and have been regarded as essential eye regulator genes among metazoan animals  <cit> . most of the genes involved in eye development had already existed in the last common ancestors of cnidarians and bilaterians  <cit> . such evidence suggests that some conserved genes have similarly contributed to eye development across a wide range of animals.

in contrast to the above discovery, the structural diversity of the eye is also evident among metazoan animals, and might have affected the diversification of species themselves by changing their morphology, behavior, and ecological strategy. the morphological unit of the eye has many different components such as muscle, lens, photoreceptor, optic nerve and visual center of brain, each with there own evolutionary histories  <cit> . molluscs provide an appropriate model for the study of the evolutionary history of these various eye components as a number of different eye types are present in one phylum. in this study, we focused on the evolution of the camera eye in coleoid cephalopods . there are two well-known cephalopod eye types; the pin-hole eye, found in nautiloids, and the camera eye, seen in coleoid cephalopods . comparative studies on the camera eye of coleoid cephalopods and the pin-hole eye of nautiloids have begun to reveal the evolutionary histories of the various eye components and their genetic backgrounds. the coleoid cephalopods have an iris, a nearly circular lens, a vitreous cavity, and photoreceptor cells that form a retina. the nautiloid eye, however, consists only of a retina. these structural differences are the result of modifications that occurred after the divergence of cephalopods from the common molluscan ancestor  <cit> . differences in visual cognition between the eye of the coleoid cephalopods and that of other molluscs appear to be a reflection of their complicated brain anatomy, as well as of their elaborated accessory eye structures  <cit> . the optic lobes of the coleoid cephalopods include secondary interneurons connected to photoreceptor cells, the cortex of which is arranged in four layers and resembles the organization of the deep layers of the vertebrate retina  <cit> . in contrast, lower molluscs, such as aplysia, have tiny neuronal clusters between photoreceptors and the brain  <cit> . therefore, the complicated cortex strucutre of the optic lobes of the coleiod cephalopods might be a new phenotype obtained in the coleoid cephalopod lineage.

the question remains as to what genetic background could have contributed to the evolution of the coleoid cephalopod camera eye. we hypothesized that changes in expresssion patterns and functions of pre-existing genes as well as the gain and loss of genes have played important roles in the evolution of the camera eye in coleoid cephalopods. previously, ogura et al.  <cit>  revealed that more than 60% of octopus eye ests were commonly observed in the human eye, indicating that changes of expression patterns and functions have been involved in the evolution of the camera eyes in the octopus and humans.

to determine the genes specifically involved in camera-eye development and those for which functions may have changed during camera eye evolution, we applied the following three strategies . first, we utilized "in vitro homology search array technology" to remove genes commonly expressed across molluscan eyes and estimate genes specifically expressed in the coleoid cephalopod camera eye. this strategy was developed for the comparative genomic study of non-sequenced species with the aid of a bioinformatic approach to probe design  <cit> . in this analysis we used a  <dig> mer oligonucleotide library based on the expressed gene sequences of the octopus, squid, nautilus and scallop, in which nearly  <dig>  annotated genes were examined. we then estimated candidate genes uniquely expressed in camera-type coleoid cephalopod eyes. second, we compared gene expression patterns among three developmental stages in pygmy squid, which we used as a coleoid cephalopod model, to validate and elucidate gene expression in the camera eye formation process. it is known that the eye formation process can be observed during stages 20- <dig> in the pygmy squid, and we utilized embryos at stage  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for the developmental array. third, to explore genes that have changed functionally, we determined whether the candidate genes in the coleoid cephalopods were under positive selection pressure. finally, we selected four candidate genes, two transcription factor genes that might have changed the expression patterns of down-stream genes, and two positively selected genes that might have experienced functional changes. we then validated their localization at various developmental stages in our cephalopod model, the pygmy squid.

RESULTS
identifying genes specifically expressed in the coleoid cephalopod camera eye
to collect cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate genes, we performed an in vitro homology search using an array designed to estimate gene expression among species on the basis of inter-species hybridization signals. in this in vitro homology search array, probes were designed, using the probe design method described in ogura et al.  <cit> , to estimate distantly related homologs of molluscan eye genes. microarray probes from octopus vulgaris , loligo bleekeri , idiosepius paradoxus , mizuhopecten  yessoensis  and nautilus pompilius  were derived from our eye est libraries and the ncbi est database. we applied total rna samples from the pygmy squid, scallop and nautilus to a custom agilent microarray designed to detect specific gene expression in molluscan eyes. the microarray results for camera eye-specific genes allowed us to eliminate  <dig> and  <dig> genes found to be significantly expressed, using the feature extraction output , in the nautilus and scallop eye rna, respectively. in addition to elimination on the basis of the microarray results, we also eliminated genes having homolog among the nautilus or scallop eye ests, based on blastn and tblastx searches . as a result, a total of  <dig>  genes  were selected as cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate genes . although this array-based estimation may include false-positive genes , as described in gilad et al.  <cit> , we expect highly conserved genes  to be eliminated using this analysis.

confirmation of cephalopod camera eye-specific genes expression in the developmental stages of the pygmy squid by developmental array
next, we performed microarray experiments using pygmy squid embryonic rna to estimate genes contributing to the camera eye developmental process in coleoid cephalopods. we extracted total rnas from whole embryos at stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> , and from the eyes at stage  <dig>  the reason for the selection of these three stages is that essential developmental events occur in each stage: stage  <dig> sees the establishment of eye placodes, stage  <dig> sees eye vesicle closure and the onset of lens formation, and stage  <dig> sees the completion of eye development . among the cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate genes selected above,  <dig> %  of the genes were found to have a positive signal against pygmy squid embryonic rna.

we then checked positive gene expression at the three developmental stages, as the highly expressed genes are expected to be specifically involved in the developmental events occurring at each stage. we isolated  <dig> genes positive against only embryonic rna at stage  <dig>  similarly,  <dig> and  <dig> genes were isolated at stage  <dig> and stage  <dig>  respectively . after eliminating genes expressed in the adult eye of the pygmy squid,  <dig> %  of the genes were selected as showing high expression at these embryonic stages.

estimation of lineage-specific functional changes in coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific genes by molecular evolutionary analysis
we hypothesized that taxon-specific gene modification contributed to the evolutionary steps in coleoid cephalopod camera eye development. to clarify the involvement of gene recruitment and subsequent positive selection in camera eye acquisition, we estimated the dn/ds ratio of camera eye-specific candidate genes after the divergence of cephalopods from the common molluscan ancestor. the cephalopod camera eye-specific data were concatenated together with homologous genes estimated by blastn and tblastx searches against the molluscan ncbi nucleotide collection and molluscan ests . phylogenetic trees based on the gene sets were analyzed using the codeml program in paml ver.  <dig>  b  <cit>  under the f3x <dig> model. finally, we obtained  <dig>  sets of multiple alignments including cephalopods and other molluscs, and dn/ds values of the camera eye-specific genes. of the camera eye-specific genes,  <dig>  were identified as positively selected genes in the cephalopod lineage .

homologs of the cornichon gene were found among the octopus and the pygmy squid ests , and both homologs were found to be positively selected genes in the cephalopod lineage. cornichon-like genes in vertebrates have been shown to be located directly downstream of pax- <dig>  <cit> . it is of great interest that the region downstream of pax- <dig> is included among the camera eye-specific genes, although it is still unclear whether the squid cornichon is controlled by pax- <dig> or not.

centaurin gamma is a small gtp family member with ntpase activity  <cit>  . it is known to be expressed in human cancer cells is known; however, its function in vertebrate development is unclear. localization of the centaurin gamma homolog  is described below.

determination of common and unique genes by comparative gene expression analysis of cephalopods and vertebrates
we next investigated whether coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific genes could be found in the vertebrate camera eye by comparing gene expression profiles across a wide range of animal phyla. a comparison of the coleoid cephalopod eye-specific candidate genes showed that  <dig>  have an e-value of less than 1e- <dig> in blastn and tblastx searches against vertebrate eye est data including the national eye institute's nei bank, ncbi unigene, and bodymap data . we found that  <dig> %  of these probes have a positive signal against pygmy squid adult eye rna. this indicates that these candidates include genes commonly expressed in cephalopod species, and that these genes are also involved in coleoid cephalopod camera eye. the list of homologous genes indicates that  <dig> % of the genes  are function-known in vertebrate genome annotation and go classification analysis. we then examined the biological functions of the camera eye-specific genes using single enrichment analysis against total cephalopod ests except the coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific genes . the go classification analysis showed that fifteen terms associated with "molecular function" were significantly over-represented in the camera eye-specific genes, including genes for protein binding, nucleotide binding, structural constituent of ribosomes, atp binding, translation initiation factor activity, gtp binding, zinc ion binding, metal ion binding, catalytic activity, binding, protein homodimerization activity, and transferase activity . terms of "biological process" category were also found to be an over-represented, including translation, intracellular protein transport, signal transduction, small gtpase mediated signal transduction, protein transport, protein modification process, and anti-apoptosis. on the other hand, no particular term of "cellular component" was over-reperesented in the camera eye-specific genes. these over-represented go terms shown above also represent many ras-like signal transduction proteins and zinc finger proteins in the camera eye-specific gene set.

* , go terms molecular function; , biological process.

to estimate the genes possibly related to camera eye specification through subsequent structural and functional gene expression, we further manually identified several transcriptional factors using the go classification and domain estimation results obtained by the pfam. homologs of six homeobox  <dig> , ets-related isoform  <dig> , lim domain-containing , lim and sh <dig> domain protein  and high mobility group b3b  were found among the camera eye-specific genes. there were also many zinc finger homologs . molecular phylogenetic analysis revealed that the squid ets- <dig> homolog was closely related to the vertebrate erg and fli- <dig> genes , which are major regulators of blood vessel development  <cit> . the squid ets- <dig> homolog is thought not to have any putative function in the squid blood vessels due to its expression pattern , although many small vessels supply blood to the cephalopod retina  <cit> . when we applied an in vitro homology search array technique to a comparison of the pygmy squid and human transcripts  <cit> , a probe based on the ets- <dig> homolog reproducibly cross-reacted with human rna . these results indicate not only that our array could effectively identify similar expression patterns across animal phyla, but also that the expression of the ets- <dig> homolog was restricted to the camera eye of vertebrates and cephalopods.

functional analysis of four candidate genes selected among the coleoid cephalopod camera eye-expressed genes
to clarify the function of the coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate genes in the camera eye formation process, we cloned and analyzed the localization of transcripts of three candidate genes in the pygmy squid embryo. we selected the ets- <dig>  hmgb <dig> and hla-b associated transcript homologs from the transcription factor genes commonly expressed in vertebrates and cephalopods due to their high expression signals and the existence of human orthologs for further functional analysis . the centaurin gamma homolog was also selected from the positively selected gene candidate genes in the cephalopod lineage as it showed a high dn/ds ratio and had a human ortholog .

among the above-mentioned genes common to both cephalopods and vertebrates, the ets- <dig> homolog showed positive expression against embryonic rna. we validated its expression in the three developmental stages  as well as its localization by in situ hybridization using pygmy squid embryos. ets- <dig> transcripts were localized in the surface of the optic lobe and in part of the brain . the transcripts appeared in tissues surrounding the future eye and the tips of the arm anlagens of the embryo at the stage  <dig> . in terms of brain development, primodial brain lobes appears before stage  <dig>   <cit> . optic lobes become visible on the inner side of the eye vesicles at stage  <dig>  the retinal primodium is distinguishable by rectangular cells at stage  <dig>  and retinal pigmentation starts at stage  <dig>  embryos at stage  <dig> show a dark brown retina. the ets- <dig> expression then appear to be restricted to the part of middle subesophageal mass , the external part of the optic lobes  and paired structure aside the buccal mass at stage  <dig>  and stage  <dig>  in comparison to the brain atlass  <cit> . strong siganals were observed in the most external layer, which correspond to outer granular layer of the optic lobes . this expression pattern is possibly related to the visual cognition system of the squid as the granular layer of the optic lobes are directly connected to the photoreceptors and act as secondary neurons of the visual circuit. hmgb <dig> transcripts appeared in the body of the stage  <dig> embryo including the eye field, mantle, and the tip of the arm anlagens , but were restricted to the inner part of the optic lobes at stage  <dig> . hla-b associated transcript-specific staining was observed in the head region, including the optic lobes, of the stage  <dig> embryo . localization of the centaurin gamma homolog from positively selected genes within the squid embryo was also analyzed using an in situ hybridization assay . transcripts were continuously distributed in the optic lobes , and this expression pattern suggests that the centaurin gamma homolog is related to developmental or proliferative steps in the optic lobe neurons.

discussion
genetic mechanisms involved in camera eye evolution of the coleoid cephalopods
the coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate genes selected by our analysis might be divided into two groups. the first group consists of genes that commonly exist in animals, but whose expression level has been changed through the structural changes of the eyes after the divergence of the cephalopods. the ets- <dig> homolog, for example, was expressed in the granular cell layers specifically found in the optic lobes in coleoid cephalopods. the fact that a large proportion of the genes expressed in the octopus eye was found in the genomes of other animals  <cit>  supports the notion that the role of the genes might have changed in relation to the structural changes in the various eye types. the second group comprises genes that commonly exist, even in molluscan eyes, but whose functions have been changed by positive selection in relation to camera eye development in cephalopods. we identified more than a hundred genes that appear to have undergone positive selection  in the coleoid cephalopod lineage. the genetic mechanism represented by these two groups seems to have been contributed to acquisition of the camera eye.

because the in vitro homology search array could be used to detect highly expressed genes in humans and squids  <cit> , we thought it possible to remove highly expressed molluscan eye genes, including housekeeping genes, from the list of candidate genes to estimate cephalopod specificity. the cephalopod camera eye-specific candidate gene set also contain genes common among animals with eyes, all of which should, ideally, be removed along with the nautilus and scallop gene pool but which nevertheless remained due to the use of incomplete gene sets.

functions of the coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific genes found in this study
one of the most intriguing events in coleoid cephalopod camera eye evolution is the transition from the simple eye to a more complex visual eye. the transition was accompanied by the evolution of the eye components including the optic lobes, visual center of the brain. in this transition, expression changes and functional chagnges of the camera eye specific candidate genes might have been contributed to the acquisition of the eye compnents. for example, ets- <dig> localization in the five-layered optic lobes of the pygmy squid appears to be involved in the organization of outer granular layer. as erg and fli- <dig>  orthologs of ets- <dig> in vertebretes, are major inducers of blood vessel development  <cit>  and d-ets- <dig> and d-ets- <dig>  orthologs of ets- <dig> in drosophila, are known to be expressed in the ventral nerve cord  <cit> , it is speculated that ets- <dig> of the pygmy squid was recruited for the development of different organs, particularly in the conversion of neuron responses in cephalopod optic lobes.

the cornichon and centaurin gamma homologs identified as camera eye specific genes in cephalopods are also known to be expressed in the vertebrate camera eye. even though these transduction-related genes are completely function-unknown, together with their upstream and downstream, their observed localization in the optic lobe suggests their involvement in the neuronal development of the coleoid cephalopod camera eye. the hmgb <dig> and hla-b associated transcript homologs may be involved in visual circuit formation through chromatin remodeling and initiation of subsequent gene expressions. as a consequence of our study, a number of common genes from the common molluscan ancestor have been shown to be involved in coleoid cephalopod camera eye evolution through changes in their expression patterns and functions.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we selected  <dig>  genes as coleoid cephalopod camera eye-specific candidates by homology searches and comparative expression against the nautilus and scallop eyes. we applied a molecular evolutionary approach to the cephalopod camera eye candidates to identify genes that had functionally changed after the divergence of cephalopods from the common ancestor. our developmental approach, which included developmental arrays and in situ hybridization using the pygmy squid embryos, indicated the contribution of camera eye-specific genes to the eye developmental process. in particular, some camera eye specific genes, such as the ets- <dig>  cornichon, and centaurin gamma homologs, was shown to have contributed to camera eye evolution through the development of a complex visual circuit.

