BACKGROUND
bats use echolocation calls for orientation in space and hunting for prey. communication calls serve the purpose of inter- and intraspecific social communication. neural control of both types of calls has access at the level of the medulla to the final common pathway for vocalization. motoneurons controlling the larynx, the vocal tract and the respiratory muscles are accessed via interneurons from the nucleus ambiguus/retroambiguus complex  <cit> . one major subcortical structure for the control of vocalizations above the level of the medulla is the periaqueductal gray matter . here, communication calls can be elicited by electrical or pharmacological stimulation in many mammalian species like squirrel monkey  <cit> , rhesus monkey  <cit> , rat  <cit> , guinea pig  <cit> , gibbon  <cit>  and bat  <cit> . while in most areas where vocalizations can be elicited, long persisting stimulation causes a fading of the vocal reaction, the pag is one of the very few regions where natural communication calls can be elicited without changes in the emotional state of the animal and without habituation to the stimulus, even over extended stimulation periods  <cit> . pag stimulation in bats also evokes echolocation calls  <cit>  without motor concomitants , and without habituation to the stimulus  <cit> . the pag in bats is thus involved in the control of communication calls as well as echolocation calls. the different types of calls are elicited at anatomically distinct pag locations  <cit> .

in monkeys, the pag has been shown to be part of the vocalization controlling system  <cit> . although the author found the majority of vocal- eliciting structures within the limbic system, only stimulation in the pag yielded all types of communication calls used by the animal  <cit> .

further findings suggest a hierarchical organization of the vocalization controlling system including the pag. bilateral lesions of vocalization-eliciting areas in the forebrain and diencephalon do not affect vocalizations triggered in the pag, whereas lesions made at brain levels below the pag, e.g., in the dorsolateral pons and the ventrolateral medulla suppress pag-triggered vocalizations  <cit> . the pag would thus serve a gating function controlling the release of vocal patterns that themselves are constituted in networks below the pag level  <cit> .

in the bat , three areas below the midbrain level in addition to the pag have been identified that yield echolocation calls  on electrical stimulation without temporal or spectral distortions  <cit> : a) the deep layers of the superior colliculus, b) the deep mesencephalic nucleus in the reticular formation and c) an area medial to the rostral parts of the dorsal nucleus of the lateral lemniscus, the paralemniscal area . all three areas share most of the stimulus-response conditions found in the pag, such as very short latencies of vocalizations on stimulation, no habituation to stimulus, no body movements accompanying the vocalizations and no distortion of the call pattern. however, only echolocation  calls can be elicited from these areas. moreover, echolocation calls from the pla can also be elicited by microinjection of a glutamate agonist , indicating that it is the neurons in the pla rather than fibers passing through this area that are responsible for the activation of vocal utterances  <cit> .

the pla displays similar properties in other bat species, e.g., pteronotus p. parnellii  <cit>  and phyllostomus discolor  <cit> . the interest in the pla as an important component for vocal control in echolocation was supported by the finding that neurons in the rostral portion of the pla of r. rouxi were active both before and during vocal emissions and also showed simultaneous responses to auditory stimuli. the pla could therefore serve as an audio-vocal interface between auditory processing and motor control of vocalization  <cit> . the physiological data on the pla available from animals other then bats are very sparse and anatomically corresponding areas have been investigated under different functional aspects  <cit> .

vocal control in other, non-echolocating mammals is characterized by a rather direct connection from pag to the ambiguus/retroambiguus complex  <cit>  or to the reticular formation  <cit> , which would not necessitate an interaction from other brain structures  below the pag level. but these findings seem to be insufficient to explain findings from schuller and coworkers and fenzl on the involvement of the pla in motor control of vocalizations. a parallel organization of the descending control system for vocalizations could be assumed at the level of the pag and pla, and it is of interest whether this organization is a general mammalian feature.

the present study investigates whether the pag and pla interact during the pag-induced emission of communication and/or echolocation calls in p. discolor using reversible blockade of pla function. we found that pag-induced communication calls could not be blocked either through ipsilateral or contralateral blockade of the pla. however, pag-induced echolocation calls could be temporarily blocked only through contralateral blockade of the pla. these differences display partly differentiated functional organizations of vocal controlling pathways for communication calls and echolocation calls below pag level.

RESULTS
implants – stability of chronical microstimulation
echolocation calls and communication calls were reliably elicited by electrical stimulation at specific stimulation sites in the pag of p. discolor using chronically implanted stimulation electrodes. the thresholds for eliciting vocalizations varied within relatively narrow limits from probe to probe and from one experimental day to the next. in fig. 1a the temporal variation of thresholds are plotted for the four implants over the entire experimental duration of  <dig>  and  <dig> days , respectively. the thresholds remained relatively stable between the day  <dig> and day  <dig>  whereas stronger changes occurred in the first days after implantation or in some cases later than  <dig> days. overall deviation between the day of implantation and the last experimental day was -30%, +33%, +56% and +95% in experiments a, b, c and d, respectively. during experiments the stimulation current was adjusted at supra-threshold levels to provide a reliable one-to-one relationship between electrical stimuli and vocal responses. the median values of supra-threshold currents used with the chronical implants a, b, c and d were 20% , 14% , 13%  and 14%  above threshold, respectively .

echolocation calls versus communication calls
in order to test whether the production of echolocation or communication calls could be suppressed by neuropharmacological blockade, the nonselective glutamate antagonist kynurenic acid  was iontophoretically injected into the pla. injections were either ipsilateral or contralateral to the pag stimulation site. twelve blockade experiments were conducted with consistent results in animal one , and seven experiments were conducted in animal two .

blocking the pla with ka suppressed pag-induced echolocation calls whereas pag-induced communication calls were less affected or not affected at all. the degree of suppression of echolocation calls depended on whether the pla blockade was applied ipsilaterally or contralaterally to the pag stimulation sites as shown in fig.  <dig>  an  <dig> min application of ka to the left pla, i.e., the pla ipsilateral to the pag electrode eliciting echolocation calls and contralateral to the electrode triggering communication calls, did not completely suppress either echolocation calls  or communication calls . a reduction of response probability for echolocation calls could, however, be seen around  <dig> min after the onset of iontophoresis. the activation probability for communication calls varied largely around 50%, and showed only a relative persistent lowering to around 40% between  <dig> and  <dig> min after the onset of ka application .

a much different pattern of vocal responses appeared if the block was applied to the pla contralateral to the pag electrode eliciting echolocation calls. the response probability for echolocation calls started to decrease about  <dig> min after the onset of ka application and showed great variability, until complete suppression at around minute  <dig> . the blockage persisted beyond the termination of the experiment after  <dig> min.

when ka was applied bilaterally to both pla sites, the suppression of pag-induced echolocation calls occurred with a much shorter delay . however, pag-induced communication calls could not be completely suppressed, although the probability of eliciting communication calls showed generally greater variability in response to ka application . a slight effect of ka could be discerned around  <dig> min after onset of the application; however, the effect did not persist. the slight mean decrease in elicitability, i.e., not falling below about 50%, and the high variability of elicitation probability persisted throughout the entire duration of the experimental run. these effects lasted beyond the  <dig> min, after which the experimental sessions had to be terminated.

after each blocking experiment a recovery period was inserted. subsequently, a control experiment with electrical microstimulation only was started  <dig> hrs after the beginning of the previous experiment. in all control runs the elicitability of both types of calls had fully recovered. calls could be elicited at standard stimulation currents, and no lesioning of pla structures by iontophoretic currents could be detected. typically the next iontophoresis experiment started within  <dig> hrs after the control experiment.

ipsilateral vs. contralateral blockade of echolocation calls
the finding that a pla-block by ka primarily affects contralaterally pag-induced echolocation calls was supported by the results from following experiments, shown in fig.  <dig>  first, ka was applied to the left pla for  <dig> min. echolocation calls elicited in the pag contralateral to the iontophoresis site were completely depressed about  <dig> min after the onset of iontophoresis and partially recovered about  <dig> min after termination of ka application. in contrast, the ipsilateral pag-triggered echolocation calls were not affected at all. similarly, the right pla was blocked by ka application for  <dig> min. again, the contralateral pag-induced echolocation calls were blocked consistently about  <dig> min after iontophoresis onset and started to recover about  <dig> min after cessation of ka application. echolocation calls elicited in the ipsilateral pag were temporarily impeded, but elicitability was far from being totally blocked.

although the depression of pag-induced echolocation calls persisted beyond the end of the experimental session , elicitability from both pag electrodes was fully recovered in the control experiments  <dig> hrs later.

influence of sedation on animal during experiments
to ensure a stable position of the animal during the iontophoresis experiments, rompun® was chronically applied subcutaneously during the sessions. sedative was adequate to achieve optimal stability of the animal. both echolocation calls and communication calls were elicited consistently over a long stimulation period of up to  <dig> days without any change in spectral composition of the calls. motor reactions associated with vocalizations, such as pinna and nose leaf movement with echolocation calls or mouth movements with communication calls, also did not change during the experiments.

to ensure that sedation had no influence on activation of electrically induced vocalizations, a pure stimulation experiment under identical depressant conditions as applied at the blockade experiments was carried out . neither the initial dose of  <dig>  ml sedative  prior to the experiment nor the continuous application of  <dig> μl/min of sedative showed any influence on the ability to trigger vocalizations. the vocalizations triggered under the influence of the sedative in general showed no difference to vocalizations triggered without sedation or to vocalizations emitted spontaneously, either in spectral or temporal patterns. also the percentage of vocal answers triggered by one pulse train  did not decrease under the influence of the sedative, as compared to experiments without sedation . a decline or even depression of vocal answers of the type seen in the blockade experiments could not be detected.

histological verification of electrode positions
stimulation sites in the pag and in the pla were identified by tissue lesions . the lesions in both structures could easily be detected in anatomical sections.

discussion
this study has demonstrated that the neural control of echolocation calls and communication calls must have access to at least partly different neural substrates for vocalization.

sedation of animals, stability of chronic implants and iontophoretic efficiency
the stability of the chronically implanted electrodes for electrical micro-stimulation was very satisfactory. both echolocation calls and communication calls were elicited consistently over a long stimulation period of up to  <dig> days without any change in spectral composition of the calls. the slight increase of stimulation thresholds for the individual electrodes  could be attributed to an accumulation of glia cells and debris caused by the presence of implants. motor reactions associated with vocalizations also did not change during the experiments.

it is noteworthy that the onset of a contralateral pla blockade is extraordinarily variable between  <dig> to almost  <dig> min under comparable experimental conditions . slightly different positions of the iontophoresis probe at the pla site may be responsible for this, as even deviations as small as  <dig> μm correspond to almost 15% of the mediolateral dimension  of the pla in p discolor. at marginal application sites, ka would have taken longer to influence the necessary number of neurons in the pla than when injected the geometrically optimal pla location. the onset time differences indicate that the suppressive effect of pla inactivation depends on the of pla neurons.

differentially organized vocal substrates for the production of echolocation calls and communication calls
vocalizations are complex motor patterns imbedded into differentiated behaviors of an animal. it is well established that the pag plays an important role in vocal control of communication calls  <cit> , e.g., communication calls can be triggered by stimulating the pag in several mammalian  <cit>  and non-mammalian species  <cit> . in addition, echolocation calls can be elicited in bats within restricted areas of the pag  <cit>  that are distinct from areas in which communication calls can be triggered  <cit> .

outside the pag, echolocation calls can also be elicited in a variety of brainstem areas  <cit> , among which the pla shows the lowest thresholds and the shortest latencies for eliciting ultrasonic vocalization. however, no communication calls can be elicited from the pla  <cit> . from these findings, the hypothesis was deducted that different types of vocalizations could be modulated via at least partially separate and/or parallel vocal pathways in the bat.

a vocal pathway from the pag to the nucleus retroambiguus  for the production of communication calls has been neuroanatomically defined by several authors  <cit> . the nra includes a group of premotor neurons which send direct projections to thoracic and upper lumbar motoneurons  <cit>  involved in expiration, and to the nucleus ambiguus containing laryngeal and pharyngeal motoneurons  <cit> . according to current knowledge, the pla has no direct interferences with components of this pathway. the direct descending vocal path therefore cannot account for the blockade of pag-induced echolocation calls by inactivation of the pla as demonstrated in this paper.

inactivation of confined areas in the brainstem exerts suppressive action on vocalization also in other mammals besides bats, as demonstrated by jürgens  <cit> . here, ka injections into the ventral pons of squirrel monkeys blocked a specific type of pag-triggered communication call with characteristic frequency modulations, whereas other call types remained unaffected.

jürgens suggests that vocal patterns are generally controlled in different brainstem regions, and that vocalizations with frequency modulations seem to depend on an intact periolivary region  <cit> . echolocation calls of p. discolor are typically frequency-modulated calls covering a range between  <dig> and  <dig> khz with the 3rd – 5th harmonic  <cit> . our findings support the assertion by jürgens that different vocal patterns could be controlled or modulated through activity in different brainstem regions, at least pertaining to echolocation calls and particular types of communication calls.

the effect of pla-induced blockades on pag-triggered vocalizations strictly depends on the side of the application, since echolocation calls can only be blocked when ka is applied contralateral to the stimulation site in the pag. this is in contrast to what jürgens describes for squirrel monkeys  <cit>  where pag-elicited vocalizations were only affected by ipsilateral, and not contralateral ka injection into the ventrolateral pons.

this difference in functional laterality may be attributed to the different brain regions involved in both studies and their specific connectivity. since the neuroanatomical connectivity of the pla is far from being understood, there is no straightforward explanation of this heterolateral influence. besides strong reciprocal connections between the pla  <cit>  of both anatomical sides, there are no major midline crossing projections known so far to our knowledge that could account for the contralateral influence. until today no anatomical data are available to describe connections between the pag and the pla and from the pla towards the region of the nucleus retroambiguus/ambiguous complex in p. discolor. only very few data are available from other species. in p. p. parnellii, efferents to the pag were found when wheat germ agglutinin conjugated to horseradish peroxidase  was injected into vocally active sites of the pla  <cit> . efferents to the nucleus ambiguus from the pla were found by metzner using wga-hrp  <cit>  and connections from the lateral tegmental area  to the pag and contralateral ltr were found using wga-hrp and fluorescent tracers  <cit> . however, these data are not sufficient to explain the effectiveness of contralateral blockades under anatomical aspects.

the enhancement of the suppression effect by bilateral ka application may have two reasons. first, reciprocal interconnection between the two plas has been shown anatomically  <cit> . second, ipsilateral blockage of the pla also leads to reduced probability for eliciting echolocation calls, although it never reaches the level of suppression seen in most contralateral cases. the reciprocal interaction between the two plas is predominantly inhibitory as shown in r. rouxi , but the functional significance of this interaction is unclear. the assumption of a bilateral, but strongly unbalanced, descending control of echolocation calls via the pla seems to fit the data more closely than does the assumption of a strictly unilateral organization. the presence of a non-functional ipsilateral pla in addition to the silent contralateral pla would further and more effectively decrease the probability for eliciting echolocation calls, resulting in a shorter time for onset of supression.

based on connectional evidence , holstege proposed that the vocal pattern generation takes place within a final common pathway for vocalization driven by input from the pag  <cit> . however, these findings and those of zhang  <cit>  that the vocal control pathway consists only of a direct connection from the pag to the nucleus retroambiguus in the medulla oblongata are not supported by the results from the monkey  <cit> . likewise, while our findings do not rule out a direct connection from the pag to the nucleus retroambiguus , they also demonstrate that a differentiated control for vocalizations  via parallel or at least partly separated pathways for echolocation calls could exist. this evidence of a more complicated network for vocal control at the level below the pag in the monkey, as well as in the bat, underlines the broader significance of this concept on a mammalian level. the bat vocal control system therefore cannot be considered to be specialized, but is a general mammalian vocalization system with distinct emphasized features.

CONCLUSIONS
communication calls and echolocation calls can be elicited with electrical microstimulation through chronically implanted electrodes at different sites within the pag. reversible blockade of the vocally active pla in the region in which only echolocation calls can be triggered totally blocks pag-induced echolocation calls but not communication calls. thus, the pag-na/nra pathway for vocalization described in literature may not be the only pathway processing vocal activity. the pla seems to be essential for the production of echolocation calls but not for particular types of communication calls elicited in the pag. this suggests differential pathway organization for particular types of communication calls on one hand and echolocation calls on the other hand. whether the differentiation of pathways applies to the two classes of echolocation calls and communication calls in general, or whether it is more directly dependent on specific call properties in the acoustic pattern domain, remains open to further experimentation.

