BACKGROUND
ginkgo biloba is a widely popular tree that is native to china and has been cultivated for well over a millennium. in asia, g. biloba is used medicinally and its seeds are also a popular cuisine item. in the west, ginkgo leaf extracts are commonly used for a variety of folk remedies  including as a treatment for improving cognitive function  <cit> . today's ginkgo biloba is the sole surviving species of an ancient group  of seed plants that may even date from the permian   <cit> . the genus ginkgo itself goes back to the jurassic period – approximately  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . although it is widely believed that the survival of g. biloba depended upon buddhist monks, who venerated the tree cultivated in their temple grounds, molecular evidence suggests that some stands in china  are of natural origin representing vestige populations  <cit> . as a living fossil, ginkgo biloba has changed little in morphology from its extinct relatives  <cit> . along with the cycadales, coniferales and gnetales, the ginkgoales is one of four orders of non-flowering seed plants  that form a sister group to the angiosperms .

morphological  <cit>  and molecular analysis have not yet succeeded in defining the precise phylogenetic hierarchy of the four gymnosperm clades  <cit> . ginkgo potentially forms a sister group with the coniferales . another model, based on molecular sequence data, places ginkgo with the cycadales  <cit> . interestingly cycads and ginkgo both share certain plesiomorphic  characters found in early fossil seed plants such as haustorial pollen  <cit> , which release motile male gametes  <cit>  as well as a large four celled opening in the neck of the archegonia  <cit> . despite the presence of these and other early seed-plant characteristics, surprisingly little work has been performed on ginkgo and cycads. some recent molecular  <cit>  and genomic  <cit>  research on cycads have been conducted and molecular studies of ginkgo genes have been initiated as well  <cit> . however, no genomic work on ginkgo biloba has been completed to date.

to begin our genomic treatment of ginkgo biloba, we focused our initial efforts on developing reproductive and vegetative tissues . separating ginkgo male and female structures at an early stage is straightforward because ginkgo is strictly a dioecious plant . organ emergence can generally be pinpointed to a specific time of the year in that both reproductive and vegetative tissues are regularly produced in the beginning of may at our collection site in new york. the reproductive structures, megasporangia bearing ovules   and microsporangia bearing pollen  , emerge at the apex of short, determinate  shoots. a discreet flush of leaves are also produced in male and female short-shoots   <cit> . long shoots  exhibit indeterminate growth and yield only vegetative organs. long-shoots are identifiable by their obvious longer internodes, whereas short shoots  have telescoped internodes. each season, short-shoots might exhibit extensive internode growth and be transformed into long-shoots and vice versa. consequently, reproductive shoots can become vegetative or vegetative shoots can become reproductive.

until now, little is known regarding the genetic regulation of development in the oldest living seed plants. in order to uncover the genetic controls directing growth and development in ginkgo biloba, we generated expressed sequence tags  from cdna libraries of very young, recently emerged organs of fertile short-shoots where a large number of regulatory genes are expected to be present. below is an analysis of these ests from ginkgo biloba. in all three tissues examined, vegetative, microsporangia , and megasporangia , we found a large number of ests with similarity to angiosperm developmental genes. conversely, a certain number of ginkgo biloba ests were uncovered with homology to genes only found in gymnosperms and non-seed plants, including a set of ginkgo ests that were only common to our cycad est dataset, further strengthening their classification as gymnosperm specific.

RESULTS
construction of a cdna library from ginkgo biloba fertile and vegetative tissue
young organs  were collected during the spring from the opening buds of short shoots immediately after their emergence. at this stage, the megasporangium consists of an axis typically bearing two ovules . the ovule is composed of a single integument surrounding a developing nucellus . the male structure consists of a main axis bearing two or more microsporangia . rna was extracted from the following organs: megagasporangia, microsporangia and two sets of leaves collected from either male or female trees. mrna isolated from all four tissues was used to construct four separate cdna libraries. . size fractionation was used to enrich for full-length cdnas during library construction. from this cdna library,  <dig>  sequence reads  were generated. all ginkgo biloba est reads have been deposited in genbank. it was determined that  <dig>   of the cdna clones were over  <dig> bp long.  <dig> of the reads were generated from the 5' end of the cdna, and  <dig> were sequenced from the 3' end. cluster analysis on the est sequence produced a unigene set of  <dig>  contigs consisting of  <dig>  singletons and  <dig> assemblies. of the clusteredests, the longest contig was  <dig>  bp. the entire unigene set or complete ginkgo blast files can be downloaded at the following website  <cit> . each g. biloba contig is given a numeric identifier. the constituent ests for each contig can be obtained at this website. additional bioinformatic analysis of the ginkgo biloba dataset can be accessed at the open sputnik comparative genomics platform at  <cit> . this site features sequence annotations, peptide sequence predictions, protein domain architectures and putative molecular markers  for the ginkgo est derived unigenes. the sequence can be downloaded either as a fasta file, a clustered fasta file or as the derived peptide fasta file. in addition, blast analysis can be performed with the clustered ests from a given ginkgo organ against all genes in arabidopsis thaliana or distinct plant clustered est datasets using the vicogenta program available at the new york plant genomics consortium website  <cit> .

ginkgo contig matches to genes in angiosperms, gymnosperms and non-seed plants
tblastx  was used to compare the g. biloba unigenes against all available plant ests from tigr   <cit> , and the plant genome database   <cit> . ests from these databases were downloaded and clustered into unigenes, which were used in the comparison. next the ginkgo unigene set was compared against the arabidopsis and rice genome annotated protein sequences downloaded from tigr. all genes used in this comparison against ginkgo were divided into one of three taxonomically relevant categories:  <dig>  angiosperms,  <dig>  gymnosperms, and  <dig>  non-seed plants. the angiosperm category encompasses all annotated rice and arabidopsis genes identified from their respective genomic sequences, as well as all higher plant ests. the majority of the gymnosperm ests came from the conifer groups pine and spruce but also include ests generated from the plant genomics consortium containing ests from the two other gymnosperm clades, cycadales and gnetales. the non-seed plant category consisted of genes from all remaining plant ests including ferns, fern allies, bryophytes and algae available with the majority of the sequences originating from physcomitrella patens and chlamydamonas reinhardtii.

a venn diagram shown in figure 3a displays the number of ginkgo contigs, which are shared between one or more of the plant est datasets at low blast stringency value . from the venn diagram, it can be seen that a majority of ginkgo unigenes  match genes in other plants, and  <dig> have no match to other plant genes. of those  <dig> ginkgo biloba unigenes with matches to other plant genes, a subgroup of  <dig> unigenes had no corresponding match to genes in the angiosperm dataset. of these  <dig> ginkgo genes that do not match angiosperms,  <dig> also match genes in non-seed plants.

the  <dig> ginkgo biloba unigenes that only match gymnosperm genes were next partitioned into matches between the three other gymnosperm orders: cycadales, coniferales, and gnetales . since there are significantly more conifer unigenes  than cycad unigenes  that were used in this comparison, one would expect that the number of matches between ginkgo and conifers would be significantly greater than matches between ginkgo and cycads. however the actual number of matches between ginkgo and conifers  is only slightly more then for ginkgo and cycads . in other words despite the fact that there is over  <dig> times the number of conifer genes then cycad genes used in this comparison, ginkgo matches to conifers are only  <dig>  times greater then matches between ginkgo and cycads. of the matches between ginkgo and gymnosperms,  <dig> match only cycads, ; and  <dig> ginkgo contigs match unigenes from both cycas rumphii and zamia furfuracea).

as one might expect, unigenes with matches to other plants are somewhat longer then those that have no match to other plants. of all ginkgo unigenes with matches to other plants, 89% are greater than  <dig> bp, whereas 72% are greater than  <dig> bp then those ginkgo unigenes with no matches to other plants.

common genes between cycads and ginkgo
our comparative analysis of the ginkgo est dataset builds upon our results from a previous genomic study on the cycad, cycas rumphii  <cit> . in our current analysis, three  of the fourteen unigenes from cycads previously found only among gymnosperms , were also homologues to ginkgo genes found only in gymnosperms. considering the relatively small number of unigenes from ginkgo  and cycads  available for our comparative studies, the detection of the same gene match in ginkgo and cycads with homology to only gymnosperms strengthens the argument that these genes are gymnosperms specific.

ginkgo matches to non-seed plants but not angisosperms
an additional four ginkgo unigenes that are not found in angiosperms were detected in non-seed plants. three of these ginkgo unigenes  match non-seed plants and other gymnosperm genes whereas the forth ginkgo gene  only matches non-seed plants with similarity to a gene in chlamydomonas.

classification of g. biloba ests by functional categories
each contig from the ginkgo dataset was automatically assigned to a functional category  based on its top match against the mips funcat list of functionally annotated gene sequences from s. cerevisiae and a. thaliana databases using blastp. a non-stringent expect value  of < e- <dig> was chosen as the threshold. table  <dig> below illustrates the relative fraction that each functional category comprises within the entire unigene set compared to our previous study in cycas rumphii  <cit> . the four largest categories of ginkgo ests according to this functional categorization are: "cellular organization" , "metabolism" , "unclassified proteins" , and "protein synthesis" . in general, these same categories are also the highest in the cycad est library from our previous work, except for "protein synthesis", which appears increased in ginkgo, whereas interestingly, the category of cell growth, cell division and dna synthesis is reduced in ginkgo compared to cycads.

ginkgo genes involved in development
analysis of the ginkgo biloba dataset revealed a number of ests with highest blast similarity to genes with known roles in higher plant developmental processes. a sampling of some of these genes is shown below . these genes included the polycomb gene curly leaf  <cit>  as well as lateral organ boundaries   <cit> , early flowering  <dig>   <cit> , flowering locus t   <cit> , and constans  from which the listed ests were detected are: g = megagametophyte, i = microgametophyte, and l = leaf.

CONCLUSIONS
the importance of ginkgo for the study of plant evolution
as the sole remaining species of an ancient genus of plants which has survived nearly  <dig> million years from the jurassic  <cit> , ginkgo biloba is a taxonomic and geographic relict that may be even older because fossils displaying a "ginkgophyte" vegetative morphology have been found as early as the permian  <cit> . ginkgo has a number of plesiomorphic  as well as apomorphic  traits that make it a valuable tool to study the evolution of seed plants. here we used a genomic approach to investigate the genes involved in regulating development in ginkgo by creating an est library from both reproductive and vegetative tissues.

similar to our previous analysis in cycas rumphii, our ginkgo est study has found significant blast homology between ginkgo ests with plant genes in gymnosperms and non-seed plants but not in angiosperms. since ests, even when clustered in contiguous genes, may not represent the complete gene  <cit> , often one will find homology to angiosperm genes when the remaining ginkgo gene sequence is revealed. for example in the gymnosperm, pinus taeda est collection, contigs of increasing length have a higher likelihood then shorter contigs matching a known gene in the arabidopsis genome  <cit> . however, in this same study a significant subcategory of very long contigs  have no homology to arabidopsis  <cit> . it is likely that at least some of these long contigs with no match to angiosperm genes represent full length genes that are specific to the gymnosperm and/or seed-less plant clades. our strategy to address this question involves screening for these same genes in additional taxa of gymnosperms, in the case of this study, ginkgo biloba. in our analysis three ginkgo genes that were only found in gymnosperms also matched the fourteen ests from our previous study of gymnosperm common cycad genes.

along these same lines, our results suggest the presence of genes common to non-seed plants and gymnosperms that are not present in angiosperms. this non-seed plant/gymnosperm grouping is not surprising considering the fact that gymnosperms have morphologically common characters that are not found in the angiosperms – particularly in their reproductive structures. for example, the megagametophyte is highly reduced both in cell number and in structural organization in angiosperms when compared to gymnosperms. although these results cannot say for certain that these genes are specific to non-seed plants and gymnosperms, or more specifically that these genes are found in gymnosperm structures that are not found in seed plant, it nonetheless represents an important starting point to correlate the presence or absence of gymnosperm genes in angiosperms and/or lower plants.

are cycads and ginkgo sister taxa?
one result from our study found that the number of ginkgo contig matches to conifers are only  <dig>  times greater then matches between ginkgo and cycads despite the fact that there is over  <dig> times the number of conifer genes then cycad genes used in this comparison,. taken together these results might indicate a closer evolutionary association between ginkgo and cycads then between ginkgo and conifers. this bias towards cycad/ginkgo similarity correlates with the fact that the majority of molecular phylogenetic studies place as the cycads sister group to ginkgo. hopefully, this preliminary data will encourage further phylogenomic studies to fully resolve the hierarchy among extant gymnosperm orders. until the full genome sequence becomes available for key gymnosperm taxa, est sampling provides an important initial step for large scale identification of molecular markers to generate robust phylogenetic trees.

developmental regulators in ginkgo
in ginkgo biloba we note here a variety of genes with similarity to developmental regulators in angiosperms. we also note below that homologues to some of these developmental regulators are also present in our cycas rumphii library as either orthologs to those found in higher plants or at least, belonging to the same gene family. an est from ginkgo biloba that was detected in the megagametophyte library has high similarity to the arabidopsis curly leaf  gene, which belongs to the polycomb-group proteins . pcgs epigenetically regulate downstream target genes  <cit> . pcgs modify chromatin-protein complexes that repress homeotic gene transcription and influence cell proliferation. in arabidopsis pcg genes have been shown to regulate mads box genes  <cit> . the clc protein product regulates the expression of agamous  <cit> , a gene controlling floral organ identity  <cit> . interestingly, an ortholog for angiosperm agamous was also detected in the ginkgo megagametophyte library . ginkgo agamous,  was identified in a study where the mads domains were examined in ginkgo  <cit> . in this work ginkgo agamous was shown via rt-pcr to be expressed in not only female but also in male and vegetative tissue. in our analysis, five total mads box homologues were also detected in the ginkgo est dataset. three of the ginkgo ests from our library, ginkgoa <dig>  ginkgoa <dig> and ginkgoa <dig>  are perfectly identical to the mads domain gene fragments previously cloned by  <cit>  as degenerate pcr products. the other two unigenes from our dataset have homologies to mads genes , but do not specifically match any of the pcr fragments isolated in their study. these two mads box unigenes either do not include the small region amplified in their degenerate pcr screen or could alternative be unique mads genes not isolated in their study. unlike the degenerate primer approach used to isolate mads genes, our est approach offers the additional advantage of cloning entire genes or at least substantially large gene fragments. among the few developmental genes examined in gymnosperms, most attention has focused on the expression of mads homologs  <cit> .

other developmental genes found in the ginkgo est library include those with homology to regulators of flowering such as early flowering  <dig> , which controls the levels of the gene flc, which itself is a central regulator of flowering  <cit> . another ginkgo est includes flowering locus t , which belongs to a small family of genes  that act to promote flowering as a downstream component from constans  <cit> . constans is a transcription factor that has a critical role integrating circadian rhythms and light signals . as one would expect an est homolog for the constans gene family was found in ginkgo. constans belongs to a large gene family, which may have redundant roles in plants  <cit> . not surprisingly, we also found homologs to constans in our previous study on cycad leaf ests  <cit> . in that flowering plants are believed to have evolved from gymnosperms, a survey of constans, elf, and ft in gymnosperms, particularly in very young reproductive tissue might help define the origins of reproductive induction in non-flowering plants. among the other genes related to developmental regulators includes a homologue to laterol organ boundaries  domain gene family which in arabidopsis has over  <dig> members  <cit> . the molecular mechanism of lob domain containing genes is unknown, but one gene in arabidopsis, asymmetric leaves <dig>  is required for normal leaf development, by potentially acting as a regulatory repressor of knox genes  <cit> . a knox homolog is also present in our est library and was found in male reproductive tissues and hox genes were also detected in our previous analysis in c. rumphii

another important component regulating development occurs at the level of protein degradation. a gene recognized in our est library includes cop <dig>  cop <dig>  serves as an e <dig> ubiquitin targeting photomorphogenic factors such as hy <dig> for degradation  <cit> . another ginkgo est from the library has highest similarity to cop <dig>  in our previous est analysis in cycas rumphii an est was also isolated with similarity to cop <dig>  <cit> . cop <dig> is a subunit of the cop <dig> signalosome complex that controls multiple signaling pathways that regulate development in all eukaryotes  <cit> . in arabidopsis, the cop <dig> and cop <dig> mutants are constitutively photomorphogenic in dark grown seedlings  <cit> . unlike angiosperms, seedlings from conifers are constitutively photomorphogenic when grown in the dark  <cit> . in ginkgo, chlorophyll and chloroplast development is completely dependent on light, however this process proceeds at a markedly slower pace then in flowering plants. that is, photomorphogenic development in ginkgo seedlings is strongly delayed after transfer from dark grown conditions to light grown conditions when compared to seed plants  <cit> . the dark grown phenotype of cycads is unreported. considering this variability in photomorphic development among and between the gymnosperms and the angiosperms, the discovery of genes encoding photomorphogenic regulators in gymnosperms will help understand the evolution of photomorphogenesis in seed plants.

taken together, our genomics analysis of ginkgo biloba is an important additional step to analyze the role of molecular development of early seed plants. thus the stage is set to further determine the role of these genes during the development of ancillary structures found between ginkgo, cycads and other gymnosperms with higher plants as well as the role of those in structures that are unique to gymnosperms and/or the non-seed plants as a step to understand the evolution of the seed plant habit.

