BACKGROUND
historically, the mammalian neocortex has been viewed as the pinnacle of brain evolution. the highly structured six-layered laminar cytoarchitecture of the neocortex and the associated computational properties contributing to complex cognition added to this view. however, exactly how laminar cytoarchitecture and associated neurophysiological processes mediate complex cognition remains poorly understood. our understanding of how the neocortex works can be informed by comparisons with other animals. notably, comparisons with non-mammalian groups lacking laminar cytoarchitecture, as is the case in birds, can be used to isolate traits that depend upon laminar cytoarchitecture from those that do not. in this study, we use this comparative approach to gain insight into the neocortex by examining sleep-related neuronal activity in the avian brain.

a growing body of research suggests that the brain rhythms occurring during sleep are involved in processing information acquired during wakefulness
 <cit> . notably, the slow  oscillation of neocortical neuronal membrane potentials between a depolarized “up-state” with action potentials, and a hyperpolarized “down-state” with neuronal quiescence occurring during non-rapid eye movement  sleep and some types of anesthesia is the focus of several hypotheses for the function of sleep
 <cit> . the term ‘slow-oscillation’ is in wide-spread use even though the interval between down-states is variable and individual cycles of the slow-oscillation originate from different neocortical locations
 <cit> . slow-oscillations manifest in electroencephalogram  or local field potential  recordings as high-amplitude, slow-waves that propagate across the mammalian neocortex as traveling waves
 <cit> , raising the possibility that they are involved in processing spatially distributed information
 <cit>  via processes such as spike timing-dependent plasticity
 <cit> . however, it remains unknown whether the traveling nature of slow-oscillations reflects a feature unique to the laminar cytoarchitecture and associated computational properties of the neocortex
 <cit>  or a more general aspect of sleep-related neuronal activity.

to distinguish between these alternatives, we studied brain activity in birds, the only non-mammalian group known to exhibit slow-oscillations
 <cit>  and associated eeg slow-waves comparable to those observed in mammals during nrem sleep
 <cit> . this similarity between mammals and birds is particularly interesting because unlike the laminar mammalian neocortex, neurons in the avian forebrain are arranged in a largely nuclear manner
 <cit> . specifically, the hyperpallium, a region developmentally homologous and functionally similar to the mammalian primary visual and somatosensory/motor cortices
 <cit> , lacks the laminar arrangement of neurons, including pyramidal neurons with long trans-layer apical dendrites found in the six-layered mammalian neocortex and in the three-layered dorsal cortex of the closest living reptilian relatives to birds
 <cit> . instead, the hyperpallium is composed of long flat nuclei stacked one on top of the other running along the dorsal-medial-anterior surface of the brain, each of which is composed of stellate neurons with short spiny dendrites and axonal projections within and between nuclei
 <cit> . interestingly, this cytoarchitecture is even found within high-order association regions in the avian brain  involved in orchestrating complex cognitive tasks, in some cases comparable to those performed by primates
 <cit> .

we recorded intracerebral potentials in the zebra finch  hyperpallium and nidopallium to evaluate whether traveling slow-waves are unique to mammals, or are shared with birds irrespective of fundamental differences in cytoarchitectonic organization.

RESULTS
analogue multiunit activity  and lfp were recorded using a 64-channel silicon multi-electrode probe inserted into the hyperpallium  and caudal nidopallium of adult female zebra finches anesthetized with  <dig> to  <dig> % isoflurane
 <cit> , an anesthetic that activates normal sleep promoting regions in the mammalian
 <cit>  and fly
 <cit>  brain. except in a thin layer just below the surface of the brain, hyperpallial lfp oscillations consist of negatively peaked signals . in contrast, the corresponding potentials near the surface of the brain are often positively peaked . similar intra-hyperpallial phase reversals have also been observed in visually evoked potentials in anesthetized zebra finches
 <cit> . unlike the mammalian neocortex, wherein long apical dendrites extending toward the surface of the brain are thought to give rise to similar phase reversals
 <cit> , there are no known neuronal asymmetries  that might cause these positively peaked potentials in finches, other than output axons projecting across the surface of the hyperpallium to the septomesencephalic tract
 <cit> . nonetheless, these oscillations are likely the basis for slow-waves recorded from epidural eeg electrodes during nrem sleep in finches and other birds
 <cit> .
 <cit> . two additional recordings were performed in caudal nidopallium .  raw intracerebral signals were recorded and off-line filtered to a signal containing local field potentials , and to a signal containing multiunit action potentials . to obtain a signal that corresponds to the level of multiunit action potential firing, the mua signal was rectified and decimated .

at a time scale of seconds, lfp patterns appear visually similar between most electrode sites , even distant ones, and are strongly correlated , giving the impression that oscillations are near-synchronous across brain regions and thus globally organized. as is the case in the mammalian neocortex
 <cit> , at most of these sites negative lfp peaks coincide with bursts of action potential activity . sites with positive lfp peaks near the surface are less likely to be associated with strong action potential firing in the same recording site .

at shorter time-scales of tens to hundreds of milliseconds, however, single oscillations do not appear as near-synchronous and globally distributed. for example, figure 
2c zooms in on a single lfp peak from figure 
2b, and shows that the peak occurs at slightly different times across the electrode grid, such that it occurs first at sites in the bottom right corner and then later at sites in the top half of the grid. although it is possible to see such shifting of activity peaks in traditional waveform plots, the temporospatial dynamics are better visualized in sequences of image plots, especially when viewed as videos . figure 
2d shows in a sequence of image plots that the traveling “peak” event in figure 
2c is a spatially localized plume of field and action potentials that propagates fast across the electrode grid . the fact that the lfp plume co-occurs with action potential firing  suggests that it reflects local neurophysiological activity, rather than activity volume-conducted from a remote source.

we compiled videos from all of our recordings from the hyperpallium , and all of them show propagating local plumes of local field and action potential activity, such as seen in figure 
2d. nonetheless, dynamic patterns of activity are generally variable across different plumes, even within the same bird. figure 
3a  shows in a different bird a plume that propagates to the surface of the brain, but in the same recording plumes can be seen propagating in different directions: a complex example is provided in figure 
3b , where a plume of activity propagates in a right  to left  direction before briefly dissipating. the activity then strengthens again near the lower center of the array and expands outward as a circle of activity. propagation of plumes is not confined within a two-dimensional layer, as they can travel over considerable distances in variable directions, including diametrically opposite ones, both within orthogonally placed electrode grids , and relative to the plane of the stacked hyperpallial nuclei. as can be seen in the movies  and additional file
11: figure s <dig>  plume propagation velocity across the 2-d electrode grid is variable. however, given that plumes have complex changing shapes and their 3-d trajectories may impinge upon the 2-d electrode grid at variable angles, it is not generally possible to estimate plume propagation velocity from translation velocity across the grid. thus, whether or not plume propagation velocity is variable remains an open question. furthermore, it is unclear how the propagation speed of avian plumes compares with that of two-dimensional slow-waves in the mammalian neocortex
 <cit> .

although we focus on the hyperpallium in the current study, we wondered whether propagating plume activity occurs outside the hyperpallium. to address this question, we added two recordings  to our dataset, one in caudolateral nidopallium  and the other one in caudomedial nidopallium , which are forebrain regions that are maximally distant from the hyperpallium . as in the hyperpallium, both recordings consist of prominent propagating plumes of local field and action potential activity , suggesting that this is a general feature of the avian pallium.

despite the large variability in propagation patterns that we observed in the videos of all recordings , there appear to be some recurrent patterns within recordings and a bias in overall directionality. although the full complexity of plumes is not yet understood, and probably is too high to be meaningfully expressed in a low-dimensional set of statistics, we reasoned that non-randomness of propagation patterns may be revealed by investigating two directionality characteristics of plumes.

first, to identify systematic time delays in amua activity between each electrode site and all other electrode sites, we calculated the maxima of normalized cross-correlation functions for each identified plume in every recording. illustrating this process for the propagating plume shown in figure 
2c, d, figure 
2e visualizes for three electrode sites the lags of amua peak activity at those sites relative to all other sites, which are color-coded in pixels arranged according to the spatial distribution of sites in the electrode grid. amua at site  <dig> is leading with respect to the other sites, such that the maximum cross-correlation is achieved later, overall, as the distance to other electrode sites increases. the lag of site  <dig> is intermediate relative to that of the other sites, being delayed with respect to sites in the lower right quadrant, but leading with respect to sites in the upper left quadrant of the grid. site  <dig> is delayed with respect to most other sites, maximally so relative to sites in the lower right quadrant. the information in each of these image plots is then averaged to a single value that expresses the mean lag of the corresponding site relative to other sites, and these mean values are visualized in a new image plot . note that the spatial distribution of site activity lag is consistent with the direction of the amua plume propagation visible in figure 
2d. to determine whether or not there is a systematic directionality in plume propagation overall, we calculated electrode site lag matrices for all identified plumes in all recordings, and averaged the result over plumes within recordings . an example is given for bird  <dig> in figure 
4a, which shows that there is underlying structure in propagation dynamics, with plume action potential activity propagating more often from the bottom-right  corner of the grid to the top-left  corner. the smooth distribution of time lags over space is consistent with the traveling propagation dynamics. mean lag maps of recordings in the other birds  show that in the hyperpallium activity of deeper  recording sites tends to lead with respect to anterior sites toward the surface of the brain, even though there is variability between birds in the exact spatial distribution of time lags. as such, at least some hyperpallial plumes may originate from the underlying mesopallium and/or nidopallium. finally, as described for propagating slow-waves in the mammalian neocortex
 <cit> , in general terms, the overall directional bias in hyperpallial plume propagation is parallel to the predominant orientation of myelinated axons in the zebra finch hyperpallium
 <cit> ; although, as noted above, individual plumes often propagate orthogonal to this axonal orientation.

because they are based on normalized cross-correlation functions, lag maps of amua plumes capture differences in the timing of oscillation events across the electrode grid, but not their magnitudes. in a second analysis approach we therefore aimed to capture overall propagation directions of predominant concentrations of neural activity based on lfp. lfp fields are less localized than are action potential fields and, therefore, better reflect the magnitude of neural activity in our recordings. we identified, at 1-ms intervals, plumes of lfp in the electrode grid that were stronger  than a threshold criterion of −250 mv, and tracked the changes of their spatial mean in time . plumes propagate in variable trajectories within recordings, both in orthogonal horizontal and sagittal planes . for each plume, we expressed the net movement across the plane of the electrode grid as a mean vector . group mean vectors per recording have significantly non-random directions  in every recording , with an overall tendency for plumes in the hyperpallium to travel anteriorly, toward the surface of the brain .

our experimental animals were anesthetized, not sleeping spontaneously. in mammals, some kinds of anesthesia, including isoflurane, activate normal sleep promoting regions in the hypothalamus
 <cit> , induce slow oscillatory brain activity resembling that occurring during spontaneous nrem sleep
 <cit> , and are a well-established method for studying the intracerebral neurophysiological aspects of nrem sleep. moreover, recent studies suggest that anesthesia may serve a functional role for the brain similar to that of sleep
 <cit> . importantly, mammalian slow-oscillations have been shown to travel both during anesthesia and nrem sleep
 <cit> . for these collective reasons, we therefore think that the isoflurane-induced slow-oscillatory patterns of brain activity reported here are likely to be comparable to those of a freely sleeping animal. indeed, the spectral power distribution recorded under isoflurane  is similar to that recorded in the eeg during natural nrem sleep in zebra finches
 <cit> .

as in the laminar mammalian neocortex, slow-waves propagate through the nuclear avian brain. thus, an important insight from our findings is that the propagating nature of slow-waves during nrem sleep and anesthesia does not reflect a neural phenomenon that is unique to mammals, or that depends upon uniquely mammalian cortical cytoarchitecture or computational properties. rather, propagating slow-waves reflect a more general type of sleep-related neural activity. propagating slow-waves may have evolved independently in birds and mammals, perhaps for functional reasons, despite their differing cortical cytoarchitectures, or it may represent an ancestral trait. although visually evoked propagating two-dimensional waves have been described in the visual cortex of anesthetized turtles
 <cit> , it remains unclear whether the cortex of non-avian reptiles generate slow-oscillations during sleep
 <cit> .

although the presence of traveling slow-waves in avian and mammalian brain structures is highly interesting from a comparative viewpoint, and may be linked in terms of function
 <cit> , we do not suggest they are necessarily identical phenomena. three-hundred million years of separation is a long time even by evolutionary standards, and it would be surprising if this was not in any way reflected in the exact phenomenology of traveling slow-waves, especially given the known differences in cytoarchitecture. nevertheless, we believe that, as in comparative work in general, differences may be as informative as similarities. although the overall phenomenology and frequency content of eeg slow-waves during nrem sleep and anesthesia in birds and mammals appear similar, our recordings show that during apparent up-states there are often multiple sharp lfp peaks and amua bursts, each of which corresponds to a propagating plume. in mammals, each cycle of a traveling slow-wave  is thought to reflect one up-state, spreading from a site of origin to neighboring regions. given the limited data on trans-membrane potentials during nrem sleep or anesthesia in birds, it is not possible to say whether multiple plumes arise and propagate during a single up-state or whether one propagating plume corresponds to one short up-state; although the former seems more likely given the single report of slow-oscillations in birds
 <cit>  and the duration of avian eeg slow-waves. furthermore, it is difficult to conclude whether or not the situation of multiple-propagating-plumes-per-presumed-up-state that we find in birds is different from the one-traveling-wave-per-up-state situation described in mammals. high-frequency activity occurring during up-states in anesthetized cats is correlated across neurons spaced < <dig>  mm apart
 <cit> , but poorly correlated across neurons spaced 4 mm apart. although propagation of this fast activity between close neurons has not been examined to our knowledge, it is conceivable that such activity correlates and propagates on fine spatial scales similar to that examined here in birds. additional studies in mammals and birds employing similar methods are needed to determine whether the propagation of higher frequency activity during apparent up-states is unique to birds.

while the propagating nature of slow-waves is shared by mammals and birds, the geometry of propagation differs between the two. in mammals, although slow-waves may engage different layers of the neocortex at slightly different times
 <cit> , propagation occurs primarily parallel to the layers of the neocortex. in contrast, in birds, slow-waves propagate as complex plumes of action and local field potential activity. while this difference is undoubtedly linked to the nuclear versus laminar arrangement of neurons in birds and mammals, respectively, it may also confer such neural cytoarchitecture with different computational properties.

depending on the actual function of propagating slow-waves, the three-dimensional nature of plumes in the avian brain may have broader implications for understanding the evolution of the nuclear pallial structures subserving complex cognition in birds. while the propagating nature of slow-waves in general may simply be an epiphenomenon of excitable interconnected neurons
 <cit> , it may also play a role in processing information on a systems level. in the former case, while propagation per se may not serve a function, the slow-oscillation may be involved in processes occurring at the local level
 <cit> . in the latter case, the propagating aspect of slow-waves may be involved in the successive reactivation and consolidation of recent memory traces
 <cit> , and/or their transfer and integration with older memories
 <cit> . if correct, then the spatial dynamics of wave propagation may shape the nature of information processing
 <cit> . in mammals, propagation occurs primarily parallel to the layers of the neocortex, restricting communication to two dimensions. in contrast, the nuclear arrangement of neurons in the avian brain and associated three-dimensional propagation of waves may confer greater degrees of computational freedom. albeit speculative, such potential benefits may explain in part why birds 1) evolutionarily “replaced” the laminar dorsal cortex present in their reptilian ancestors with the nuclear hyperpallium, and 2) elaborated extensively upon pre-existing nuclear structures in the reptilian dorsal ventricular ridge to form the mesopallium and nidopallium, large nuclear structures that orchestrate complex cognitive abilities comparable to those orchestrated by high-order association regions in the laminar mammalian neocortex
 <cit> .

finally, our findings may have implications for the interpretation of sleep-related neuronal activity in the song system of sleeping zebra finches, a prominent model for investigating sleep’s role in memory consolidation
 <cit> . in anesthetized and spontaneously sleeping male finches, neurons in nuclei of the forebrain song system exhibit spontaneous bursts of activity
 <cit> . bursts in one nuclei often precede bursts in another distantly located nuclei, raising the possibility that this sequential activity is involved in processing song-related information
 <cit> . as such, it would be interesting to determine whether this activity is part of larger plumes of activity propagating in the surrounding forebrain, or whether this activity propagates via dedicated pathways unaffected by surrounding plumes of activity.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrate that slow-waves propagate as complex three-dimensional plumes of neuronal activity in the nuclear avian brain. these findings indicate that the propagating nature of slow-waves during nrem sleep and anesthesia does not reflect a neural phenomenon that is unique to mammals, or that depends upon uniquely mammalian cortical cytoarchitecture or computational properties. as such, efforts to understand the mechanisms responsible for propagating waves should not focus on lamination, per se, but rather on traits shared by mammalian and avian brains. in this regard, our findings refine our understanding of the neocortex. in addition, the three-dimensional nature of propagating plumes raises the intriguing possibility that such activity reflects computational processes that contributed to the evolution and elaboration of nuclear structures and associated complex cognition in birds. more generally, the presence of mammalian-like activity in the avian brain, despite differences in neuronal cytoarchitecture, suggests that the apparent absence of similar sleep-related activity in prominent invertebrate models of sleep, such as drosophila melanogaster <cit> , cannot be simply attributed to their lack of a neocortex. rather, such animals may lack neuronal properties  involved in performing sleep functions shared by mammals and birds.

