BACKGROUND
the availability of high-throughput sequencing has revolutionized the fields of population genetics and molecular ecology  <cit> . early genomic work focused mainly on broad comparative analyses between species  <cit>  and was limited to one or a few individuals per species. the emergent field of population genomics  <cit> , including conservation  <cit>  and landscape genomics  <cit> , investigates genomic allele-frequency patterns at the species level, i.e. among and within natural populations. main interests revolve around exploring patterns of genetic diversity, differentiation and admixture, inferring demographic population histories, and studying signals of local adaptations in wild populations  <cit> .

to date, population-genomics studies have mainly focused on humans  <cit> , some model species  <cit>  and others relevant to agricultural production  <cit> . other taxa, particularly those with large genomes, have remained largely unexplored because of significant challenges in the laboratory and during bioinformatical analyses  <cit> . sequencing of complete genomes of many individuals is usually still prohibitive because of associated costs and bioinformatical complexities, especially in species where a reference genome is unavailable. yet, many biological questions can be addressed by describing polymorphisms from a subset of genomic regions, provided that these regions are approximately evenly distributed throughout the genome.

in the laboratory, several strategies have recently been developed enabling so-called ‘reduced genome complexity sequencing’, i.e. sampling only a small fraction of the genome in several individuals. these strategies include sequencing of reduced-representation libraries   <cit> , restriction-site-associated dna sequencing  <cit> , and other sequence-based-genotyping approaches  <cit> . essentially, all of these methods are based on the same key principle: reducing genome complexity by digestion of genomic dna with one or several restriction enzymes followed by a selection of resulting restriction fragments, and high-throughput sequencing of the final set of fragments.

one of the key characteristics of the aforementioned methods is that, at least in theory, read mapping can be carried out regardless of the availability of a reference genome by constructing a reference sequence from overlapping sequence stacks  <cit> . moreover, the similarity among sequence stacks of different individuals allows the direct estimation of allele frequencies by simultaneous identification of polymorphisms and genotype calling . this reduces the major issue of ascertainment bias, which arises when markers are identified in a small subset of individuals and subsequently genotyped in an extended sample set  <cit> .

one popular reduced-genome complexity approach is rrl sequencing. rrls were first used to generate single-nucleotide polymorphisms  maps of the human genome using classical sanger sequencing  <cit> . since van tassel et al. <cit>  first adapted the approach to high-throughput sequencing, it has been applied in a number of snp discovery studies . in the rrl approach, the number of restriction fragments subjected to high-throughput sequencing is reduced via size-selection before sequencing library preparation. rrls allow the degree of complexity reduction to be customized by defining the selected fragment-size range. by providing easy access to flanking sequences necessary to design snp genotyping assays when a reference genome is unavailable, rrls are superior to other reduced-complexity approaches  <cit> . in the rrl approach, long dna stretches can be sequenced by simply size-selecting for longer fragments  and complete sequencing of these fragments independent of the platform read length through shearing of fragments prior to high-throughput sequencing library preparation followed by assembly of the resulting sequence fragments  <cit> .

although the rrl principle is highly promising for generating population genomic snp data, current protocols must be improved so as to i) facilitate library construction for individual samples, and most importantly, ii) maximize the number of homologous fragments generated during library construction. in the past, rrl sequencing has usually been performed on pools of dna samples from multiple individuals for practical reasons  <cit> . however, pooling leads to the loss of major biological information as it prohibits the assignment of individual genotypes . because of this, many biological questions, such as investigating admixture or linking phenotypes with genotypes in studies of natural selection, cannot be addressed when samples are pooled. furthermore, pooling strongly increases the risk of missing rare alleles, especially if there are many individuals in the pool  <cit> . in addition, pooling is highly sensitive to variation in dna concentration among samples, which will inadvertently lead to an over – or underrepresentation of certain alleles  <cit> . thus, current protocols need to be improved to facilitate rrl generation of individual samples.

analyzing individual samples requires improvements to minimize dna loss during purification steps, which is particularly important if sample-dna quantity is limited. moreover, genome complexity needs to be reduced in a reproducible manner  across samples as this primarily determines the effectiveness of the genotyping-by-sequencing principle and reference-free mapping  <cit> . non-overlapping sequences will lead to a high number of missing genotypes. the accurate sequencing of homologous sites is also of particular importance when working with pooled samples, as the true number of sequenced individuals at a particular snp site cannot be determined. in the most extreme case, only alleles of one individual would be sequenced. in such a case, however, allele frequencies would nonetheless be estimated under the assumption that all allele copies in the pool had been sampled.

from a bioinformatical point of view, the amounts of raw data produced by high-throughput sequencing platforms are vast and many computational steps are required to translate raw outputs into high-quality snp calls  <cit> . thus, accurately identifying snps and calling genotypes from high-throughput sequencing data while filtering out sequencing errors remains a challenge. various snp calling programs have been introduced and algorithms are under constant development  <cit> .

one of the most widely used commercial software suites for genomic data analysis is the clc genomics workbench . the software contains a basic snp caller  that detects snps based solely on applying quality thresholds to sequencing, mapping and base quality. genotypes are determined using hard-filter criteria, i.e. by simply counting the number of sequencing reads for each allele and applying arbitrary custom cut-off rules. for instance, a genotype would be called heterozygous if an alternative allele is present in 20-80% of the reads. however, for low sequencing depths this way of genotype calling tends to underestimate the number of heterozygous genotypes  <cit> .

arguably, two of the most popular non-commercial software suites are the genome analysis toolkit   <cit>  and samtools <cit> . both samtools and the unified genotyper of the genome analysis toolkit , incorporate uncertainty in a probabilistic framework, in order to call snps and genotypes simultaneously  <cit> . both samtools and gatk allow the joint analysis of all samples from one population . a major strength of the bayesian framework is the potential to incorporate prior information, such as previous observations of alternative alleles, heterozygosity, and allele frequencies. ideally, additional information such as representative reference snps or linkage-disequilibrium patterns could be incorporated  <cit> . unfortunately, such information so far limited to a few model species  and humans  <cit> . it has been proposed that in contrast to clc, gatk  might have the tendency to overestimate the number of heterozygous genotypes  <cit> . this is because gatk aggressively calls alternative alleles in favor of high sensitivity, resulting in a high number of false-positive calls which require extensive post-filtering.

despite the fact that accurate snp and genotype calling is fundamental for precise population parameter estimation in downstream analyses  <cit> , to our knowledge direct comparisons of different snp callers in the aforementioned context are still scarce. to date, most studies employ only one snp caller, although it is conceivable that different callers will produce different datasets. in previous studies, validations were often restricted to confirming and comparing the polymorphic state of snps , but not actual genotypes at the individual level.

here, we provide a comprehensive framework to obtain high-quality snp data in population genomics, addressing both laboratory and bioinformatic challenges. first, we refined and improved an rrl protocol , which maximizes the generation of homologous dna fragments across individuals, thus achieving high genotyping-by-sequencing efficiency. our protocol also contains modifications for economical handling of dna during library preparation. all modifications support the establishment of single-sample libraries. second, we directly compared three popular snp callers  using our irrl data generated for two orangutan populations .

orangutans are the only great apes found outside africa and the phylogenetically most distant great apes to humans, which makes them particularly interesting to study in terms of the evolution of the hominid lineage  <cit> . in contrast to humans , in non-human great apes large-scale population genomic data from wild-born individuals with known population origin are scarce . rather, most genomic data were generated from a small number of zoo animals with mostly unknown population origins  <cit> , thus providing a limited perspective for population genomic analyses of wild populations. genome-wide data in orangutans will enable the investigation of the genetic basis of local adaptations among orangutan populations  <cit> . moreover, population genomic data will shed more light on the particularly complex demographic history of orangutans, as shaped by volcanic eruptions and recurrent sea level changes connecting the islands of borneo and sumatra during the pleistocene  <cit> .

RESULTS
improved reduced-representation sequencing
we developed a protocol to construct improved rrls  that maximizes efficiency and repeatability of genome complexity reduction. we applied several key modifications to the method outlined in van tassel et al. <cit>  including:  high-resolution fragment-size-selection down to an accuracy of one base pair to increase precision of isolating homologous fragments ,  modifications to minimize dna loss during purification steps, achieving dna recovery rates of >95%, and  adjustments to establish single-sample libraries to avoid the necessity of sample pooling. in order for restriction enzymes to generate homologous fragments across samples, our protocol includes recommendations for suitable sample handling and dna isolation to avoid dna strand breaking prior to digestion.

we established irrls for  <dig> unrelated orangutans from two populations, the west alas population on northwestern sumatra  and the south kinabatangan population on northeastern borneo . based on the number of study individuals, the orangutan genome size of  <dig>  gigabases   <cit> , the budgeted solid <dig> sequencing costs, and an intended 30-fold  sequencing depth, we calculated our targeted degree of genome complexity reduction to be 100-fold, i.e. 1% of the genome. we carried out in-silico digests of the orangutan reference genome  <cit>  with several candidate blunt-end cutters in order to identify the restriction enzyme suitable to our project needs . in the selected size range of 104–123 bp, a haeiii digest yielded  <dig>  predicted fragments with low repetitive sequence content . our in-silico digest demonstrated the importance of uniform fragment selection. for instance, extending the selected size range by as few as 4 bp  in all individuals would have already resulted in a 25% increase in the selected genome proportion, i.e.  <dig> % of the genome with lower average coverage per site. furthermore, a range shift of a few base pairs in some individuals in either direction would lead to a dramatic decrease in homology among the generated fragments.

in total, we obtained  <dig> million beads for the west alas population and  <dig> million beads for the south kinabatangan population by individually barcoding irrls and sequencing them on the solid <dig> platform  with paired-end chemistry. raw sequence data were submitted to the ncbi sequence read archive . median numbers of mapped reads for each individual were  <dig> , <dig> for the west alas population and  <dig> , <dig> for the south kinabatangan population . the greater sequencing output for south kinabatangan individuals is related to different performances of our solid <dig> runs that were beyond our control. we also observed a poor performance of the f <dig> sequence read direction. we only considered high quality base pairs  in downstream analyses, i.e. sites with mapping and base quality phred scores of ≥  <dig>  and a minimal sequence depth of 10×. applying these stringent filters, we retained  <dig> , <dig> bphiqual with 41× median sequence coverage for west alas individuals and  <dig> , <dig> bphiqual with 42× median coverage for south kinabatangan individuals .

apredicted by in-silico digest of the orangutan reference genome ponabe <dig>  with haeiii. bpercentage of sequenced sites that were predicted by the in-silico digest. cf3/f <dig> are the sequence read directions of the paired end sequencing mode. dnumber of sequenced base pairs passing all high quality filters . egatk estimates based on bphiqual.

to assess the performance of our irrl protocol, we estimated the irrl target efficiency as the percentage of obtained bphiqual sites which were predicted by the in-silico digest . irrl efficiency varied among individuals but was very high with a median of 97% for west alas individuals and 86% for the south kinabatangan individuals . thus, the vast majority of sequenced high quality bases were target sites, i.e. predicted by the in-silico digest of the orangutan reference genome.

comparison of snp discovery and genotype calling
we identified snps de-novo and called individual genotypes using three different algorithms: gatk, samtools, and clc. calls were based on the stringent bphiqual filter thresholds. for the gatk and samtools dataset, we also applied a minimal threshold on the genotype quality score . in addition, we performed identical population-based filtering for all three algorithms. we only accepted snps with a maximum of two alleles and genotypes meeting all quality filter criteria in at least eight individuals per population , allowing accurate allele frequency estimations. applying all filters we retrieved  <dig>  snps in the gatk dataset,  <dig>  snps in the clc dataset, and  <dig>  snps in the samtools dataset .

intersect
intersect
intersect
we required all snps to have a genotype call passing all stringent quality filters in a minimum of eight individuals per population . the intersect datasets contain exclusively concordant genotype calls between the designated snp callers. pop_sk: south kinabatangan population, pop_wa: west alas population.

abased on the sites being polymorphic within the population.

bcoverage values of intersect datasets are taken from the first named snp caller. the coverage values of the second named caller are given in brackets.

compared to similar studies , median sequence coverage at snp sites across all individuals in our datasets was extremely high , although coverage counts differed drastically among datasets. this discrepancy in coverage counts could be attributed to a different treatment of quality scores in read counting and/or different default parameters among the callers, since we applied identical quality thresholds to the data. the considerably lower read counts in the samtools dataset and potentially different prior probabilities in the bayesian framework may be causal for the strikingly lower number of total snps in our samtools dataset.

we observed a low overlap of snps among the three datasets, i.e. snp sites present in at least two datasets irrespective of the genotype calls at the individual level . in total,  <dig>  snps overlapped among all three datasets. at only 13%, the samtools dataset exhibited the lowest percentage of private snps compared to the other two algorithms .

many of the non-overlapping sites were present in initial snp discoveries, but were removed because less than eight individuals per population had a genotype call meeting all high-quality filter criteria . for the clc and samtools dataset, genotype calls often failed the minimum coverage requirement of  <dig> reads. for the gatk dataset, many genotype calls did not have a sufficiently high genotype quality score.

for all overlapping snps, we evaluated the concordance of genotype assignments by comparing for each individual whether two callers produced identical genotypes. the percentage of identical genotype calls varied among individuals with median values of  <dig> % for gatk-clc,  <dig> % for samtools-gatk, and  <dig> % for samtools-clc . a quantitative investigation of discordantly called genotypes between the callers revealed that the vast majority  of these genotypes were called heterozygous by one caller but homozygous for either of the alleles by the other caller. the relative distribution of these heterozygous/homozygous genotype calls appeared to be strongly biased . for example, examining discordant genotype calls between gatk and clc showed that in most cases , gatk assigned a heterozygous genotype while clc assigned a homozygous one. pairwise snp caller comparisons revealed that samtools had the highest tendency to call heterozygotes in such cases, followed by gatk and clc .

we also created three intersect datasets by accepting only identically assigned genotypes between pairs of snp callers . this procedure has been suggested to reduce caller-specific errors and increase specificity  <cit> . we retained  <dig>  snps for the gatk-clcintersect dataset,  <dig>  snps for the samtools-gatkintersect dataset, and  <dig>  snps for the samtools-clcintersect dataset .

impact on biological inferences
over all six datasets, there were more sites segregating in the sumatran west alas population compared to the bornean south kinabatangan population . the vast majority of snps  were private. in addition, we observed a large percentage of singletons . the highest number of singletons was obtained in the clc dataset  followed by samtools  and gatk . median site heterozygosity was always higher for the south kinabatangan population than for the west alas population.

to investigate the potential impact of the different snp datasets on biological downstream analyses, we calculated three important statistics.  kernel-density distributions for site heterozygosity and  minor allele frequency were not identical among the snp datasets . from a qualitative point of view, differences in kernel density distributions among all six datasets were especially pronounced for the west alas population  for which median sequence coverage was lower compared to the south kinabatangan population. nevertheless, it is striking that we obtained these differences despite a stringent minimal read cut-off of  <dig> reads and 29×  medium sequence coverage. for example, the clc dataset consisted of the largest proportion of low frequency alleles. in contrast, gatk called more variants at mid-frequency and showed higher overall heterozygosity levels.

to evaluate the impact of the snp dataset differences on genome-wide scans for signatures of natural selection, we performed  sliding-window analyses  to identify signals of putative selective sweeps based on population differentiation. we used the allele-frequency differential  to measure population differentiation. we arbitrarily defined outlier regions as windows with an average population differentiation d >  <dig>  . the overlap of outlier windows among datasets was low. only  <dig> % of all detected outlier windows were identical among all three single-caller datasets , which improved to  <dig> % when intersect datasets were used .

genotype validations
to determine genotype accuracy, we validated  <dig> genotypes from a subset of  <dig> snps overlapping among datasets by classical sanger sequencing. we picked snps with the only requirements that a minimum of ten individuals per population had an assigned genotype and that at least one individual showed a conflicting genotype call between gatk/samtools and clc. because all validated genotypes were identical between gatk and samtools, we did not distinguish between the two for this analysis, but rather focused on the difference between probabilistic  and hard-filtering  callers.

our results show that gatk/samtools clearly outperformed clc, with a correct genotype assignment in 83% of the conflicting calls . gatk/samtools calling accuracy was especially high for singletons  and for genotypes that were according to gatk/samtools homozygous for either of the two alleles but heterozygous according to clc . we also verified the genotype accuracy of identical calls and found  <dig> miscalled genotypes out of  <dig> .


discordant calls


a


concordant calls

c
aoverlapping snp sites but discordant genotype assignments. bloci were exclusively counted in this category without considering them in the homo- or heterozygote categories below. c <dig> of the  <dig> genotypes were validated from the same sites used to validate the discordant genotypes. the remaining  <dig> genotypes were validated from  <dig> snps chosen randomly from the gatk-clcintersect dataset .

characteristics of snp callers
gatk seemed to be conservative in calling singletons and low frequency alleles in our dataset, as it exhibited the lowest proportion of singletons among all snp datasets. yet, among all datasets, gatk had the highest medium site heterozygosity. it appears that gatk slightly overestimates mid-frequency alleles, because our genotype validations revealed that in 30% of the cases where gatk called a heterozygous and clc a homozygous genotype, clc was correct. thus, our results suggest that with increasing minor allele frequency, gatk starts calling alternative alleles more aggressively due to the population prior in multi-sample analysis.

it appears that clc generally underestimates heterozygosity. the clc dataset consisted of an excess of singletons, suggesting that clc called sequence errors as a genetic variants to a greater extent. thus, the clc dataset contained the lowest overall site heterozygosities among all datasets. detailed investigation of discordantly called genotypes revealed that almost all of these genotypes were homozygous with clc, but heterozygous with the other callers. to our surprise, clc largely miscalled genotypes as heterozygous which were correctly assigned as homozygous by gatk .

our results indicate that samtools is more restrictive in snp calling than gatk and clc. the samtools dataset consisted of considerably fewer snps than gatk and clc, but the degree of overlap with the other datasets was much higher than for the other datasets. samtools showed the highest tendency to assign heterozygous genotypes in cases of discordantly called genotypes among callers. for example, the few discordantly called genotypes were strongly biased in that 84% were heterozygous with samtools, but homozygous with gatk.

discussion
our study provides a framework for the generation of genome-wide snp datasets for population genomic studies, from laboratory procedures to bioinformatics, which is widely applicable in non-model species. we present an improved protocol for highly efficient and more precise reduced genome complexity sequencing that simultaneously allows discovery of novel snps and genotyping. using data generated from  <dig> wild-born orangutans from two populations, we observed significant inconsistencies among three commonly used snp callers . these inconsistencies among the snp datasets led to strong disagreement in outliers detected in scans for signatures of natural selection. this shows the potential impact on downstream biological analyses and emphasizes the need to critically evaluate the accuracy of snp and genotype calling in population genomic studies.

we present a refined irrl method presenting an improvement of the approach by van tassel et al.  <cit> . several key modifications greatly enhanced the effectiveness of genotyping-by-sequencing, as measured by target sequence efficiency. target sequence efficiency was high because we focused on laboratory procedures to obtain homologous sequences across individuals, i.e. reproducible fragment generation and precise size selection. to our knowledge, these procedures do not seem to have received sufficient attention in the literature, probably because most studies pooled individuals to develop snp markers  <cit>  without the direct aim of estimating allele-frequencies.

the importance of uniform fragment selection is well illustrated by our in-silico digests of the orangutan reference genome. an imprecise isolation of fragments would have led to a substantial change in the overall composition of fragment libraries across samples. this in turn would have caused a substantial increase in missing genotypes because of significantly reduced overlap of homologous fragments. thus, accurate size selection and generation of uniform fragments to achieve high sequences homology are paramount in producing high-quality rrls that maximize the amount of biological information.

the higher and more constant target sequence efficiencies for sumatran west alas individuals  compared to bornean south kinabatangan individuals  were most likely caused by carrying out the initial in-silico digest, which predicted our target sites, on the sumatran reference genome. since sumatran and bornean orangutans diverged more than  <dig>  years ago,  <cit> , bornean orangutans will inevitably exhibit more mutations at restriction sites.

we also improved previous rrl approaches by minimizing the loss of dna during purification steps, thus facilitating single-sample library construction. economical handling of dna is particularly relevant when studying species for which sample quantity is a limiting factor, which is the case for most wild animal populations. a high dna recovery rate during purification steps is especially important when dealing with low template amounts , where dna loss will be disproportionately higher for technical reasons, and/or targeting only a small fraction of the genome. so far, these problems have been circumvented by pooling samples. our dna recovery rate of >95% in the purification steps is considerably higher than obtained through conventional methods using extractions from gels and/or silica columns .

from a bioinformatical perspective, we demonstrate that different snp callers lead to substantially different snp datasets, in spite of applying rather conservative quality filters. for example, we applied a phred-scaled mapping and base quality threshold of ≥ q <dig>  corresponding to an error probability of ≤ <dig> %. in contrast, other studies only apply q <dig>   <cit> . furthermore, our median sequence coverage of 41×  is substantially higher than that found in other studies, in which sequencing depth is usually between 6-16× with lower cut-off values than used in this study  <cit> .

there are three main reasons for the conspicuous differences among the snp datasets. first, the snps dropping out because of our population-based filtering were different among the gatk, samtools and clc datasets. second, although we used identical mapped short reads and filtering criteria on the raw data to call snps and genotypes, we cannot exclude a potential influence of the poor f <dig> sequence read performance due to specific internal filters of snp callers. third and most importantly, some differences will arguably be related to the conceptually very different methods of snp identification and genotype assignment  <cit> .

intersect strategies have been proposed to reduce caller-specific errors  <cit> . the estimated genotype accuracy of  <dig> % of intersected genotypes is higher than in comparable studies that use only one caller . yet, most of these studies actually only verified the polymorphic state of snps but not individual genotype calls. thus, the true genotype error rate in these studies is almost certainly higher than estimated.

the intersect strategy seems to be appealing because false-positive assignments should be minimized. however, it is inevitably less sensitive towards snp discovery  <cit> . the appropriate strategy and filter stringencies for each study depend on the specific needs of downstream analyses. nonetheless, apart from higher false-negatives rates, as observed in our dataset, intersecting genotype calls might also introduce non-random biases. more detailed investigations will be required to fully appreciate the consequences of intersecting strategies.

among all datasets, the general patterns tend to agree with previous detailed studies on orangutan population genetics and demographic history. for instance, the higher number of singletons and low-frequency alleles we observe in the sumatran west alas population is in agreement with previous studies using conventional genetic markers   <cit> . furthermore, the slightly higher site heterozygosities in the south kinabatangan population are also in agreement with previous studies using conventional genetic markers  <cit> .

many downstream analyses in population genomics, such as selection tests or demographic inferences rely on the allele-frequency spectra  <cit> . thus, biological conclusions drawn from such analyses may well change depending on which snp caller has been used. this possibility is illustrated by the extremely low overlap of identified outlier regions in our sliding-window analyses to detect selective sweeps based on population differentiation.

apart from reliable snp analysis, the accurate characterization of the allele-frequency spectra is mainly influenced by three sources of bias. first, allele frequencies will not be representative of the population if there is a sampling bias  <cit> . to address this issue and reduce this bias, we carefully selected study animals and verified population origins. by contrast, genomic studies often rely on zoo animals with unknown population provenance  or apply a limited sampling schema , and thus there are likely inherent sampling biases.

second, the discovery of snps in a subset of individuals for subsequent genotype calling in an extended sample set will lead to ascertainment bias  <cit> . the degree of ascertainment bias depends on the representativeness of the sampling scheme of individuals used for the initial snp discovery  <cit> . especially in population and conservation genomics, ascertainment bias is a serious problem when assessing, for instance, genetic diversity. low-frequency variants will be underestimated and a systematic bias will be introduced  <cit> . the key strength of reduced genome complexity approaches is that this form of ascertainment bias can be minimized by the genotyping-by-sequencing principle.

third, it is biologically relevant to also capture rare alleles, which is the reason why we established individual libraries . low-frequency alleles are important in estimates of demographic parameters  <cit>  and studies of positive  <cit>  and purifying selection  <cit> .

the framework provided in this study will be valuable to generate genome-wide snp datasets in the emerging fields of population, conservation and landscape genomics. our irrl protocol is part of a growing suite of sequencing methods, which have completely changed study designs and hold great promise for studies of ecology and evolution in diverse species. the strength of reduced-genome-complexity rrl methods is that they can be applied to any dna-based life form, opening up the field of population genomics to smaller research groups studying organisms for which large-scale genetic data is not yet available. until high-throughput sequencing becomes more affordable and bioinformatical advances allow routine whole-genome re-sequencing of populations, we expect that reduced-genome-complexity approaches will remain essential for population genomic studies particularly in non-model organisms with large genomes.

CONCLUSIONS
we generated snp datasets for  <dig> wild-born orangutans from two populations representing the first effort of large-scale snp discovery and genotyping of orangutans with known population provenance. in the field of population genomics, researchers need to exert caution when generating genome-wide snp datasets. we show that accurate generation of homologues fragments in reduced-genome-complexity sequencing is paramount, especially for pooled samples with no control for missing genotypes in the estimation of allele frequencies. we present an improved rrl protocol , which allows sampling only a fraction of the genome with maximized sequence overlap among individuals. the scale and efficiency achieved with our irrl protocol demonstrates its suitability to generate genome-wide snp datasets. our direct comparison of three popular snp callers demonstrated that depending on the calling algorithm, sequence depths and filtering criteria, substantially different snp datasets are obtained that will affect downstream analyses and thus might have a substantial effect on biological conclusions. when only applying a single snp caller, we advise to use a probabilistic algorithm and call genotypes in a multi-sample mode. in our study, the bayesian framework of the unified genotyper of the gatk showed a higher sensitivity in discovering snps than the framework of samtools with similar genotype calling accuracy.

