BACKGROUND
the interaction between glucose and nonesterified fatty acids  for oxidation in tissues or at the whole body level has been documented in many animal and human studies  <cit> . the glucose - nefa cycle was first described by randle and coworkers  <cit> . in essence they showed that the metabolic relationship between the substrates glucose and nefa is reciprocal and not dependent. high plasma glucose concentrations promote glucose oxidation and inhibit nefa oxidation. vice versa, high plasma nefa concentrations promote nefa oxidation and inhibit glucose oxidation. apart from the fact that mass action drives the glucose - nefa cycle, substrate competition is also mediated by insulin. insulin stimulates glucose oxidation and inhibits nefa oxidation. the basic principles of the glucose - nefa cycle also seem to apply for glucose and amino acids  and therefore the existence of a glucose -aa cycle was proposed  <cit> .

the purpose of substrate competition is to meet the energy demand of the body by oxidation of different substrates, i.e. glucose, nefa or aa, depending on the availability of the substrates. at fasting, when plasma glucose, aa, and insulin levels are low, plasma nefa levels will increase due to lipolysis from body fat, and nefa will be primarily oxidized. after a meal, when plasma glucose, aa, and insulin levels are high, glucose and to a lesser extent aa will be oxidized.

in diabetic subjects however, the orchestrating role of substrate competition to channel energy oxidation depending on substrate availability is out of balance. the diabetic state is characterized by hyperglycaemia and insulin resistance and, as such, the metabolic handling of substrates like glucose, nefa and aa is disturbed. for instance, diabetic subjects are hyperglycaemic but show impaired  glucose oxidation and increased nefa oxidation at elevated plasma nefa concentrations  <cit> . an increased rate of nefa oxidation may thus represent a mechanism to meet the energy demand of diabetic subjects. there is inconsistent information whether aa play a role in the unbalance of substrate competition in diabetic subjects  <cit> . both increased  <cit>  and unchanged  <cit>  aa oxidation has been reported in studies with diabetic patients. the inconsistency may be caused by differences in study design: severity of diabetes, treatment with medication or with diets, used substrate methodology and control over plasma glucose and aa concentrations during the study, all play a role in the balance of substrate competition in diabetic subjects  <cit> .

the aim of the present study was to characterize and compare insulin-stimulated glucose and aa utilization in normal and streptozotocin  diabetic pigs by means of the hyperinsulinaemic, euglycaemic, euaminoacidaemic clamp technique , thereby avoiding differences in substrate fluxes by mass action. the pig was chosen as animal model for the study of translational metabolism because of the many similarities between pigs and humans. both species are of equal size and they are omnivores with similar food intake patterns, digestion and metabolism  <cit> .

RESULTS
experiment 1
the insulin-stimulated individual aa clearance rates in  <dig> normal and  <dig> diabetic pigs, as calculated from the first clamp study when using the aa mixure from table  <dig> are presented in table  <dig>  in diabetic pigs, the clearance rates of some essential aa like arginine, phenylalanine, threonine and tyrosine were increased 2- <dig> fold whereas the clearance rates of all non-essential aa were increased 2- <dig> fold.

total amino acid concentration is  <dig> g/l. essential amino acids are arg through val. non-essential amino acids are ala through ser.

mean ± sem, * p < . <dig>  † p < . <dig> and ‡ p < . <dig> compared to normal pigs.

during the clamp studies in diabetic pigs the steady state plasma aa concentrations were compared to the corresponding preclamp  aa concentrations  in order to adjust the aa mixture to the diabetic status. after each of the  <dig> clamp studies in diabetic pigs, the aa mixture was further finetuned to optimally meet the utilization rates per individual aa in diabetic pigs. the final aa mixture for diabetic pigs is presented in table  <dig> 

total amino acid concentration is  <dig> g/l. essential amino acids are arg through val. non-essential amino acids are ala through ser.

experiment 2
diabetic pigs  versus normal pigs  showed basal hyperglycaemia , reduced plasma concentrations of total aa and increased plasma concentrations of urea  and at the level of individual aa , some essential aa concentrations were increased  whereas one essential aa  and the non-essential aa alanine, asparagine, glutamine, glutamate, glycine and serine were decreased .

means ± sem

means ± sem

in normal pigs, at steady state during the clamp study with the tailor made aa mixture for normal pigs , plasma insulin concentrations were increased approximately 4-fold  over preclamp concentrations whereas the concentrations of glucose, lactate, total aa, urea and all individual aa  did not change significantly . the coefficients of variation of individual aa concentrations were less than 21% in the preclamp situation and less than 12% in the steady state situation.

means ± sem, vc = coefficient of variation.

in diabetic pigs, at steady state during the clamp study with the tailor made aa mixture for diabetic pigs , plasma insulin concentrations were increased approximately 5-fold  over preclamp concentrations, plasma glucose concentrations were reduced to the euglycaemic range and the concentrations of lactate, total aa, urea and all individual aa did not change significantly . the coefficients of variation of individual aa concentrations were less than 15% in the preclamp situation and less than 11% in the steady state situation.

means ± sem. vc = coefficient of variation.

the insulin-stimulated individual aa clearance rates in normal and diabetic pigs, are presented in table  <dig>  in diabetic pigs, the clearance rates of the essential aa threonine and tyrosine were increased approximately 2-fold and the clearance rates of the non-essential aa alanine, asparagine, glutamate and proline were increased 2- <dig> fold. the corresponding %-change in individual aa clearance rates from the normal to the diabetic status is depicted in figure  <dig>  when the aa clearance rates are subdivided in total aa, essential aa and non-essential aa , the clearance rates of total aa  and non-essential aa  were increased in diabetic vs normal pigs. essential aa clearance was largely unchanged . glucose clearance rate  was reduced approximately 4-fold in diabetic vs normal pigs . taken together, the ratio of insulin-stimulated glucose versus aa clearance was decreased  <dig> -fold in diabetic pigs, which was caused by a  <dig> -fold decrease in glucose clearance and a  <dig> -fold increase in non-essential aa clearance.

normal pigs were infused with an amino acid mixture  designed for normal pigs and diabetic pigs were infused with an amino acid mixture  designed for diabetic pigs.

mean ± sem, * p < . <dig>  † p < . <dig> and ‡ p < . <dig> compared to normal pigs.

discussion
this study demonstrates that in diabetic pigs insulin resistance for glucose utilization is accompanied by insulin hypersensitivity for non-essential aa utilization. in parallel with the randle concept , the present data suggest the existence of a glucose - non-essential aa substrate interaction in diabetic pigs whereby reduced insulin-stimulated glucose clearance seems to be compensated by increased non-essential aa clearance.

insulin resistance for glucose metabolism in diabetic subjects has been argued to be a primary metabolic defect caused by glucose and lipid toxicity  <cit>  and insulin hypersensitivity for non-essential aa clearance, as shown in the present study, seems therefore a secondary response, probably a compensatory mechanism to warrant sufficient energy supply to body tissues of diabetic subjects.

it has previously been shown that substrate competition, apart from glucose - nefa, can take place between glucose and aa. infusion of an aa mixture reduced insulin-stimulated glucose disposal, and more specifically glucose oxidation, in healthy man  <cit> . theoretically the reduction in glucose oxidation was caused by increased aa oxidation. in our study with diabetic pigs, the low glucose utilization rate coincided with a high utilization rate of non-essential aa. plasma urea concentrations remained high during the clamp studies in diabetic pigs which suggests that aa oxidation was not inhibited by insulin. therefore, the increase in non-essential aa clearance in diabetic pigs most likely reflects increased aa oxidation.

glucose and amino acid utilization in normal and diabetic pigs
in the present study, nutrient utilization was expressed as nutrient clearance in ml/kg·min. another approach is to express nutrient utilization as mg/kg·min. this is valid for glucose and total aa because nutrient utilization rates were determined at matched plasma glucose and aa concentrations , and therefore the masses of glucose and aa which were utilized by the body can be directly compared between normal and diabetic pigs. the insulin-stimulated net utilization of glucose  was  <dig> -times greater than the net utilization of aa  in normal pigs. this is largely in accordance with our previous observations  <cit>  where we found a ratio of ~10: <dig> in the net utilization of glucose compared to aa in normal pigs. in diabetic pigs however, the insulin-stimulated net utilization of glucose  was almost equal to the net utilization of aa . when transforming the net utilization rates to generation of gross energy from nutrients, the following calculation can be made: the combustion energy  and net atp production  for glucose vs aa vs nefa are  <dig>  and  <dig>  vs  <dig>  and  <dig>  vs  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively  <cit> . this implies that the 2-fold increase  in aa utilization in diabetic pigs does not fully compensate for the  <dig> -fold decrease  in glucose utilization in terms of energy transfer. energy content of glucose and aa is similar and therefore it can be concluded that the remainder of energy compensation in diabetic pigs must come from increased nefa utilization to fill the existing energy gap  between a  <dig> -fold decrease in glucose utilization and a 2-fold increase in aa utilization. energy content of nefa is approximately 2-fold higher compared to glucose and therefore it can be calculated that nefa utilization must have been increased  <dig> -fold  under the present experimental conditions in diabetic pigs.

essential and non-essential amino acid utilization in diabetic pigs
adult pigs require a core of nine aa for maintenance and productive purposes which are called "essential". in young growing pigs, like the pigs used in the present study, two additional aa are considered  essential: arginine and tyrosine. other amino acids which pigs are able to synthesize are termed "non-essential"  <cit> .

with respect to non-essential aa, alanine is the major aa utilized by the liver as a substrate for gluconeogenesis  <cit> . the plasma concentration of alanine reflects the algebraic sum of its release from peripheral tissue and rates of utilization by the liver for gluconeogenesis. plasma alanine concentrations were low in diabetic pigs indicating that release of alanine is lower than its utilization. our data show that insulin-stimulated alanine utilization was high in diabetic pigs, which fits with the general observation that gluconeogenesis from alanine is increased in diabetes  <cit> .

essential aa were preferentially spared from increased utilization in diabetic pigs, as shown for phenylalanine and leucine in previous studies in diabetic humans  <cit> . this may represent a protective mechanism to maintain body protein integrity. however, the utilization rates of two essential aa, threonine and tyrosine, were increased in diabetic pigs. threonine, when catabolised, is dehydrated first to alpha-ketobutyrate, which is then converted to propionyl coa, the precursor of succinyl coa. through threonine metabolism pyruvate is formed, which enters the krebs cycle  <cit> . therefore threonine may compensate for the reduction in glucose-related energy in diabetes. however, threonine is also involved in many physiological functions, in particular those of immune system functionality  <cit> , gut mucosal repair processes  <cit>  and threonine deficiency inhibits growth and reduces body water content  <cit> , thereby possibly worsening dehydration in diabetes. tyrosine is the immediate precursor for production of the neurotransmitters and hormones dopamine, adrenaline, noradrenaline, thyroxine and the antioxidant melanin, and as such involved in the regulation of metabolism and inhibition of inflammation  <cit> . abnormalities in metabolism and inflammation are characteristic features of diabetes  <cit> . a deficiency in some essential aa like threonine and tyrosine may therefore contribute to the development of secondary complications and the health problems of diabetic patients, i.e. increased susceptibility to infections and reduced nervous system functionality.

infused amino acid mixtures
it can be argued that the chosen composition of the infused aa mixture played a major role in the balance between glucose and aa utilization. there are two arguments against this assumption. first, the composition of the aa mixture was determined by the endogenous aa fluxes in the pig. basal plasma aa concentrations were kept constant at steady state of the clamp and this approach determined the composition of the aa mixture. second, two different aa mixtures were used in the present study. one aa mixture  contained 48% essential and 52% non-essential aa, the other aa mixture  contained 52% essential and 48% non-essential aa. both aa mixtures yielded comparable results with respect to the increase in clearance rates of non-essential aa in diabetic pigs. minor differences were observed at the level of some individual aa like arginine, phenylalanine, cysteine, glutamine, glycine and serine. therefore the conclusion with respect to the existence of a glucose - non-essential aa substrate cycle in diabetic pigs is valid for both aa mixtures, i.e. a mixture which fits normal pigs  and a mixture which fits diabetic pigs .

limitations of the study
data were collected by means of the hyperinsulinaemic euglycaemic euaminoacidaemic clamp technique which reflects the nutrient uptake capacity of the body. linking these data to the randle cycle is a debatable issue because oxidation of nutrients was not measured in the present study. referring to the plasma urea concentrations as a crude measure of aa oxidation is only partly valid. during the clamp, nutrients disappear from the blood into tissues and the intracellular fate of these nutrients is unknown. aa could be used for protein synthesis or oxidation. young pigs have a high capacity for growth and therefore it is expected that a large portion of the infused aa is used for protein accretion and not for oxidation. it is uncertain whether the capacity for protein accretion is unaltered during hyperinsulinaemic euglycaemic euaminoacidaemic conditions in diabetic pigs. however, there are some indications that this is the case: 1) lysine is the first limiting aa for protein accretion and body weight gain in pigs  <cit> . in the present study, lysine clearance was not different in diabetic and control pigs. 2) diabetes seems not to be associated with insulin resistance for protein synthesis and protein degradation  <cit> . 3) at identical dietary energy intake, average weekly growth of control pigs was ~ <dig> kg whereas growth of diabetic pigs was ~ <dig> kg with an urinary glucose excretion of ~ <dig> kg. this is in line with our previous observations  <cit> . this suggests that dietary energy efficacy is reduced ~4-fold in hyperglycaemic diabetic pigs which seems to be mainly caused by loss of energy via the urine. under the present euglycaemic clamp conditions however, when urinary glucose loss is negligible, the capacity for growth seems similar in control and diabetic pigs.

taken together, the interpretation of the data with respect to the randle cycle should be read with the reservation in mind that oxidation was not measured in the present study.

CONCLUSIONS
studies so far have established that excess exogenous aa infusion competes with glucose for uptake by insulin-sensitive tissues in healthy individuals  <cit> . whether this substrate competition is in effect in diabetic subjects was the research focus of the present study. we conclude that a glucose - aa cycle exists in diabetic subjects but the nature of substrate competition seems different from healthy subjects. given the fact that glucose uptake is suppressed and considered to be the primary metabolic defect in diabetic subjects, the increase in non-essential aa uptake seems a compensatory mechanism to provide the body with sufficient energy. therefore the glucose - aa cycle in diabetic subjects may be designated as "compensatory" in stead of "competitive" with regard to the substrate interaction, being a glucose - non essential aa substrate compensation.

