BACKGROUND
proper cell adhesion is an important determinant for proliferation, migration and differentiation. adhesion is often between ligands present in the extracellular matrix  and cell-surface proteins such as integrins, providing cells an anchor point for morphogenetic changes. adhesion may also involve direct cell-cell contact via other transmembrane or cell surface-associated proteins. cell-cell adhesion is particularly important in the nervous system, where there is a paucity of laminin/collagen rich matrix, but many sites of functional cell-cell interaction that regulate cell migration, axon pathfinding, and synapse formation and plasticity <cit> .

the proteoglycan agrin presents an interesting molecule for studies of cell adhesion, particularly for neurons. agrin functions in neurodevelopment, and is an essential signal for maintaining postsynaptic differentiation at the neuromuscular junction   <cit> . agrin exists in multiple protein isoforms, including a secreted, matrix-bound form that is found at the nmj and in other basement membranes throughout the body, and a type  <dig> transmembrane form that is the predominant form expressed by neurons of the central nervous system  <cit> . thus, it can be either a matrix-associated molecule, or a transmembrane, cell-associated molecule. it was our goal in these studies to determine if cells, and especially neurons, respond to agrin as they do to ecm ligands such as rgd peptides, or as they do to transmembrane adhesion molecules such as cadherins.

in assays using recombinant agrin as an adhesive substrate, the carboxy terminus of agrin was shown to mediate neuronal adhesion. some, but not all, of this adhesion was dependent on beta <dig> integrins, though a direct interaction of agrin and integrins was not established  <cit> . thus, agrin may function as an ecm ligand for cell adhesion, similar to the laminins, with which it binds. alternatively, the expression of the transmembrane form of agrin and structural similarities with other transmembrane adhesion molecules, such as neurexins, raise the possibility that agrin also functions as a transmembrane adhesion molecule in the nervous system  <cit> . the present study uses nanopatterned surfaces to examine the properties of cellular adhesion to molecularly defined agrin substrates, and compares these to adhesion mediated by cadherins, a well-established class of transmembrane, homophilic-adhesion molecules, and to previous work on rgd peptides, the canonical ecm ligand for integrin mediated adhesion  <cit> .

nanopatterned substrates offer a number of advantages for such studies. gold nanoparticles can be deposited onto slides and biofunctionalized with the protein of interest, and the intervening space can be passivated with polyethylene glycol  to prevent non-specific interactions of the cell and substrate. using this process, the stoichiometry, orientation, and spacing of the protein being presented as the adhesive substrate can be controlled. this approach has been used to study the adhesion, spreading, and motility of cells when presented with patterned rgd peptides arrayed on  <dig> nm spots that should only interact with single integrin complexes. this revealed a maximal spacing between spots of  <dig> nm before integrin mediated functions including adhesion, proliferation, and cell spreading, decreased sharply  <cit> .

the results of the present study indicate that the adhesion profile of cells to patterned agrin more closely resembles that of rgd peptides than cadherins, even for neuroblastoma cell lines and primary cortical neurons. this suggests that cells recognize and adhere to agrin by mechanisms that are more closely related to the mechanisms of adhesion to the ecm than to transmembrane-protein-mediated cell/cell adhesion.

RESULTS
adhesion of cells to nanopatterned agrin
in this study, agrin was used as a nanopatterned substrate for cell adhesion assays. with this technique, gold nanoparticles 5– <dig> nm in diameter are arrayed on a glass slide at tunable distances ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> nm between particles . the intervening glass surface is passivated with polyethylene glycol  to prevent adhesion to areas other than the functionalized nanoparticles. a construct consisting of the carboxy-terminal quarter  of rat agrin with c-terminal myc and 6x-histidine tags was expressed in cos- <dig> cells and purified from the media by nickel chromatography  . in addition, a commercial agrin construct consisting of the c-terminal half of agrin , with an n-terminal histidine tag, was also used  . the nanoparticles were functionalized with these constructs using a thiol-nta linkage that reacts with the gold in the substrate and the nickel bound by the histidine tag. using this approach, agrin is presented as a substrate for cell adhesion with a controlled spacing, limited stoichiometry, and fixed orientation. the validation and characterization of agrin binding to the gold nanoparticles is described in detail elsewhere  <cit> .

agrin is known to be a permissive substrate for cell adhesion when presented in a uniform coating. the ability of agrin to mediate cell adhesion when presented as a nanopatterned substrate was tested using neuroblastoma cell lines and agrin spaced at  <dig> nm. cells were incubated on the substrates for four hours, non-adherent cells were washed off, and bound cells were quantified using a colorimetric assay . both rat b <dig> cells and human shsy-5y cells bound specifically to the agrin substrate . in this and subsequent experiments, both c <dig> and c <dig> agrin constructs were used with similar results. the data shown is for c <dig> agrin unless otherwise noted. no cell adhesion was seen on the peg-passivated portions of the slide that did not also have agrin functionalized gold nanoparticles. adherent cells showed normal morphology, with a slightly elongated soma and short processes. the "dipping edge" is also seen in figure 2a, c . this is a region of artifactually high particle density that forms when the nanopatterned surfaces are made using the dip-coating procedure . therefore, cells efficiently adhere to agrin when presented as a nanopatterned surface with  <dig> nm spacing.

comparison of adhesive substrates
the goal of this study was to determine if adhesion to agrin was more characteristic of adhesion to extracellular matrix components, or to a cell surface adhesion molecule. we therefore first compared agrin to other classes of adhesion molecules using uniformly coated surfaces. these other adhesive substrates included 1) laminin, an extracellular matrix component, 2) l <dig>  a ig-superfamily member transmembrane adhesion molecule, and  <dig> ) n-cadherin and cadherin <dig>  two classic homophilic cell surface adhesion molecules. both mouse c2c <dig> myoblasts and human shsy5y neuroblastoma cells were tested with similar results . c2c <dig> cells bound all substrates significantly less efficiently than laminin . however, adhesion to agrin was significantly higher than adhesion to n-cadherin or cadherin <dig> . shsy5y cells bound agrin and l <dig> without a significant reduction compared to laminin. binding to n-cadherin and cadherin <dig> was significantly reduced relative to laminin , but only cadherin <dig> differed significantly from agrin . three independent adhesion assays were performed for each substrate and cell type, and adhesion was standardized to the amount of adhesion observed for laminin in each trial. background binding on bsa coated substrates was subtracted and all substrates were deposited using  <dig> μg/ml solutions of recombinant protein.

agrin and n-cadherin were next tested for their dependence on spacing of the nanopattern. this provided a comparison of agrin to a homophilic adhesion molecule where both provided good adhesion for a neuroblastoma cell line. in each case, both primary mouse cortical neurons and rat b <dig> neuroblastoma cells were tested . as above, results were obtained for three independent assays and adhesion was standardized to uniformly coated agrin or n-cadherin. for agrin, adhesion of both primary cortical neurons and b <dig> cells was comparable to uniformly coated protein at spacings of  <dig> and  <dig> nm . primary cortical neurons did show a small but significant reduction in adhesion to  <dig> nm spaced agrin , but the difference was not significant compared to  <dig> nm spaced agrin . however, adhesion dropped significantly with  <dig> and  <dig> nm spacing . adhesion to the  <dig> nm spaced agrin was comparable to the negative control for both cell types . negative controls were created using bsa coated gold nanoparticles in the same peg passivated environment.

the decreased agrin adhesion seen with increased spacing may be an under-estimate. in more closely spaced patterns, the cells were clearly adhering to the surface and had normal morphologies. at  <dig> and  <dig> nm, the cells were clumped, adhering to one another if one cell got purchase on the substrate. this was true of both b <dig> cells and primary neurons, with the primary cells clumping more quickly than the neuroblastoma cells. quantification of this effect for the b <dig> cells is shown in additional file  <dig>  this effect is probably mediated by classical cell-cell adhesion mechanisms, although disrupting these mechanisms through approaches such as the chelation of divalent cations decreases adhesion overall  <cit> , making this assumption difficult to test. thus, as the values reported are based on the number of adherent cells/sample, the number of cells preferentially binding the substrate, as opposed to binding other cells, may be even lower.

unlike nanopatterned agrin, cell adhesion to n-cadherin showed no sharp spacing-dependent threshold . for both cell types , the adhesion to patterned substrates was significantly lower than to uniformly coated n-cadherin . the amount of adhesion decreased gradually as the spacing of the nanopattern increased. no single step  produced a significant decrease in adhesion, but all patterned n-cadherin substrates showed adhesion significantly above the negative control . like cells on patterned agrin, cell clumping was also observed on the more widely spaced n-cadherin patterns. this again suggests that the amount of adhesion on widely spaced n-cadherin substrates may be an over-estimate, but unlike agrin, these values were still significantly higher than negative controls. therefore, adhesion to n-cadherin is dependent on spacing, but the relationship varies more linearly with spacing and does not show a critical threshold as agrin-mediated adhesion did.

cell motility on nanopatterned agrin
the spacing of the nanopatterned agrin also influenced cell motility , and this inversely correlated with adhesion. cells on more closely spaced patterns  displayed less mobility than cells on more widely spaced patterns . interestingly, the mobility differences were not purely a function of the cells' ability to adhere, as cells on uniformly coated agrin or laminin had intermediate motilities.

motile cells often extend a leading process during migration; however, cell motility also inversely correlated with the extension of processes, as assessed by a cell-spreading index . on more closely spaced agrin patterns, cells were flatter and extended short protrusions. on more widely spaced agrin patterns, cells extended fewer processes, had rounder cell bodies, and occupied less surface area. thus, strong cell adhesion to closely spaced patterns led to the anticipated effects on cell morphology and spreading, but the looser adhesion of widely spaced patterns was more conducive to increased cell motility.

molecular mechanisms
the adhesion profile of cells on agrin nanopatterned arrays  is very similar to the profile previously reported for cells adhering to patterned rgd peptides, where adhesion also dropped at >  <dig> nm spacing  <cit> . since rgd is the canonical extracellular matrix ligand for integrin-mediated cell adhesion  <cit> , we tested the possible involvement of integrin signaling in adhesion to agrin by adding competing peptides to cell adhesion assays with  <dig> nm agrin spacing . the peptide ikvav  significantly reduced adhesion compared to control assays performed with no competing peptide . this effect was specific, and no decrease in adhesion was seen using rgd or hav  peptides compared to the controls.

we also tested whether presenting agrin as a patterned versus unpatterned substrate influenced adhesion . indeed differences in cell adhesion were seen in comparing the c-terminal  <dig> versus  <dig> kda fragments when each was patterned with  <dig> nm spacing, with c <dig> conferring approximately half as much adhesion as c <dig>  . however, consistent with previous studies, no differences were seen when these two fragments were coated homogeneously  . there are two possible explanations for this difference. first, a mechanism for adhesion to c <dig> may be functional when it is presented uniformly, but lost when it is presented as a patterned substrate. however, this mechanism would need to be retained in the c <dig> fragment, even when it is nanopatterned. alternatively, the c <dig> and c <dig> constructs are presented in the reverse orientation by virtue of their respective c-terminal and n-terminal 6x his tags in the thiol-nta functionalization of the gold nanoparticles; whereas, they are presented in a random orientation when homogeneously coated. in either case, the differences detected by the patterned presentation further suggest the usefulness of this approach for assessing cellular responses to conditions that can be controlled at the molecular scale.

discussion
we have shown that agrin presented as a nanopatterned substrate mediates adhesion for a variety of cell types, including primary neurons and neuroblastoma cell lines. in addition, we have shown that the dependence of adhesion on the spacing of the agrin nanopattern has a sharp spacing-dependent threshold, similar to that of the canonical integrin ligand rgd, a component of many ecm proteins  <cit> . in contrast, the cell-surface homophilic adhesion molecule n-cadherin has a more linear dependence on spacing, with no significant spacing-dependent threshold. nanopatterned spacing also influences cell motility and morphology, but not simply in parallel with adhesion. consistent with cells responding to agrin as they would to integrin-dependent extracellular matrix ligands, adhesion was inhibited by competing ikvav peptides. finally, nanopatterned substrates are capable of highlighting differing cell responses that are masked when the substrate is uniformly presented.

in addition to the effects on cell adhesion that we show, cell proliferation had a similar dependence on the spacing of agrin substrates . both proliferation and adhesion are often integrin-mediated processes, and the inhibition of adhesion by the ikvav peptide is consistent with this. the ikvav sequence was identified as an active motif in the laminin alpha <dig> chain that promoted cell adhesion, proliferation, and neurite extension, and these effects depend, at least in part, on beta <dig> integrins  <cit> . as such, the rgd and ikvav peptides have been previously reported to be similarly effective  <cit> . agrin contains neither an rgd nor an ikvav sequence; however, previous studies have shown that adhesion of chick primary ciliary ganglion neurons to agrin was largely dependent on beta <dig> integrins, and was sensitive to rgd peptide competition at a site that was also sensitive to function blocking αv integrin antibodies. a second, non-rgd-sensitive site of integrin-dependent cell-adhesion mapped to a more c-terminal portion of agrin, although both sites are contained within the c <dig> fragment  <cit> . the insensitivity of rat b <dig> neuroblastoma cells to rgd peptide competition in this study is interesting and may reflect a greater dependence in this cell type for adhesion to the more c-terminal domain of agrin. together, these results strongly suggest that adhesion to agrin is at least in part integrin dependent, and the absence of an ikvav or rgd peptide may indicate that the interaction is either indirect or mediated by a less-well defined domain. despite the lack of primary sequence homology, agrin and laminins do share many structural similarities, including egf-like repeats and laminin-type globular domains, found in the c-terminus of agrin.

the n-terminus of agrin and its heparan sulfate additions have been extensively studied for their role in stopping neurite outgrowth and promoting nerve terminal differentiation  <cit> . agrin has also been used in other biophysical studies in which its presentation was spatially restricted either by using microcontact printing to pattern substrates  <cit> , or microfluidics to restrict the point of agrin application  <cit> . these studies were designed to investigate the spatial properties of agrin signaling in synaptogenesis on muscle cells, an activity that maps to the c-terminal portion of the protein, which is not subject to glycosaminoglycan addition.

since agrin exists as both a matrix protein and a transmembrane protein in vivo, we felt it was particularly important to determine in which context cells are responding to it  <cit> . the extracellular matrix bound isoform is the active form for neuromuscular junction synaptogenesis  <cit> . however, agrin's role in the central nervous system, where the transmembrane isoform predominates, remains less clear. the loss of agrin effects synapse density in the brain, and through interactions with the k-na-atpase, is proposed to mediate activity dependent plasticity  <cit> . agrin also activates both c-fos and creb signaling in neurons  <cit> . given these disparate effects, it is difficult to know what in vitro assays may most accurately measure agrin's true function. we chose cell adhesion as a first attempt to examine how neurons respond to agrin, in part because this assay also allowed the comparison to well-known components of the extracellular matrix and to well-established transmembrane adhesion molecules, such as l <dig> and cadherins. it is interesting that even neurons respond to agrin more as cells respond to the ecm ligand rgd than as they do to the transmembrane proteins n-cadherin.

why is there a sharp threshold for adhesion to agrin and rgd, but not n-cadherin? first, we have to acknowledge that the comparison of agrin to one integrin-dependent matrix ligand and one homophilic transmembrane adhesion molecule is not exhaustive, but the consistencies and inconsistencies are noteworthy. our preferred explanation is that adhesion to agrin requires an intracellular signaling cascade, and the formation of an adhesion complex analogous  to that of integrin-mediated adhesion to rgd. the size of these complexes inside the cell may create a lower limit for spacing; presumably their effectiveness is reduced if the sites of adhesion are spaced more closely than the diameter of such a complex. this could explain the saturating effect seen at  <dig> and  <dig> nm spacing, which were similar to uniform coating. the threshold for decreasing adhesion would arise when the avidity of these complexes is no longer sufficient to cause adhesion, not through the lack of signal at an individual complex, but from the lack of sufficient cumulative signal from the array of adhesive sites. in contrast, the n-cadherin mediated adhesion may be more analogous to mechanical "stickiness" at the cell surface, where the force required to disrupt adhesion varies more linearly with the protein's density on the membrane. the absence of an intracellular cascade would eliminate the threshold, and as long as some of the protein is present there will be some amount of adhesion, with the upper limit being defined at the molecular scale and by the affinity of the interaction.

the affinity of the cellular receptors for the ligand may also contribute to the agrin threshold effect. if this is the case, it is interesting to note that integrins have a much lower affinity for rgd peptides than for full-length fibronectin  <cit> , yet large agrin fragments have an apparently similar threshold to rgd peptide. however, in considering affinity as an explanation, it is also important to consider the constraints of our system. each gold particle is bound with only one or sometimes two proteins, and this number should not change as the spacing changes  <cit> . therefore, at the molecular level, the number of ligands presented to a cell-surface receptor is not changed; it is the spacing between these sites of interaction this changes. this effectively decreases the density of potential attachment sites seen by a single cell by the square of the change in spacing, but does not change the molecular composition of an individual attachment site. therefore, avidity, and not classic receptor-ligand binding affinity, is the variable. a biophysical test of this would be to measure the force of cell adhesion as the spacing of agrin and n-cadherin is increased to confirm that our measures of adhesion co-vary with mechanical force.

the subtleties of cellular responses to agrin, such as the orientation of the protein, may have further implications for function. for instance, the anti-parallel presentation created by the n-terminal 6x his tag of c <dig> may more closely resemble membrane-to-membrane interactions or suggest an orientation of agrin within the meshwork of matrix that is optimal for cellular recognition and binding.

in considering molecular spacing, laminin polymers in a self-assembling meshwork form a polygon pattern with vertices separated by 30– <dig> nanometers, comparable to the 30– <dig> nanometer spacing of agrin-coated nanoparticles that conferred optimal cell adhesion. laminin polymerization also organizes other cell-surface proteins, including dystroglycan, another receptor interacting with the c-terminus of agrin  <cit> . thus our results appear to be in a physiologically relevant range of distances and the patterning of ecm-associated ligands with such spacing may actually provide a more physiological presentation. however, there are also limitations to the use of nanopatterned substrates. for instance, if cell adhesion depends on clustered adhesion molecules, the size of the gold-nanoparticles as well as their spacing would be expected to have a strong influence. also, if adhesion depends on a mix of proteins, either as homo-dimers or in multiprotein complexes, the stoichiometric presentation of the substrates would be more difficult to control.

an additional distinction between uniformly coated substrates and the nanopatterned substrates such as we have described is the thickness and rigidity of the substrate itself. homogeneous coating of glass with recombinant proteins applied at  <dig> μg/ml results in a film of protein that can be 100– <dig> nm thick . however, molecules directly anchored to the nanoparticles are presented in comparatively low copy number and the thickness of the surrounding peg-passivation can be controlled by polymer length. therefore, the nanopatterned substrates are presumably more rigid and more reproducible in their thickness and stiffness than homogeneous substrates. substrate rigidity has been shown to have a variety of effects on cell morphology, proliferation, and differentiation  <cit> . these effects may also be influencing the cellular response to homogeneous versus patterned substrates, particularly for parameters like cell motility.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented above are most consistent with cells adhering to agrin through mechanisms that more closely resemble interactions with the ecm and ligands such as rgd, than with transmembrane adhesion molecules such as n-cadherin, which we tested in parallel. these findings are of particular significance for agrin, which exists as both a secreted, ecm-bound protein and as a type- <dig> transmembrane protein. we were most interested in examining the adhesion properties of neurons, because the transmembrane form of agrin is the predominant isoform found in the central nervous system, but its function there remains unclear. therefore, it is interesting that neurons recognize agrin as though it was a matrix-presented ligand.

future experiments can take advantage of the nanopatterned presentation of molecules such as agrin to address additional questions of cell biology. for example, if agrin is presented in the proper orientation with  <dig> nm spacing in a grid  <dig> nm across, does it induce pre- or postsynaptic specializations in cultured neurons? such a focal, anchored presentation, which would approximate the point of contact between an outgrowing axon and its postsynaptic target, may cause very different effects than bath application of soluble agrin in the media. such an experiment may bridge the apparent gap in agrin's central function in nmj formation with its modest effects on synapse formation in the central nervous system. the results presented here not only establish the feasibility of such studies, they also provide mechanistic suggestions for how cells respond to agrin in comparison to other adhesion molecules.

