BACKGROUND
endogenous prion protein is known to play a central role in the pathogenesis of transmitted prion diseases  <cit> . the gene encoding the prion protein, prnp, has therefore been suggested as a candidate locus for disease susceptibility. in humans, mice and sheep, coding variants of prnp have been shown to have major effects on the susceptibility to and incubation time of such diseases  <cit> . however, no clear relationships between bovine prnp polymorphisms and susceptibility to bovine spongiform encephalopathy  have been revealed so far  <cit> . here we examine the effects of two insertion/deletion  polymorphisms that were tentatively associated with bse in a small case-control study  <cit> . both the 23-bp indel  <cit>  in the promoter region and the 12-bp indel  <cit>  in intron  <dig> affect binding sites for transcription factors , and thus might affect the expression of prnp  <cit> . we analysed both polymorphisms in bse-affected and control animals of four different populations: holstein-friesian cattle from the united kingdom  and germany , german brown and german fleckvieh.

RESULTS
single marker analyses
genotyping of both indel polymorphisms and χ <dig> testing revealed significant association of each polymorphism with the bse status in all populations except german fleckvieh. genotypes with deletion alleles and deletion alleles of both loci are generally overrepresented in the affected animals of all breeds . using fisher's combined probability test, highly significant associations between the deletion allele and the bse cases were found for both the 23-bp  and the 12-bp indel  over all populations. a combined logistic regression analysis involving all breeds also revealed highly significant associations between both indels and bse . modelling the genotype data shows that the bse risk tends to increase in line with the number of deletion alleles at both loci . heterozygous and homozygous carriers of the 12-bp deletion allele, when compared with non-carriers, have relatively higher risks of bse, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the different breeds. the corresponding population attributable risks  <cit> , i.e. the portion of the bse incidence in the population that is due to the risk allele , range from to  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

haplotype analyses
we performed haplotype analysis, to estimate the combined effect of both polymorphisms. strong linkage disequilibrium was present in all populations , with the most frequent haplotypes being 23del-12del, 23ins-12ins and 23del-12ins. haplotype 23ins-12del occurs in < 1% in all populations and was therefore excluded from further analyses. the χ <dig> test indicated significant deviations from the expected haplotype frequencies in cases and controls of all populations except german fleckvieh  and logistic regression modelling revealed significant contrasts in the ors. the 23del-12del haplotype is associated with an increased risk of bse incidence, whereas the 23ins-12ins haplotype seems to be protective. the effect of the 23del-12ins haplotype depends on the population, but it does not differ significantly from that of the 23ins-12ins reference haplotype in any population. additionally, the effect of the 23del-12del haplotype in the combined analysis is highly significantly different from that of the remaining major haplotypes .

diplotype analyses
we attempted to assess the risk of bse infection associated with each diplotype. five common diplotypes were found , with the sixth, 23del-12ins/23del-12ins, being relatively rare ; as such, it was excluded from further analyses. for german holstein control animals, the diplotypes were inferred from estimated haplotype frequencies . in both holstein populations, the 23del-12del/23del-12del diplotype is significantly overrepresented in affected animals as revealed by χ <dig> testing . significant association was also observed in the german brown breed, where the 23ins-12ins/23ins-12ins diplotype is highly overrepresented in the controls , and the 23del-12del/23ins-12ins diplotype occurs significantly more often in the cases . analysis over all populations indicates that the highest risk is conferred by the 23del-12del/23del-12del diplotype . figure  <dig> shows the diplotype conferred ors obtained from logistic regression analysis of the combined data, accounting for population effects, and the data of each individual population. the ors were calculated using the absolute risks averaged across all five diplotypes as reference in order to allow for a meaningful comparison of populations. the analyses of the individual populations and the combined analysis suggest that risk of bse in a population tends to increase in line with the number of deletion alleles at the 12-bp indel.

modelling the modes of allelic action and relative contribution of both polymorphisms
likelihood ratio tests were applied as proposed by north et al.  <cit>  to investigate both the modes of allelic action for both loci  and for possible epistatic effects . the results indicate that for the individual populations as well as for the combined analysis neither the inclusion of dominance effects nor inclusion of epistatic effects leads to a significantly better fit compared to a model that accounts for additive effects only. hence, likelihood ratio tests were performed to verify whether fitting an additive effect for either indel locus reduces the likelihood significantly compared to a full model that includes additive effects of both polymorphisms. this analysis revealed that exclusion of the 23-bp indel does not reduce the likelihood significantly in any of the individual populations or in the combined data. however, exclusion of the 12-bp indel polymorphism reduces the likelihood significantly in uk holstein  and in the combined analysis . thus, the main effect on bse susceptibility seems to result from the 12-bp indel. this is supported by the haplotype analysis, which showed that the effect of the 23del-12ins haplotype does not differ significantly from that of 23ins-12ins, whereas the 23del-12del haplotype is significantly associated with higher bse risk in the holstein populations and in german brown .

discussion
we found significant association between prnp promoter indel polymorphisms and the bse status in three cattle populations. the association is not significant in the german fleckvieh population. however, as in the other populations, the deletion alleles are overrepresented in bse-affected animals of german fleckvieh. furthermore, including the german fleckvieh population into the combined analyses leads to more significant overall association . thus, there is no reason to assume a fundamentally different situation in german fleckvieh with regard to the effect of the indel polymorphisms on bse susceptibility. haplotype analysis and likelihood ratio tests identified that the main effect on bse susceptibility is due to the 12-bp indel. although suggestive, our findings cannot directly verify a causal role for either or both indel polymorphisms in the aetiology of bse. the observed associations could result from another, genetic variant in linkage disequilibrium with the indel polymorphisms, although a functional role for these two polymorphisms is supported by their location in regulatory regions of prnp. in vitro analyses have shown that the 12-bp deletion disrupts binding of the sp <dig> transcription factor and in vivo and in vitro investigations suggest that the two polymorphisms affect prnp expression, albeit with the direction of the effects remaining to be clarified  <cit> . one could speculate that, all other factors being equal, susceptibility to bse might be reduced with a lowered expression of endogenous prion protein. elevated expression of the prion protein, in contrast, would result in more substrate for conversion into the pathogenic form and possibly higher bse susceptibility.

the calculated population attributable risks allow assessing the effect of the indel polymorphisms on the bse epidemic. for example, 53% and 35% of the holstein bse cases in uk and germany, respectively, can be explained by the 12-bp deletion allele . thus, if the uk holstein population had been fixed for the alternative 12-bp insertion allele , roughly  <dig>  bse cases would have occurred instead of the  <dig>  cases that were recorded. similarly, the number of cases in german holstein would have been reduced from  <dig> to about  <dig>  although the two populations have similar frequencies of the risk increasing deletion alleles, the bse-incidence is orders of magnitude smaller in the german than in the uk population, which is most likely explained by differences in environmental exposure, such as a generally less intensive use of meat and bone meal in ruminant nutrition in germany. thus, although the indel polymorphisms – and particularly the 12-bp indel – are associated with the bse risk, they are not the main risk factors. instead, the decisive factor is environmental: that is to say, whether or not an animal is sufficiently exposed to the infectious agent. eliminating or minimising exposure to the infectious agent should therefore be considered to be the primary measure to reduce bse incidence, even in the light of the strong genetic component of bse susceptibility as we report it here. however, selective breeding to reduce the frequency of the susceptibility alleles would still bring an additional protective component that should not be discounted.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we presented significant association between prnp promoter indel polymorphisms and the bse status in three of four investigated cattle populations . we conclude that the main effect on bse susceptibility seems to result from the 12-bp indel. the causality of either or both polymorphism cannot be verified in this study, however our data highlight that the  <dig> bp deletion allele is associated with increased risk for an animal to succumb to feed-borne bse . thus, our findings show a substantial genetic component for the susceptibility of cattle to bse, conferred by variants in the regulatory region of prnp, a gene that has been shown to be involved in prion disease susceptibility/resistance in other species. however, the different dimensions of the bse epidemic in uk and germany, on the one hand, and the similar frequencies of the prnp-associated susceptibility alleles in uk and german cattle, on the other, indicate, that the main bse risk factor for cattle is environmental, i.e. exposure to contaminated feed, and not genetic.

