BACKGROUND
a central stage at the protein structure modeling is to develop an effective energy function, also called potential or scoring function, which generally fall into two categories: physical-based and knowledge-based energy functions. physical-based energy functions are derived from the laws of physics, which often use molecular mechanics method  <cit> . whereas, knowledge-based energy functions are based on statistical analysis of experimentally determined protein structures, which provide an excellent shortcut towards a powerful energy function  <cit> . compared to physical-based energy functions, knowledge-based energy functions have become more and more popular in protein structure prediction due to the relatively easy generation and manipulation of model structures and the lower computational cost. this can be seen from recent casps , in which the most successful prediction methods use knowledge-based energy functions  <cit> . moreover, knowledge-based approaches have also been widely used in protein design  <cit> , validation of experimentally determined protein structures  <cit>  and protein-protein and protein-ligand interactions  <cit> .

knowledge-based energy functions can also be developed at different level of complexity depending on the level of structural details considered in the structural models. at the most detailed structural level, the knowledge-based energy functions require the structural information of all heavy atoms  <cit> . the all-atom knowledge-based energy functions can achieve good accuracy in structural analysis, but they typically incur intensive computation  <cit> . to reduce running time, many efforts have attempted to develop coarse-grained models with reduced structural representation  <cit> . the simplest coarse-grained model is to represent a residue as a point and thus a protein structure can be delineated as a simple cα-trace. the coarse-grained models at residue level indeed can significantly decrease the running time in structure modeling but they usually suffer unsatisfactory accuracy  <cit> .

to balance the accuracy and computational time, the intermediate models between the atom-level and residue-level representations have also been developed  <cit> . in these models, the side chains are considered, which are usually simplified as cβ atoms or the side chain center of mass. for example, in low resolution structure prediction, the rosetta of baker lab used a structural model represented by heavy main-chain atoms and pseudo side chain center of mass  <cit> . more recently, makino and itoh also developed a knowledge-based potential named dfmac that requires the coordinates of main-chain atoms  and pseudo cβ atom  <cit> . since the side chain conformations have been abstracted, these main-chain dependent models can achieve both relatively good accuracy and reasonable running time. although these energy models have showed high ability of structure discrimination on known decoy data sets, few have demonstrated success in structure modeling, especially in de novo structure prediction. this is because de novo structure prediction requires high-performance scoring function not only with high accuracy of structure discrimination at low computational expense, but also with a smooth energy landscape which goes beyond the ability to distinguish the known decoy data sets. for example, dfmac uses an orientation-dependent potential term between two cα-pseudo-cβ vectors. although the orientation-dependent potential showed a considerable improvement in distinguishing native structures and non-native  structures, it relies on strict geometry features which are difficult to be satisfied due to the inaccuracy of pseudo atoms. this could significantly affect its use in structural modeling. therefore, development of scoring functions for effective structure modeling still remains a challenging problem.

here we also attempt to develop an effective knowledge-based scoring function based on main-chain dependent coarse-grained model that only requires the main-chain atoms  coordinates per residue, which we called as ncaco-score. in developing ncaco-score, we considered an integration of four potential terms: contact-based pairwise atom-atom interactions, sequence-dependent local conformational propensities, solvation effects, and geometry propensities of pairwise triplet fragments on beta sheet. although the first three terms follow the same form of other knowledge-based scoring functions  <cit> , they are derived differently and carefully parameterized in the integration . moreover, we proposed a new potential term, the fourth term, to promote the formation of beta sheet during the structure modeling. the testing on  <dig> decoy sets from decoys'r'us database  <cit>  shows that ncaco-score outperforms other coarse-grained potentials in discriminating native structures from their decoy structures. remarkably, its average z-score is much lower than those other coarse-grained potentials, indicating that ncaco-score has a larger energy gap between the native state and nonnative ones. this suggests its potential and effectiveness in structure prediction  <cit> . furthermore, in an application of the scoring function to structure prediction using a simple fragment-based assembly procedure, we found that the structures modeled for the  <dig> hard targets of casp <dig> achieved comparable accuracy with those predicted by robetta  <cit> . the average running time of prediction for these targets was ~ <dig>  h of cpu time. this demonstrates the effectiveness of the ncaco-score in structure modeling. we believe that the scoring function could be very useful for protein structure modeling.

RESULTS
overview of ncaco-score
in ncaco-score, we consider two levels of coarse-grained structure representations. one is a five-bead model, in which a residue is represented as four main-chain atoms  and a pseudo side chain center of mass . the pseudo side chain center of mass  was determined according to the φ/ψ backbone torsion angles of the residue. we use the five-bead model to derive pairwise atom-atom contact potential  and sequence-dependent local conformational potential . the other is a residue-level structure representation requiring cα coordinates only. we use the residue-level model to derive solvation potential  and beta sheet geometry propensity potential . therefore, our ncaco-score integrates the above four terms:   

the potential components considered in ncaco-score could reflect different aspects of protein folding principle. econ stands for the mean interaction potential between two atoms, which reflects the compatibility of the whole protein structure. this potential is the most widely used term in knowledge-based scoring function, and is even used alone in some pioneers' work  <cit> . etrp reflects the local conformational biases of secondary structure, which is local-sequence dependent. esol stands for the solvation energy of protein, which reflects the hydrophobic effect of protein folding. we used a simple model based on cα atom to derive the solvation energy by following makino and itoh's method  <cit> . to promote the formation of beta sheet, we introduced ebeta to capture the geometrical features of beta sheet at residue level. the details of these four terms and their integration are described in methods. although it's difficult to construct orthogonal potential components for knowledge-based scoring function, we will show below that the integration of these four terms indeed improves structure discrimination ability, enabling us to develop an effective knowledge-based scoring function.

assessment of structure discrimination ability of ncaco-score and its individual terms
to gain insights into how well ncaco-score and its individual components discriminate native structures from non-native structures , we looked into their performance of structure discrimination on the decoys'r'us sets.  <dig> proteins from five decoy sets were selected: 1) 4state_reduced , 2) fisa , 3) fisa_casp <dig> , 4) lmds , and 5) lattice_ssfit .

a the decoy structures with broken backbone or missing fragments were removed from our test.

b the rank of native structure relative to decoy structures based on the calculated respective energies.

c the z-score of native structure in the decoy structures.

d ebeta is not evaluated due to no beta sheet in the protein.

for individual terms, etrp had the best performance, which ranked the first  <dig> of  <dig> native structures with average z-score of - <dig> , indicating that it contributed the most to ncaco-score. although econ and esol overall had lower ability of structure discrimination compared to etrp, they outperformed etrp in the fisa set. ebeta, which is designed to capture the structural feature of beta sheet, indeed showed a good performance for most proteins containing beta sheet .

from above, we can see that the performance of ncaco-score largely relies on the individual term etrp. therefore, the extremely poor performance of etrp in discriminating the native and decoy structures of four proteins  could significantly affect the performance of ncaco-score in these four proteins. however, econ and esol have better structure discrimination than etrp in these four proteins. as shown in table  <dig>  the integration of these two terms improves the performance ncaco-score, particularly for 1hdd-c in fisa set and 1fc <dig> in lmds set, in which integrated ncaco-score significantly outperforms etrp. this suggests the necessity of the integration of these different terms in developing an effective scoring function.

the decoy discrimination ability of ncaco-score was also rigorously evaluated using 4-fold cross-validations on the decoys'r'us sets . as seen from the results of cross-validations, ncaco-score performed nearly equally well in both training sets and testing sets not only for the average rank of native structures  but also for the z-score of native structures . the close performance of our model in training sets and testing sets suggests the robustness and reliability of our model.

a good energy function should be able to discriminate native structure from near-native decoys  <cit> . however, decoys'r'us sets are not suitable for this test, because most of the decoys are far from native structures. therefore, we further generated a new near-native decoy set by fragment replacement method . this data set consists of  <dig> proteins with decoys of tm-scores between  <dig>  and  <dig>  compared to the native structure . when ncaco-score was tested on this data set, the average pearson correlation coefficient between energy and crmsd for the  <dig> proteins was  <dig>  , demonstrating the reliability of ncaco-score in discrimination of near native structures.

comparison with other knowledge-based scoring functions
we compared the performance of ncaco-score on the  <dig> decoys'r'us sets with  <dig> state-of-the-art knowledge-based scoring functions: rapdf  <cit> , atomic kbp  <cit> , dfire-a  <cit> , dfire-b  <cit> , pc2ca  <cit> , and dfmac  <cit> . table  <dig> shows comparison of the ranks and z-scores of the native structures. rapdf, atomic kbp, and dfire-a need coordinates of all heavy atoms of main chain and side chain. dfire-b needs information of main chain and cβ. pc2ca needs information of cα and cβ. dfmac needs information of the main-chain atoms . like dfmac, our scoring function ncaco-score needs coordinates of the main-chain atoms . the comparison results showed ncaco-score had the best discrimination performance on the  <dig> proteins in terms of both the average rank and the average z-score. among the four functions which used coarse-grained model , ncaco-score had the lowest average z-score , followed by dfmac , pc2ca  and dfire-b . for the average rank of native structure, ncaco-score also gave the best rank , followed by pc2ca  dfire-b  and dfmac .

a the decoy structures with broken backbone or missing fragments were removed from our test.

b the rank of native structure relative to decoy structures based on the calculated respective energies.

c the z-score of native structure in the decoy structures.

d the pearson correlation coefficient between energy and crmsd.

for individual proteins, all the  <dig> functions showed similar trends with regard to their structure discriminating abilities. for example, they all discriminated 4state_reduced and lattice_ssfit sets with ease but were difficult to discriminate same proteins . this phenomenon has been mentioned by other researchers before  <cit> . zhou speculated that the failure of the scoring functions in 1bba could be that it was an atypical small protein without a significant hydrophobic core  <cit> .

application to de novo protein structure prediction
next, we sought to explore the performance of ncaco-score in structure modeling. based on fragment assembly with three-residue fragments, we implemented a de novo structure prediction method that uses ncaco-score to guide the fragment assembly process . to promote the formation of correct beta sheet, and prevent the formation of wrong beta sheet, the weight of ebeta was changed periodically according to a sine function during the fragment assembly procedure. in order to avoid the excessive collisions between atoms during the assembly process, a simple energy term for punishing collision was added to the ncaco-score. the procedure iterated three times, and the predicted structures from the previous iteration were used as the initial structures of the next iteration.

to compare our prediction method with robetta, one of the best existing protein structure prediction servers, we tested  <dig> casp <dig> hard targets, on which robetta used template-free modeling method. for each target,  <dig> structure models were generated in our method, then clustered and  <dig> top models were selected by a centroid-based clustering. table  <dig> shows the accuracies of the top  <dig> models predicted by our method by comparing to the models that robetta predicted in casp <dig> which are available at the robetta web site. as shown in the table, our method had average prediction accuracy of tm-score  <dig> , comparable to that by robetta .

although both our structure predictor and robetta are based on fragment assembly, they have significantly different performance on modeling the structures. for example, for t0496-d <dig>  our method correctly predicted its overall topology except for the coil part of its n-terminal  , which is much better than robetta prediction . for the  <dig> targets, the pearson's correlation coefficient between tm-scores of our predicted structures and those of robetta-predicted structures is very low . the complementarity between the two methods underscores the importance of our work on the development of ncaco-score for structure modeling. moreover, our method guided by ncaco-score has a moderate computational cost. for the  <dig> targets, the average cpu time was ~ <dig>  h on a  <dig>  ghz intel xeon processor.

discussion
in this study, we have developed a knowledge-based scoring function named ncaco-score. ncaco-score integrates four different aspects of statistical structural features based on two coarse-grained models that only require coordinates of the heavy atoms of main-chain and pseudo side chain center of mass. we have demonstrated that ncaco-score can effectively discriminate native structures from their decoys, with a performance comparable to or even better than other state-of-the-art coarse-grained or all-atom knowledge-based statistical scoring functions. moreover, ncaco-score can be used to guide fragment assembly for fast structure prediction, which can achieve a comparable accuracy to robetta, one of the best structure modellers of similar kind.

in developing knowledge-based scoring functions, orientation-dependent structural features have been widely used  <cit> . for examples, dfmac uses an orientation-dependent potential term between two cα-pseudo-cβ vectors  <cit> , and in opus-cα, the distance-dependent pairwise energy term and hydrogen bonding energy term are also orientation-dependent  <cit> . these orientation-dependent potentials are sensitive to geometrical features, causing the energy to be truncated abruptly at the cutoff. therefore, these orientation-dependent potentials could have very rough energy landscape, which limit their applications to structural modeling. in ncaco-score, we exclude the orientation-dependent potentials that are sensitive to geometrical features, and only the coordinates of the heavy atoms of main-chain and pseudo side chain center of mass are needed, greatly simplifying structure representation without need to scan the side chain conformations. moreover, unlike the directional hydrogen-bonding potentials for capturing the interaction of beta sheet, which depend on critical geometrical constraints for atoms, the novel term we developed to capture beta sheet was based on the propensity of geometrical features between beta-strand parings. as the geometrical features are defined at cα level in our model, the potential is less sensitive than typical directional hydrogen-bonding potential. we have shown that the novel beta sheet geometry propensity potential indeed had a good discrimination power for most proteins containing beta sheet.

many potential terms were proposed and could be included in an effective knowledge-based scoring function. for example, wu et al. added packing energy and three-body energy in their opus-cα potential  <cit> , makino and itoh added the potential of ω dihedral angle in their dfmac potential  <cit> , and fogolari et.al. added pseudo bond/angle/dihedral potentials in their pc2ca potential  <cit> . these potential terms are proved effective more or less in structure discrimination, which will be attempted in ncaco-score in our future work. the inclusion of more potential terms could improve the performance of structure discrimination, but this could render the energy landscape too rough and cause overfitting  <cit> . in developing ncaco-score, we have only considered four terms that reflect different aspects of protein folding principles. indeed, integration of these four terms improves the performance of ncaco-score, although etrp makes a dominant contribution.

CONCLUSIONS
ncaco-score is a knowledge-based scoring function that integrates four statistical structural features to effectively discriminate native structures from their decoys. successful application of ncaco-score to structure modeling shows that ncaco-score could be a useful tool for structure modeling.

