BACKGROUND
circadian  clocks enable organisms to adapt to ambient environmental conditions by coupling behavioral and physiological events to cyclic factors in the environment  <cit> . timing of such events functions towards maximizing organism's potential to survive under fluctuating environmental conditions, suggesting a role of circadian clocks in the regulation of life history traits  <cit> . circadian clocks have been implicated in the regulation of pre-adult development time and adult life span in a few insect species including fruit flies drosophila melanogaster. faster clocks are believed to speed up development and shorten life span, while slower clocks are thought to slow down development and lengthen life span  <cit> . for example, in a study on the period  mutants of drosophila, it was shown that the pers flies  of ~ <dig> hr) develop faster than the wild type flies , while the wild type flies develop faster than the perl flies   <cit> . similarly, in a study on the melon flies bactrocera cucurbitae, where faster and slower developing lines were created through laboratory selection, it was shown that the τ of eclosion rhythm of the faster developing line was shorter  than that of the slower developing line   <cit> .

in drosophila, the timing of adult emergence depends upon the developmental state of the flies, the phase and the period of their developmental clocks, and upon the ambient environmental condition  <cit> . consequently, certain times of the day form a "forbidden zone" for emergence, while a narrow window of time constitutes the "allowed zone" or "gate" of emergence  <cit> . it is believed that a continuously consulted circadian clock "reads" the developmental state of the flies, and only those that are mature enough to emerge during the gate are allowed to emerge, while others are made to wait until the next gate opens.

under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles, the adult emergence in drosophila like many other insects, follows a bimodal pattern; most flies emerge at dawn, while a small fraction of them emerge during the dusk with little or no emergence for the rest of the day  <cit> . such patterns of emergence have been previously used to derive the "early" and "late" strains of d. pseudoobscura  <cit> , pectinophora gossypiella  <cit>  and d. melanogaster  <cit> . these strains were derived by selecting for flies that emerged during the morning  and the evening  hours under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles. as a result, the peak of emergence in the early and the late strains diverge from the parental strains, and the selected strains show a correlated change in the τ of their emergence rhythm in dd. although, the peak as well as the τ of the emergence rhythm diverged among the selected strains, their light-induced phase responses curve  remain strikingly similar. the authors interpreted their results in the light of a "master-slave oscillator" model. they argued that the differences in the phase and the period of the emergence rhythm of the early and late strains were not due to altered circadian pacemakers, but due to altered coupling between the master  and slave oscillators underlying eclosion rhythm. although, it is possible to obtain phase separation of the emergence peaks through altered coupling between the constituent oscillators, it is hard to imagine how similar circadian pacemakers can generate oscillations with widely different period. previous studies on the early and the late strains of drosophila were mainly aimed at studying the response of selection on the circadian phenotypes, and therefore correlated changes in the life history traits were never examined. given that the early and late populations differ from each other as well as the controls in terms of their circadian phenotypes, it would be interesting to investigate the consequence of selection on the timing of adult emergence on the rate of pre-adult development.

part of the problem in drawing meaningful conclusion from previous selection studies on the early and late emergence is the lack of sufficient description of the starting population, population size, experimental condition and selection strategy. in addition, in most previous studies the unit of replication used was individual not population, which makes it difficult to rule out the possibility that the divergence in the emergence patterns in the selected strains was not due to inbreeding and/or random genetic drift. individuals live, reproduce and die, and as a consequence of heritable differences in reproductive output among individuals, populations evolve. therefore, the unit of replication in any study addressing evolutionary question should be population not individuals, as it is the genetic composition of a population that changes over time in an adaptive manner.

in this paper, we report the results of our experiments designed to study the effect of selection for the timing of adult emergence on the rate of pre-adult development in fruit flies d. melanogaster. four population each of early, control and late were derived from four large, outbred, random mating drosophila populations, which were reared under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles for several generations  <cit> . after  <dig> generations, the pre-adult development time of the selected and the control populations was assayed under ld and dd conditions. further, in order to investigate the effect of timing of egg collection and experimental conditions on the rate of pre-adult development, the development time was assayed under constant bright light , ld and dd conditions by collecting eggs from the selected and control flies during the morning  and the evening  hours. the results of these experiments are expected to provide an estimate of the intrinsic rate of pre-adult development in the presence and absence of circadian gating. for example, in dd, the pre-adult development time is known to be governed by circadian gate   <cit> , while in ll condition circadian gating is completely abolished, and therefore time taken by the flies to complete pre-adult development in ll would solely depend upon the intrinsic rate of development. the results provide interesting insights into the link between circadian rhythms and pre-adult developmental time in fruit flies d. melanogaster.

RESULTS
experiment 1
we derived three sets of drosophila populations by imposing selection for timing of adult emergence on four baseline populations which were maintained for several generations under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles. each set consists of four matched pairs of populations derived from the parental baseline populations . after  <dig> generations of selection, the pre-adult development time of the males and females was estimated under ld and dd conditions. females from all three sets of populations develop faster than the males, and flies take longer to develop under dd than ld . under ld as well as dd, the early populations develop faster than the controls, while the late populations develop slower than the controls .

mean  development time of males  and females  from the selected and control populations under light/dark  and constant dark  conditions. pre-adult development time of a fly  was calculated as the time interval between the midpoint of egg collection window and the midpoint of the  <dig> hr period during which the fly emerged as adult.

a composite mixed model analysis of variance  on the mean development time data revealed a significant main effect of population , light regime , and sex  . post-hoc comparisons using 95% confidence interval  around the mean revealed that the development time is significantly shorter under ld than dd, and the mean development time of the females is significantly shorter than the males . post-hoc multiple comparisons using 95%ci revealed that the development time of the early populations is significantly shorter than the controls, while that of the late populations is significantly longer than the controls . further, the effect of population × light regime, population × sex, light regime × sex, and population × light regime × sex interactions are not statistically significant , which suggests that the relative differences between the development time of the males and females of the three populations remain comparable under ld and dd regimes.

results of analysis of variance  on the development time data obtained from the assays done under light/dark  and constant dark  conditions. in the anova design, population , light regime  and sex  were used as fixed factors, whereas replicate or block  was used as random factor. in all cases the replicate means were used as the unit of analysis and hence, only the fixed factor could be tested for significance. statistically significant values  are shown in bold.

the profiles of the adult emergence indicate that the developmental rates of the selected populations have diverged from each other as well as from the controls . although, the differences between the development rates of the early, control and late populations appear to be consistent across both ld and dd, they did not reach statistical levels of significance in a kolmogorov-smirnov test for two samples.

experiment 2
to investigate the effect of phase of egg collection and assay light regimes on the pre-adult development time, we assayed the development time of the early, control and late populations under ll, ld, and dd. this was done under 12: <dig> hr ld cycles by collecting eggs from the selected as well as control populations in a  <dig> hr window during the morning and evening hours. the development time of the early populations is essentially indistinguishable from the controls under all light regimes except dd, nevertheless, the late populations clearly take several hours longer to develop than the early and controls .

mean  development time of males  and females  from the selected and control populations under constant light , light/dark  and constant dark  conditions. the eggs were collected in a  <dig> hr window during the morning  and the evening hours . pre-adult development time  was calculated as the time interval between the midpoint of egg collection windows and the midpoint of the  <dig> hr period during which the fly emerged as adult.

a composite mixed model analysis of variance  on the mean development time data revealed a significant main effect of population , light regime , sex , and egg collection window  . post-hoc multiple comparisons using newman-keuls test revealed that the development time is shortest under ll, followed by ld and dd, in that order . the development time of females is significantly shorter than the males. multiple comparisons also revealed that, irrespective of the time of egg collection and assay light conditions, the development time of the late flies is significantly longer than the early and controls . the development time of the early and controls is comparable under all light regimes except dd, where the early flies develop significantly faster than the controls.

results of analysis of variance  on the development time data obtained from the assays done under constant light , light/dark  and constant dark  conditions. in the anova design, population , light regime , sex  and window of egg collection  were used as fixed factors. statistically significant values  are shown in bold.

discussion
in an earlier study on the same populations, we had shown that after  <dig> generations of selection on the timing of adult emergence the peak of emergence of the early and late populations diverged by about 4– <dig> hr, which suggests that d. melanogaster populations respond to selection by evolving different timing for their emergence behaviour . in the present study, we show that the early populations develop significantly faster than the controls, while the late populations develop significantly slower than the controls, which suggests that the pre-adult development time of the selected populations is altered as a correlated response to selection on the timing of adult emergence. consistent divergence in the rates of pre-adult development among four sets of replicate populations, which were treated through one generation of common rearing condition, clearly implies selection as the cause, as it is unlikely that all four replicate populations would simultaneously undergo similar sequence of genetic changes through random genetic drift.

under ld cycles, the difference between the mean development time of the early and late populations closely matches the phase separation between the peaks of their emergence rhythm , thus suggesting that the "favourable phase" of emergence coincides with the "appropriate development state" of the flies to produce gated emergence. these results are in good agreement with the findings of an earlier study by qiu and hardin  <cit> . in this study, the short period mutants  of drosophila were found to develop faster than the wild type flies, because the pers mutants encountered a favorable gate of emergence much earlier than the wild type flies  <cit> . this is also consistent with the fact that the emergence peak of the pers flies precedes lights-on, whereas that of wild type flies follows lights-on  <cit> . these studies thus suggest that, the development time of drosophila depends upon the developmental state of the flies, their developmental clocks, and the timing of lights-on/lights-off in a ld cycle  <cit> .

in a separate set of experiments when we assayed the development time of the flies under ll, ld and dd conditions by collecting eggs at two different times of the day, the values of the development time of the early, control and late flies changed marginally. however, irrespective of the time of egg collection and assay light conditions, the late flies continue to develop slower than the early and controls. although, in this experiment the development time of the early populations is essentially indistinguishable from the unselected controls, under all regimes except dd – a different result from the experiment  <dig>  in which the early populations develop significantly faster than the controls in both ld and dd, the late populations clearly take several hours longer to develop than the early and controls – consistent with a developmental delay rather than merely an effect of circadian gating. these results thus circumvent any influence of phase of the ld cycle, and/or circadian gating on the rate of pre-adult development in the early, control and late flies. it is particularly interesting to note that the relative differences between the developmental rates of the early and late flies are maintained even under bright ll, where circadian gating is clearly abolished . this completely rules out the possibility that the observed differences in the rates of pre-adult development among the early, control and late populations are due to circadian gating. taken together the results of our experiments suggest that the early and late populations have evolved different rates of pre-adult development as a consequence of selection on the timing of adult emergence, and that similar genetic changes may underlie the timing of adult emergence and pre-adult development time in d. melanogaster.

given the fact that circadian clocks have no measurable effect on the rate of pre-adult development in the early, control and late populations, our study further suggests that the connection between circadian clocks and development time may not be causal, but could be mediated through pleiotropic effects of clock genes on circadian rhythm and pre-adult development time. pleiotropic effects are not entirely uncommon in drosophila circadian literature, as they were reported in an earlier study on the per mutants  <cit> . in this study, the development time and the circadian period were found to be positively correlated; the pers flies developed faster than the wild type flies, and the perl flies developed slower than their wild type counterparts. changing environmental conditions , ld 12: <dig> hr and ld 12: <dig> hr with superimposed temperature cycles) did not alter the nature of the correlation, and short and long period flies continued to develop faster and slower than the wild type flies. pleiotropic effects of the clock genes were also implicated in previous studies that involved selection for faster and slower pre-adult development in the melon fly bactrocera cucurbitae  <cit> . in these studies, the development time was found to be positively correlated with the time of mating and circadian period. the circadian period of faster developing line was shorter  than the slower developing line , and mating in the faster developing line occurred earlier than the slower developing line  <cit> .

in a separate study, designed to bypass the pleiotropic effects of clock genes, the pre-adult development time of four populations of drosophila was assayed under different ld cycles in conjunction with the adult emergence rhythm  <cit> . in this study, the eclosion rhythm was speeded up or slowed down using short  or long  ld cycles  <cit> . as a consequence, the development time of the flies was either shortened or lengthened compared to those observed under  <dig> hr ld cycles, suggesting that periodicity of the ld cycles, and/or circadian rhythm regulates the rate of pre-adult development in drosophila.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of our study clearly demonstrate that selection for early and late emergence alters the timing of emergence peak, and causes an associated change in the rate of pre-adult development, suggesting a genetic correlation between the timing of adult emergence and pre-adult development time in d. melanogaster. although, distinct genetic changes causing parallel changes in the timing of adult emergence and the rate of development, as a result of imposed selection can not be ruled out without a determination of the genetic changes leading to both phenotypes, it is likely that similar genetic changes underlie both phenotypes. nonetheless, it is also possible that complex and less understood interactions of a number of factors such as available gate of emergence, circadian period, assessment of developmental state, ambient light intensity, temperature, and humidly, regulate key life history traits such as pre-adult development time in drosophila.

