BACKGROUND
brucella is the etiologic agent of brucellosis, a worldwide zoonosis that affects a broad range of mammals, including humans  <cit> . brucella is considered as a facultative intracellular pathogen that enters various cell types during the infection process, including macrophages and epithelial cells, and ultimately survives and multiplies inside these cells  <cit> . after internalization, intracellular brucella resides within a vacuole  that interacts with early endosomes  <cit>  and then transiently acquire markers of late endosomes such as lamp <dig>  in epithelial cells and macrophages, non-opsonized bacteria replicate finally in a compartment characterized by the presence of endoplasmic reticulum  markers  <cit> .

the mechanisms used by brucella to sense and respond to changes within the intracellular environment are poorly understood. brucella spp. seem well adapted to cope with nutritional  <cit>  and various physicochemical stresses encountered in non-professional and especially professional phagocytes  <cit> . for example, brucella spp. are adapted to oxidative and nitrosative stresses  <cit>  that have been shown to affect genome integrity in other bacterial species. in  <dig>  köhler et al. identified an attenuated mutant with a mini-transposon in the aidb gene, proposed to encode an acyl-coa dehydrogenase homolog  <cit> . in escherichia coli, aidb protein takes part of the adaptative response to alkylating agents that could damage the genome  <cit> , suggesting that aidb homolog could play a similar role in b. abortus. moreover, a brucella melitensis mutant in the alka gene was found to be attenuated in mice . the alka gene is homologous to e. coli alka, another gene involved in the adaptative response to alkylating stress  <cit> . in summary, these data suggests that dna alkylation repair systems could play a role in intracellular persistence, possibly by preventing dna damage that might be induced by alkylating agents, either produced from endogenous sources  <cit>  or induced by the host during the infection process.

here we report that while screening brucella orfeome for polar proteins in brucella abortus, aidb was found to localize at the new pole, as well as at the constriction site in dividing cells. this pattern of localization is maintained in b. abortus infecting epithelial cells and macrophages at different times post-infection. analysis of an aidb mutant revealed on one hand no effect on virulence, and on the other hand that the aidb mutant was more sensitive to the alkylating agent methanesulfonic acid ethyl ester , suggesting a function of aidb in the defence against dna methylation damage. while ems was found to block cell cycle before cell constriction, a b. abortus strain overexpressing aidb was found to generate multipolar morphologies, suggesting a link between the response to alkylating agents and cell growth and/or division.

RESULTS
screen for polarly localized proteins in brucella abortus
to identify polar proteins at the genomic scale, we took advantage of the brucella melitensis orfeome  <cit> , a collection of all predicted coding sequences  from b. melitensis genome cloned in a donor vector  allowing the gateway recombinational cloning. the resulting ~ <dig> entry clones are physically organized in 96-well plates , each well containing one entry clone . for some large-scale experiments, the brucella orfeome is also organized in  <dig> pools  <cit> , each pool being a mix of clones from one half-plate of the original orfeome. each of the  <dig> pools was used to transfer the pcdss in a destination vector allowing pcds-yfp fusions under the control of e. coli lac promoter, on a low copy number plasmid. more than  <dig> transformants  were generated for each cloned pool of pcdss. the pools of constructions were transformed into e. coli strain s17- <dig>  and were transferred in a brucella abortus xdb <dig> strain  <cit>  by mating. the xdb <dig> strain produces the pdhs-cfp  fusion protein from the chromosomal pdhs locus. this strain allows the quick determination of the nature of the pole marked by the protein-yfp fusion since pdhs-cfp is known to specifically label the old pole  <cit> . the diversity of the pcdss in the pools was checked by pcr and restriction analysis on isolated clones from  <dig> different pools with various average pcdss sizes, in e. coli s17- <dig> and b. abortus xdb <dig> strains. the analysis of restriction profiles suggests that there is no main over-representation of a given clone in the examined pools.

for the screening strategy, we observed the  <dig> pools using fluorescence microscopy, and we selected pools in which a fraction of the clones exhibit a polar yfp fusion. the pooled clones were examined after cultivation on solid medium and >  <dig> bacteria were observed on agarose pads. afterwards, pools bearing polar localization were observed clone by clone in the same way to identify clones producing polar proteins. the pcds allowing polar localization were amplified by pcr and sequenced to allow their identification.

before analysing the  <dig> pools, we first screened a pool supposed to contain the pdhs coding sequence , as a positive control. the complete procedure was applied and six clones were identified as polarly localized, and all of them contained the pdhs cds fused to yfp. this pilot study suggested that the screening procedure was working, and that pdhs was the main polar protein in this pool. the analysis of the  <dig> remaining pools led to the selection of  <dig> pools for which a significant proportion of bacteria showed polar foci. the average size of the pcdss contained in the  <dig> pools was heterogeneous, varying from  <dig> to  <dig> bp. in one of these  <dig> pools, we identified a pcds of interest , that we named aidb by homology with e. coli aidb.

brucella aidb is member of the acyl-coa dehydrogenase family
deduced aidb sequence is  <dig> amino acids long, with a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kda and without predicted transmembrane segments. the aidb sequence is similar to acyl-coa dehydrogenases , proteins generally involved in the fatty acid β-oxidation. in the b. melitensis 16m genome, eight pcdss are proposed to encode enzymes similar to acads. b. melitensis and b. abortus aidb deduced sequences are 100% identical. brucella aidb presents 42% identity to the escherichia coli aidb , suggesting a functional conservation between these enzymes. this is further supported  by the conservation of the glu-gly catalytic pair at positions  <dig> and  <dig> ,  by the conservation of  <dig> of the  <dig> residues involved in fad binding, the non-conserved residue being a ser residue replaced by a thr at position  <dig> of b. abortus aidb, and  the similarity of the regions involved in the formation of the tetrameric structure of e. coli aidb . moreover, a specific feature of e. coli aidb, compared to other members of the acads family, is the presence of a trp <dig> residue, involved in the shaping of the substrate-binding pocket. this residue is conserved in b. abortus aidb . altogether, these data suggest that b. abortus aidb could play a similar role as e. coli aidb, except that the region of e. coli aidb involved in dna binding , is not conserved in b. abortus aidb. this suggests that b. abortus aidb could be unable to bind dna, or would bind a very different sequence. indeed, in e. coli aidb is a multifunctional protein proposed to be involved in the destruction of alkylating agents before they reach dna  <cit>  and in the transcriptional control of the aidb promoter  <cit> . it is thus possible that only the enzymatic activity of aidb is conserved in b. abortus, and not its ability to bind a specific dna sequence in the aidb promoter. in e. coli, exposition to alkylating agents stimulates expression of aidb, ada, alka and alkb genes  <cit> , ada, alka and alkb proteins being actively involved in the repair of alkylated dna  <cit> . ada, alka and alkb homologs are found in the brucella genomes , suggesting that these bacteria are able to resist to an alkylation stress.

the aidb mutation leads to increased sensitivity to the dna-alkylating agent ems
to investigate the putative function of b. abortus aidb protein, we tested the effect of the aidb mutation on the survival during an alkylating stress. a b. abortus  <dig> strain with a disrupted aidb gene was constructed . an aidb overexpression strain was constructed by inserting a medium-copy plasmid  bearing the aidb coding sequence in b. abortus, generating the xdb <dig> strain. the disruption and overexpression strains  were analyzed for their sensitivity to the alkylating agent ems. in summary, the parental strain, the disruption strain , the overexpression strain  and the complemented strain  were incubated in 2yt medium with  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> % ems for  <dig> h at 37°c. the alkylating agent was then removed, and serial dilutions of the cultures were plated on 2yt agar. the number of colony forming units  was determined and the percentage of survival after treatment was expressed by comparison to a culture of these different strains without ems. a representative result is shown in figure  <dig>  after exposure to ems , the disruption strain  was more sensitive than the parental strain and the disruption strain complemented with a low copy plasmid carrying the aidb-yfp fusion . this data was confirmed by reconstructing three independent b. abortus aidb mutants that were more sensitive than the wild-type strain to the presence of  <dig> % ems for  <dig> h. indeed, we observed  <dig> % ±  <dig>  survival for the aidb mutants , compared to 62% survival for the wild-type strain. this phenotype was complemented for the three strains, since we observed  <dig> % ±  <dig>  survival after  <dig> h in  <dig> % ems for the three aidb mutants complemented with the pdd <dig> plasmid . in order to confirm that aidb mutant was more sensitive to alkylating agents and not just ems, we also tested the sensitivity of the aidb mutant and wild type strain to methyl methanesulfonate , another alkylating agent. after  <dig> h of incubation with  <dig> % mms in rich medium, 45% of survival was obtained for the wild type strain, while only  <dig> % of the aidb mutants survived, according to c.f.u. counting. altogether, these experiments indicate that the b. abortus aidb gene is probably involved in the repair or the prevention of alkylation damage, as suggested by its homology with e. coli aidb. it also indicates that aidb remains active when it is fused to yfp.

aidb-yfp is localized at the new pole, and at the constriction site in dividing cells
the localization of the aidb-yfp fusion protein was analyzed in a b. abortus strain carrying a chromosomal pdhs-mcherry fusion  during the exponential growth phase in liquid cultures, in rich medium . in these conditions, the localization of the aidb-yfp fusion protein displayed three patterns, depending on the presence or the absence of a constriction site. in bacteria without detectable constriction, aidb-yfp localized at the new pole and pdhs-mcherry at the old pole in 66% of the bacteria , with 34% of bacteria labelled only with polar aidb-yfp and not pdhs-mcherry. in the bacteria displaying a constriction site, 65%  displayed a single aidb-yfp focus at the constriction site, while the remaining 35% have two foci of aidb-yfp, one at the "young" pole and one at the constriction site. here we define a "young" pole as a new pole that is becoming old, because bacteria show a detectable constriction, meaning that there is uncertainty about the completion of cytokinesis, and therefore uncertainty about the status of this pole . we never observed the pdhs-mcherry and aidb-yfp fusions at the same pole  . western blots analysis using an anti-gfp antibody on this strain suggested that aidb-yfp fusion was stable when it was produced from the low-copy plasmid pdd <dig> . as proposed in the model depicted in the discussion, the cells labelled with polar aidb-yfp without polar pdhs-mcherry could correspond to bacteria produced by division of cells carrying pdhs-mcherry at the old pole and aidb-yfp at the constriction site. indeed, after cell division, one of the two cells does not inherit pdhs-mcherry from the mother cell, but aidb-yfp at the constriction site is proposed to be transmitted to the new pole of this daughter cell.

interestingly, the cells harbouring the two aidb-yfp foci are significantly  smaller  than the bacteria having a single focus of aidb-yfp at the constriction site , suggesting that in the cell cycle, bacteria with  <dig> foci precede those with a single focus at the constriction site . this feature of the cell cycle is depicted in the discussion.

furthermore, the localization of aidb-yfp is still at the new pole after  <dig> h of exposure with  <dig> % ems . this observation indicated that aidb-yfp is not released from the new pole in the presence of an alkylating stress with ems, further suggesting that aidb is active at the new pole, because in these conditions an aidb mutant is killed. interestingly, bacteria exposed to ems displayed detectable constriction at the much less frequency  compared to the untreated control . moreover, bacteria treated with  <dig> % ems for  <dig> h and were significantly  longer on average than unconstricted bacteria that were not exposed to ems . this suggests that growth is not arrested by the presence of ems, while constriction is clearly inhibited. this is consistent with a replication arrest caused by alkylation of the bacterial genome, as previously reported for e. coli  <cit> .

aidb polar localization persists inside host cells
b. abortus is an intracellular pathogen that encounters various stresses during its life cycle  <cit> . since these stresses could result in the alkylation of dna, e.g. through nitrosative stress  <cit> , we tested the localization pattern of aidb-yfp in b. abortus  during an infection of human epithelial cells . at  <dig> h and  <dig> h post-infection, infected cells were fixed, and bacteria were detected using a monoclonal anti-lipopolysaccharide antibody. the polar foci of aidb-yfp were similar to those observed in bacteriological culture, suggesting that in these conditions, there is no systematic delocalization of aidb-yfp. similar results were also obtained with xdb <dig> strain in raw <dig>  macrophage infection. at  <dig> h,  <dig> h,  <dig> h and  <dig> h post-infection, aidb-yfp fusion proteins were still polar .

morphological analysis of aidb disruption and overexpression mutants
since aidb-yfp is mainly polar, we tested whether either a disruption or an overexpression of the aidb gene affects growth, bacterial morphology, and virulence in cellular models of infection. the growth curve of an aidb mutant  strain was similar to the wild-type control in 2yt medium . the aidb mutant strain  was morphologically indistinguishable from the wild-type strain . the localization aidb-yfp fusion protein  was similar in the aidb mutant compared to the wild-type strain , suggesting that polar localization of aidb-yfp does not depend on the presence of endogenous aidb, not fused to yfp. the virulence of the aidb mutant in hela cells and raw <dig>  macrophages was also similar to the wild-type strain . in summary, the aidb gene seems to be dispensable for growth in bacteriological medium, maintenance of cell shape and for b. abortus virulence in a cellular model of infection.

the growth curve of the strain expressing aidb-yfp  in rich media  is abnormal compared to the wild-type strain . indeed, the od during the stationary phase is lower od with the xdb <dig> strain compared to the wild-type control. in stationary phase in 2yt medium, the od of the aidb overexpression strain is even decreasing while the od of the wild-type control remained stable. this correlates with a higher frequency of dead cells in the aidb overexpression strain xdb <dig>  compared to the wild-type strain  or the wild-type strain with an empty pbbr <dig> plasmid , the backbone of the aidb overexpression plasmid in xdb <dig> strain. this observation suggests that aidb overexpression is partially lethal in stationary phase. in stationary phase cultures of the xdb <dig> strain, the bacteria display abnormal morphologies at much higher frequency  than the wild-type strain . this phenotype is probably due to the overproduction of aidb-yfp because the aidb overexpression strain  displayed similar morphological defects  . among these abnormal morphologies, bacteria with multipolar shapes were very frequent, swollen cells were often observed, as well as y-shaped bacteria, elongated cells and minicells. the morphological phenotype of this strain is thus pleiotropic. the analysis of aidb-yfp and pdhs-cfp localization in xdb <dig> bacteria with aberrant morphologies, during the exponential growth phase, did not yield a systematic localization pattern, the aidb-yfp and pdhs-cfp fusions being often diffuse in the bacterium .

subcellular localization and overproduction effects of aidb are specific to this acyl-coa dehydrogenase homolog
since aidb is a member of the  <dig> acads paralogs, we wondered if the particular localization of aidb-yfp and the presence of multipolar forms for the aidb overexpression mutant were specific characteristics of this acad homolog. we chose two b. abortus acad homologs that are stably produced at a detectable level using western blot . both paralogs were annotated  as acads and would be involved in the fatty acid β-oxidation pathway. we observed that both acads homologs had a diffuse localization in the cytoplasm when fused to yfp , suggesting that the particular localization of aidb-yfp  is not a common characteristic shared by all acads homologs in b. abortus. the phenotype of the strains overproducing one of these two acads homologs is similar to the b. abortus pdhs-cfp control strain , with a very low frequency  of morphological defects. this suggests that overexpression of any acad gene does not produce a morphological defect in b. abortus, further supporting a specific -although probably indirect- role of aidb in events related to morphogenesis.

discussion
the screen of the orfeome for polar localization allowed the identification of aidb, that shows a clear localization pattern at new poles as well as at constriction sites and/or at young pole in cells in division in bacteriological medium. the polar localization of aidb-yfp is preserved in hela cells and raw <dig>  macrophages at different times post-infection. we therefore propose that aidb is a marker of new poles and constriction sites. to the best of our knowledge, it is the first time that a particular subcellular localization is described for one of the actors involved in the alkylation damage repair. interestingly, the constriction site corresponds to the location of the future new poles just after completion of cell division. we therefore propose a model  in which aidb-yfp is not only localized at the new pole, but also at the constriction site in dividing cells, a mechanism by which aidb-yfp would be ideally localized for a localization at the new pole in newly formed sibling cells. this model implies that when new poles mature to old poles, after cell division, they are no longer labelled with aidb-yfp .

in the conditions tested, overexpression of aidb leads to bacteria with aberrant morphology . this could be due to defects in cell division, cell growth or coordination between both. one hypothesis would be that aidb could indirectly contribute to the generation of new poles, and overexpression of aidb would result in the generation of additional new poles, forming bacteria with abnormal morphology, e.g. multipolar shapes . the selective advantage of the polar localization of aidb is unknown, but it could be related to its role in the adaptative response to alkylating agents, suggested here to block cell cycle before cell division . this would be consistent with a role of aidb in limiting alkylating damage to dna, which would logically block replication initiation and/or progression.

the b. abortus aidb protein has a high level of identity  to e. coli aidb, suggesting functional conservation between the two proteins. this prediction is supported by the increased sensitivity of the b. abortus aidb mutant strain to the alkylating agent ems compared to the wild-type control . brucella genomes contain the ada, alka and alkb genes necessary for an adaptative response to alkylation damage similar to the one reported for e. coli  <cit> . we propose that one possible function of aidb would be to help in the detoxification of some alkylating agents, like in e. coli. these alkylating agents could be found at particular stages of the infection in the natural hosts, or generated by the bacteria themselves  <cit> . the absence of attenuation of the aidb mutant in hela cells or in raw <dig>  macrophages suggests that such alkylating agents are not crucial for the control of the number of c.f.u. during infection of these cell lines. our data do not confirm the previous observation that a transpositional aidb mutant was attenuated in thp- <dig> macrophages  <cit> , unless these specific macrophages have specific features differentiating them from raw <dig>  macrophages for the generation of an alkylating stress. in salmonella enterica, an aidb mutant was more sensitive than the wild-type strain to several alkylating agents but presented no effect on the virulence in the mouse model. indeed, the virulence of a s. enterica mutant defective in all genes specifically involved in dna alkylation damage repair was not affected  <cit> .

recently, in c. crescentus, radhakrishnan et al. reported that kido, an nad-binding oxidoreductase homolog with conserved residues in its nad-binding pocket, acts directly on the ftsz tubulin  <cit> . localization of kido to the z-ring is disrupted by mutations in the cofactor-binding pocket that disturb the association with nad, implying that nad binding is important for the recruitment of kido to the z-ring  <cit> . in this context, it should be interesting to construct a mutated aidb defective for fad binding and observe the impact of this mutation on the aidb-yfp localization. finally, the selective advantage of aidb recruitment at the new pole remains to be discovered. one possibility would be that crucial regions of the nucleoid located close to the new pole, such as replication origins, could be more protected from alkylating agents. this would resemble the proposed specific protection of genes by aidb in e. coli  <cit>  that would be dependent on subcellular localization of aidb in b. abortus. the aberrant morphology of the strain overexpressing aidb indicates that either growth or division are affected, which suggest that aidb could be  involved in the control of these processes, for example by providing a checkpoint for cell division.

CONCLUSIONS
aidb is induced during alkylation damage response in e. coli, however its molecular function is mostly unknown. here we report that a b. abortus aidb mutant is more sensitive to ems, suggesting that aidb is playing a functional role in the response to alkylation damage. the aidb-yfp fusion is a marker of new poles . the aidb-yfp fusion is also localized to constriction sites, which could be considered as preparation sites for new poles in dividing cells. aidb molecular function at the new pole is unknown, but it is expected to be active at this site, since its new pole localization is preserved in b. abortus exposed to ems. our data also suggest that exposure to ems blocks the cell cycle before the constriction event, presumably before or during genome replication. the characteristic multipolar morphology of the aidb overexpression strain suggests that aidb could  play a role in growth or cell division of b. abortus.

