BACKGROUND
it has been  <dig> years since the publication of messenger and mcguire  <cit> , the first major effort to develop a phylogenetic hypothesis for crown cetacea  based on a combined phylogenetic analysis of morphological and molecular characters . since that time, the amount of molecular data published on cetaceans has increased by more than two orders of magnitude, the number of relevant morphological characters has increased ~50%, while advances in computer applications and analytical methods now enable large-scale phylogenetic analyses that could not be completed in  <dig>  although the messenger and mcguire  <cit>  study was groundbreaking, some of their morphological characters and observations have been disputed  <cit> . in addition, the only extinct cetacean included in their study was a composite outgroup taxon, archaeoceti, despite the fact that cetacea has a rich fossil record  <cit> . given these developments and the wide range of topologies supported by subsequent morphological  <cit>  , molecular  <cit>  , and combined analyses  <cit>  , a second look at cetacean phylogeny using a concatenation of morphological and molecular characters from both living and extinct taxa is long overdue.

in the absence of a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for cetacea that includes extant and extinct taxa, molecular systematists have used dna-based clocks to time branching events within cetacea . to date, these molecular clock studies have produced estimates for speciation events that vary widely. for example, cassens et al.  <cit>  suggested that the split between kogiidae  and physeteridae  occurred approximately  <dig> ma  whereas recent dating analyses produced much younger estimates, from means of  <dig> ma  <cit>  to  <dig> ma  <cit> . many calibration points in molecular clock studies of cetacea have been based on extinct taxa that have not been included in rigorous phylogenetic analyses of character matrices, which may explain in part the wide range of published divergence dates. in these cases, molecular systematists have had to trust the opinions of paleontologists regarding relationships of these extinct taxa to extant cetaceans  <cit> . a reliance on expert opinions is understandable given the absence of rigorous phylogenetic studies of fossils. however, a more comprehensive phylogenetic hypothesis that directly combines molecular data and fossils is required to rigorously estimate the timing of cetacean diversification, to test divergence times based on molecular clocks, and also to develop more reliable calibration points for subsequent molecular clock studies.

messenger and mcguire  <cit>  focused on the apparent conflict between molecular data, which at the time supported paraphyly of odontoceti  <cit> , and morphological data, which strongly supported odontocete monophyly  <cit> . since  <dig>  additional morphological support for odontoceti has been presented  <cit> , while the balance of molecular studies, in particular insertions of transposons  <cit> , mitochondrial  genomes , and nuclear  dna sequences , now support odontocete monophyly. messenger and mcguire  <cit>  found relatively low bootstrap support for most higher-level clades within odontoceti, including nodes defining the branching sequence of taxa collectively referred to as "river dolphins." river dolphins include odontocetes that share long, narrow rostra, an elongate and fused mandibular symphysis, and numerous teeth in the upper and lower jaws  <cit> . these taxa also are characterized by a flexible neck, broad forelimb flippers, and eyes that are reduced relative to most extant cetaceans  <cit> . four of these species are restricted to rivers; ganges and indus river dolphins , the functionally extinct yangtze river dolphin , and the amazon river dolphin ; whereas one, the franciscana , occurs in coastal/estuarine waters off of eastern south america. although molecular data for lipotes and pontoporia were not available at the time of the messenger and mcguire  <cit>  study, subsequently published dna sequences for these two taxa  <cit> , as well as new sequences for platanista and inia  <cit> , have not led to a consensus on river dolphin relationships . a synthesis of these diverse data and new character evidence are necessary to determine which signals emerge as the strongest in combined analysis of all relevant phylogenetic data.

skeletal similarities among river dolphins were long thought to be evidence of their monophyly  <cit> , although the presence of a vestibular sac off the nasal passage  <cit>  and some basicranial sinus features  <cit>  ally lipotes, inia, and in some cases pontoporia with delphinoidea, the clade that includes porpoises and oceanic dolphins. if extant river dolphins are monophyletic, and if their affinity for freshwater is an ancestral trait, then their far-flung distribution can be explained by river hopping, analogous to the widely recognized biogeographic process of island hopping  <cit> . however, this scenario is now unwarranted given that recent molecular data strongly support river dolphin paraphyly or polyphyly  <cit> . instead, hamilton et al.  <cit>  suggested that cenozoic changes in sea level essentially stranded the ancestors of extant river dolphins in different river systems, where they subsequently developed intolerance to salt water on at least three occasions. it also has been suggested that the scarcity of close extant relatives to river dolphins in the oceans is the result of past competition with extinct members of delphinoidea in the marine environment  <cit> . in developing these scenarios, molecular workers frequently referred to extinct taxa thought to be close relatives of extant river dolphins; however, their hypotheses were seriously hampered by the fact that there is still no published phylogenetic hypothesis based on molecular and morphological characters that includes extensive sampling of both extant and extinct odontocete taxa. until such a joint study is completed, hypotheses that explain the distribution of extant river dolphins will remain highly speculative.

the main objectives of the current study are: 1) to derive a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for crown cetacea that is based on a supermatrix analysis of both genomic and paleontological data, 2) to allocate, for the first time, many extinct crown cetaceans to clades with extant members in the context of molecular data, and to discuss the temporal implications of these allocations for the radiation of crown odontoceti and crown mysticeti, and 3) to use our integrated supermatrix analysis of molecules, morphology, and fossils to reconstruct the biogeographic history of river dolphins and the evolution of skeletal features shared by these species. our combined dataset merges published data with newly generated morphological and molecular characters, including six nu gene fragments  for the yangtze river dolphin, a species that has been difficult to place in previous systematic studies. unlike previous systematic studies that have sampled nearly all extant species of cetacea  <cit> , the present study takes a different approach. speciose extant families are represented by multiple taxa, all other extant families are represented by at least one species, and nearly all extinct families of crown cetacea are sampled for at least one exemplar .

taxa and otus included in the phylogenetic analysis are unbolded. * taxa named in the present study . ^ taxa assumed to be monophyletic in analyses. † extinct.

RESULTS
phylogenetic hypotheses based on fossils and molecules
the primary focus of this study was to produce phylogenetic hypotheses for crown group cetacea that incorporate extensive character information from both fossils and molecules. first, we executed separate analyses of morphological and molecular datasets to record phylogenetic patterns. then, we analyzed the combined database in a parsimony supermatrix context and executed an analysis of the morphological data constrained to fit the ml/bayesian molecular tree.

the morphological dataset includes  <dig> characters with a focus on variation in the skull region . parsimony analysis of the morphology partition yielded four minimum length trees, each  <dig>  steps in length . in describing the results of our analyses, we use an unranked classification scheme that is new to this study , but heavily influenced by several previous phylogenetic hypotheses and classifications  <cit> . as in an analysis of an earlier version of the morphological partition  <cit> , monophyly of mysticeti, odontoceti, inioidea, and physteridae + kogiidae  was supported. however, unlike that earlier work, delphinoidea and inioidea + delphinoidea also were supported, as in many molecular studies  <cit> . our greater taxonomic sampling of delphinidans, as compared to that of geisler and sanders  <cit> , allowed us to test several traditional families and subfamilies of cetacea. we found support for monophyly of delphinidae, phocoenidae, and delphininae. although many nodes are shared among the trees supported by morphology and those favored by molecules, areas of disagreement remain. the morphological partition supported several groupings found by previous morphological studies but contradicted by most molecular studies, including balaenoidea  <cit> , physeteroidea + ziphiidae  <cit> , platanista + lipotes  <cit> , and the grouping of orcinus orca within globicephalinae  <cit> . we also found morphological support for two novel groupings, balaenoidea + balaenopteridae and monodontidae + delphinidae. a parsimony analysis with implied weighting of characters  and a bayesian analysis  produced broadly similar topologies. these additional analyses of the morphological partition support monophyly of mysticeti, balaenoidea, odontoceti, physeteroidea, ziphiidae, inioidea, delphinoidea, and inioidea + delphinoidea. most notably, a clade including all extant odontocetes, but excluding all oligocene taxa, was supported by a posterior probability  of  <dig> . most higher-level relationships within the odontocete crown group were not well supported in the bayesian analysis , and as in the parsimony analysis with implied weights, monodontidae fell among the delphinids as the sister-group to orcaella .

the molecular partition includes mt genomes, transposon insertions, and segments of  <dig> nu loci that are distributed across the different chromosomes of the cow genome . bayesian and ml analyses of the combined molecular data yielded identical trees , and a bayesian search in which the molecular dataset was partitioned by gene gave the same basic topology with similar support scores . the ml/bayesian topology was congruent with the bayesian consensus in a recent molecular supermatrix analysis  <cit>  except that the positions of two delphinid species, orcinus orca and leucopleurus acutus, are swapped. in our trees, l. acutus is the sister species to all other delphinids included in our analysis, and o. orca is the sister species to the next most inclusive delphinid clade. among the river dolphins, lipotes groups with inioidea , and platanista is placed as the sister taxon to delphinida plus ziphiidae . relationships among odontocete families are congruent with the hypothesis of nikaido et al.  <cit>  , and several subsequent studies 

our bayesian/ml tree is largely congruent with the parsimony trees obtained from the analysis of our morphological and molecular supermatrix  ;  <dig> of  <dig> nodes that define relationships among extant taxa were the same . differences were largely due to contrasting methodologies and not to the inclusion of morphological/fossil data in the supermatrix; the tree supported by parsimony analysis of the molecular data alone  is highly congruent with the parsimony analysis of the fossil + molecular supermatrix  and conflicts at the same five nodes with the trees from the bayesian/ml analyses of the molecular data. in contrast to the explicitly model-based approaches, parsimony analysis of the molecular matrix positions lipotes as the sister-group to the remaining delphinidans, and also resolves a clade composed of platanista and ziphiidae. relationships within ziphiidae do not match those supported by ml and bayesian analyses .

nearly all nodes in the bayesian/ml molecular tree were well supported;  <dig> nodes received a pp of  <dig>  and bootstrap support of 100% . only one of these highly supported nodes  did not occur in the parsimony analysis of the complete supermatrix . several other clades that did not occur in the parsimony trees received less support: mesoplodon + ziphius , lipotes + inioidea , globicephala + pseudorca , and ziphiidae + delphinida . most clades favored by parsimony analysis of the molecular data that conflicted with bayesian and ml results were weakly supported . the lone exception was the grouping of platanista with ziphiidae . when the nu dna data were analyzed in isolation from the very large and more rapidly evolving mt dna partition using parsimony or model-based methods , results closely matched the combined molecular tree derived from ml/bayesian analyses .

our overall supermatrix merged information from the fossil record and from the mt and nu genomes. two most parsimonious trees were found for the combined supermatrix, each  <dig>  steps in length, and the strict consensus of these two trees is well resolved . the minimum length trees vary only in the positions of the extinct toothed mysticetes aetiocetus cotylalveus and chonecetus goedertorum; in one they form a monophyletic aetiocetidae, which has been supported by several studies  <cit> , whereas in the other, aetiocetus is more closely related to chaeomysticeti  than is chonecetus, a result previously obtained by fitzgerald  <cit> . relationships among extant taxa are the same in both trees, with the strict consensus reconstructing many traditionally recognized taxa as monophyletic . because of the instability of many extinct taxa in our trees, we calculated double decay branch support  in addition to branch support  scores  <cit> . we used ddbs to measure the stability of relationships among extant taxa within the context of evidence from the complete matrix, including fossils. branch support was used to measure the character support for relationships among all taxa, extant and extinct, in our trees . clades that received high ddbs values include: mysticeti , balaenopteridae , balaenopteroidea , odontoceti , physeteroidea , ziphiidae , delphinida , delphinoidea , inioidea , phocoenidae , delphinidae , delphininae , and globicephalinae .

branch support values generally are low . this is primarily attributed to the inclusion of extinct taxa that can only be scored for the morphology partition and which subdivide long internodes into much shorter internal branches. corresponding ddbs values are dramatically higher than bs, often by more than a factor of  <dig>  of the  <dig> nodes in the strict consensus,  <dig>  received very low bs values . many of these weakly supported nodes connect to branches that are situated on the stem lineage to crown odontoceti. nodes within delphinidae, where no fossils were sampled, have much higher bs values, some of which are identical to the ddbs values . where comparable, bs values are lower than those reported by geisler and sanders  <cit> . some of this reduction is attributed to the addition of  <dig> taxa to their morphological matrix. for example, geisler and sanders  <cit>  did not include the extinct ziphiid ninoziphius platyrostris, which is known only from a partial skeleton with poorly preserved skull. the bs for ziphiidae is much lower than that found by geisler and sanders  <cit>  ; however, a double decay analysis that ignores the phylogenetic position of ninoziphius, but not the positions of other extinct taxa, increases the bs to  <dig>  steps.

relationships among odontocete families are broadly congruent with published molecular and morphological studies . physeteroidea is the extant sister group to all other living odontocetes, consistent with numerous molecular studies  and some morphological analyses . the grouping of physeteroidea with ziphiidae, as found in some morphological analyses , was not supported. as in the majority of recent molecular studies, monodontidae is the sister-group to phocoenidae  <cit>  with inioidea, delphinida, and also delphinoidea recovered .

a more controversial finding is a sister-group relationship between platanista and ziphiidae . although the bs for this node is low , the ddbs is near the median of recovered values at  <dig> . this sister-group relationship had previously been recovered in multiple previous analyses . alternatively, platanista has been placed as the sister-group to delphinida + ziphiidae . a third alternative places platanista as the sister-group to delphinida as in heyning  <cit>   among others , but this grouping was not recovered in any of our phylogenetic analyses .

similar to the situation with platanista, the placement of lipotes vexillifer has varied among previous studies; the combined parsimony analysis agrees with messenger and mcguire  <cit>   and others  in placing the yangtze river dolphin as the extant sister-group to a clade composed of delphinoidea and inioidea. this conflicts with multiple studies that position lipotes as the extant sister-group to inioidea . it should be noted that the support for lipotes as the extant sister-group to delphinoidea + inioidea, instead of as the extant sister taxon of inioidea, is marginal . the closest relative to lipotes is the extinct genus parapontoporia, here represented by two species, p. wilsoni and p. sternbergi. this placement is consistent with some morphological studies  <cit>  but is at odds with others that consider parapontoporia to be a pontoporiid  <cit> .

relationships within ziphiidae are somewhat unconventional . as in the morphological analysis of geisler and sanders  <cit> , mesoplodon is more closely related to berardius than to ziphius or tasmacetus. such an apical position for berardius contradicts previous morphological  <cit>  and molecular hypotheses  <cit> . an important caveat to the ziphiid relationships found here is the very low series of bs and ddbs values for these nodes .

within delphinidae, orcaella brevirostris is placed as the sister-group to globicephalinae, a result that is consistent with the molecular analysis of caballero et al.  <cit>  and the supermatrix tree of mcgowen et al.  <cit> , but contradicts the smaller supermatrix of steeman et al.  <cit> , the supertree of price et al.  <cit> , and analysis of mt dna data  <cit> . within globicephalinae, globicephala is more closely related to grampus than to pseudorca, a result that was weakly supported by leduc et al.  <cit> . among the delphinids included in our analysis, leucopleurus acutus is positioned as the sister-species to all remaining delphinids, with orcinus orca branching from a more apical node as the sister to all delphinids except l. acutus. although mcgowen et al.  <cit>  also recovered a tree in which these two taxa represented early branching events within delphinidae, the positions of these taxa were reversed with orcinus, not leucopleurus, as the sister-group to all other extant delphinid species.

of the  <dig> extinct taxa and/or specimens included in the analysis, the majority were determined to be stem odontocetes . a similar result was recovered by geisler and sanders  <cit>  based on an earlier dataset that was further augmented and modified in the current study. overall, the arrangement of stem odontocetes is quite similar, with xenorophidae as the first odontocete branch, followed agorophius, patriocetus, and undescribed taxa intercalated among these three named taxa. however, some topological details differ from the tree supported by geisler and sanders  <cit> . for example, in the strict consensus of the current study, waipatia forms a clade with patriocetus and an undescribed form from south carolina . somewhat surprisingly, the putative platanistid zarhachis and the eurhinodelphid xiphiacetus did not fall inside crown cetacea but instead form a clade outside of it . eurhinodelphids have typically been placed within crown odontoceti; however, there has been no consensus beyond that. eurhinodelphids have been considered as a stem group to ziphiidae  <cit> , sister-group to delphinida  <cit> , or sister-group to squalodontidae + squalodelphidae  <cit> . simocetus rayi, which was not sampled by geisler and sanders  <cit> , here is placed slightly more apical in the cladogram than agorophius and an unnamed taxon . as noted above, relationships among stem odontocetes in the parsimony analysis of the supermatrix were weakly supported .

within the odontocete crown group, two extinct taxa, pliopontos and brachydelphis, are positioned inside inioidea . the placement of brachydelphis inside inioidea contrasts with an analysis of an earlier version of the morphological dataset utilized here  <cit> ; the authors of that study reconstructed brachydelphis as a stem platanistoid . identifying pliopontos and brachydelphis as inioids is in agreement with a previous phylogenetic hypothesis  <cit> , although unlike that study and others  <cit>  these two taxa are here reconstructed as successive stem taxa to inia, instead of being positioned inside pontoporiidae. kentriodon pernix and atocetus nasalis, two extinct species from the possibly paraphyletic kentriodontidae, were also included in the analysis. the former is the sister-group to delphinoidea + inioidea whereas the latter is the sister-group to delphinoidea in our minimum length trees .

the miocene mysticetes diorocetus and pelocetus are immediately outside the mysticete crown group . historically such taxa were referred to as cetotheres  <cit> , but more recent systematic work on mysticete phylogeny has redefined cetotheriidae to a monophyletic family that excludes these taxa  <cit> . regardless, the phylogenetic positions of these miocene mysticetes are controversial, with some studies excluding them from the crown group  <cit> , which is supported here. other studies place some miocene mysticetes as more closely related to balaenopterids  <cit>  or to balaenopterids and eschrichtiids  <cit> . within crown mysticeti, balaenidae is sister to the remaining extant lineages and caperea is sister to a monophyletic balaenopteroidea, as has been found in many analyses of dna sequence data  <cit> , molecular supermatrices  <cit> , a recent morphological analysis  <cit> , and in an analysis that combined morphological and molecular data  <cit> . balaenoidea , which is favored by nearly all morphological studies   <cit> , is not supported. parabalaenoptera is a stem balaenopterid as in previous work .

in addition to the parsimony analysis of the supermatrix, we also executed a morphological analysis with ml/bayesian molecular constraints. this search yielded three trees, each with a score of  <dig> , which differ only in the relationships of three xenorophids: xenorophus sloanii, an undescribed species of xenorophus , and another undescribed taxon  . given the backbone constraint, relationships among extant taxa are identical to those obtained by ml and bayesian analyses of the molecular partition ; however,  <dig> of these nodes are also supported by the parsimony analysis of morphology  and three more are supported when implied weighting was applied to morphology . implementation of the ml/bayesian constraint and implied weighting changed the positions of several extinct otu's  as compared to the combined parsimony analysis of morphology and molecules . unlike our parsimony analysis of the supermatrix and the hypothesis of geisler and sanders  <cit> , archaeodelphis is placed as the sister-group to all remaining odontocetes instead of being closely related to xenorophus . the trees obtained with the ml/bayesian constraint separate archaeodelphis from the xenorophidae, as defined by uhen  <cit> . unlike the combined parsimony tree, the clade including agorophius and an undescribed otu  is positioned in a group of oligocene taxa that includes patriocetus kazakhstanicus. this contradicts the allocation of patriocetus to the squalodontidae  <cit> .

the ml/bayesian molecular constraint positions platanista as the extant sister-group to ziphiidae plus delphinida. enforcing this relationship resulted in the recovery of a platanistoid clade, although here platanistoidea includes squalodelphinidae  but not waipatiidae and squalodontidae . xiphiacetus  is here placed as the sister-group to platanistoids, unlike the unconstrained analysis where it was positioned outside of the odontocete crown group. another difference is that platanistidae  is monophyletic in the analysis with the ml/bayesian constraint. moving to more apical nodes in the tree, the only extinct ziphiid included in the analysis  is sister to a clade composed of the remaining ziphiids, whereas in the unconstrained parsimony analysis ziphius is sister to all other ziphiids in our sample . within delphinida, the extinct taxon kentriodon moved from being outside inioidea + delphinoidea to being an early-branching stem delphinoid, and phylogenetic relationships within inioidea were rearranged .

temporal implications of phylogenetic hypotheses
the fit between the fossil record  and all minimum length trees recovered from the four parsimony analyses that included extinct taxa  was measured by the modified manhattan stratigraphic measure  and the gap excess ratio  . all trees implied substantial ghost lineages as indicated by the fairly low msm* scores ; however, ger scores, which are standardized by the maximum possible sum of all ghost lineages, are much higher . the msm* scores for all trees are statistically significant . taken together, these results suggest that the fossil record of neoceti  is reasonably good.

in cases where the fad and lad cannot be distinguished, and multiple specimens are known, the lad is arbitrarily placed  <dig> ka after the fad. fad: first appearance datum; lad: last appearance datum; * provenance uncertain. see additional file 2: table s <dig> and additional file  <dig> for details and references.

sister-group relationships and the first appearances of extinct taxa in the fossil record suggest that the diversifications of crown odontoceti and crown mysticeti postdated the oligocene, in contrast to molecular clock studies that suggested earlier dates . the shortest suboptimal tree that includes an oligocene taxon inside either crown odontoceti or crown mysticeti is  <dig>  steps longer than the minimum length trees . in this suboptimal tree, the undescribed otu represented by chm pv <dig> is positioned as a stem taxon to the clade that includes delphinida, ziphiidae, and platanistidae. although not supported by the supermatrix of the present study, this alternative topology could not be statistically rejected . the shortest suboptimal trees that include other oligocene odontocetes inside crown odontoceti are much longer ; however, these suboptimal topologies could not be rejected at a p value of  <dig>  either. the shortest tree that includes agorophius in the odontocete crown group  is also the shortest tree that places simocetus, patriocetus, waipatia, and prosqualodon davidis in the odontocete crown group. this suboptimal tree positions those oligocene odontocetes in a clade that is the sister-group to delphinida + ziphiidae + platanistidae. although this topology is still above the p =  <dig>  threshold, its rejection approached statistical significance for the winning-sites test . the shortest tree that places waipatia inside platanistoidea, as advocated by some studies  <cit> , is  <dig>  steps longer than the minimum length trees, although this too could not be rejected at the p =  <dig>  level .

the shortest suboptimal trees that included oligocene mysticetes within crown mysticeti were somewhat longer than their counterparts on the odontocete side of the tree . most of these hypotheses could be rejected at p ≤  <dig>  for the templeton and winning-sites tests; the sole exception was a topology that placed eomysticetus whitmorei as the sister-group to balaenidae . even though the combined supermatrix dwarfs the morphological partition in size, the same p values are obtained when templeton and winning-sites tests are conducted on the morphological partition because the suboptimal trees differ from the minimum length trees in the positions of extinct, not extant, taxa.

the evolution of river dolphins
not surprisingly, all morphological character states shared by river dolphins cannot be simply described as convergences, reversals, or symplesiomorphies. we focused on nine of the potential river dolphin "synapomorphies" listed by geisler and sanders  <cit> , specifically those that occur in at least three of the four extant genera. river dolphin characters were optimized onto the trees derived from parsimony analysis of the supermatrix  and those supported by analysis of the morphological data with ml/bayesian molecular constraints . pairwise comparisons among the four river dolphin genera for each of the nine characters summarize whether shared similarities in character states between genera are most simply interpreted as homologous - inherited from a common ancestor, or analogous - independently derived through either convergence or reversal . when the character state similarities among all extant river dolphins are homologous, this implies symplesiomorphy . by contrast, when all pairwise similarities among genera are analogous, the character is purely convergent and evolved independently in each of the four river dolphin genera . if some but not all states are homologous, the simplest explanation is either that the character experienced reversal  or, more commonly, convergent evolution to similar character states in two or three separate lineages. several characters previously interpreted as synapomorphies of all extant river dolphins  <cit>  are here interpreted as synapomorphies of more exclusive clades, such as inioidea  or iniodea plus lipotes . alternatively, some characters previously interpreted as synapomorphies of all river dolphins are, in the context of our combined phylogenetic hypotheses, better interpreted as synapomorphies for even more inclusive clades . in many cases, character optimizations offer multiple equally parsimonious interpretations of the evidence, and at least some interpretations of homology versus analogy are ambiguous .

for the trees derived from parsimony analysis of the supermatrix, two characters are symplesiomorphic . character  <dig>  is symplesiomorphic for all river dolphins, but there are two subsequent reversals to the primitive condition in inia and in pontoporia . character  <dig>  is purely convergent, with the morphology of each extant genus interpreted as the result of an independent derivation. the remaining five characters have ambiguous optimizations, but for character  <dig> , the inference of homology between two distantly related genera, lipotes and platanista, implies that this similarity was present in the last common ancestor of all extant river dolphin genera . in contrast, when these same nine characters are mapped on trees derived from parsimony analysis of morphology with the ml/bayesian molecular constraint, a more consistent pattern of convergence is implied . three shared character states are symplesiomorphic , and four characters experienced one or more instances of convergence . the optimizations for fusion of the mandibular symphysis and absence of the olecranon process are uncertain, but the latter is interpreted as convergently evolved between platanista and the remaining three genera . the discrepancies in character optimizations between the trees obtained from constrained and unconstrained parsimony analyses underscore the importance of resolving the phylogenetic positions of platanista and lipotes for understanding the evolution of morphological characters shared by these two taxa.

discussion
combination of diverse evidence and the phylogeny of neoceti
our analyses found strong support for several traditionally recognized clades. most notable is the support for mysticeti, inioidea, and delphinida; the ddbs for each is more than  <dig> steps. all of our phylogenetic analyses that included molecular evidence  also supported three newly named clades; 1) plicogulae , 2) synrhina , and 3) monodontoidae . based on the support we found in combined analyses of molecules and fossils and the fact that these clades have been recovered by numerous previous studies , we provide names, definitions, and morphological diagnoses for each .

a parsimony search of the complete supermatrix  and analysis of the morphological data with ml/bayesian molecular constraints  showed conflicting phylogenetic positions for two river dolphins, platanista and lipotes, despite the fact that we added six new nu gene fragments for the latter taxon. although we do not have a strong preference for either hypothesis, we do note that only the analysis with the ml/bayesian constraint allocates the extinct taxa zarhachis and notocetus to the platanistoidea, a result supported by some morphological analyses  <cit> . furthermore, two sine transposon insertions, considered by some to be very reliable phylogenetic characters  <cit> , support the constraint tree  and conflict with the parsimony analysis of the supermatrix . clear resolution of remaining conflicts is critical, because the placements of fossils relative to different extant species, the timing of diversification, and the reconstruction of evolutionary changes are profoundly altered depending on the basic set of relationships among the major lineages of extant cetaceans . however, given the conflicts among separate analyses of smaller datasets regarding the placements of platanista and lipotes , the amount of data included in our supermatrix , and the generally weak support for the placement of lipotes in all of our concatenated analyses , it is clear that the interrelationships of these river dolphins represent challenging systematic problems that may require a more complete matrix with less missing data, a genome-scale dataset, or a much broader sampling of extinct taxa to derive a consistently robust resolution.

dating the radiations of crown odontoceti and crown mysticeti
we used the first appearances between sister taxa in the fossil record to infer minimum dates of divergence at particular nodes in our trees. in all analyses that included extinct taxa, we were not able to confirm the hypothesis based on molecular clocks that eight to ten distinct lineages of cetaceans that have extant representatives existed by the end of the oligocene  <cit> . all  <dig> oligocene otu's sampled in the present study  were positioned outside of crown mysticeti and crown odontoceti, implying post-oligocene ages for these two crown clades. although the significance of this result in comparison to the molecular clock studies is hard to gauge, it suggests one or more possibilities: 1) the fossil record of oligocene cetaceans is poor, 2) the fossil record of oligocene cetaceans is good, but we inadvertently excluded oligocene members of the crown groups from our phylogenetic analyses, 3) molecular clocks have overestimated the dates for the earliest splits in crown odontoceti and mysticeti, or 4) the morphological character data simply are not sufficient for robust resolution of these relationships. the first possibility appears unlikely given the significant correlation  between the topologies recovered here and the fossil record. the second possibility is more likely; our study heavily samples oligocene, described and undescribed otu's from the southeastern united states. if oligocene faunas were highly endemic, and the radiations of odontoceti and mysticeti did not occur in the southeastern united states, then exclusion of oligocene taxa from crown odontoceti and from crown mysticeti may not be a surprising result.

examples of oligocene taxa/specimens that have been referred to clades within crown odontoceti, but were not sampled here because they could not be coded based on published descriptions, are oligodelphis, a putative delphinoid, and ferecetotherium, a putative physeteroid. both taxa are only represented by fragmentary holotypes that were collected from the maikop series near the town of perikeshkul, azerbaijan. recent chemostratigraphic and biostratigraphic work  <cit>  indicates that the lower miocene and upper oligocene are equally represented  at the outcrops near perikeshkul. thus future work is needed to determine if these two taxa in fact came from the oligocene part of the section and if they have been accurately allocated to delphinoidea and physeteroidea.

a review of recent literature would suggest that there are several accepted records of platanistoidea in the oligocene  <cit> . as mentioned in the results section, unlike fordyce  <cit>  we did not find waipatia to be a member of platanistoidea . instead this taxon falls outside of crown group odontoceti. similarly we found squalodon and prosqualodon to be outside of the odontocete crown group and not within platanistoidea, contrary to muizon  <cit>  and fordyce  <cit> . four of the oligocene records of platanistoids on the paleobiology database are considered squalodelphinids, a family that fell inside platanistoidea in our analysis with the ml/bayesian constraint but not so in the unconstrained, combined parsimony analysis . three of these records are not well substantiated, but notocetus marplesi, from the late oligocene otekaike limestone formation  <cit> , was positioned as the sister-group to the clade of notocetus vanbenedeni + squalodelphis in the phylogenetic analysis of fordyce  <cit> . although we have not had an opportunity to examine the holotype and only reported specimen of this taxon, allocation of this species to squalodelphinidae would only extend the range of this family by  <dig> to  <dig> million years . as discussed in more detail below, the occurrence of at least a few lineages of crown odontocetes in the late oligocene is to be expected.

among described oligocene mysticetes, steeman  <cit>  suggested that one taxon, mauicetus parki, is a member of crown mysticeti. the holotype consists of part of the postorbital region of the skull, and previously published descriptions suggest limited fossil remains that can only be identified as a chaeomysticete  <cit> . steeman  <cit>  reported that one of the petrosals of the holotype had been freed from the skull, and her analysis of morphological data placed this oligocene form not only within the crown group but also within balaenopteroidea. if correct, then molecular estimates for the radiation of balaenopteroidea are substantially  underestimated  <cit> . however, it is difficult to compare the topology of steeman  <cit>  to phylogenetic studies of molecular data that are sampled at the species level. steeman  <cit>  included the genera eschrichtius and balaenoptera as otus  and found these genera to be separated by multiple extinct mysticetes, including mauicetus parki. by contrast, some molecular analyses have found eschrichtius to be nested within the genus balaenoptera  <cit> . furthermore, the positions of many extinct mysticetes in steeman's tree differ sharply from the only studies on mysticete systematics that included molecular and fossil data  <cit> . regardless, mauicetus parki should be included in future analyses that combine morphological and molecular data, particularly now that the petrosal, which has many diagnostic features, is available for study.

other putative records of crown odontocetes or crown mysticetes in the oligocene consist of undescribed taxa that we have not had the opportunity to study. ichishima et al.  <cit>  and steeman et al.  <cit>  mentioned a specimen from the oligocene of new zealand which they referred to as "kentriodon ? sp." or as "cf. kentriodon." however, in neither case was the morphology of this specimen described or the basis for this identification discussed. in a meeting abstract, fordyce  <cit>  introduced the first putative stem balaenid mysticete from the late oligocene, based on a partial skull and other elements . the morphology of the specimen was briefly described, although fordyce did not specify what features ally it with extant balaenids. steeman  <cit>  included an undescribed taxon from the oligocene of new zealand  in her phylogenetic analysis, which was positioned as the sister-taxon to mauicetus parki. thus placed, this taxon would be a member of the mysticete crown group as well as a stem balaenopteroid; however, as with mauicetus parki, it is difficult to reconcile the position of zmt  <dig> in light of recent molecular phylogenies based on species-level otus that conflict with the basic structure of steeman's  <cit>  phylogenetic hypothesis.

the above discussion should not be understood as a rejection of any putative crown odontocete or mysticete in the oligocene. to the contrary, we think that several early splits in crown odontoceti and crown mysticeti did occur in the late oligocene because the oldest undisputed physeteroids  <cit>  and a balaenid  <cit>  are known from the earliest miocene. however, what is known of the late oligocene fossil record consists predominantly of plesiomorphic odontocetes and mysticetes, many with long intertemporal regions, some with external nares that are anterior to the orbits, and numerous mysticetes that retain teeth  <cit> . as noted above, possible exceptions to this pattern that require further investigation are ferecetotherium, which is likely a physeteroid and possibly oligocene in age, and notocetus marplesi, which is oligocene in age and is possibly a squalodelphinid. certainly other undescribed taxa that have been tentatively placed in crown odontoceti or crown mysticeti should be described and placed in phylogenetic analyses as well  <cit> , but we caution against the use of these undescribed taxa as calibration points in molecular clock studies until that is done  <cit> . our phylogenetic analyses, which are based on a reasonable sample of the known oligocene cetacean fossil record, do not support the radiation of crown mysticeti and crown odontoceti in the early oligocene, as reconstructed by several molecular clock studies  <cit> . the timing of these basal splits is critical because if they occurred in the earliest oligocene, then they would have coincided with an interval of pronounced ocean cooling  <cit>  that may have helped spur early neocete evolution  <cit> .

given our criticism of some of the calibration points used in molecular clock studies, we present a more conservative, and better justified, set of points . the first four calibrations are preferred because they are based on fossil taxa that have had their relationships to extant taxa determined by computer-assisted phylogenetic analyses of datasets that include molecular and morphological data. the phylogenetic positions of kentriodon pernix and simocetus rayi, which provide minimum ages for delphinida and neoceti respectively, are based on the current study, with ages supported by work listed in table s <dig> . a minimum age for plicogulae is provided by "megaptera" miocaena  <cit> , which is at least  <dig>  ma in age  <cit> , and we agree with van tuinen and hadley  <cit>  in considering pakicetidae as a good calibration point for the clade referred to as whippomorpha or cetancodonta  <cit> , which is constrained to be older than  <dig> ma  <cit> .

relationships of taxa in the "preferred calibration points" are based on phylogenetic analyses that combine molecular and morphological data. taxa in "other suggested calibration points" either vary in their position among combined analyses of molecules and morphology or have been placed based on phylogenetic analysis of morphological data only. nodes refer to node-based definitions of these taxa. fad: first appearance datum. see text for supporting references.

we are less confident about the last five calibration points . regarding a minimum age for synrhina, placement of notocetus within platanistoidea is supported by our analysis of the morphological partition with the bayesian/ml constraint but not our parsimony analysis of the supermatrix. if this taxon is a platanistoid, then it constrains synrhina to be at least  <dig> ma  <cit> . the remaining four calibration points are deemed less reliable because they are based on phylogenetic analyses of morphological data only. as described in the results section, morphological and molecular data are at odds with respect to the phylogenetic positions of some extant taxa, thus it is unclear if the positions of extinct taxa would be stable to the addition of molecular data. morenocetus parvus, the earliest described balaenid  <cit> , is from deposits of the same age as notocetus and, if accurately placed, implies that crown mysticetes emerged in the earliest miocene. also among the last five calibration points is llanocetus denticrenatus, the earliest stem mysticete  <cit> . llanocetus provides an older minimum age of  <dig> ma  <cit>  for neoceti relative to our more conservative estimate based on the odontocete simocetus rayi. finally, the phocoenid salumiphocaena stocktoni  <cit>  and the ziphiid archaeoziphius microglenoideus  <cit>  potentially provide minimum ages of  <dig>  ma  <cit>  and  <dig>  ma for monodontoidae and the ziphiid crown group, respectively.

our phylogenetic analyses support the exclusion of oligocene cetaceans from crown mysticeti and crown odontoceti, however we used two statistical tests  to determine whether our supermatrix strongly rejects hypotheses that include one or more oligocene taxa in either of these clades. with one exception, we could reject all hypotheses that placed any of the oligocene mysticetes we sampled in crown mysticeti. the sole suboptimal topology that the templeton test did not reject places eomysticetidae as the sister-group to balaenidae. although a few characters do support a clade of eomysticetids and balaenids , the skull of eomysticetids is radically different from that of balaenids. unlike the templeton test, the balaenid + eomysticetid hypothesis was rejected by the winning-sites test .

for odontocetes, positioning one or more of the oligocene otus we sampled inside crown odontoceti cost between  <dig>  and  <dig>  steps. one important exception was a tree that placed the undescribed otu chm pv <dig> as the sister-group to synrhina . if this suboptimal tree is accurate, then at the end of the oligocene there would have been at least three separate lineages of odontocetes that have extant descendants. chm pv <dig> is more like extant odontocetes than other oligocene taxa we sampled in having extreme polydonty, probable homodonty , near absence of the parietals from the skull roof, and development of a fossa on the palatine for the pterygoid sinus. it also shares with eurhinodelphids, ziphiids, and squaloziphius a massive postglenoid process of the squamosal. although inclusion of chm pv <dig> in crown odontoceti is not supported by the present study, future analyses should include multiple miocene ziphiids, eurhinodelphids, and platanistoids to determine whether these taxa "pull" chm pv <dig> into the crown group.

most trees that position oligocene taxa inside crown odontoceti require many more steps than the minimum length trees, but the suboptimal topologies could not be rejected at p ≤  <dig>  using the templeton or winning-sites tests. thus, it is possible that the morphological data are simply not robust enough to determine, with confidence, whether certain oligocene fossils are stem or crown odontocetes. however, detailed inspection of many of these trees reveals problematic patterns. the shortest tree that includes agorophius in crown odontoceti also places patriocetus, simocetus, prosqualodon davidis, and waipatia in the crown group . this suboptimal tree requires the oligocene odontocetes to exhibit step-wise reversals of cranial telescoping, the evolutionary process by which the external nares and rostral bones shifted posteriorly  <cit> . this tree also places the above oligocene taxa inside the crown group in reverse stratigraphic order; taxa that branch from the most apical nodes are early oligocene, and taxa that branch from the most basal nodes are late oligocene. similar inconsistencies between cranial telescoping and stratigraphy occur for the shortest trees that include waipatia inside platanistoidea .

evolution of riverine odontocetes
the current consensus among morphologists is that platanista  is not closely related to the two other extant river dolphins  or to the coastal dolphin pontoporia  <cit> . the grouping that included all four genera was originally named platanistoidea  <cit> , although given that the group apparently is not monophyletic, platanistoidea is now used instead to refer to platanista and its extinct relatives  <cit> . one of the intriguing questions raised by non-monophyly of river dolphins is, how did they obtain such a disjunct distribution? by placing various marine odontocetes as the respective sister-groups to each extant river dolphin genus , the current study supports suggestions that odontocetes invaded river systems on at least three occasions  <cit> . hamilton et al.  <cit>  expanded upon the hypothesis of separate, freshwater invasions by speculating that the ancestors of extant river dolphins remained in river systems after sea level regressed from its middle miocene highs. in citing evidence for this hypothesis, they summarized published geologic evidence for a large epicontinental sea, called the paranense sea, in south america in the miocene. they further suggested that the divergence of riverine inia from marine pontoporia was caused by the regression of the paranense sea. in criticizing this scenario, steeman et al.  <cit>  noted that their molecular clock estimate placed the divergence between these species at  <dig> ma, well before the middle miocene regressions mentioned by hamilton et al.  <cit> . however, in calibrating their molecular clock, steeman et al.  <cit>  used the putative pontoporiid brachydelphis to place a minimum age of  <dig> ma on the inia/pontoporia divergence. in our bayesian constraint trees, brachydelphis is placed outside of the inia and pontoporia clade. although the phylogeny of inioidea varied among our analyses , this does raise doubts about the appropriateness of brachydelphis as a calibration point, and we consider the hamilton et al.  <cit>  scenario as worthy of further investigation in combined phylogenetic analyses of cetacea.

cassens et al.  <cit>  also speculated that river dolphins persisted in river systems, but not in marine environments, either because 1) they did not have to compete with delphinoids for prey or 2) they were less affected by changes in ocean temperature or circulation. although we are not able to test these hypotheses directly, current evidence casts doubt on both of them. regarding competition, in the yangtze river the range of lipotes overlapped with the delphinoid neophocaena phocaenoides and in the amazonian river basin, there is significant range overlap between inia and the delphinoid sotalia fluviatilis  <cit> . in the case of lipotes, human activities, not competition with neophocaena, have been implicated in its demise  <cit> . similarly human activities are the primary threat to inia as well  <cit> . although positive evidence for the competitive exclusion hypothesis is wanting, river dolphins are sympatric with relatively few species of delphinoids in rivers. thus it is possible that the intensity of competition, not the simple presence or absence of a single delphinoid species, could explain the absence of close relatives to lipotes and platanista in modern marine environments. cassens et al.  <cit>  cite the simultaneous decline of extinct, marine relatives of extant river dolphins with the increase of delphinoids as evidence to support their hypothesis. however, until now, none of the extinct taxa included in their diversity estimates had been analyzed explicitly in the context of molecular data, and most had not been included in computer-assisted phylogenetic analyses of morphology alone. as described above, we found one supposed platanistoid  to instead be outside of the odontocete crown group in two of our analyses , along with several more putative platanistoids that branch from the stem lineage of odontoceti in our parsimony analysis of the supermatrix . thus we encourage future studies to include more putative, extinct relatives of river dolphins in total evidence analyses to test whether the simultaneous changes in delphinoid and river dolphin diversity are supported. regarding the second hypothesis of cassens et al.  <cit>  that fluvial environments provided a refuge from changes in oceanic temperature and circulation changes, we note that a marine environment generally experiences less variability in temperature than a river due to a smaller surface area to volume ratio.

now that there is a consensus that river dolphins do not form a natural group, it is useful to revisit the morphological evidence that initially led to the hypothesis that these taxa are very closely related. the most obvious morphological feature shared by pontoporia and extant river dolphins is a narrow and elongate rostrum  <cit> , although several authors have suggested that this feature is symplesiomorphic  <cit> . even so, other characters that river dolphins share have a more restricted distribution, and in the most comprehensive morphological analysis to date, geisler and sanders  <cit>  listed seven unambiguous synapomorphies for the subclade delimited by all extant river dolphins. the present study incorporates a modified version of the geisler and sanders  <cit>  matrix, and analyses of the expanded matrix agree with other morphological studies in excluding platanista from a close relationship with lipotes, inia, and pontoporia . however, we changed very few individual character codings from geisler and sanders  <cit> , thus the morphological support for river dolphin monophyly, although now in the minority, still remains. with the trees of extant and extinct cetaceans obtained in the current study, we are able to scrutinize the morphological characters that support river dolphin monophyly and test hypotheses that were developed to explain their homoplastic behavior.

river dolphin paraphyly/polyphyly implies several possible evolutionary explanations for morphological characters shared by extant river dolphins and pontoporia: 1) the characters are convergent, 2) the similarities are symplesiomorphic, 3) similarities are due to reversals, or 4) various combinations of these effects. complicating the evaluation of these hypotheses is the positioning of extant river dolphins as successive sister-groups to delphinoidea in some phylogenetic hypotheses based solely on living species ; thus according to parsimony optimization, it is unclear whether these similarities are convergent or are homologs with subsequent reversals in delphinoidea and/or ziphiidae. futhermore, the positions of platanista and several extinct taxa, which vary between the parsimony analysis of the supermatrix and the trees constrained by the ml/bayesian topology, have a major impact on whether morphological characters shared by river dolphins are reconstructed as convergent, reversed, or symplesiomorphic .

the fact that odontocetes restricted to rivers share several morphological features has led some to hypothesize that these features are adaptations to fluvial environments  <cit> . key among these possible adaptations are features related to prey capture : > <dig> maxillary teeth , > <dig> mandibular teeth , long mandibular symphysis , fused mandibular symphysis , and long zygomatic process of squamosal . although it is possible that these characters are functionally related, each has passed initial tests of logical independence  and were therefore optimized on our trees as separate characters. if these characters states are in fact adaptations to a riverine environment, we would expect them to have evolved convergently in independent lineages of river dolphins. one of these character states, a large number of mandibular teeth , does not appear to be an adaptation of this type  because it is a symplesiomorphy of river dolphins on both sets of trees . however, convergence remains a possibility for the other four characters. for example, according to the ml/bayesian constrained trees, the elongate zygomatic process  and the long mandibular symphysis  of platanista are convergent with those traits in inioidea plus lipotes; however, symplesiomorphy is an equally efficient interpretation on the parsimony tree for these two characters. conversely, although a fused mandibular symphysis  is a symplesiomorphy on the parsimony tree, convergence between platanista and inioidea plus lipotes is equally parsimonious to symplesiomorphy on the ml/bayesian constrained trees .

given the above discussion, the elongate zygomatic processes, long mandibular symphyses, and other traits shared by river dolphins may be convergent, particulary if we accept the ml/bayesian constrained trees , but could these characters be adaptations to life in a fluvial environment? extant odontocetes use two major modes of prey capture: 1) raptorial feeding where prey are seized by the teeth, and 2) suction feeding where prey are sucked into the mouth and teeth play little to no role in prey acquisition  <cit> . the suite of prey capture features shared by extant river dolphins are all correlated with raptorial feeding; however, there is no reason to think raptorial feeding is more efficient in rivers than in the ocean. even more revealing are the paleoenvironments where fossils of extinct "river dolphins" have been found. on the ml/bayesian constrained trees , platanista is closely related to the extinct taxa zarhachis, notocetus, and xiphiacetus, all of which have been found in sediments that were clearly deposited in marine environments  <cit> . all three of those extinct marine odontocetes have a long mandibular symphysis, two have a fused symphysis, and one has an elongate zygomatic process of the squamosal. similarly, pontoporia, parapontoporia, pliopontos, and brachydelphis, which are close relatives of lipotes and inia, also occur in marine environments  <cit>  or were found in marine sediments  <cit> . two of these marine odontocetes have a long and fused mandibular symphysis, and three have a long zygomatic process. clearly there is not a simple one-to-one correlation between the presence of river dolphin characters involved in prey capture and a riverine habitat.

if we optimize habitat on the parsimony trees  or the ml/bayesian constrained trees , the simplest interpretation is that odontocetes switched from marine to riverine habitats three times on the terminal branches leading to platanista, lipotes, and inia . to see if there is any support for the hypothesis that river dolphin characters related to feeding are adaptations to river environments, we optimized these characters using delayed transformation  optimization . deltran optimizations were employed because this procedure shifts as many character changes as possible to apical branches, where invasions of freshwater habitats occurred. if no pattern is found with deltran optimizations, then these characters should not be interpreted as adaptations to riverine environments. the character mappings suggest that half  to nearly all  of the river dolphin character states involved in prey capture evolved on internal branches that are optimized as marine - five out of ten state changes for the parsimony trees and nine out of ten on the ml/bayesian constrained trees. focusing on the parsimony trees, those changes that may have occurred in freshwater cetaceans are not evenly distributed; three occur on the terminal branch leading to platanista and two others are positioned on the branch leading to lipotes. those same character states evolved in marine relatives of inia, so even here the adaptation hypothesis is contradicted in part. futhermore, one of the characters that is placed on the branch leading to lipotes, a long mandibular symphysis, may have evolved earlier because an elongate symphysis occurs in the unsampled, extinct parapontoporia pacifica  <cit> , possibly a lipotid. to summarize, we find meager support for the hypothesis that prey capture features shared by river dolphins are adaptations to freshwater environments. a better understanding of the evolution of prey capture features in river dolphins will require observational data on the function of these features in extant taxa, which is generally lacking, as well as paleobiological studies on extinct taxa to infer their diets and behaviors. until this is done, such discussions will be largely speculative, and existing data cannot discriminate between the hypothesis that these prey-capture features are exaptations  in extant river dolphins or are simply feeding adaptations that are equally effective in marine and fluvial environments. characteristics of the soft anatomy shared by extant river dolphins  may represent adaptations to life in a riverine habitat, but this hypothesis is difficult to test using fossil data and is again contradicted, or at least complicated, by the presence of these features in the coastal marine genus, pontoporia.

CONCLUSIONS
 <dig>  the relationships among extant lineages of cetacea were investigated through phylogenetic analyses of diverse molecular data and parsimony analysis of the entire supermatrix, which included molecules, morphology, and extinct taxa. of the  <dig> nodes defining relationships among extant taxa, support for one third of them is overwhelming, with ml bootstrap of 100%, pp of  <dig> , and ddbs >  <dig> steps: cetacea plus hippopotamidae, cetacea, mysticeti, balaenopteroidea, balaenopteridae, physeteroidea, delphinida, inioidea, and phocoenidae. another seven clades have very strong support, with ml bootstrap of 100%, pp of  <dig> , and ddbs values between  <dig> and  <dig> steps: odontoceti, synrhina, ziphiidae, delphinoidea, monodontoidae, delphinidae, and delphininae. although there was broad congruence among these analyses, lipotes and platanista, two of the river dolphin genera, were inconsistently positioned in parsimony and explicitly model-based searches. therefore, the tree supported by bayesian and ml analyses of the molecular partition was used as a topological scaffold in an additional analysis of the morphological partition to determine how this underlying topology influences phylogenetic interpretations of extinct taxa. the ml/bayesian constrained tree and the parsimony supermatrix tree suggest that the phylogenetic relationships of many extinct otus are unstable due to missing character data and to the density of taxonomic sampling, but several fossils were consistently positioned relative to extant taxa.

 <dig>  all trees with extinct taxa had a statistically significant fit with the fossil record, suggesting that the fossil record of crown cetacea is quite good. of the  <dig> described and undescribed oligocene cetaceans included in our analyses, all were positioned outside of crown odontoceti and crown mysticeti. thus our results do not support the hypothesis that the basal splits in both crown groups occurred in the late eocene to early oligocene as proposed by several molecular clock studies. however, we could not statistically reject some suboptimal topologies that placed oligocene odontocetes within crown odontoceti. futhermore, additional oligocene taxa need to be included in future combined phylogenetic analyses of molecular and morphological data - most notably ferecetotherium kelloggi, notocetus marplesi, oligodelphis azerbajdzanicus, mauicetus parki, and several undescribed specimens.

 <dig>  by allocating multiple, extinct, marine odontocetes to clades that include extant river dolphins, our analyses support the hypothesis that marine odontocetes invaded river systems on multiple occasions. extant river dolphins share a suite of morphological features associated with raptorial prey capture. some of these character states are symplesiomorphic whereas others may be convergent, depending upon the topology accepted and on alternative equally parsimonious optimizations. on the ml/bayesian constrained trees, most if not all of these states evolved in marine lineages, whereas on the trees derived from a parsimony analysis of the supermatrix, at least half of these characters evolved in marine taxa. even on the latter trees, no river dolphin character associated with prey capture is interpreted to have evolved separately on the three terminal branches leading to extant freshwater taxa. thus we find little support for the hypothesis that these characters are adaptations to river environments.

