BACKGROUND
insecticides play a vital role in reducing malaria transmission in africa. an escalation in the use of two very effective tools, indoor residual spraying with insecticides and insecticide treated bednets, has led to impressive reductions in malaria with child death rates halved and more than  <dig>  million lives saved since  <dig>  <cit> . inevitably, as insecticide use has intensified, malaria vectors have developed resistance to these chemicals . with just four classes of insecticides available for public health and only the pyrethroids approved for bednet treatment, this poses a major challenge to sustaining and extending recent achievements in malaria reduction.

numerous studies have attempted to identify the genes responsible for insecticide resistance in the major malaria vectors. one of the most potent mechanisms identified to date is increased activity of enzymes that detoxify insecticides . four enzyme families are known to be associated with insecticide metabolism , glutathione transferases , udp glucornyltransferases  and cytochrome p450s ) and a number of individual enzymes, most notably from the cytochrome p <dig> family, have been implicated in conferring resistance to one or more insecticide classes . more recently, the importance of interactions between different enzymes and transporters in the insecticide detoxification pathway has been recognised  <cit> . to dissect these pathways further, and to distinguish members of these large gene families with housekeeping functions from those more likely to have detoxification roles, further information on their sites of expression is required. the first objective of this study was to characterise expression patterns of the key gene families associated with insecticide resistance across the major organs linked to xenobiotic detoxification in insects, with a particular focus on the p450s. although transcriptomes of many of the key tissues in anopheles gambiae have already been described , this study used material from a highly insecticide resistant strain and from a susceptible strain to identify genes whose tissue-specific enrichment might be linked to the resistance phenotype.

to date, all comparisons of the transcriptome between insecticide resistant and susceptible malaria vectors have compared gene expression in the whole organism. this approach has the potential to miss candidates. if, for example, expression of a gene is restricted to an organ that contributes only a small proportion of mrna to the total rna pool, or differential expression occurs in only one tissue, even large differences in expression between a resistant and susceptible population may not be detectable  <cit> . thus the second objective of the study was to compare gene expression in key body parts between an insecticide resistant and susceptible strain of mosquito to identify candidates not immediately apparent in whole organism microarray studies. adult mosquitoes were dissected into body parts that could be readily separated with minimal risk of contamination, and are suspected to be involved in metabolic resistance.

RESULTS
rna was extracted from three dissected ‘body parts’: the malpighian tubules, the midgut and the abdomen integument  with the remaining undissected body parts forming a fourth sample group. each biological replicate consisted of 15– <dig> adult female mosquitoes from the major african malaria vector, an. gambiae. dissections were performed on an insecticide susceptible strain  originally from cameroon  <cit>  and the tiassalé strain from cote d’ivoire, which is highly resistant to all four classes of insecticide  <cit> .

transcription in these body parts was compared in two ways  each body part against the corresponding whole organism for both strains and  resistant against the corresponding susceptible body parts .

gene enrichment in individual body part versus whole organism
transcripts showing enriched transcription in each of the four body parts were determined using a multiple test correction significance cut-off of p ≤ <dig>  for both the resistant and susceptible strains. as expected, a clear positive correlation can be observed for local transcription between the resistant and susceptible strains in each body part. this is illustrated in figure  <dig>  where the vast majority of probes follow a y = x trend.figure  <dig> 
gene enrichment in individual body parts in insecticide susceptible and resistant mosquitoes. log <dig> fold change in transcription of all probes in individual tissues against the reconstituted whole organism, plotted for tiassalé  and n’gousso . probes for the four detoxification families are indicated in pink , green , red  and yellow .



in all body parts, similar numbers of transcripts showed enriched or depleted transcription compared to the whole organism, with a range of  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the total probes . the magnitude of change in transcription of individual transcripts in the midgut and remaining body parts is relatively low with no transcripts exceeding log <dig> fold change of  <dig>  compared to the abdomen integument and malpighian tubules where  <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively are above log <dig> 3-fold enriched . the full lists of transcripts enriched in each body parts are listed in additional file 3: table s <dig> 

the an. gambiae genome contains  <dig> genes encoding four major detoxification families  and  <dig> ugts), together comprising  <dig> % of the probes on the agilent array  <cit> . each of the dissected body parts have an over representation of detoxification transcripts with more members of these gene families overtranscribed relative to the whole organism than found in the ‘remaining’ . additional file 2: table s <dig> shows that  <dig> % of the total number of detoxification transcripts are enriched in the malpighian tubules of the resistant strain,  <dig> % in the midgut and  <dig> % in the abdomen integument. in contrast, the ‘remaining’  show a depletion of detoxification transcripts in the overtranscribed subset when compared to the whole organism. these data reinforce the importance of the selected body parts in xenobiotic detoxification.

the cytochrome p <dig> family has been most strongly linked with insecticide resistance in anopheles mosquitoes, with several enzymes capable of detoxifying insecticides from more than one class  <cit> . identifying the primary sites of transcription of this enzyme family will aid prediction of function  <cit>  and help identify the key organs largely responsible for insecticide detoxification in resistant mosquitoes. within the p <dig> gene family, body part enrichment shows some relationship with the gene tree clustering  with the cyp9j and 6p families largely enriched in the midgut, the cyp4gs, 6ys and 325cs enriched in the abdomen integument and the cyp6z family enriched in the malpighian tubules. the diversity in enrichment patterns within this gene family led us to look specifically at thirteen cytochrome p450s that had been implicated in insecticide resistance to see if these were enriched in a particular body part . the criteria for inclusion of these p450s as candidate insecticide resistant genes was that they had been found to be significantly over expressed in pyrethroid and/or ddt resistant an. gambiae populations in more than one independent study. four of these transcripts were significantly  and highly  enriched in the malpighian tubules  compared to whole organism and one was enriched in the midgut and two in the abdomen integument . the remaining  <dig> showed no significant tissue enrichment.figure  <dig> 
local expression of cytochrome p450s linked to insecticide resistance. heatmap showing the log <dig> fold change of a subset of cytochrome p450s  in different body parts of the tiassalé strain. crosses indicate non-significance .



the enrichment of a subset of seven cytochrome p450s in particular body parts was confirmed by qpcr, although for two of these midgut enriched transcripts, a much greater over expression was observed by qpcr than for microarray  . antibodies were available for three cytochrome p450s, which were used to confirm the major sites of transcription within the abdomen integument of the tiassalé resistant strain. in agreement with microarray transcription data, cyp6z <dig> and cyp6z <dig> were detected in the malpighian tubules of resistant mosquitoes, whilst cyp4g <dig>  identified as enriched in the abdomen integument by both microarray and qpcr, was found only in the oenocytes, a cellular layer located under the abdomen cuticle . a cyp4g from drosophila melanogaster, cyp4g <dig>  has also been shown to be highly enriched in oenocyte cells; this drosophila enzyme catalyses a key step in the formation of cuticular hydrocarbons  <cit> . the potential role of over expression of 4g <dig>  and its paralogue 4g <dig>  in altering the cuticular structure in insecticide resistant mosquitoes is currently under investigation.figure  <dig> 
immunohistochemical stainings of cytochrome p450s associated with pyrethroid resistance. longitudinal sections from resistant mosquito  specimens immunostained with a) a-cyp6z <dig>  b) a-cyp6z <dig> and c) a-cyp4g <dig> specific antibodies . the middle panel shows the same sections stained red using the nucleic acid stain topro. the merged immunohistochemical staining  appears in the right column. bar scale : 100 nm.



a new list of candidate insecticide resistance genes from the body part specific arrays
the two strains used in this study originate from sites separated by approximately  <dig>  km, so substantial variation in gene transcription between them is to be expected, regardless of the difference in their insecticide resistance profile. thus caution must be applied when correlating gene transcription levels with the resistance phenotype. however, with a goal of identifying further candidate insecticide resistance genes from the direct comparisons between dissected body parts from the resistant and susceptible strain for further functional validation, we applied a stringent selection process to derive a new gene list. this involved selecting only genes detected as enriched in body parts from tiassalé versus n’gousso via both the limma and gaga methods with an adjusted p value ≤ <dig>  and setting a cut off of  <dig> -fold differential expression . this identified a list of  <dig> transcripts, representing  <dig> genes transcribed at higher levels in the tiassalé strain and  <dig> genes with higher transcription in the susceptible n’gousso strain . eleven of these transcripts were selected for qpcr validation yielding a positive correlation with the array ) .figure  <dig> 
validation of selection of genes from the candidate list by qpcr. log <dig> fold change from qpcr data and array data of the direct comparison between the resistant and susceptible populations  <cit> . genes were selected from the ‘stringent candidate gene list’ consisting of probes enriched in the resistant versus susceptible strain in one or more dissected body parts. standard error bars are shown.



all of the  <dig> cytochrome p450s  on this candidate list were also detected in the direct whole comparisons of the whole organism transcriptomes between these strains . indeed the majority  of the  <dig> transcripts on our candidate list derived from the comparisons of dissected body parts were also detected in comparisons of the entire transcriptome between the two strains. nevertheless,  <dig>  would have been missed using whole organism arrays and  <dig>  of the genes are regulated in the opposite direction between the whole organism and dissected body part comparisons. of the  <dig> transcripts not detected in strain comparisons at the whole organism level, the majority  were detected from the abdomen integument . abdomen integuments from other resistant strains of an. gambiae are being dissected to search for further supporting evidence for a role of these transcripts in conferring resistance prior to follow up functional analysis.table  <dig> 
genes showing the greatest differential expression between resistant and susceptible strains in specific body parts, but which were not identified in whole transcriptome comparisons


splice variants, as predicted by vectorbase, are labelled with variations of -rx.



CONCLUSIONS
microarrays are widely used to identify insecticide resistance mechanisms in mosquito populations  <cit> . however, all of these studies have used whole-organism rna as a template, which may dilute or distort the final level of transcript expression detectable. by dissecting some of the major body parts involved in xenobiotic detoxification from two strains of an. gambiae, differing in their resistance phenotype we have been able to simultaneously identify the local expression profiles of known insecticide resistance candidates and compare transcription between the two strains within individual body parts.

this rich data set will be useful for establishing pathways of detoxification as genes catalysing the three classic classes of drug metabolism   <cit>  would be expected to be co-regulated. pyrethroid mimetic activity–based probes, used to detect pyrethroid metabolising enzymes in the rat liver, identified a potential network of drug metabolising enzymes from multiple families involved in pyrethroid metabolism  <cit> . applying the same approach to insecticide resistant mosquitoes and using the data on local transcription from the current data set, will help unravel the pathways of insecticide metabolism selected for by intensive use of pyrethroids.

although potential new insecticide resistance candidates have emerged from this study, it is encouraging that the majority of candidate insecticide resistant transcripts identified from direct comparison of the transcriptomes of dissected body part were also detected in the whole organisms comparisons. no single body part emerged as the key site of overtranscription of putative insecticide resistance genes in this study and it is therefore recommended that, unless resources enable a more comprehensive study design involving multiple dissected tissues, transcriptional approaches to identify candidate insecticide resistance transcripts continue to use the whole body transcriptome. nevertheless this data set on local sites of transcription should be consulted when designing follow up qpcr validation steps, or for screening known candidates in field populations.

