BACKGROUND
hybrid plants can show enhanced growth rate, novel phenotypes or adaptive advantages in diverse environments. they may even have enhanced potential to evolve into new species  <cit> . the unique biology of hybrids has led to the proposal of many hypothetical molecular, genetic and epigenetic mechanisms to explain the differences between progeny and progenitors . one intriguing hypothesis is that variation in gene expression is a driver of hybrid biology. expression variation has been proposed as a driver of phenotypic changes, species evolution and domestication . gene expression levels in hybrids can vary in comparison to the levels in either parent, usually classified into additive/mid-parent values  and several non-additive categories, such as low-parent dominance  or high-parent dominance , although expression outside the range of the two parents is rare  <cit> . the relative proportion of non-additive inheritance usually varies across species, crosses and tissues . while the underlying mechanisms regulating gene expression in hybrids remain to be discovered, small rna and transposable elements  have been proposed as likely agents that may trigger non-additive inheritance  <cit> .

tes were discovered by mcclintock and proposed as regulators of gene expression  <cit> . recent studies suggest that tes can mediate genome-wide rewiring of gene regulatory networks  <cit> . there are many possible ways that a te could affect gene expression  <cit> , including disrupting gene integrity by inserting into genes, creating or disrupting direct cis-regulatory elements, and capturing and duplicating genes or gene fragments  <cit> . the proteins encoded by tes and their relatives can also affect gene expression  <cit> . another way tes may modify gene expression is to sensitize a gene to be under epigenetic control. since tes are usually epigenetically silenced  <cit> , silencing can spread from tes to closely linked genes  <cit> . this spread could cause reduced expression of nearby genes  <cit> . the regulatory effect of tes on gene expression is rather stable, can persist through hybridization and be transmitted across generations  <cit> .

small rna is composed mostly of mirna and small interfering rna . the role of sirna is generally considered to be the silencing of tes and genes, which occurs largely by rna-directed dna methylation or post-transcriptional pathways  <cit> . both sirna and tes can regulate gene expression. for instance, in the case of paramutation, where gene expression levels in the progeny are similar to one parent and deviate from the mid-parent value, sirna has been proposed to be the control mechanism  <cit> . similarly, insertion of a te in a gene or promoter can alter expression patterns or levels. given the role of tes and sirna in gene expression regulation, and the relative speed with which plant genomes diverge in both tes and sirna content, we investigated the observed diversity of gene expression levels in a hybrid system for links to either te or sirna or both. in our study, we found a number of such links, and we also found a correlation between short sense strand rna fragments, high levels of gene expression and hp inheritance.

RESULTS
inheritance patterns of mrna and genic small rna in arabidopsis hybrids
to study how mrna and genic small rna levels are inherited in hybrids, we sequenced mrna and small rna from four genotypes, col, ler and their reciprocal hybrids col × ler  and ler × col  from leaf tissues . we used four pooled leaves from a single plant to prepare each total rna sample, with four plants producing four biological replicate samples. this was done to preserve the variation in mrna and small rna from a single individual, rather than using a mixture of different plants which may vary for small rna and mrna levels. we reasoned that the use of a single plant per replicate would facilitate the study of dynamic co-regulation between small rna and mrna levels. we obtained 10– <dig> million mapped mrna reads and 1– <dig> million mapped small rna reads for each library . at this sequencing depth, a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  protein-coding genes were found to uniquely match sequenced mrna and genic small rna, respectively;  <dig> genes were found with both mrna and genic small rna .

at fdr <  <dig> , we found  <dig>  genes with differentially expressed mrna and  <dig>  genes with differentially expressed genic small rna among col, ler and the hybrids . these differentially expressed genes could be assigned into seven groups based on the comparison of the expression level in hybrids and their two parents . for mrna, the expression level of most of the genes  was additive . about 31 % of the genes showed non-additive expression levels in the hybrids similar to one of the two parents, either hp or lp. we also detected several genes that showed expression levels between the mp value and lp value . there were very few cases  where the hybrid expression levels were between the mp value and hp value  or outside the parental range . similar to mrna, most of the genes  with genic small rna showed small rna levels inherited additively in hybrids. about  <dig>  % of these genes showed lpmp and lp inheritance of small rna levels , similar to previous findings in arabidopsis and other species  <cit> . genes with genic small rna levels outside the parental range were rare, as in the case of mrna. we looked at gene ontology for the genes with different inheritance patterns of mrna, and found that genes with mp, lpmp and lp inheritance patterns were mostly enriched in the categories of response to stress, protein amino acid phosphorylation and nucleotide binding activity. the genes with hp inheritance patterns were mainly enriched in photosynthesis and ribosome structural composition . because of the very low number of genes with ahp, hpmp, and blp patterns, the following analysis will focus on the  <dig>  genes with hp, mp, lpmp and lp inheritance patterns for mrna levels.table  <dig> number of genes observed with additive and non-additive inheritance patterns of genic small rna and mrna in arabidopsis hybrids


ahp above high-parent, blp below low-parent, hp high-parent, hpmp between mid-parent and high-parent, lp low-parent, lpmp between mid-parent and low-parent, mp mid-parent, uc unclassified 



small rna and tes correlate with different mrna inheritance patterns in hybrids
to study whether tes and the production of small rnas might influence the inheritance patterns of gene expression, mrna inheritance in hybrids was compared among four classes of genes: genes lacking tes and small rnas; genes with one or more tes within the gene boundaries but no small rnas; genes with small rnas but no tes; and genes with both one or more tes and small rnas . out of the  <dig>  differentially expressed genes, ~15 % of them have either small rna matching the gene, a te within the gene, or both. compared to genes that are without tes or small rna, this set of genes shows a higher proportion of non-additive gene inheritance patterns . more genes with small rna but not tes show a hp pattern; however when tes are present, more lpmp and lp genes are found. interestingly, genes with both tes and small rna show similar proportions of inheritance patterns to genes that only have tes. the increase in lpmp and lp inheritance patterns was most obvious when the te was within the gene boundaries, and decayed rapidly when a te was located nearby, upstream or downstream of the gene .fig.  <dig> small rna  and tes are associated with mrna inheritance patterns in hybrids. the percentage of genes differentially expressed between the two parents with different inheritance patterns  are plotted on the y axis for each of four te/srna categories: te-, absence of any tes; te+, presence of one or more tes; srna-, absence of small rna; srna+, presence of small rna. the number of genes in each of the four te/srna categories is given below each category



presence of small rna, tes and mrna inheritance patterns correlate with mrna expression levels in parents
we studied whether mrna expression level in parents was associated with mrna inheritance patterns in hybrids. we found that genes with different mrna inheritance patterns show different mrna levels in parents. while genes with hp inheritance patterns show the highest median expression levels, genes with lpmp and lp patterns show relatively low median expression levels. the lowest mrna abundance of all was observed for genes with lpmp inheritance . this pattern was further illustrated by comparing mrna inheritance patterns for genes with different mrna abundance in parents. while highly expressed genes  were often associated with hp inheritance in hybrids, genes with lower levels of mrna expression  were frequently associated with lp inheritance . thus, highly-expressed genes tend to show hp inheritance patterns, and genes with lower expression levels are more likely to show lp inheritance patterns. as expected from the observations that hp-inherited genes are associated with small rnas but lack tes, this class of genes are enriched in highly-expressed genes .fig.  <dig> the expression level of genes with different inheritance in hybrids, and genes with tes or srna. a mrna inheritance in hybrids is related to mrna abundance  in the parents. the letters a, b, c and d above each box indicate the mrna level is significantly different between the genes in each group and all three other groups with different mrna inheritance patterns based on a wilcoxon rank-sum test. b mrna inheritance for genes with different expression levels in parents. c genes with small rna but no tes  tend to be highly expressed genes . rpk = normalized mrna read counts per kb. hp, high-parent; lp, low-parent; lpmp, between lp and mp; mp, mid-parent; srna: small rna



small rna that correlates with high mrna expression levels in parents and hp inheritance in hybrids is predominantly from sense strand
the association of tes and small rna with reduced gene expression has been well documented previously, but it was unexpected that the presence of small rna  was found to be associated with increased gene expression. to provide further insight, we studied the relationship between genic small rna and mrna levels using the two parental genotypes, col and ler. we found that small rna level was positively correlated with mrna level, but only when mrna expression was above a clearly defined threshold of around  <dig>  normalized reads . interestingly, both the presence of tes and the strand from which small rna was detected were strongly differentiated between the genes above and below this expression threshold. the genes with high mrna levels, as expected, were much less likely to have tes than genes with low mrna levels . moreover, small rna of the highly expressed genes predominantly or exclusively matched the sense strand , while sense and antisense strands were roughly equally expressed from genes where mrna was expressed at lower levels . we studied how small rna strandedness in parents correlates with mrna expression patterns in hybrids . we found more sense strand small rna  in the genes with hp inheritance, and more small rna from both strands in the genes with lpmp and lp inheritance. significantly, this distribution of sssrna levels closely resembled that of mrna levels .fig.  <dig> association between mrna level and srna level depends on the strand specificity of the srna. a plot of srna abundance against mrna expression level. the grey “x” represents genes that were not differentially expressed. dots of different colors represent differentially expressed genes with different mrna inheritance patterns. blue, hp; grey, mp; orange, lpmp; red, lp. genes were divided into two groups based on their mrna abundance, “group i”  and “group ii” . group ii genes showed significant positive correlation between srna level and mrna level. b percentage of genes with gene body tes in “group i” and “group ii” genes. c percentage of sense strand srna for genes in “group i” and “group ii”. **,p <  <dig> . d mrna inheritance is correlated with srna strand-specificity. high parent inherited genes  show statistically significant enrichment for sense-strand specific srna, other inheritance patterns  show roughly equal levels of srna from the two strands. e genes with more than 90 % of small rna from the sense strand  show more cg methylation in the gene body. f mrna inheritance pattern and dna methylation pattern. hp, high-parent; lp, low-parent; lpmp, between lp and mp; mp, mid-parent; srna: small rna



dna methylation has been suggested to be associated with reduced gene expression, and the presence of gene body methylation is linked and correlated with the presence of transposons  <cit> . however, gene-body methylation in the cg sequence context is frequently associated with high mrna expression level . since we observed an association between sssrna and high mrna abundance, we were interested to see how sssrna correlates with dna methylation. using a recently published dataset on the arabidopsis methylome  <cit> , we investigated the possibility that different dna methylation patterns are associated with sssrna. we found that genes with small rna derived predominantly from the sense strand correlate with genes with cg methylation or no methylation. on the other hand, genes with small rna from both strands tend to have methylation in all sequence contexts . we also observed that genes with high-parent inheritance were more likely to lack methylation, and genes with lpmp inheritance are very likely to be methylated . while sssrna is associated with high-parent inheritance pattern in hybrids , such an association was not observed for cg methylation .

observed patterns are replicated in a second cross
in order to investigate the possibility that our results were in some way specific to our experimental conditions, we used the data of shen et al.  <cit>  to investigate the relationships in a second experimental hybrid system. shen et al. used different arabidopsis accessions , different tissues , and a different sequencing platform . similar to the results in our dataset, we found that small rna levels were positively associated with mrna level when mrna abundance was above a threshold level . those highly expressed genes more frequently had sssrna, and were less likely to have tes , while genes expressed at low levels were more likely to have both sense and antisense small rna, and tes . we also observed association between sssrna and high parent-inheritance , but were not able to statistically evaluate this result because of limited replication in the second dataset. also, we found that genes with predominantly sssrna were frequently associated with cg methylation . similar to the results in the ler x col cross, genes with hp-like inheritance patterns had reduced levels of dna methylation .

the sssrnas likely arise from mrna degradation
in order to determine the molecular origin of the sssrnas that are correlated with high parent expression, we first looked at the size distribution of these species to assess whether they fit the canonical 21-24 nt size range typical of processing by dicer  <cit> . fig. 4a-c show the size distribution for small rnas in the range 21-28 nt, for high and low expressed mrnas , loci producing predominantly sense strand species versus mixed species, and the four inheritance classes for each locus. both highly-expressed genes and genes with mostly sssrnas produce similar proportions of rnas in each size class with a slight progressive bias to shorter rnas, a distribution consistent with products of mrna degradation instead of processing by dicer. the genes that show hp inheritance patterns have slightly more 25-28 nt small rna but 21-24 nt small rnas are still the dominant small rna species. while the genes that show lp inheritance have predominantly 24 nt small rna indicative of sirnas, genes with hp or mp inheritance have a high proportion of 21 nt species .fig.  <dig> sense strand srnas are not canonical small interfering rna. a comparison of srna size distribution for highly expressed  and lower expressed genes . b distribution of srna size for genes with predominantly  sssrna and genes with less than 90 % of srna from the sense strand. c distribution of srna size for genes with different mrna inheritance patterns. d mrna half-life for genes with different percentages of sssrna. error bars represent the standard deviation of four biological replicates. rpk = normalized mrna read counts per kb. hp, high-parent; lp, low-parent; lpmp, between lp and mp; mp, mid-parent; srna: small rna



additional observations indicate that the sssrnas are likely associated with mrna degradation. firstly, degradation intermediates, along with regulatory small rnas, are captured in small rna libraries because they are in the selected size range and possess a free 5’po4− group capable of adaptor ligation. secondly, the sssrnas do not exhibit the marked bias to 5’ terminal uridine  or adenosine nucleotides  that is preferred for argonaute binding . thirdly, we investigated whether sssrna correlated with mrna half-life  <cit> . the mrnas associated with genes producing high levels of sssrna showed a tendency to have longer half lives than other genes , linking the production of these species with the mechanisms of rna degradation.

discussion
tes and small rna are associated with high probability of non-additive mrna inheritance in hybrids
following hybridization, differentially expressed genes between parents could follow the mean of the two parents , or deviate from mp . the proportion of genes showing additive and non-additive expression usually varies substantially between studies  <cit> , and this has been widely attributed to the different assay platforms, species, crosses and tissues. there are a number of possible regulatory mechanisms that could lead to non-additive gene expression, which complicates prediction of the phenotypic consequences from hybridization. here, we present that integrated knowledge of nearby tes, mrna expression level, and small rna strandedness in parents serve as indicators of the direction of deviation from additive expression.

for genes that had both small rna and tes, the gene expression levels are generally low and the small rnas possess the expected properties of sirnas. these genes are often associated with a low-parent inheritance pattern, which is consistent with a role for sirna in gene silencing in hybrid plants. we propose that sirnas and tes are therefore causally related to lp and lpmp inheritance. however, for genes with detectable small rna but no te, the gene expression levels are often very high, and small rna sequencing identifies predominantly or exclusively sense-strand derived fragments with high proportions of 25-28 nt rnas and little noticeable 5’ nucleotide bias. these features are correlated with hp inheritance in the hybrids. the fact that small rna from different strands is associated with contrasting non-additive inheritance patterns suggests that small rna strandedness should be considered in future studies on small rna and gene expression pattern. we should note that while we observed strong correlations in this study, these are significant associations not qualitative relationships. many exceptions exist, such as highly expressed genes that contain tes, or additively expressed genes that produce sirna. it is therefore possible that if these phenomena are causative of non-additive gene expression, they may not be the only mechanisms regulating non-additive expression in hybrids.

mechanistic implications of sssrnas and high-parent inheritance
despite a long-known association between sirna, dna methylation and low levels of mrna expression, it has previously been described that genes with body methylation can show higher expression than genes that are unmethylated  <cit> . one explanation is that cg  of methylation) is associated with higher expression levels  <cit> . examples where sirna level is positively correlated with mrna level in hybrids have been described before  <cit> . here, at the genome-wide scale in arabidopsis, we found that small rna sequencing can also identify small rnas whose accumulation is positively correlated with mrna level , occurs in the absence of tes  and are derived predominantly from the sense strand . these sssrnas are most likely created by endonuclease activity on mrna from highly expressed genes. supporting this conclusion, the sssrnas exhibited a wider size distribution and lacked the 5’ terminal nucleotide bias of 21-24 nt for mirnas or sirnas . also these sssrnas are derived from sequence throughout the transcript , making it unlikely that they are products of the dcl family enzymes.

importantly, we observe a large number of highly-expressed genes that produce no detectable small rna. thus, sssrnas do not appear to be a general outcome from mrna degradation. one explanation for this difference is that not all highly expressed genes may produce sufficiently stable 21-24 nt degradation intermediates to be detected by the rna-adaptor ligation approaches that are used to generate small rna libraries. we also considered the possibility that argonaute binding could preferentially stabilize the subset of mrna degradation products with 5’ u or a terminal nucleotides, but did not find evidence supporting this hypothesis . additionally, these sssrnas were from genes that tend to have longer half-lives, which is in contrast to the expected abundance of mrnas derived from endonuclease degradation through a common pool of enzymes and intermediates . we therefore have no definitive evidence for the mechanism by which sssrnas were produced.

we observed a correlation between hp inherited mrna expression level in hybrid offspring and the presence of sssrnas matching the hp inherited mrnas. we propose three possible mechanisms by which sssrna might be linked to a mechanism for hp inheritance, each of which could be tested with future work.

one explanation of this correlation could be that sssrnas may functionally contribute to trans-acting regulatory mechanisms that, in turn, stimulate higher expression of both loci in a hybrid diploid. this could occur in a manner analogous, but opposite in outcome, to the repressive effects of sirna and tes that mediate lp or lpmp expression. interaction of sssrnas with other factors that either activate or repress gene transcription would then mediate this effect. however, this speculative mechanism would require the invocation of a previously undiscovered, sssrna-mediated mechanism for transcriptional activation.

another explanation is that sssrnas could be indicative of different degradation rates of mrnas, and that mrna degradation is therefore implicated in the mechanism of hp inheritance. we expect that, once free of the 5’ cap and 3’ poly  tail or cleaved by mirna-targeted action, mrnas are degraded by enzymes, largely exonucleases, that are not sequence specific. on this basis, all mrna in the process of degradation would be part of a common pool, and thus, for two mrnas with the same overall level of accumulation but different half-lives, degradation intermediates of the shorter-lived mrna would be expected to be more common, since this transcript will have a higher rate of synthesis and thus more intermediates at each stage of degradation. we would also expect oligomer intermediates such as sssrna to be biased towards certain sites, which are furthest from the site unprotected from exonuclease action by cleavage or tail/cap loss. since we observe more sssrna for longer-lived mrnas, and sssrna throughout the transcript, our results are not consistent with sssrna being the expected degradation intermediates of mrnas. one possible explanation is that certain mrnas with longer half-lives are degraded differently, producing degradation intermediates with different positional bias and longer half-lives. this could be a result of varying affinities of the degradation machinery for different mrnas, or be the consequence of a property of the mrnas . either way, this explanation requires different mrnas to show different degradation rates and/or fragment sizes after degradation has been initiated by mirna-directed cleavage, loss of poly  tail or loss of 5’ cap. in hybrids, mrna degradation could therefore act differentially on a subset of highly expressed genes, leading to hp inheritance of those genes.

a third, related possibility is that the sssrna are an indication of degradation pathways becoming overloaded under certain conditions in hybrids, leading to hp inheritance through reduced degradation rates. a link was recently reported between cytoplasmic mrna decay and suppression of post-transcriptional gene silencing   <cit> . disruption of rna decay increases ptgs, as evidenced by the increased production of sirnas from protein coding transcripts . these ct-sirna were also shown to be associated with highly expressed genes, leading to the interpretation that when rna decay pathways are disrupted by genetic mutation or overloaded by high-level expression of transgenes or endogenous genes, aberrant transcripts are channeled into the ptgs pathway. although our evidence does not support sssrnas as being produced via ptgs, our observations are consistent with the idea that when parental gene expression levels are very high, they may overload cellular capacity for mrna degradation under some conditions. increased levels of rna production and degradation in hybrids, as a general consequence of hybrid vigor or of epigenetically activated transcription, could lead to a global “degradation overload” effect on gene expression inheritance, one which may be more prevalent among genes with highly stable mrnas. a subtly different interpretation would be that since our data is derived from bulk mrna extraction from leaf tissue, it is possible that mrna degradation is overloaded in some cell types only, and both hp inheritance and sssrna are a consequence of high level, cell-specific expression of certain genes in hybrids, in a subset of the cells investigated. if mrna degradation is indeed limiting in some cell types, sssrna would be prevalent for the genes highly expressed in these cells, and these mrnas also tend to have longer than average half lives.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we describe significant associations between mrna expression levels, small rna fragments, tes and non-additive gene expression in hybrids. we show evidence that sssrna is associated with high mrna expression in parents of a cross and with hp inheritance in hybrids. we also show that lp and lpmp inheritance are correlated with low mrna expression in parents, with small rna from both the sense and antisense strands, with the presence of tes and with dna methylation in all sequence contexts. thus, known mechanisms of transcriptional silencing may account for lp and lpmp inheritance patterns via trans repression of genes by sirna inherited from one parent, much of which is initiated by the presence of tes within gene bodies. for hp inheritance, a challenging phenomenon to interpret using currently understood mechanisms of gene expression control, we suggest that overloaded mrna decay may be involved in mediating hp inheritance patterns for at least some highly-expressed genes.

