BACKGROUND
wheat is the most widely consumed food crop in the world, being processed to give a wide range of products, such as bread, pasta, biscuits, and noodles. this unique versatility is mostly due to gluten proteins, the cohesive mass remaining after washing out the starch granules and water soluble components from a wheat dough. gluten was first described by beccari in  <dig> .

gluten proteins, belonging to the “prolamin superfamily”  <cit> , are composed of gliadins and glutenins. gliadins are monomeric proteins, whereas glutenins are polymeric proteins, considered among the largest natural protein molecules  <cit> . glutenin polymers are made up of protein subunits of high  and low  molecular weight, linked together by intermolecular disulfide bonds. the size and composition of the glutenin polymers play an important role in determining dough rheological properties  <cit> .

the hmw-gs are better characterized than lmw-gs, since these latter are much more numerous and heterogeneous. lmw-gs can be classified according to different criteria, based on their primary structure, electrophoretic mobility in sds-page and n-terminal amino acid sequence. lmw-gs are distinguished into typical types, namely those proteins having a particular primary structure, and gliadin-like types, namely those lmw-gs that are gliadins according to the primary structure, but functionally act like glutenin subunits, due to the presence of an odd number of cysteine residues. the odd number of cysteines enables these gliadin-like proteins to form intermolecular disulfide bonds that incorporate them into glutenin polymer. based largely on their order of increasing electrophoretic mobility in sds-page, lmw-gs are classified into b, c and d groups. the b group is composed primarily of typical lmw-gs, whereas the majority of c and d subunits correspond to gliadin-like proteins. the c subunits include mostly α- and γ-gliadin-like lmw-gs, whereas the d group includes ω-gliadin-like proteins, which may be slower moving than b subunits .

all these proteins are initially targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum, where signal sequence cleavage occurs, and then transported to the protein storage vacuole. while post-translational modifications of storage proteins have been extensively studied in legumes, they have received less attention in cereals where, with the notable exception of rice, prolamins constitute the majority of the accumulated polypeptides. identification of distinct processing events would be very useful, not only to understand the mechanisms that lead to accumulation of the mature proteins, but also as a tool to monitor their intracellular transport. information on post-translational events involved in the biosynthesis of prolamins is indeed rather sparse. for instance, the c-terminal domain of wheat lmw-gs and γ-gliadins presents homology with 2s storage proteins, but, while these proteins are often proteolytically processed after transport to the storage vacuole  <cit> , the wheat proteins maintain an intact c-terminal domain. proteolytic processing of vacuolar storage proteins is often due to the action of asparaginyl endopeptidases, a class of proteolytic enzymes  that preferentially cleave after asparagine residues. the repetitive domain of prolamins is rich in proline and glutamine, but poor in asparagine, and thus lacks sites that can be cleaved by these enzymes. however, indication that enzymes belonging to this class may be involved in the maturation of prolamins is now emerging. cleavage after an asparagine residue has been hypothesized in the processing of certain ω-gliadins  <cit> . further evidence indicating that asparaginyl endopeptidases play a role in wheat storage protein maturation is provided by the comparison of the n-terminal sequences of different lmw-gs. typical lmw-gs are in fact classified according to the n-terminal amino acid residue of the mature protein: serine in lmw-s, methionine in lmw-m and isoleucine in lmw-i types . lmw-s and lmw-m are, on the basis of complete nucleotide sequences, practically identical. the n-terminal amino acid sequences of these two protein types differ in that the first three n-terminal amino acids, met-  in the mature sequence of lmw-m-types are absent from the amino acid sequence of the s-type. however, the nucleotide sequence encoding these three residues is present in the s-type lmw-gs genes with the exception that the codon encoding threonine is replaced by that encoding asparagine, at least in a specific lmw-s type gene    <cit>  .

according to signal sequence cleavage site prediction algorithms, cleavage by signal peptidase would generate a qmet- n-terminal amino acid sequence for lmw-m  type subunits . removal of the n-terminal glutamine residue would therefore be required to generate m- or s-type lmw-gs, although it has been suggested that the signal cleavage might be degenerate, producing both cleavages  <cit> . on the other hand, the identification of the gene coding for a specific lmw-s type   <cit>  showed the presence of a codon encoding an asparagine in place of a threonine before the start of the mature sequence . accordingly, we postulated that the presence of an asparagine in the unprocessed protein in place of a threonine residue could result in preferential processing to produce an n-terminal end of the lmw-s type  <cit> . this would result from cleavage of the peptide men by an asparaginyl endoprotease, similar to a process that occurs in ω-gliadins  <cit> .

in order to test our hypothesis, we expressed native and mutated versions of lmw-m and lmw-s genes in the endosperm tissue of transgenic durum wheats. proteomic comparisons, ms/ms analyses and edman degradation, demonstrated the involvement of asparagine in the formation of the lmw-s glutenin subunits.

our results indicate that lmw-gs can be quantitatively processed most likely by vacuolar asparaginyl endoproteases, and suggest that lmw-gs accumulated in the vacuole are not sequestered into stable aggregates that would hinder the action of proteolytic enzymes. rather, our results indicate that, whatever is the mechanism of glutenin polymer transport to the vacuole, the proteins remain available for proteolytic processing, and can be converted to the mature form by the removal of a short n-terminal sequence.

RESULTS
production of wheat transgenic plants
the descriptions of the genes used in this study are reported in the plant material and genetic transformation paragraph .

durum wheat transgenic plants were produced to express native and modified versions of lmw-m  and lmw-s  type genes in wheat endosperm . eleven, twenty-seven and thirty-two independent regenerated plants  were obtained for the b1133-wt, b1133-t23n and 42k-n23t lmw-gs genes, respectively, for a transformation efficiency of about 2%, that is within the typical efficiency obtained in stable wheat transformation.

proteomic analysis
since the proteomic patterns of the untransformed durum wheat cultivar svevo and all the null segregant plants obtained from the progenies of the three types of transgenic plants were identical , we eventually used only the null segregant plants as a control for the proteomic comparisons, as in the following description.

proteomic comparison between proteins from the plants transformed with the 42k-n23t construct and proteins from the corresponding null segregant plants
the recipient cultivar svevo possesses a lmw42k protein with pi  <dig>  and molecular weight of  <dig> , while the expected pi of the 42k-n23t protein is  <dig>  with molecular weight of  <dig> . accordingly, we used ipg strips in the ph range 6- <dig> in order to maximize separation of the native and transgenic proteins. the proteomic comparison of the b subunits obtained from the null segregant control plants and the transgenic plants permitted us to identify two proteins exclusive to the latter .

analysis of mass spectrometry data from multiple 2d gel separations yielded evidence for the 42k-n23t construct that was identified from  <dig> total spectra, with  <dig> exclusive unique spectra, and  <dig> exclusive unique peptides, resulting in  <dig> out of  <dig> amino acids identified, corresponding to 90% sequence coverage, including n-terminal peptides . edman degradation confirmed that the n-terminal amino acid sequence of the transgenic protein present in spot  <dig> was metship . the protein present in spot  <dig> did not yield sufficient material to provide interpretable n-terminal edman sequence or tandem mass spectrometry  data, thus the results are available for spot  <dig> only.

in the “genotype” column the three transgenic genotypes here analysed are reported. the “expected n-terminal sequence” column reports the deduced n-terminal amino acid sequences on the basis of transgene nucleotide sequences, whereas the “observed n-terminal sequence” corresponds to those obtained after edman degradation, relatively to each of the eight protein spots indicated in the second column.

proteomic comparison between proteins from plants transformed with the b1133-wt construct and proteins from the corresponding null segregant plants
the expected molecular weight of the b1133-wt protein is  <dig>   and the expected pi is  <dig> . thus, we used ipg strips in the ph range 6- <dig> on a preparation of total glutenin subunits as a control since this protein is not normally present in the cultivar svevo. the comparison of gels from transformed and null segregant plants enabled us to identify two main spots present in the transgenic plants, but absent in the control samples. the proteins showed the expected molecular weight, but were visible as what appears to be a charge train . immunoblotting performed by using an anti-flag antibody to detect proteins of the corresponding gel region gave positive signals matching the same charge train, indicating that the proteins in the spots corresponded to the transgenic proteins , possibly differing from one another as consequence of glutamine deamidation, which is a common artifact in proteomic analyses  <cit> . gel spots were collected and submitted for ms analyses. these results are summarized in figure  <dig> and additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the expected sequences are reported and the identified peptides are highlighted or underlined. with scaffold set to display proteins with a peptide probability of 90%, there were, for example for spot  <dig>   <dig> exclusive unique peptides,  <dig> exclusive unique spectra, and a total of  <dig> out of  <dig> amino acids matched for a coverage of 80%. both the his- and flag tags, as well as the n-terminal peptide, metscif-, were identified, confirming that the protein was processed as a lmw-m type . similar results were obtained for spot  <dig> . the presence of a phenylalanine residue in seventh position in spots  <dig> and  <dig> instead of the original serine is due to a point mutation that occurred during the cloning procedure.

proteomic comparison between proteins of plants transformed with the b1133-t23n construct and proteins from the corresponding null segregant plants
as in the case of the b1133-t23n protein, ipg strips in the ph range 3- <dig> were used to separate a preparation of the total glutenin subunits, since the expected pi was  <dig> . four spots were identified as a possible charge train at the expected molecular weight  both in the coomassie stained gels  and in the corresponding immunoblots performed with the anti-flag antibody . all identified spots were submitted to ms/ms analysis, and corresponded to the same transgenic protein . for this reason, these results are summarized in figure  <dig>  in which the expected sequence is reported and the identified peptides are underlined. in summary,  <dig> total spectra corresponding to  <dig> unique peptides identified this protein. in total,  <dig> amino acids were identified, out of  <dig> , including both the his- and flag tags, as well as the n-terminal peptide, that was, as expected, scisgle- . these results confirmed that the protein is processed as a lmw-s type. n-terminal amino acid sequencing on four protein spots corresponding to the transgenic proteins, confirmed that the proteins were of the lmw-s types .

evidence for an n-terminal glutamine
examination of a number of ms/ms spectra revealed that, in addition to the peptide metscif-, there was another peptide that contained an n-terminal glutamine as evidenced by the presence of a singly charged, protonated peptide of mass  <dig> . this peptide fragmented to yield an overlapping series of b and y ions that were interpreted by the sequencing software as the peptide sequence -etscif with an unidentified n-terminal mass of  <dig> . this would correspond to the sequence qmetscif- in which the n-terminal dipeptide  had undergone rearrangement to pyroglutamic acid . the metscif peptide was strongly predominant over the qmetshif form. a similar n-terminal peptide was identified by dupont et al.  <cit>  in a presumably glu-b <dig> coded lmw-gs from the bread wheat cultivar butte  <dig>  and also by mamone et al. <cit>  for a lmw-gs, although in this latter case the sequence was qmdt-. the presence of glutamine as first residue corresponds to the expected n-terminal sequence of lmw-gs, according to signal sequence cleavage site prediction. it is of interest that edman sequencing of the met-type proteins does not indicate q as the first amino acid, but rather m, suggesting that the qmetship form cyclizes rapidly and is thus unavailable to edman sequencing, whereas the amino acid m is readily recognized for met-type proteins suggesting that cyclization is partial, that the q is partly removed by some other enzyme  or the signal cleavage itself is degenerate, producing cleavages before and after the q  <cit> . with or without the q, they both correspond to the lmw-m type. in any case, the reporting of qmet- , qmen- and qmdt- n terminal peptides indicates that this type of processing may occur in lmw-gs.

finally, ikeda et al. <cit>  identified lmw-gs with the n-terminal sequence menshipgle, likely as the result of a partial escape from the action of asparaginyl endopeptidase. we did not find any menshif in the transgenic polypeptides, although we cannot exclude its presence as a minor component.

discussion
wheat gluten proteins are typical secretory proteins in that their synthesis, folding, maturation and deposition take place within the endomembrane system of the plant cell. among them, lmw-gs are the most heterogeneous group, being represented by multiple proteins, including those with a characteristic lmw-gs sequence and others with a gliadin-like sequence. in regard to the former, the most common proteins are those typically known as lmw-m and lmw-s types, according to the first amino acid of the mature sequence . the lmw-m and lmw-s protein types are practically identical, on the basis of the complete nucleotide sequence, since the main difference resides in the absence or the presence of three additional n-terminal amino acids  in the mature sequence of lmw-m type, that are instead absent in lmw-s types. however, the corresponding nucleotide triplets are present in the sequences encoding both -s and -m type lmw-gs precursors, except that in one case the third amino acid corresponds to threonine and in the other to asparagine  <cit> . because of the presence of either a threonine or an asparagine residue in position  <dig> of the lmw-m and lmw-s precursors , we have hypothesized that, in case of lmw-s types, a preferential  processing at the n-terminal end could occur, that would generate the cleavage of the peptide men, most likely by an asparaginyl endoprotease. these proteolytic enzymes have been termed also “legumains” or “vacuolar processing enzymes”  <cit>  and consist of a large family of plant and animal asn-specific cysteine proteinases. in plants, they occur in storage vacuoles or cell wall of seeds and vegetative organs. in seeds, they play a role in both protein maturation and degradation. they in fact are involved in post-translational processing of protein precursors by cleaving asparagine residues in p <dig> position of peptide bonds  <cit> . asparaginyl endoprotease functions depend on the conformational state of the substrate protein. they are involved in maturation processing when they have access to a normal processing site of the precursor protein, but contribute to the degradation processing by performing an extensive proteolysis, when the protein is misfolded. thus, seed legumains have a role in protein maturation and also a “structural proof-reading function”  <cit> . most of what we know about the characteristics and the biological function of these enzymes is derived from studies on dicot plants. barley np <dig> has been reported to be localized to the cell wall of nucellar cell types  <cit> , while rice rep- <dig> has been implicated, together with rep- <dig>  in storage protein degradation  <cit> . these enzymes thus appear to play a role different from storage protein processing. recently, osvpe <dig>  a rice homolog of the arabidopsis βvpe gene, has been shown to be responsible for the cleavage of rice storage globulins in the protein storage vacuoles  <cit> .

in order to determine if the hypothesized maturation processing occurs, we produced durum wheat transgenic plants transformed with three gene constructs, two corresponding to the two lmw-gs gene types, namely those with triplets giving rise to threonine or asparagine residues in position  <dig> of the coding sequence, and a third one in which the codon for the threonine residue was mutated to give rise to an asparagine residue. the transgenic proteins were characterized in t <dig> kernels by means of a proteomic comparison. ms/ms analyses coupled with edman sequencing of the identified proteins clearly demonstrated that the processing is dependent on the presence of a threonine or asparagine residue in position  <dig> of the coding sequences: if an asparagine residue is present, proteins are processed as lmw-s types; conversely, when a threonine residue is present, the mature proteins are lmw-m types. in figure  <dig> we propose a model for lmw-gs maturation process.

until now it has not been possible to define whether a low-molecular-weight glutenin subunit gene was a lmw-s or lmw-m type with certainty, because the importance of the asparagine or threonine residue in position  <dig> of the coding region in the maturation process of lmw-gs had only been hypothesized  <cit> . however, in different papers, this terminology has already been applied .

the results here reported are the first direct evidence of the role exerted by asparagine and threonine residues in generating either lmw-m or lmw-s types. it is very likely that a similar maturation process occurs in ω-gliadins, as reported by dupont et al. <cit> , and also in farinins and triticins, as hypothesized by kasarda et al. <cit> .

lmw-gs have additional asparagine residues  that are not processed likely because they are protected, either by the presence of proline in p1’ position in some cases, or because they are structurally hidden .

while our results do not allow us to infer the compartment in which processing of the n-terminus of lmw-gs occurs, it seems reasonable to assume that such modification occurs after the protein has been transported to protein storage vacuoles. in rice, mutants accumulating storage protein precursors have been very useful in the study of the mechanism of storage protein deposition  <cit> . our results indicate that a similar approach may be applied also to wheat.

finally, although it seems unlikely that the presence/absence of the three amino acids met- at the n-terminus of lmw-gs can cause differences in grain technological performance, since the main structure of the whole protein is largely unchanged, the plant material described here could be used to perform further analyses in order to assess the role of the changes introduced on dough properties.

CONCLUSIONS
wheat plant transformation with endogenous genes and site-directed mutated genes, coupled with a proteomic comparison, allowed the determination of the n-terminal maturation process of low-molecular-weight glutenin subunits, and suggest that, in general, lmw-gs can be quantitatively processed most likely by vacuolar asparaginyl endoproteases. this would imply that lmw-gs accumulated in the vacuole do not form stable aggregates, but they remain available for proteolytic processing, necessary for finalizing the maturation process.

