BACKGROUND
most perennial plants undergo a rhythmic periodicity for shoot growth, in which phytomers are initiated but do not fully expand, and flowering and fruiting occur only after a dormancy period  <cit> . apical dominance of the terminal meristem imposes paradormancy on the lateral dormant bud, preventing them from growing out. this is termed preformation and allows for a rapid flush of growth, generally in spring  <cit> . in shoots of many adult woody perennials, growth cessation occurs soon after this time and is followed by the abortion of the spring shoot such as citrus, kiwi fruit, peach and pomegranate. abortion of spring shoot or abortion of spring shoot tip is an inherent characteristic that induces subsequent development from subjacent axillary buds, resulting in the sympodial growth pattern  <cit> . sympodial branching is a common feature of many woody trees and a process of shoot tip abortion and pseudoterminal renewal branching from an axillary bud. in addition, shoot tip abortion plays an important role in floral bud initiation of some important fruit crops . although the phenomenon of shoot tip abortion is described in the older botanical literature and the resultant occurrence of a “pseudoterminal bud” is commonly used as a distinguishing characteristic in taxonomic keys to woody plants, little regarding its morphogenetic aspects has been reported until recently  <cit> .

in citrus, there are three important types of shoots produced during the growing season. the main type grows in late winter or early spring , and two additional types grow at the end of june  and late in september   <cit> . the spring flush is the most important for flower formation and flowering  <cit> . in most cases, only vegetative shoots are formed in the summer and autumn. all three types of citrus shoots typically cease growth temporarily by abortion of the shoot tips . for spring shoots of trifoliate orange , abortion of the shoot tips  takes place in spring or early summer and is rapidly followed by a decline in the growth of the distal portion of the extending shoot. the entire shoot tip soon turns yellow and abscises at the base of the shoot apex; this physiological phenomenon is called “self-pruning” in citrus. self-pruning is a necessary but not sufficient condition for citrus flowering. previous cytological studies revealed that the floral buds of spring shoots in an early-flowering mutant of trifoliate orange  initiated differentiation immediately after self-pruning  <cit> . in sweet orange, the new terminal bud and lateral buds of the spring shoot are in an undetermined state after self-pruning, and floral primordial are not observed. only a small portion of lateral buds developed into summer or autumn shoots in a year, and new terminal buds and remaining lateral buds of the spring shoot entered dormancy until spring of the next year. the floral buds of sweet orange initiate their differentiation on spring shoots in march of the next year. the whole integrated flower bud forms in  <dig>  months and then flowering begins . these results suggest that self-pruning is a demarcation point for shoot apical meristem  to initiate leaf bud or floral bud development in citrus. although self-pruning has been described as playing an important role in development process in several woody species, no satisfactory adaptive or evolutionary explanations exist for it  <cit> .

during self-pruning of citrus, shoot tip separates from the top part of the shoots at a predetermined position , called the abscission zone . the cells of the az are small, cytoplasmically dense, and isodiametric as compared with neighboring cells, and they are responsive to signals promoting abscission  <cit> . these signals induce enzymatic dissolution of the middle lamellae between az cell walls, resulting in a loss of adhesion between the organ and plant body  <cit> . both external and internal factors such as fungus invasion, extreme temperatures, salinity, programmed cell death , hormone, reactive oxygen species  and water stress have been reported to be involved in organ abscission . recently developed molecular approaches have been used in abscission process in horticulture crops. in apple plants, the aba and ethylene signaling pathways are strongly up-regulated concurrently with a specific down-regulation of gibberellin signaling in the fruits induced to abscise  <cit> . a hypothetical model for abscission process was proposed based upon both transcriptomic and metabolic data in apple, indicating a strong link between abscission and these hormones  <cit> . according to this model, aba may transiently cooperate with other hormones and secondary messengers in the generation of an intrafruit signal leading to the downstream activation of the abscission zone  <cit> . in addiction, previous studies have also identified transcriptional signatures associated to flower and leaf abscission in tomato  <cit>  and citrus  <cit> , respectively. recently, ludwików et al.  <cit>  reported that the arabidopsis protein phosphatase type 2c, abi <dig>  a negative regulator of abscisic acid signaling, was also involved in the regulation of ethylene biosynthesis under oxidative stress conditions. meanwhile, abi <dig> interacted with acs <dig> and dephosphorylates its c-terminal fragment, a target of the stress-responsive mitogen-activated protein kinase, mpk <dig>  <cit> . previously, some indirect evidence also supported a link between ros and abscission  <cit> . for example, a model of stress-induced leaf abscission signalling has been already proposed  <cit>  as well as its involvement in apple fruitlet abscission  <cit> . furthermore, peroxidase activity was increased during the ethylene induced pedicel abscission in tobacco plants  <cit> . so far, most of the current molecular knowledge on the abscission process comes from model plants. however, there is an increasing economic interest in developing molecular approaches focused on the abscission of food and fruit crops. therefore, investigation of the molecular events associated with self-pruning development and physiology may provide new insights into the basic biology of abscission and ultimately allow this process to be manipulated in an agriculturally favorable manner.

this study was designed to assess whether pcd is involved in citrus self-pruning and to examine the expression of genes involved in self-pruning. therefore, self-pruning phenomena, morphology, ros accumulation, and changes in gene expression during the self-pruning process of sweet orange were investigated. our results from terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dutp nick end labeling  and transmission electron microscopy  analyses suggest that pcd occurs systematically at shoot tips during the self-pruning process, and ros-induced pcd may be involved in the process of self-pruning. in addition, we carried out a high-throughput microarray analysis of the specific gene expression occurring during self-pruning. our results notably increase the current catalogue of genes related to the abscission process and provide new candidate genes for future biotechnological applications in citrus. to our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive report of a direct link between citrus self-pruning and pcd.

RESULTS
morphology of sweet orange spring shoots self-pruning
although sweet orange is an evergreen tree, there were no apparent developmental changes in the size or form of buds when it entered dormancy at the end of the growing season. bud enlarge somewhat and fold back due to differential enlargement, and presumably more growth occured on the adaxial than on the abaxial surfaces in the spring. following the period of bud opening in the current study, the shoot underwent a period of rapid elongation during which the successive leaves and the stem continued to enlarge and mature . early in this phase of growth, the tip of the shoot, including the three or four youngest pairs of leaves and leaf primordia, ceased growth . this terminal part of the shoot, 4–7 mm in length, remained green for 2– <dig> weeks but did not increase in size . about the time that the shoot attained its maximum length, the tip changed from green to yellow and then gradually became brown and died; the shoot tips on the aborting portion ranged from only 5 mm to 2 cm in length . yellowing occurred throughout the entire apical portion within a short time , and lobular of shoot tips began to fall . athough the color boundary was distinct, no depressed line commonly found in abscission layer until separation approached . after such changes had begun, the az was evident . subsequently, an obvious area of necrosis formed across the base of the shoot tip, just above the position of the uppermost axillary buds . for spring shoots of sweet orange, self-pruning was completed within 2 weeks from lobular of shoot tips fall  to generating a protective layer . the shrunken, distorted shoot tips sometimes persisted for months, only gradually being sloughed off .figure  <dig> 
phenotypic characteristics of ‘cara cara’ navel orange  spring shoot during self-pruning process.  tips of spring shoot;  5 days before self-pruning;  3 days before self-pruning ;  begin self-pruning of spring shoots ;  form visible az;  7 days after self-pruning;  shoot tip gradually becomes brown and dies;  generating a protective layer for the az. red arrows represent az.



cytological changes during the self-pruning process
the paraffin sections and tem analysis of shoot tip cells showed no visible evidence of cellular breakdown or death before self-pruning . only after the shoot tip became yellow did the cytoplasm became less intensely stained compared to that in cells of the active growth regions . this change in stainability may reflect an alteration in the chemical and/or physical nature of the protoplasm, and it was the first histological indication of an altered developmental pattern. apices of the subjacent axillary buds would serve as the pseudoterminal bud . in this bud, the cytoplasm became more densely stained  than before self-pruning . during the self-pruning process, when the shoots elongation was complete and lobular of shoot tips began to fall , in the apical meristem of the unexpanded shoot tip cells became more vacuolated and their nuclei were condensed . these changes suggested that a parallel senescence pattern was occurring, and scattered necrotic areas became evident in pith and cortex , but at the abscission site, a separation layer in the stem was not yet apparent. after 2– <dig> days, the separation layer was visible . at the later stage, when the tip including all the leaf primordia was completely necrotic, separation of the cells in pith and cortex of the stem at the abscission site had occurred . the abscission site was commonly located in an internode distal to the sixth, seventh, or eighth leaf. no protective layer had formed in the stem at this stage . after the shoot tip dropped off, the protective layer developed .figure  <dig> 
cytological changes of ‘cara cara’ navel orange  spring shoot during self-pruning process by paraffin section and tem analysis. stages a–f occur before self-pruning,  45 days, 35 days, 25 days, 15 days, 7 days, and 3 days before self-pruning of shoot tips, respectively.  3 days before self-pruning of lateral bud;  20 days after self-pruning;  lobular of shoot tips begin to fall ;  the appearance of the az; stages l–p occur after self-pruning,  visible az;  shoot tip begins to fall;  shoot tips after self-pruning;  before formation of protective layer of az;  after protective layer of az formed. bars are 50 μm in l–p, and 100 μm in other photographs. red arrows represent az.
detection of programmed cell death in shoot tips during self-pruning process. tunel analysis was performed on 10-μm-thick bud meristem sections.  vigorous spring shoots of shoot tips ;  staining signal of az at beginning of self-pruning;  staining signal of az after self-pruning;  staining signal of the az at the beginning of self-pruning;  staining signal of az after self-pruning; number  <dig> and  <dig>  represents cells undergoing programmed cell death and dying cells, respectively. red arrows represent az. paraffin section bars are 100 μm.



dan degradation involved in self-pruning
to detect fragmented nuclear dna in situ, the tunel procedure was used to assess and confirm the degradation of nuclear dna in shoot tips . vigorous growth of the shoot tips did not show symptoms of dna fragmentation . however, when self-pruning began, the initial dna fragmentation could be detected in the az, and slightly more tunel-positive nuclei were also observed in the outer epidermis of leaf primordia . as the shoot tip gradually became brown and died, widespread and more extensive dna fragmentation was observed in the apical portions . these results suggested that developmental or environmentally induced pcd occurs during the self-pruning process. the tem results indicated that shoot tip cells are flat and small, with large nuclei and abundant cytoplasm before self-pruning . these cells are rectangular with large nuclei and exhibit remarkable vitality and potential for cell division . relative to control tissues, the shoot tip cells had a markedly irregular shape after abscission induction , indicating chromatin disorganization and condensation. when the az breakdown, the apical portions already appeared dead .

changes in cellular and nuclear morphology of shoot tip cells by tem analysis
pcd in plants shows characteristic cellular, structural, and morphological features  <cit> . thus, we searched for such features in the apical portion side of the az using tem during the self-pruning process . before self-pruning, numerous vacuoles were detected around the nucleus as well as organelles containing electron-translucent contents . when self-pruning began, the cells exhibited different levels of degradation and changes that were followed by fracture development . the cells in the az eventually died, and the cytoplasm appeared to be granulated . several ultrastructural changes were also detected. for example, we detected budding-like nuclear segmentations that resulted in the separation of nuclear fragments . the tonoplast of the vacuole was ruptured and other endomembrane organelles underwent degradation . meanwhile, gradual degradation of the karyotheca, mitochondria and chloroplasts were also observed . overall, the observed changes in the structural and morphological features of az cells indicate clear differences prior to self-pruning and afterward. in addition, the dna of apical portion cells was found to be partially degraded by using agarose-gel electrophoresis analysis as self-pruning began .figure  <dig> 
tem of tissue from shoot tips of spring shoots.  the cell from az before self-pruning;  nucleolus begin death;  vacuole, karyotheca, mitochondria, and chloroplasts began to break, respectively;  the cells with dying bodies;  the completely dead cells;  cells with dying bodies;  the completely dead cells;  results of dna electrophoresis of shoot tip, dl <dig> dna molecular ladder was applied to the run, lanes  <dig> and 2: dna isolated before self-pruning of shoot tip; lanes  <dig> and 4: dna isolated at the start of self-pruning of the shoot tip. cell organelle labeling: ch, chloroplast; va, vacuole; mi, mitochondria; nu, nucleus; ka, karyotheca. bars are 2 μm in a, g and h,  <dig>  μm in c-e and 200 nm in f.



analysis of ros accumulation in shoot tips by histochemical staining
histochemical staining with nitro blue tetrazolium  and diaminobenzidine  was performed to check the levels of h2o <dig> and o2- of shoot tips during the self-pruning process . the results showed similar staining patterns for both dab and nbt. before self-pruning, little or no staining was observed in shoot tips ; whereas, the az was stained as self-pruning began . the shoot tips exhibited deeper staining 7 days after abscission layer formation  than 3 days after self-pruning , indicating that shoot tips accumulated higher levels of h2o <dig> and o2- during the self-pruning process. the accumulation of ros was gradually reduced after the protective layer formed .

differential transcriptome responses of shoot tips during self-pruning
to identify degs during the self-pruning process, a citrus microarray was used to measure the expression of genes at three stages. among the three stages, more genes were up-regulated  than down-regulated  from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig>  however, more genes were down-regulated  than up-regulated  from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig>  a total of  <dig> degs were identified from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig> based on p ≤  <dig>  and four fold changes. among these degs,  <dig> genes were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated . in addition,  <dig>  degs were identified from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig>  with  <dig> genes up-regulated and  <dig> down-regulated . combining the results obtained for the three stages,  <dig>  degs were identified as candidate self-pruning-related genes; a total of  <dig> degs were in common to all three stages and may represent typical self-pruning responsive genes .

in this study, we classified the  <dig>  degs of the shoot tips into four clusters based on the similarity of the kinetic expression patterns. cluster  <dig> genes  were induced immediately at stage  <dig> and most maintained high expression levels at stage  <dig> . it was the largest group among the four clusters comprising all up-regulated genes. this cluster featured genes encoding transcription factor , biotic/abiotic responses, ethylene signaling/biogenesis, and cell wall degradation enzymes. these genes were significantly induced in all three stages of self-pruning, and these results indicated that the gene cluster might play a key role during whole self-pruning process. cluster  <dig> comprises  <dig> genes that were suppressed immediately at stage  <dig> and most maintained low expression levels at stage  <dig> . blast analysis indicated that these genes are involved in amino acid metabolism, development and transcription, and auxin signaling. the repression of the cluster genes may imply possible involvement of meristem gene regulation and development of shoot tips. cluster  <dig> comprises  <dig> genes that were transiently suppressed at stage  <dig> and were then induced at stage  <dig> . this cluster also featured genes encoding ethylene signaling/biogenesis and cell wall degradation enzymes. this cluster show up-regulated expression at later stages of self-pruning, indicating the expression of genes involved in cell wall and ethylene metabolism. cluster  <dig> comprises  <dig> genes that were transiently induced at stage  <dig> and were then suppressed at stage  <dig> . hormone-related genes featured this cluster, indicating these genes might be related to the response to abscission signals and the activation of the az cells during the abscission process.figure  <dig> 
expression patterns of degs.  the total numbers of degs  at stage  <dig>  stage  <dig> and stage  <dig>   venn diagram showing the overlapping of degs at three development stages.  cluster  <dig> consisting of  <dig> degs;  cluster  <dig> consisting of  <dig> degs;  cluster  <dig> consisting of  <dig> degs;  cluster  <dig> consisting of  <dig> degs.



identification of self-pruning–related genes by microarray analysis
to investigate the biological processes possibly regulated by the  <dig>  differentially expressed genes , a homology search was conducted using the ncbi database . we detected  <dig>  sequences  as having homology with known proteins and the remaining  <dig> sequences  did not possess homology with any other proteins . in addition,  <dig> sequences were annotated as related to transcription factors  belonging to  <dig> families . the zinc finger family was the most prevalent, followed by the nac and myb families, part of which might play roles in regulating development and metabolism. go annotation of these genes was also performed by blast2go. based on go annotation, only  <dig> degs  were divided into the three principal go organization categories: molecular function, biological process, and cellular components . the remaining  <dig> degs  were not classified .

many genes involved in different hormone synthesis and signaling pathways were included among these degs . four abscisic acid -related genes , which encode key enzymes in aba biosynthesis and metabolism, showed significant differences during self-pruning . in addition, go analysis revealed nine genes involved in aba signaling and aba responsiveness . the microarray results showed that most aba-related genes were significantly up-regulated during the self-pruning process . twenty-four auxin-related genes were differentially altered, and these genes included six auxin-induced proteins , four auxin response factors , one auxin-responsive gh <dig> family protein , and  <dig> auxin-related genes  from go analysis. interestingly, the auxin-induced proteins were up-regulated and auxin response factors were down-regulated during the self-pruning process . after self-pruning, genes for ethylene biosynthesis and perception were up-regulated , including  <dig> ethylene-responsive tfs  and two ethylene response element binding proteins . this was the largest group among the five clusters comprising all hormone pathway genes. coinciding with the increased expression of ethylene biosynthetic genes, the expression of cytokinin riboside 5-monophosphate phosphoribohydrolase gene , a key gene related to cytokinin biosynthesis, was consistently suppressed . in addiction, eight genes involved in the response to gibberellin acid  stimulus  were up-regulated after self-pruning . the expression of a ga 2-beta-dioxygenase gene, which is responsible for ga catabolism, increased. these results indicated that aba, auxin, ethylene and ga may be involved in the regulation of self-pruning process.

in this study, a shared set of  <dig> genes associated with cell wall biosynthesis, loosening, and degradation were identified, with most of the genes exhibiting significant changes at all the three stages . specifically, seven genes encoding pectinesterase-related protein  and two gene encoding polygalacturonase-related protein  were up-regulated during the self-pruning process . we also observed one expansin gene  expressed during the shoot tip abscission process. twelve genes encoding xyloglucan endotransglucosylase/hydrolase   were up-regulated . four genes encoding pectate lyase  were up-regulated during the whole self-pruning process . some candidate genes related to cell wall degradation and wall modification  were also identified, such as serine carboxypeptidase, snakin, peroxidase, cell wall invertase, and chitinase, all of which probably aid in later abscission processes . another group of genes that was up-regulated from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig> included those possibly involved in pcd , such as mitogen-activated protein kinase , beta-expansin , ethylene responsive element binding genes  and amino acid permease  based on go analysis  <cit> , similar to the pattern observed for genes associated with cell wall degradation .

changes in transcript levels of selected genes during the self-pruning process
transcriptional regulation revealed by microarray data was confirmed by using real-time pcr. twenty-four genes were chosen to design gene-specific primers; these selected genes encode proteins previously reported to be associated with, or involved in abscission process in other species, or their transcript levels were significantly changed during the whole self-pruning process. on the other hand, self-pruning plays an important role in citrus floral bud initiation. therefore, five key or integrated citrus flowering-related genes  and three genes related to vegetative growth  were also investigated . two soc1-like  and three ft homologues from citrus were isolated in previous studies  <cit> ; however, three cift homologues showed high identities in open reading frame. thus, total cift and cisoc1/ <dig> were investigated in this study. overall, real-time pcr revealed the same expression trend as the microarray data for  <dig> of the genes except cit. <dig>  and cit. <dig>  , despite some quantitative differences in expression level. these results confirmed that the microarray data were reliable. it is notable that the expression levels of ciap <dig> and ciflc, belonging to the cluster  <dig>  were up-regulated whereas cisoc <dig> and citfl <dig> were down-regulated as genes gathered in cluster  <dig>  however, cisp, cift and ciwus of the cluster  <dig> were transiently suppressed at stage  <dig> and then induced to the initial expression level at stage  <dig> .

expression of the ciap <dig>  ciflc, cisp and cift byin situ hybridization
to assess the physiological functions of ciap <dig>  ciflc, cisp, and cift during the self-pruning of shoot tips and lateral bud development process, we examined their expression in shoot tips and lateral bud by in situ hybridization .primer sequences were shown in detail in the additional file 9: table s <dig>  previous studies revealed that ap <dig> can be used as a good marker to determine whether herbaceous and woody plants are either at the flowering stage  <cit>  or at the development stage  <cit> . in the present study, there was little or no ciap <dig> expression in the center of the meristem . however, ciap <dig> was detected in leaf primordia at 10 days before self-pruning  and tended to decrease at the beginning of self-pruning . it is worth noting that ciap <dig> was expressed strongly in lateral buds after self-pruning  as compared with its expression before self-pruning . ciflc is a key component in the regulatory pathway of bud dormancy release in citrus  <cit> . ciflc was found to be expresses in the whole zone of the sam, leaf primordia, and the young leaves at 10 days before self-pruning  and its expression was maintained at low level as self-pruning began . in the lateral bud, ciflc showed relatively high transcript level at 20 days after self-pruning  compared with the levels at 3 days before self-pruning . the level of cisp was high in the whole zone of the sam and leaf primordia at 10 days before self-pruning  and tended to decrease as self-pruning began . cisp was highly expressed at 20 days after self-pruning in the axillary bud  compared with 3 days before self-pruning . however, cisp, ciap <dig> and ciflc did not show specific expression at the az . considering cift, we did not obtain very clear signals at these stages , possibly because of low abundance of the transcript. in addition, recent studies of arabidopsis also demonstrated that protein of ft is produced in the vascular tissues of leaves and moves from the leaves to the sam as a mobile flowering signal  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
ciap1
,
ciflc
, and
cisp
expression during self-pruning shown by
in situ
hybridization. 
ciap <dig> expression in shoot tips at  <dig> days before self-pruning and self-pruning beginning, respectively; 
ciap <dig> expression in lateral bud at  <dig> days before self-pruning and  <dig> days after self-pruning, respectively. 
ciflc expression in shoot tips at  <dig> days before self-pruning and self-pruning beginning, respectively; 
ciflc expression in lateral bud at  <dig> days before self-pruning and  <dig> days after self-pruning. 
cisp expression in shoot tips at  <dig> days before self-pruning and self-pruning beginning, respectively; 
ciap <dig> expression in lateral bud at  <dig> days before self-pruning and  <dig> days after self-pruning, respectively; 
ciap <dig>  ciflc and cisp expression in az, respectively.  hybridized with a sense cisp probe. red arrows represent az. the primers used for the analyses are given in additional file 9: table s <dig>  bars are  <dig> μm in m, n and o, and  <dig> μm in other photographs.



discussion
self-pruning is a demarcation point for sam to initiate leaf bud or floral bud development. however, the phenological and morphological plasticity of self-pruning in citrus have not been examined by experimental manipulation. abscission typically occurs at spring shoots when the citrus shoot separates from the top part of the shoots. this process has been widely characterized at az level  <cit> , as the last step involved in abscission, but understanding the mechanisms occurring during self-pruing induction would improve the sketched models already published. therefore, this study provided the first thorough analysis of the underlying physiological and molecular activities that occur during the major events of the self-pruning process. over the last two decades, genes related to fruit and leaf abscission have been identified, including several transcription factor genes whose homologs are involved in meristem cell fates of model plants, including lateral organ boundaries domain protein  <dig>  wus, knat <dig>  bell-like protein  <dig>  and jointless as well as axillary meristem genes blind and lateral suppressor in tomato . although the complete sweet orange genome sequence is now available  <cit> , no clear homologs have yet been identified in citrus except wus and knat <dig>  it is possible that some different genes, perhaps a member of a different subfamily, perform similar functions during citrus development. in this study, homologs of knat <dig> displayed expression profiles similar to those previously described in sam  <cit> , but they did not reach a significant level based on stringent value p ≤  <dig>  and 4-fold change. one possible reason for this observation is that the regulatory mechanism of self-pruning differs between model plants and woody plants.

many hormones regulate the process of plant organ abscission, such as auxin, aba, ga, jasmonic acid , and ethylene, among which auxin and ethylene play important roles  <cit> . ethylene and aba may play the role of “amplifiers” of the unknown signal or signals that cause all the transcriptional rearrangements observed in abscising tissues. ethylene and aba, in concert with secondary messengers, carry the stimuli that activate the az and cause the release of the tissue  <cit> . on the contrary, auxin and gibberellin-related genes, regulating the growing and differentiation of the tissues, are negative regulated during the abscission induction. therefore, auxin prevents the abscission process in plants, and ethylene accelerates it  <cit> . as previously reported , hormones seem to play a relatively important role during the abscission process, because a majority of the transcriptionally activated genes involved in hormone signaling appear to be downstream of the induction of abscission . in fact, the expression of many genes associated with ethylene and auxin metabolism were altered during the self-pruning process. this is consistent with the relationship between abscission and increased expression of genes for ethylene synthesis and ethylene receptors in the az, which has been reported in apple  <cit>  and olive  <cit> . as long as the flux of auxin to the az is maintained, cell separation is inhibited and abscission does not happen  <cit> . the potential importance of auxin–ethylene crosstalk was also supported in transcriptome analysis of tomato flower az  <cit> , in which auxin depletion caused altered expression of auxin-related genes in association with the acquisition of ethylene sensitivity in the flower az. aba has been implicated in the regulation of stress-induced senescence  <cit> , and it has been proposed that aba might be correlated with the ethylene-associated abscission activation in citrus fruitlets  <cit> . we observed some genes involved with aba biosynthesis and signaling and an increase in the expression of genes for aba biosynthesis during the self-pruning process. for other hormones, the induction of rate-limiting enzyme genes for ga and ja suggests coordinated regulatory modes among these hormone-related genes, and enhanced expression of the aba catabolism gene  <cit>  may indicate increased aba breakdown during the self-pruning process.

pcd is a highly organized and genetically controlled suicidal process  <cit> . in the developmental program of plants, legumains have been associated with the pcd of internal layers of the seed coat in arabidopsis
 <cit> , with the pcd related to heat shock through a signaling pathway involving ros and a map kinase in arabidopsis
 <cit> , with the pcd involved in somatic embryogenesis in arabidopsis
 <cit> , and with the pcd related to the release of apical dominance in potato tubers  <cit> . this may suggest a functional relationship between pcd and self-pruning by affecting shoot tips cell viability. here, we detected dna fragmentation in the shoot tips during the self-pruning process by tunel analysis, suggesting pcd may be involved in self-pruning process. in spring shoots, if the shoot tip is undergoing pcd, it should only be detected on the apical portions but, the tunel signal was detected on both sides of the az . the result might be caused by the second self-pruning of shoot tips. for some spring shoot, it will begin the second self-pruning with great distances between az and pseudoterminal bud . in addition, the az cells are not distinguishable from those of the adjacent tissues before activation, resulting difficult to identify the proper position of the az. therefore, in the apical spring shoots including even the distal az the transcriptional profiling analysis was performed in this study. we know that pcd can be initiated by all types of ros, and the ros level is tightly regulated by the balance between production and scavenging. the shift from a signaling to a deleterious role is related to ros exceeding a threshold level, which leads to various cellular alterations and damage  <cit> . in the present study, we noted an increase in the h2o <dig> and o2- levels in shoot tips during the self-pruning process. although we could not decipher the mechanism of action regarding h2o <dig> and o2-, our work demonstrates that ros accumulate at higher level probably because they may play a role in stimulating the expression of abscission-related genes during the induction of shoot tip abscission. on the other hand, many genes involved in ros detoxification were also identified in this study . therefore, we speculate a balance of preferential expression of ros-related genes between the laminar az and apical portions of shoot tips during the self-pruning process. this balance would be biased toward the laminar az during the early events prior to detachment and to the apical portion once cell separation has started. hence, ros could be involved in signaling events occurring during the onset of the self-pruning process. further research is required to establish the relationship between the occurrence of pcd and the underlying regulatory molecular mechanisms during self-pruning.

abscission is considered to be achieved through four major steps based on a working model  <cit> : 1) determination of the az, 2) competence to respond to abscission signals, 3) activation of the abscission and 4) post abscission transdifferentiation. thus, based on above model of abscission, at stage  <dig> the az cells may be already competent to respond to abscission stimuli at stage 1; the az was activated at stage  <dig>  as consequence of the up-regulation of cell-wall degrading genes as well as defense genes, and an initial lateral breakdown of the cell layers was evident; at stage  <dig>  the post abscission transdifferentiation where the proximal cell layers increased in volume and formed the protective layer in the present study. therefore, the classification of the clusters into four groups suggests that the abscission process may be separated into two main phases. in the early phase, from stage  <dig> to stage  <dig> , ethylene sensitivity and abscission competence are acquired; and in the second phase, between stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> , the active abscission process starts and leads to shoot tip abscission. a key step in the loss of adhesion between cells within a separation layer was the induction of cell wall degrading enzymes such as polygalacturonases, which have been studied in oilseed rape and arabidopsis az s  <cit> . the roles of other wall-modifying proteins such as expansin, xeh, and pectinesterase have also been studied during the abscission process  <cit> . previous reports have indicated that an increase in xeh, expansin, and pectate lyase correlate with organ abscission  <cit> . in the present study, numerous genes encoding above genes were found to be over-represented during self-pruning process . these results indicated that these genes may be involved in sweet orange self-pruning process. overall, these results suggest that many genes related to cell wall degradation play an important role in regulating sweet orange self-pruning.

in this study, according to function clustering of the  <dig>  degs by go analysis, about 30% of the genes related to macromolecule and protein metabolism were expressed preferentially in the shoot tips during the self-pruning period . the involvement of protein biosynthesis was also supported by the induction of genes encoding translation initiation and elongation factors. this is consistent with previous reports of stimulation by protein biosynthesis within the az in citrus  <cit> . these results suggested that the specific activation of the protein metabolism within the az is a consequence of remodeling of protein composition coupled with the activation of hormone signaling events. in the three stages of our experimental set-up, it is noteworthy that some of the crucial genes taking part in cell wall remodeling already exhibited high or low expression levels, especially in the third period. this indicated that several steps need to occur from self-pruning–related gene expression to shoot tip abscission, including protein translation and degradation and probably transport to the extracellular matrix. indeed, our results also identified the induction of several genes  involved in vesicle trafficking based on go analysis , a process that has recently been indicated as crucial for abscission  <cit> . in general, engaged lipid metabolism usually involves an extensive network of golgi bodies and endoplasmic reticulum  <cit> , a characteristic of cells undergoing abscission  <cit> . along the same lines, the lipid metabolism  pathway displayed a high frequency of preferential expression within the az . therefore, the lipid metabolism pathway enhancement during abscission could be due partially to the production of golgi bodies and new endoplasmic reticulum profiles that are generated to assist the required membrane trafficking.

in addition, self-pruning in citrus affects the sam development program and therefore the architecture of the plant as well as the production of fruits. the floral bud induction could be paralleled with the mechanism occurring in the other fruit plants promoting the return of the bloom or the onset of alternative bearing, this latter being an unwanted trait that negatively affects fruit production. several classes of tfs exhibited significant changes in expression, including erf/ap <dig> tfs, bzip proteins, mads-box and myb domain proteins . the differentially expressed erf/ap <dig> tfs were co-expressed with the genes for biosynthesis and signaling of ethylene and aba, consistent with their roles in these two hormone signaling pathways  <cit> . interestingly, three homologs of citrus flowering related genes, which encode three mads-box tfs  and regulator of self-pruning process of sweet orange spring shoots, were down-regulated in shoot tips before self-pruning, and up-regulated in lateral buds after self-pruning. based on these results, we conclude that a high expression level of three flowering time genes might help to maintain the terminal buds in a dormant state before self-pruning, whereas the down-regulation of these genes after self-pruning induction might be closely related to the shift of cell activity or the change in flowering competence of spring shoot lateral buds.

CONCLUSIONS
to identify the physiological and molecular properties of citrus shoot tips during the self-pruning process, we analyzed morphology, cytology, dna degradation, ros accumulation, and gene expression profiles of shoot tips. based on our findings, we have developed a model of self-pruning . before self-pruning, ethylene and aba are produced in the shoot tip, triggering those unidentified early abscission signals that at the end stimulate the expression of genes involved in the cell wall metabolism. the depletion of the auxin in the az of the spring shoot causes the az to become sensitive to ethylene and aba, which promote the advancement of abscission. the generation of golgi-derived vesicles containing cell–wall related enzymes is responsible for the transport of these enzymes to the extracellular matrix, facilitating degradation of cell wall of the az cells. pcd is induced at the distal side of the az by ros. the az is identified by loss of cell viability, altered nuclear morphology, dna fragmentation, elevated levels of ros, and elevated enzymatic activities and expression of pcd-associated genes . throughout the entire process, the protein metabolism machinery appears to be activated to coordinate new protein scenarios, and hormone signaling and ros are activated to regulate the steps of the process. after self-pruning, when the lateral buds are released from inhibition, florigen and nutrients are gradually transported to the lateral bud, and the lateral bud begins to accumulate nutrients for flower bud differentiation.figure  <dig> 
proposed model for molecular events occurring in the sweet orange  shoot tips and az during self-pruning based on expression data obtained from microarray hybridization. arrow-ended and blunt-ended lines represent process induction and repression, respectively; white dashed and solid arrows represent transport gradually decreased and increased, respectively.



