BACKGROUND
x-ray crystallography is a well known biophysical technique to determine the tertiary structure of proteins. given a protein crystal of good quality, this technique can often generate the electron density map to higher than  <dig> Å resolution from the x-ray diffraction data. the backbone of the protein can often be derived from such density maps using crystallography software  <cit> . however, if the electron density map has low resolution, such as 6- <dig> Å, the typical software can not derive the backbone of the protein since the characteristics of amino acids are not well resolved at this resolution. low resolution protein density map are more and more abundant as the electron cryomicroscopy technique advances  <cit> . this technique does not require growing protein crystals which is often a limiting factor for structure determination using x-ray crystallography technique  <cit> .

at low resolution, the location and orientation of the secondary structures such as helices and β-sheets can be computationally identified  <cit> . it is also possible to derive the β-strands computationally  <cit> . since the loop densities are not well resolved, the connection of the adjacent secondary structure elements is often not available. figure  <dig> shows an example of a density map and the computationally detected helical skeletons using helix tracer  <cit> . in this case, helix tracer was able to detect five skeletons that represent the electron density of five helices. the shortest helix which has five amino acids was not detectable by helix tracer. each skeleton can be represented by the coordinates of the central axis of the helix. however, it is not known which segment of the protein sequence corresponds to which skeleton. the problem studied in this paper is how to predict the structure for the helical skeletons. once the structure of the skeletons are predicted, loops can be added using our previous method  <cit>  <cit>  or other existing loop closure methods  <cit> .

given a protein sequence, the location of secondary structures on the sequence can be roughly predicted using the existing secondary structure prediction  methods. such methods can generally predict the secondary structures to about 70-80% accuracy  <cit> . it is possible to derive the native topology for the skeletons by mapping the sequence segments obtained from ssp to the skeletons detected from the density map  <cit> . secondary structure topology in this paper refers to the order and the direction of the secondary structures such as helices and strands with respect to the protein sequence. for a protein with n helices and m strands, there are  different topologies if there are n helical skeletons and m strand skeletons. this is because there are n! different orders for assigning n helices and  <dig> directions to assign each helix. when the number of skeletons is not the same as the number of the sequence segments, the number of topologies is  where k is the number of helical skeletons assuming k ≤ n, which is often true when only the reliably detected skeletons are considered for mapping. this paper only explores the structure prediction problem for the helical skeletons. we have not extended the work to the skeletons of β-strands.

it has been an active research area to use a combination of structure prediction and the protein density map to derive the tertiary structure for the proteins. one approach can be considered as "sequence initiated". it uses the existing comparative modeling  <cit>  or ab initio structure prediction methods  <cit>  to generate the initial possible conformations of the protein and use the density map to enhance the evaluation of the conformations. another approach can be considered as "combined density and sequence initiated". it builds the initial conformations using both the density and sequence information. this approach has suggested that the native topology of the secondary structures can be predicted near the top of the list  <cit> .

our previous work has shown that if the cα atoms of the secondary structures are known, the native secondary structure topology can be ranked near top of the list even without modeling the loops  <cit> . in this paper, we started with the protein density map instead of the assumption of the locations for the cα atoms. we present a method that predicts the tertiary structure for the helical skeletons without building the entire chain of the protein. our test using  <dig> proteins shows that a near native structure is ranked near the top of the list for the helical skeletons in the density map.

since our method predicts the structure for helices without building the entire chain, we explored the perspective of applying it to the structure prediction in large proteins in this paper. although comparative modeling method can be used to predict the structure of the large proteins, it requires the template structures that share certain level of similarity to the target structure  <cit> . instead of constructing the entire chain which is almost impossible for a large protein, we will show the preliminary results of a novel approach to predict the structure of multiple local regions where characteristic helical skeletons are located.

RESULTS
given the protein density map at 6- <dig> Å resolution and its primary structure, our method generates a list of possible 3-dimentional structures for the helices of the protein. figure  <dig> shows an example of the predicted structure for the helix skeletons detected from the  <dig> Å resolution protein density map. in this case, helix tracer detected five of the six helices in this protein . in theory, there are totally  =  <dig> different topologies, with each one representing a specific order and direction of the skeletons  <cit> . after distance and length screening there were  <dig> valid topologies . for each valid topology,  <dig> structures were generated using simulated annealing to sample the freedom from , , ..., , . the translation along the helix axis was set to zero for simplicity. the predicted structures were sorted by the effective contact energy formed by the helices  <cit> . the highest ranked structure with the correct topology  is the 759th out of  <dig> structures . it has a backbone root-mean-square-deviation  of  <dig>  Å from the native protein. the rmsd was calculated for the helix portion of the chain that was constructed by our program. note that our method predicts the helix portion of the chain without building the loops; the predicted structure does not have the information about the loops. the two adjacent helices were simply connected with a straight line between the last c atom of the first helix and the first n atom of the next helix . the amino acid names were shown for one of the five helices . for viewing clarity, certain constructed side chains were shown for that helix. it can be seen that the sequence segment, the direction of the assignment are correct for this helix when the predicted helix is compared to its native peer. we noticed that the perfect helix model has introduced error in the predicted structure, since helices are often not perfectly straight and contain slightly different dihedral angles .

a: the number of amino acids in the protein

b: the number of helices in the protein

c: the number of skeletons detected by helix tracer

d: the number of all possible topologies

e: the number of valid topologies after applying distance and length screening

f: the number of structures generated for all valid topologies

g: the highest rank of the structure that has the correct topology

h: the root mean square deviation  of cá atoms of the structure that has the highest rank with the correct topology

i: the percentage of the highest rank among all generated structures

to test the performance of our method, we generated thirty-five density maps at  <dig> Å resolution  <cit>  using the native structures from the pdb. the proteins were randomly selected among the proteins that have three to seven helices . the total number of possible topologies  is shown in the 6th column. it appears that the distance and the length screening are generally effective to reduce the number of topologies . however, this reduction is protein dependent. for some proteins, it only reduces less than 10% of the topologies , and for other proteins, it reduces more than 80% . this is expected since the distance screening can only reduce the topologies in which the loops appear to be short in amino acid sequence but long in the density map and not the other way around. the structures were ranked by the contact energy formed by the constructed helices and not including the loops. the highest rank of the structure that has the correct topology is listed in column  <dig> . our previous study has shown that if the backbone coordinates are fixed, the correct topology can generally be located at the top 25% of the list that is ranked by the effective contact energy  <cit> . in this study we relaxed the requirement of fixing the backbone coordinates and built the possible backbones from the central helical axis. this involves the sampling of the rotation and translation freedom about the helix axis. our simulated annealing test in this paper suggests that a near-native helical structure can be found within the top 1% of the structures generated .

since our method predicts the structure for the helical skeletons without building the entire chain, we explored the possibility of applying it to large proteins at multiple local regions. we performed a test on two proteins that have  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids respectively . for each protein, we generated their density map at  <dig> Å resolution and used the helix tracer to detect the skeletons. we selected two local regions with closely associated skeletons and wanted to see how well our program can predict a near native structure for the local regions without building the entire chain of the protein. each local region consists of four helical skeletons. the structures constructed for each local region were ranked by their effective contact energy. the highest ranked structure that has the correct topology is at the 10448th of the  <dig> pool of structures generated for the first local region . the structure for region g <dig> has a backbone rmsd of  <dig>  Å when it is compared with its native peer . it is ranked at the top  <dig> % in the pool of structures for this region. the two local regions we selected have no common skeletons, although they may have in principle. we simply combined the ranked list of structures for the first local region  with that for the second local region . since each list is developed independently from the other, the conflicting assignments need to be eliminated when the two lists are combined. a conflicting assignment is such that the same segment of the sequence is assigned to both a skeleton in the first region and a skeleton in the second region. after this screening, the highest ranked structure with the correct topology  for eight skeletons was ranked the 3741775th of a pool of  <dig> e+ <dig> structures, about the top 0% of the list.

a: the number of amino acids in the protein

b: the number of helices in the protein

c: the number of skeletons used for structure prediction in the region

d: the number of all possible topologies in the region

e: the number of valid topologies after applying distance and length screening

f: the number of structures generated in the region or the total number of the structures evaluated for two regions

g: the highest rank of the structure with the correct topology among the generated structures

h: the rmsd of the highest ranked structure with the correct topology among the generated structures

i: the percentage of the rank for the structure with the highest rank and the correct topology

our exploratory test about the local regions of large proteins used minimum rules to eliminate the impossible structures. we expect that more geometrical rules can be used to enhance the ranking of the near-native structure. this paper suggests that a near-native structure for the helical skeletons can be found near the top of the list ranked by the effective contact energy. in order to generate a few most likely structures, additional evaluation is needed involving statistical analysis of the likely structures, refinement of the structures and using additional information from the density map.

CONCLUSIONS
our previous work has shown that if the cα atoms of the helices are fixed, the correct topology can be ranked within the top 25% of the list ranked by the effective energy that is formed by the helices  <cit> . this approach does not involve the construction of the loops, yet is still able to distinguish most of the bad structures. in this paper, we have relaxed the assumption of the fixed locations for cα atoms. we have developed a method to construct the backbone and the side chains using the central helical axis detected from the low resolution density map. we used a combination of approaches in this paper to work with the even larger solution space. such approaches include the newly developed parallel simulated annealing process, the distance and length screening and the incorporation of more efficient algorithms for adding side chains. a test with  <dig> low resolution density maps shows that the highest ranked structure that has the correct topology can be found within the top 1% of the list ranked by the effective energy that is formed by the helices.

