BACKGROUND
numerous bacterial processes are controlled in a population density-dependent manner. this phenomenon is based on a form of cell-to-cell communication that is referred to as quorum sensing, and it regulates microbial processes of medical, economic, and ecological relevance. among these processes are development of genetic competence, sporulation, formation of biofilm, bioluminescence, expression of virulence factors, and production of antibiotics  <cit> . deciphering the molecular bases of quorum sensing is important for understanding and manipulating the behavior of microbes in their natural and artificial niches. the practical implications of gaining a better understanding of quorum sensing and other types of bacterial cell-to-cell communication mechanisms are foreseen in areas as diverse as identification of new targets amenable to therapeutic intervention to treat human diseases, production of foods, feeds, and pharmacologically relevant compounds, and biological control of crop and animal pathogens  <cit> .

quorum sensing allows unicellular organisms to modulate a wide range of physiological responses in a population density-dependent manner, thereby enabling unicellular organisms to evoke cell population-wide synchronous responses that are typical of multicellular organisms. the phenomenon of quorum sensing is mediated by secreted small signal molecules that are usually referred to as autoinducers  <cit> . from the chemical nature point of view, the majority of the known autoinducers belong to one of two types: n-acyl homoserine lactones, which are most commonly utilized as communication signals by gram-negative bacteria; or peptides, which are characteristically found in cell-to-cell communication systems of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . other autoinducer types have also been identified, including 2-heptyl-3-hydroxy-quinolone and  <dig> -dihydroxy- <dig> -petanedione   <cit> . following secretion, autoinducers accumulate in the environment and, when a threshold concentration is reached, trigger signal transduction events in the target cells that lead to changes in the expression levels of genes that are under autoinducer-dependent control. this cellular response requires interaction of the autoinducer with a specific protein receptor. the receptors of n-acyl homoserine lactone autoinducers are typically cytoplasmic proteins that become competent transcriptional activators upon binding of the cognate autoinducer ligand. in the case of peptide autoinducers, the receptors are typically membrane-bound histidine protein kinases of two-component signal transduction systems that transduce signals via a phosphorylation cascade and response regulator proteins that exert transcriptional control on the target genes.

the production of peptide antibiotics  is a process that is regulated by peptide autoinducer-dependent quorum sensing in several species of gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . these peptide antibiotics are diverse in terms of structure, mode of action, antimicrobial potency, spectrum of antimicrobial activity, and industrial applicability  <cit> . among these peptide antibiotic-producing gram-positive bacteria are species of the genus carnobacterium. members of this genus were originally included in the genus lactobacillus  <cit> , and they can be found in a wide range of natural niches, and as adventitious microflora in a variety of food products  <cit> . c. maltaromaticum lv17b, a bacterium isolated from refrigerated fresh meat  <cit> , produces the peptide antibiotics known as carnobacteriocin b <dig>  and carnobacteriocin bm <dig>   <cit> . the carnobacteriocins display potent antimicrobial activity against several gram-positive bacteria, including, most significantly, the nosocomial pathogen enterococcus faecalis and the food-borne pathogen listeria monocytogenes  <cit> . like other peptide antibiotics and their producing lactic acid bacteria, the carnobacteriocins and their producer, c. maltaromaticum, are candidate food biopreservative agents for exploration of preservation strategies that suppress or reduce the growth of bacterial pathogens and bacteria with high spoilage potential  <cit> .

in c. maltaromaticum lv17b, the genes required for carnobacteriocin production are distributed in two loci, one in a 61-kb plasmid  and another in the chromosome  <cit>  . the locus in pcp <dig> includes the cbns-cbnk-cbnr gene triad, which is predicted to encode a so-called three-component regulatory system. three-component regulatory systems composed of peptide autoinducer-sensor kinase-response regulator triads are emerging as important regulatory systems in gram-positive bacteria with low gc content  <cit> . the gene cbns encodes the precursor of the peptide autoinducer named cs . this autoinducer precursor has a leader peptide of 17-amino acid residues that is cleaved off concomitantly with autoinducer secretion. the genes cbnk and cbnr encode a histidine protein kinase of the subfamily  <dig> and a response regulator protein, respectively, of a two-component signal transduction system  <cit> . the cbnk-cbnr system is the proposed peptide autoinducer sensing and signal transducing apparatus controlling carnobacteriocin production.

in this study, we characterized the regulatory circuit that is involved in cs-dependent regulation of peptide antibiotic production in c. maltaromaticum lv17b. we report the dissection and functional reconstitution of the cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system in the homologous c. maltaromaticum host and in the heterologous lactococcus lactis host. we also present the functional analysis of three c. maltaromaticum promoters that are regulated by the cs-cbnk-cbnr system.

RESULTS
dissection and functional reconstruction of the cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system in carnobacterium maltaromaticum lv17c
the carnobacteriocins produced by the lactic acid bacterium c. maltaromaticum lv17b have potent antimicrobial activity against several gram-positive bacteria, including important human pathogens and bacteria with high food-spoilage properties  <cit> . c. maltaromaticum lv17b and its carnobacteriocins are candidate biopreservative agents for exploration of novel food preservation strategies. with this consideration in mind, it is important to decipher the molecular mechanism controlling carnobacteriocin production. to this end, we sought to validate the functioning of the hypothesized cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system encoded in the carnobacteriocin production locus in the plasmid pcp <dig> of c. maltaromaticum lv17b.

to functionally characterize the cs-cbnk-cbnr system, we first constructed two series of plasmids suitable for synchronous replication in c. maltaromaticum that permitted us to investigate the activity of the regulatory system by utilizing a gusa reporter read-out . members of one of these plasmid series were derived from the expression vector pil <dig> and constitutively expressed a wild-type cbnk-cbnr gene cassette , or a gene cassette with a mutation in one of the regulatory genes. three pil <dig> derivatives expressing regulatory proteins were constructed: pbrkr ; pbrka239r ; and pbrkrn <dig> . the amino acid substitution in each regulatory protein was made at its predicted phosphorylation site, which was previously identified by comparative sequence analysis with known histidine protein kinases or response regulator proteins  <cit> . members of the other plasmid series were derived from the promoter screening vector pnz <dig>  and contained the promoter-less reporter gene gusa of pnz <dig> fused downstream of the suspected cbnkr-regulated promoters pbm <dig> , pb , or ps  . each of the pil <dig> derivatives or pil <dig> was introduced in c. maltaromaticum lv17c . prior to introduction of each of these plasmids in c. maltaromaticum lv17c, the strain was transformed with the pnz <dig> derivatives or pnz <dig>  thus creating a set of two plasmid-containing c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformants suitable for the functional investigation of the cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system.

we first investigated whether the pbrkr/plqpbm <dig> c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformant, carrying the wild-type cbnk-cbnr gene cassette, had a functional cs-triggered signal transduction cascade capable of mediating the activation of the pbm <dig> promoter. to this end, we examined the effect of cs treatment on the gusa activity of this transformant. the comparison between the gusa activity in cell suspensions of cs-treated cultures and the gusa activity in cell suspensions of  <dig> % trifluoroacetic acid-treated cultures revealed that the pbrkr/plqpbm <dig> transformant had a robust induction of reporter activity only when treated with the peptide autoinducer . in contrast, irrespective of treatment, no significant gusa activity was detected in the pil253/plqpbm <dig> c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformant or the pbrkr/pnz <dig> c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformant . these results clearly demonstrated that the pbrkr/plqpbm <dig> transformant has a functional cbnk- and/or cbnr-dependent signal transduction system that is capable of activating transcription of the promoter pbm <dig> in response to cs.

based on the sequence similarity of cbnk and cbnr to histidine protein kinases and response regulator proteins, respectively, of two-component regulatory systems, we speculated that both carnobacterial proteins would be required for cs-dependent induction of gusa activity, and that the cbnk-cbnr system would utilize a phosphorylation cascade to transduce the cs signal into promoter activation. to probe this hypothesis, we determined whether a site-specific mutation that removed the predicted phosphorylation site of cbnk  or of cbnr  would affect the ability of the cbnk-cbnr system to activate the promoter pbm <dig> in a cs-dependent manner. the analysis of the pbrka239r/plqpbm <dig> c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformant showed that the substitution of his  <dig> of cbnk with ala rendered a transformant with no gusa activity, irrespective of cs treatment. likewise, examination of the pbrkrn62/plqpbm <dig> c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformant indicated that the replacement of asp  <dig> of cbnr with asn abrogated the function of the cbnk-cbnr system, as judged by the lack of cs-induced gusa activity . these results demonstrate that both cbnk and cbnr are required for cs-dependent activation of the promoter pbm <dig> in the c. maltaromaticum genetic background. moreover, the fact that his  <dig> and asp  <dig> are needed for biological activity of cbnk and cbnr, respectively, is in agreement with the sequence-based predicted role of each of these residues as a site for phosphorylation  <cit> .

functional reconstruction of the cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system in a heterologous host
to investigate the portability of the cs-cbnk-cbnr three-component regulatory system to a different genetic background, we assessed whether this regulatory system could be functionally reconstructed in a heterologous host. l. lactis was selected as a sensible host for these experiments since it is a lactic acid bacterium with a codon usage and a g + c content that is similar to that of c. maltaromaticum. more importantly, the pil <dig> and pnz <dig> vectors had been demonstrated to be suitable for utilization in l. lactis  <cit> .

each of the pil <dig> derivatives expressing the carnobacterial regulatory proteins  or pil <dig> was introduced in l. lactis strains that were already transformed with plqpbm <dig>  or pnz <dig>  this allowed us to generate a set of two plasmid-containing l. lactis transformants equivalent to the two plasmid-containing c. maltaromaticum transformants described above. the functionality of the cs-cbnk-cbnr system in the l. lactis transformants was examined with the same methodological approach utilized for the analysis of their c. maltaromaticum transformant counterparts. the analysis showed that the cs-triggered signal transduction cascade that leads to the activation of the pbm <dig> promoter was functional in l. lactis. moreover, as seen in c. maltaromaticum, cs-triggered promoter activation required both cbnk and cbnr . overall, these results clearly demonstrate that the cbnk-cbnr two-component signal transduction system is necessary and sufficient to transduce the signal of the peptide autoinducer cs into activation of the promoter pbm <dig>  in both the homologous c. maltaromaticum host and the heterologous l. lactis host.

functional characterization of the promoters pbm <dig>  pb, and ps
the promoters pbm <dig>  pb, and ps have each two imperfect 10-bp direct repeats that are separated by a 12-bp at-rich segment  <cit> . this sequence motif has been proposed to be a site for cbnr binding  <cit> . the sequence similarity of these promoters suggests that they have similar cs-dependent activation profiles. to investigate this possibility, the gusa reporter assay was utilized to characterize the cs-dependent activation patterns of these promoters in c. maltaromaticum lv17c transformants carrying pbrkr and either plqpbm <dig>  plqpb, or plqps. we determined gusa activity in the cell suspensions of the transformants after treatment with cs at different concentrations . the analysis revealed clear differences in the strength of the promoters pbm <dig>  pb, and ps. in addition to this dose-response analysis, we investigated the time-dependent activation patterns of pbm <dig>  pb, and ps by monitoring the gusa activity of cultures that were treated with cs at a single saturating concentration . the kinetics of promoter activation was comparable for all the promoters, with gusa activity reaching maximum after  <dig> hours of cs treatment.

we also conducted dose-response and time-dependent experiments using l. lactis strains transformed with pbrkr and either plqpbm <dig>  plqpb, or plqps. these experiments revealed a pattern of promoter activation in this heterologous host that is comparable to that observed in the homologous c. maltaromaticum host. figure  <dig> shows the results obtained with the pbrkr/plqpbm <dig> l. lactis transformants. overall, our promoter functional analysis demonstrates that pbm <dig>  pb, and ps displayed qualitatively equivalent regulation patterns, and that the functional properties of these promoters are not species specific.

CONCLUSIONS
deconvoluting the molecular bases of bacterial mechanisms of intra- and inter-species cell-to-cell communication is crucial to deepening our understanding of the social behavior of microorganisms, and to manipulate bacterial behavior in natural and artificial environments. in particular, a detailed knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of quorum sensing is anticipated to have practical relevance to medical, agricultural, and industrial applications. the present study was aimed at characterizing the molecular mechanism that is involved in quorum sensing-dependent regulation of carnobacteriocin production by c. maltaromaticum lv17b. this bacterium and its carnobacteriocins are of particular interest because of their potential application to food preservation. our results provide evidence supporting a model in which the cbnk-cbnr two-component signal transduction system is necessary and sufficient to transduce the signal of the peptide autoinducer cs into activation of the promoters that drive the expression of the genes required for production of carnobacteriocins and the immunity proteins that protect c. maltaromaticum lv17b from their antimicrobial activity. the cs-cbnk-cbnr triad forms a three-component regulatory system by which production of carnobacteriocins is controlled in a population density-dependent  manner. notably, cs induces expression of its own gene, suggesting a positive-feedback loop that would result in a fast burst of gene up-regulation, which will lead to a sharp induction of carnobacteriocin and carnobacteriocin immunity protein production. the cs-cbnk-cbnr-based regulatory mechanism would permit the bacterial population to synchronize the production of carnobacteriocins and the carnobacteriocin immunity proteins. such a population-wide action would afford a substantial burst of carnobacteriocin production that could increase the competitive fitness of the bacterium by enhancing its ability to inhibit the growth, or kill, susceptible bacterial competitors. finally, the cs-cbnk-cbnr-based two-plasmid expression system we have constructed is a suitable genetic tool for undertaking future structure-function relationship analyses to map the residues required for the biological activity of cs, cbnk, and cbnr. this plasmid system also has potential for use as a starting point for the development of cloning vectors for inducible gene expression in c. maltaromaticum, l. lactis, and other lactic acid bacteria.

