BACKGROUND
pisum sativum  seeds are a rich source of minerals, proteins, starch and antioxidants. dry pea seeds are widely used in agriculture as feed for livestock and are gaining interest as feed in aquaculture. pea seeds, one of the oldest grain legumes consumed by humans, are also gaining wide recognition as a healthy food ingredient in the human diet due to the low glycemic index of the starches  <cit> .

flavonoids are of particular interest due to their strong antioxidant properties. proanthocyanidins , also known as condensed tannins, are a subclass of flavonoids that accumulate in seed coats of a number of plant species including pea, and are thought to function as protective agents against biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . historically, pas were considered as anti-nutritional compounds in pulse nutritional studies because they can precipitate proteins and reduce bioavailability of some minerals. however, recent research suggests that pas have considerable potential for use as a novel therapy or treatment for a range of human health conditions, including cardiovascular disease, cancer establishment and progression, and bacterial infections  <cit> . the use of pas as a plant-based health-beneficial component in the human diet has led to renewed interest in this class of flavonoids in food crops  <cit> . specifically, studies indicate that pa polymer length is inversely related to bioavailability in humans  <cit> . therefore, identification of variation in pa composition and length within pisum sativum, as well as the mechanisms responsible for this variation would be a great benefit for breeding new cultivars with additional health beneficial properties.figure  <dig> 
proanthocyanidin biosynthetic pathway with transcript levels of each biosynthetic gene estimated by  <dig> read numbers, and structures of proanthocyanidins and their derivatized products. a) proanthocyanidin biosynthetic pathway. pal, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; c4h, cinnamate 4-hydroxylase; 4cl, 4-coumarate:coa ligase; chs, chalcone synthase; chi, chalcone isomerase; f3’5’h, flavonoid 3’5’-hydroxylase; f3’h, flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase; f3h, flavanone 3-hydroxylase; dfr, dihydroflavonal 4-reductase; ans, anthocyanidin synthase; anr, anthocyanidin reductase; lar, leucoanthocyanidin reductase. values in brackets indicate the read numbers from 454-pyrosequencing. b) c4-c <dig> linkage in pa-phloroglucinol adduct structures.



pas are derived from the flavonoid branch of the phenylpropanoid pathway . chemical diversity can be introduced early in the pathway by regio-selective cytochrome p <dig> enzymes, f3′h and f3′5′h , which hydroxylate 3′- or 3′,5′-positions of naringenin b-ring  <cit> . two consecutive reactions by f3h  <cit>  and dfr then synthesize colorless flavan- <dig> -diols   <cit> , which are further converted to -cis-flavan-3-ols through the sequential reactions of anthocyanidin synthase   <cit>  and anthocyanidin reductase   <cit>  or to -trans-flavan-3-ols by leucoanthocyanidin reductase   <cit> .

biosynthesis of these flavan-3-ol monomers is believed to occur on the cytosolic surface of the endoplasmic reticulum, yet pas themselves accumulate in the vacuole  <cit> . two multi-drug and toxic compound extrusion  transporters, tt <dig> and mate <dig>  characterized from arabidopsis thaliana and medicago truncatula, respectively, are able to transport epicatechin-3-o-glucoside  across the tonoplastic membrane, but they were not able to transport aglycones   <cit> . therefore, glycosylation of flavan-3-ols appears to be necessary for the mate-mediated transport, which is further supported by the recent discovery of an epicatechin-specific glycosyltransferase from m. truncatula  <cit> . mechanistically, the mate transporters are flavonoid h+-anti-porters, and the proton gradient required for this h+-anti-porter is believed to be generated by aha <dig>  on the tonoplast membrane  <cit> .

in contrast to the transporter-mediated delivery of pa monomers, vesicle-mediated transport has also been proposed in planta. arabidopsis mutant tt <dig>  which encodes a glutathione-s-transferase-like protein, accumulates pa derivatives including flavan-3-ols in small vacuole-like structures  <cit> . tt <dig> may itself bind flavonoids to protect them from oxidation in the cytosol rather than conjugate glutathione to the flavan-3-ols  <cit> . a golgi-independent vesicle-mediated trafficking pathway has also been proposed for anthocyanins, a group of pigments closely related to flavan-3-ols  <cit> . recently, vesicles containing pa were identified and named as tannosome from grape  and several other vascular plants  <cit> . this result also supports the implication of vesicle-mediated trafficking, but the vesicles appear to be derived from chloroplasts, which is in contrast to the er/cytosolic biosynthesis of pa and hence requires further investigation.

pa polymers consist of flavan-3-ol aglycone subunits, suggesting a β-glucosidase within the vacuole may be required. alternatively, deglycosylation may be coupled with condensation, which itself remains unknown. pa polymer length, composition of subunits, and c-c bond stereochemistry varies between plant species, suggesting enzymatic control of condensation  <cit> . laccases and peroxidases have been considered as potential condensing enzymes, although to date no pa condensing enzyme has been identified. one candidate, tt <dig>  a putative laccase-like polyphenol oxidase, was proposed, but this enzyme appears to function in the apoplastic space where it converts colourless extractable pas into their brown non-extractable oxidized form  <cit> . however, tt <dig> recombinant enzyme can oxidize epicatechin , resulting in the formation of oligomers, although the resulting in vitro interflavan linkages are not naturally occurring  <cit> . it is possible that a protein partner, such as the dirigent protein involved in lignin coupling  <cit> , is necessary for proper pa oligomerization, but non-enzymatic polymerization has not yet been ruled out  <cit> .

much of the research on seed coat-derived pas has been conducted using the non-crop species arabidopsis and m. truncatula. however, both of these species produce pa polymers composed almost exclusively of the cis-flavan-3-ol, epicatechin   <cit> . pea offers unique advantages to study pa biosynthesis. pea seeds are substantially larger than those of arabidopsis and m. truncatula, allowing for ready isolation of the seed coat tissue, the primary site of pa accumulation  <cit> . also, a long history of agricultural breeding of pea has produced a wide variety of pea cultivars. thousands of accessions of pea  exist around the world, providing both a rich source of genetic diversity and nutritional variation  <cit> . it is likely that variations in pa composition and polymer length exist in pea, and this could provide valuable resources to improve desirable pas by breeding or biotechnological means. despite the importance of pea as a crop and the possible value in understanding pea pa metabolism, comprehensive chemical and biochemical studies of pas in pea have not been achieved to date. as the first step to advance the knowledge of pa biosynthesis in pea, we histologically localized pas, determined pa accumulation, and chemically characterized the pas of three pa-accumulating cultivars within the pea seed coat over development. the transcript abundance of two key pa branch point genes, psanr and pslar, were profiled over development, and the enzymes they encode were biochemically characterized. using these data, we developed a working hypothesis of pa biosynthesis in pea seed coat tissue.

RESULTS
localization of pas in developing ‘courier’ pea seed coats
pas were localized in the pea seed coats of ‘courier’  over development using a p-dimethylaminocinnamaldehyde  staining method  <cit> . pas mainly accumulated intracellularly  in the cells of the epidermal and ground parenchyma layers of the seed coat throughout development . as the seed matured, the cells of the epidermal layer of the seed coat sclerified, and the intercellular space and vacuolar size decreased. as a result, the vacuolar-localized pas are visualized in the inner side of the epidermal layer. also note that the inner seed coat cell layers are progressively crushed by the expanding embryo as the seed develops .figure  <dig> 
pea seeds and pa localization in developing pea seed coat. a) representative images of pea seeds from each cultivar. b) cotyledon mid-region cross sections of ‘courier’ pea seed coats. e, epidermal layer; h, hypodermal layer; ch, chlorenchyma layer; gp, ground parenchyma layer; bp, branched parenchyma layer. daa: days after anthesis.



proanthocyanidin profile of pisum sativum cultivars
the pa content and subunit composition of the seed coats from three pa-accumulating pea cultivars  and a cultivar containing minimal pas  were determined by acid-catalyzed cleavage followed by phloroglucinol derivatization    <cit> . this method allows the determination of pa subunit composition and concentration by the comparison of the retention properties of reaction products with those of flavan-3-ol standards and other well characterized pa phloroglucinol reaction products. flavan-3-ol pa extension units form phloroglucinol adducts at their c <dig> position while terminal flavan-3-ol units are released as flavan-3-ol monomers , the ratio of which allows determination of the mean degree of polymerization .table  <dig> 
pa chemical analyses of ‘courier’, ‘solido’, and ‘lan3017’ pea seeds and seed coats



pa analysis using phloroglucinolysis and rp-hplc-dad in mature pea seeds

peak id
compound
‘courier’
‘solido’
‘lan3017’
conversion yieldc
total seed pad
total seed coat pa e

amolar % ± se ; bnd, not detected; cyield of pa extract calculated.


dtotal seed pa content based on characterized pa subunits, expressed as mg/100 g dry weight of whole seeds. gc-p, gallocatechin--phloroglucinol; gc, gallocatechin; egc-p, epigallocatechin--phloroglucinol; egc, epigallocatechin; ct-p, catechin--phloroglucinol; ct, catechin; ec-p, epicatechin--phloroglucinol; ec, epicatechin.


etotal seed coat pa content expressed as % = mg/100 mg dry weight of seed coat sample using 80% methanol extraction. proanthocyanidin extract from ‘cdc acer’ pea seed coats purified as described by jin et al.  <cit>  was used as a standard for the butanol-hcl assay. data are means ± se .
hplc chromatograms of the phloroglucinol acid hydrolysis products from pea seeds of ‘courier’, ‘lan3017’, and ‘canstar’.  <dig>  l-ascorbic acid;  <dig>  phloroglucinol;  <dig>  gallocatechin--phloroglucinol;  <dig>  epigallocatechin--phloroglucinol;  <dig>  gallocatechin;  <dig>  putative catechin--phloroglucinol;  <dig>  catechin--phloroglucinol;  <dig>  epicatechin--phloroglucinol;  <dig>  epigallocatechin;  <dig>  catechin;  <dig>  epicatechin.



no pa subunits were detected in the rp-hplc chromatography of ‘canstar’ seed extracts . pa subunits were detected in the seed extracts of cultivars ‘courier’, ‘solido’, and ‘lan3017’, that have brown or brown-speckled seed coats . in the seeds of pea cultivars ‘courier’ and ‘solido’, similar pa flavan-3-ol extension and terminal unit profiles were detected . the pa flavan-3-ol extension units were nearly exclusively prodelphinidin , where epigallocatechin  was the most abundant flavan-3-ol extension subunit followed by gallocatechin . the pa terminal subunits of these pea cultivars mainly consisted of gc  and egc . a minimal amount of epicatechin  also occurred in the pa extension subunits  in these two cultivars, and in the terminal subunits  of ‘solido’ . on the other hand, the pa flavan-3-ol extension and terminal subunit profile of ‘lan3017’ seeds was markedly different from those of ‘solido’ and ‘courier’ . ‘lan3017’ contained nearly exclusively procyanidin  moieties in the pa polymers, with the majority of the pa extension subunits consisting of ec  followed by catechin .

the mdp of the pa polymers was similar in ‘courier’ and ‘solido’ at 5– <dig> subunits in length. however, the pa mdp was  <dig> to  <dig> times greater in ‘lan3017’ than that in the other pea cultivars . the pa extension and terminal subunits in the pa-containing pea cultivars are assumed to be linked in a b-type configuration  , as the pa interflavonoid bonds were readily cleaved under the acidic conditions. the identities of the pa subunits detected in the hplc analysis were further substantiated by lc-ms/ms .

similar pa levels were found among the pa-containing pea cultivars when the total extractable pa content of the seed coat was estimated using the butanol-hcl method . the total extractable pa yield from whole seed extracts was also calculated using the pa extract yield values and the conversion yield of pas to known subunits with data from the phloroglucinolysis method   <cit> . the lower pa content values obtained in the whole seed extracts compared to the seed coat extracts are the result of: 1) pa localization in the seed coat and not the embryo of the seeds for all cultivars, and 2) a larger ratio of embryo to seed coat tissue in the seeds of ‘solido’, and decreased solubility of the longer pa polymers of ‘lan3017’ in the extraction solvent used in the phloroglucinolysis procedure compared to the shorter pa polymers present in ‘courier’ and ‘solido’. therefore, the total extractable pa content of the seed coat as estimated using the butanol-hcl assay is the method of choice for determining pa content difference among these cultivars.

to further understand pa accumulation in the pea seed coat, the content and composition of ‘courier’ extractable pas over development were examined. the molar percent of gc in the extension units increased as seed development progressed, while a small decrease in egc occurred . the mdp of pas from young seed coats at 12 days after anthesis  was less than five, then it increased slightly  by  <dig> daa and it remained at this level until  <dig> daa . at seed maturity, the mdp increased to approximately seven . the extractable seed coat pa content increased during development, reaching a maximum level at  <dig> daa . after  <dig> daa, the extractable pa content steadily decreased until seed maturation.table  <dig> 
pa profiles in developing seed coats of ‘courier’


gc-p
egc-p
ec-p
gc
egc
ec

 <dig> daa
a

 <dig> daa

 <dig> daa

 <dig> daa

 <dig> daa

adaa, days after anthesis; bmolar% ± se .

gc-p, gallocatechin--phloroglucinol; egc-p, epigallocatechin--phloroglucinol; ec-p, epicatechin--phloroglucinol; gc, gallocatechin; egc, epigallocatechin; ec, epicatechin.

pa content was determined using the phloroglucinolysis and rp-hplc-dad analysis method.
temporal profiles of
psanr
,
psdfr
and
pslar
transcript abundance, pa content and mean degree of polymerization in pea seed coats of ‘courier’. a) pa content  and mean degree of polymerization  in developing ‘courier’ seed coats from  <dig> to  <dig> daa; data are means ± se . relative transcript abundance of ‘courier’ b)
psanr
c)
psdfr and d)
pslar from  <dig> to  <dig> daa using qrt-pcr. transcript abundance values of psanr and psdfr were normalized to the  <dig> daa, and pslar to the  <dig> daa samples. actin was used as the reference gene in all experiments. data are means ± se .



cloning and characterization p. sativum anr
pea seed coat pa subunits consisted of a high quantity of trans-flavan-3-ols  in addition to common cis-flavan-3-ols . in contrast, the pas of the closely related legume species medicago truncatula and the model plant arabidopsis thaliana are reported to not contain trans-flavan-3-ol subunits. these results imply that both lar and anr, the key enzymes responsible for the biosynthesis of pa precursors, are highly active in the pea seed coat pa biosynthesis pathway . no biochemical studies of these two key branch enzymes have been conducted in the crop species pea, and thus we pursued thorough biochemical studies of anr and lar.

‘courier’ was chosen as the source of a psanr clone as this cultivar displayed high seed coat pa accumulation as well as significant quantities of cis-flavan-3-ol pa subunits . a full-length psanr clone was retrieved from ‘courier’ seed coat cdna using degenerate pcr, followed by rapid amplification of cdna ends . psanr encodes a  <dig> -bp orf and shares 84% and 60% amino acid identity with m. truncatula anr and arabidopsis anr, respectively. psanr is highly conserved among ‘courier’, ‘lan3017’ and ‘solido’, differing by only a single amino acid in ‘lan3017’  and in ‘solido’ .

to examine the catalytic activity of psanr, psanr was expressed as an n-terminal six-histidine tagged recombinant protein and purified using a ni-nta column. based on the pea pa subunit composition data, the primary in planta substrate for ‘courier’ psanr is expected to be the 2′,3′,4′-hydroxylated anthocyanidin, delphinidin . therefore, delphinidin as well as two related compounds, 2′,3′-hydroxylated cyanidin and 3′-hydroxylated pelargonidin, were assessed as substrates for recombinant psanr . when the psanr enzymatic products were analyzed by lc-ms/ms, they showed identical co-chromatographic and ms/ms patterns with the corresponding authentic cis-flavan-3-ol standards, egc, ec and eaz . no flavan-3-ol product was detected when nadph was omitted or if the protein was boiled prior to the assay . these results showed that all three compounds can be efficiently used as substrates to produce cis-flavan-3-ols, and that non-enzymatic conversion of cis-flavan-3-ols to trans-flavan-3-ols did not occur under our in vitro assay conditions. the optimal ph  and temperature for psanr activity were determined to be  <dig>  and 40°c, respectively. in the optimized reaction condition, the kinetics properties of psanr for the three substrates were further determined . the rates of the respective product formation  from substrates fit well to the michaelis-menten kinetics model with minor variations in affinity and turnover number. psanr showed comparable kcat values for all three substrates ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  × 10−3 sec− <dig>  however, the km values for pelagonidin and cyanidin as substrates were approximately 5-fold lower than for delphinidin, making the overall kinetic efficiency of psanr for delphinidin 2– <dig> fold lower than for pelagonidin and cyanidin. interestingly, it was recently reported that anrs from vitis vinifera  and camellia sinensis  have an intrinsic epimerase activity, producing trans-flavan-3-ols in vitro as well as cis-flavan-3-ols  <cit> . of interest to this study is the possibility that anr could contribute to the formation of trans-flavan-3-ols, along with its known ability to form cis-flavan-3-ols. however, we observed no evidence for psanr epimerase activity for the conversion of cis-flavan-3-ols to trans-flavan-3-ols, as trans-flavan-3-ol products were not observed using cis-flavan-3-ols  as substrates in the psanr recombinant enzyme assays .figure  <dig> 
in vitro
characterization of psanr recombinant enzyme.
a-c: psanr reaction kinetics were explored using cyanidin , delphinidin  and pelargonidin . left: michaelis-menten kinetics plots. each data point represents means ± se . right: lc-ms identification in reference to authentic standards .
psanr reaction kinetics using cyanidin, pelargonidin or delphinidin as a substrate



substrate
k
m

v
max

k
cat

k
cat
/k
m


adata are means ± se .



transcriptome of p. sativum seed coat
although anr activity could be evaluated using commercial substrates, lar substrates  are not stable or commercially available. due to the lack of substrate, lar activity was examined using enzymatically synthesized substrates by the dfr recombinant enzyme. however, both psdfr and pslar clones were not present in the publicly available est database. during the progress of this work, two transcript shotgun assembly  data from garden and field pea were released to the ncbi using next-generation sequencings   <cit> . in these data sets, a full length psdfr could be identified, but a pslar clone was still missing since the seed coat was not included in these sequencing samples.

to improve the current pea tsa data and also to facilitate the present studies of pa metabolism, pea seed coats were physically isolated and pooled from ripening fruits between  <dig> and  <dig> daa. a small scale ngs  was performed using the roche/ <dig> sequencing method. accordingly, a total of  <dig>  reads with an average of 392-bp read length were generated, and these individual reads were assembled through mira algorithm to yield  <dig>  unigenes   <cit> . these unigenes were annotated by blastx against tair and uniprot protein sets through the fiesta bioinformatics pipeline . with an e-value of 10− <dig> cut-off, the unigenes showed  <dig>  and  <dig>  hits against tair and uniprot protein sets.

annotated unigenes were ranked by their abundance, according to the number of reads constituting the contigs . the transcripts among the top  <dig> highly expressed genes included 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase , indole-3-acetic acid amido synthetase , methionine synthase , and gibberellin 2β-dioxygenase . these results are consistent with gene expression changes observed in other studies . it should be noted that two unigenes annotated as anr and f3′5′ hydroxylase were ranked as the 5th and 6th most abundant contigs in the database, indicating that pa biosynthesis is a major metabolic route in pea seed coat.

next, we assessed the coverage of pa metabolic genes represented in our seed coat-specific tsa data set. the protein sequences of the characterized enzymes involved in pa biosynthesis were curated from arabidopsis, medicago sativa , m. truncatula, and petunia , and were used as blastx queries. the identified contigs and singletons with high e-value hits were manually inspected to determine the numbers of reads for each gene. this quantitative analysis revealed that all  <dig> genes for pa biosynthesis are present in the pea tsa data set, but their read numbers varied significantly . in agreement with the pa chemical phenotype of ‘courier’ , f3′5′h showed an abundant read number  of transcripts while f3′h had only two reads. as these two enzymes compete for the common substrate naringenin, this relative transcript abundance explains the delphinidin-derived pa subunits in ‘courier’. in this tsa data set, dfr and anr were represented by  <dig> and  <dig> reads, respectively, and they were present as full-length genes. however, lar had only  <dig> reads and was present as a partial clone .

cloning and characterization p. sativum lar
the deduced protein sequences from the full-length psdfr  is approximately  <dig>  kda, and it shows 89% and 70% amino acid identity to m. truncatula and arabidopsis dfr, respectively. contigs representing pslar lacked a portion of the 5’-sequence, and hence the full-length pslar  was recovered by 5’-race. the encoded pslar protein sequence, calculated to be approximately  <dig>  kda, is 85% and 67% identical to m. truncatula lar and desmodium uncinatum lar, respectively. the lar characteristic amino acid motifs rflp, iccn, and thd were conserved in the pslar protein sequence   <cit> .

to examine their catalytic activities, pslar and psdfr were expressed as recombinant proteins with n-terminal six-histidine tags and purified using the same method as for psanr . purified psdfr recombinant enzyme was used to provide pslar substrate in vitro. in these coupled assays, purified psdfr and pslar were mixed at a 2: <dig> molar ratio, and the dfr substrate, dihydroquercetin  or dihydromyricetin , was added to the reaction assays in optimized reaction conditions . the formation of predicted trans-flavan-3-ol  was then analyzed by lc-ms in comparison to the authentic standards . only co-incubation of psdfr and pslar could synthesize compounds displaying + ion for ct  or gc  .figure  <dig> 
in vitro
psdfr and pslar coupled assays. product synthesis rates from the coupled assays were measured using dfr substrates, dihydroquercetin  and dihydromyricetin . left: pseudo-kinetics plots were inferred from the coupled assays. each data point represents means ± se . c-f: lc-ms + extracted ion chromatographs  of authentic -catechin  and -gallocatechin  along with in vitro assay products  from psdfr only  or psdfr + pslar coupled assays .



overall, the coupled assays showed very efficient conversions of the substrates, dhq and dhm. when the coupled assays were performed at 65 μm substrate, 36% conversion of dhq to ct and 12% conversion of dhm to gc were observed. despite the inaccuracy to calculate kinetic properties from the coupled assays, pslar kinetic values were inferred by plotting product formation rate in relation to varying substrate  concentrations. in these pseudo-kinetic analyses, the product synthesis rates  of the coupled assays were  <dig> to 3-fold lower than those from anr but still comparable .

as observed for psanr activity, the substrate with a lower degree of b-ring hydroxylation  was converted more efficiently, even though dhm is the expected native substrate in ‘courier’ seed coats. for dfr, lar and anr, the degree of b-ring hydroxylation of the available substrate is determined by the upstream activity of flavonoid 3’-hydroxylase  and flavonoid 3’5’-hydroxylase  . preliminary gene expression data from our lab  indicates that psf3’h is highly expressed in ‘lan3017’ versus f3’5’h in ‘courier’ and ‘solido’, which matches the observed pa profiles . thus, substrate availability is controlled independently from the substrate preference of these enzymes. the confirmation of an active pslar protein when coupled to psdfr in vitro, therefore, supports the abundance of  <dig> -trans-flavan-3-ols found in the pea seed coats.

developmental regulation of psanr and pslar in ‘courier’ seed coats
with the demonstration of enzymatically competent psanr and pslar, we assumed that coordinated expression of psanr and pslar determines the pa content and composition in pea seed coats of ‘courier’. to understand developmental regulation of these two key genes, temporal expression of psanr and pslar from  <dig> to  <dig> daa in ‘courier’ seed coat was determined by quantitative real-time pcr . the transcript abundance of both psanr and pslar was high during the earlier stages of pea seed coat development. both genes displayed a decline in expression as the seed coat matured, but pslar transcripts decreased significantly faster than psanr transcript. seed coat psdfr transcript levels  were stable from  <dig> to  <dig> daa, except for a 2-fold increase at  <dig> daa . maximal pa accumulation in ‘courier’ seed coat did not immediately follow transcriptional induction of psanr and pslar, but it reached its highest level at  <dig> daa . pa mdp increased to five by  <dig> daa, and it remained at this level to  <dig> daa .

heterologous expression of pslar in arabidopsis
arabidopsis lacks lar and does not synthesize trans-flavan-3-ols. in arabidopsis, all leucoanthocyanidins are channelled to cis-flavan-3-ols by ans and anr. in order to examine if the expression of pslar in arabidopsis seed coat can re-direct the metabolic flux to trans-flavan-3-ols, pslar was expressed with a flag-epitope tag by a ~ <dig> -kb fragment of arabidopsis anr promoter  <cit> . this construct  was transformed to wild-type arabidopsis as well as anr knock-out  arabidopsis mutants identified from a t-dna knock-out database. we hypothesized that the wild-type arabidopsis expressing pslar would synthesize pas comprised of a mixture of cis- and trans-flavan-3-ols while the arabidopsis anr mutant expressing pslar would produce pas exclusively composed of trans-flavan-3-ols.

using transgenic plants, t-dna insertions were confirmed by pcr-screening of genomic dna in the anr mutant . subsequently, presence of pslar transcript and its recombinant enzyme were confirmed by rt-pcr and immunoblot analysis using anti-flag antibodies . furthermore, activity of the pslar was confirmed using crude protein extracted from siliques with and without supplementary recombinant psdfr . therefore, the transgenic arabidopsis produced functional lar. subsequently, the arabidopsis transgenic lines were examined for alteration of pa subunit chemical phenotypes. the anr mutant expressing pslar was used to test for restoration of seed coat color and to detect the presence of dmaca reactive products; the seeds from wild-type arabidopsis expressing pslar were used to profile monomer units of pa after phloroglucinol derivatization. despite the clear evidence of successful transformation and presence of functional pslar, no complementation of the seed coat color or presence of dmaca reactive products were observed in the anr mutant background, nor was the presence of trans-flavan-3-ol and its derivatives observed in wild-type arabidopsis .

discussion
proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in pea  seeds
to investigate the pa diversity of pea seeds, the pa profiles of four pea cultivars were analyzed, and significant quantitative and qualitative variations in pa chemistry were observed. of the cultivars examined, ‘canstar’ lacked detectable pas, while ‘courier’, ‘solido’, and ‘lan3017’ had different quantities and/or types of pas . all three pa-containing cultivars contained pa levels comparable to that found in blueberries, cranberries, sorghum  and hazelnuts  <cit> . ‘courier’ and ‘solido’ pas are composed primarily of prodelphinidin subunits , similar to the pea cultivars ‘cdc acer’ and ‘cdc rocket’  <cit> , and those found in tea  <cit> . in contrast, ‘lan3017’, was composed of procyanidin-type subunits . these differences in pa subunit composition may impact the nutritional quality as tri-hydroxylated flavan-3-ols  have a higher antioxidant potential than di-hydroxylated forms   <cit> . additionally, the mean degree of polymerization of ‘lan3017’ pas are 2– <dig> fold higher than ‘courier’ or ‘solido’ pas. the mechanism controlling pa polymerization remains unknown, but it is particularly relevant as bioavailability after consumption by animals and humans is inversely related to polymer length  <cit> . in this regard, pea offers a valuable system to investigate the molecular basis for subtle biochemical differences in pa biosynthesis, and the pea cultivars with different pa profiles can be integrated into animal and human nutritional studies.

although delphinidin-derived epi-gallocatechin is the most abundant cis-flavan-3-ol subunit in the pas of ‘courier’ , the pa precurors substrates, pelargonidin and cyanidin, were utilized more efficiently than delphinidin by recombinant psanr in our in vitro assays . in comparison, pas of tea tree  also contain a high proportion of delphinidin-derived flavan-3-ol subunits, and its anr displayed a higher preference for delphinidin than the other two substrates, displaying consistent in vivo and in vitro substrate preference  <cit> . the discrepancy of substrate preference found in pea ‘courer’ is enigmatic, but obviously substrate availability for psanr dictates pa monomer types in pea. it is well established that relative expression of f3’h and f3’5’h determines the psanr substrate availability. we speculate that a dominant expression of f3’5’h may have recently occurred in ‘courier’, but downstream psanr has not fully adapted to delphinidin as a preferred substrate in this cultivar.

contribution of lar to proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in pea and other plants
with the discoveries of anr  from arabidopsis  <cit>  and lar from d. uncinatum  <cit> , it has been well accepted that cis-flavan-3-ols are synthesized by the consecutive reactions of ans and anr, and trans-flavan-3-ols are synthesized by lar, from the common substrates flavan- <dig> -diols  . for lar activity, biochemical data using purified recombinant lar enzyme from this work and others  have shown that lar efficiently catalyzes the synthesis of trans-flavan-3-ols from leucoanthocyanidins . in the dfr/lar coupled assays shown here, the synthesis rates of the lar products, catechin and gallocatechin, from their respective substrates  were slightly lower than, but still comparable to, those of cis-flavan-3-ols by anr. these data are consistent with the pea pa monomer profile composed of comparable amounts of trans- and cis-3-flavan-3-ols. although lar has been isolated from several plants, lar kinetic data is scarce, due to the instability and inaccessibility of its substrates. the only km values reported are 5–26 μm for three types of leucoanthocyanidins from native d. uncinatum lar  <cit> . in dfr/lar coupled assays, the amount of lar substrates  is expected to be very low. thus, the efficient synthesis of pslar products observed in the coupled assays implies rapid consumption of low abundant intermediates by pslar and may reflect high affinity of the substrates to pslar.

the biochemical data for pslar strongly support its role in production of trans-flavan-3-ols in pea. however, data from lar overexpression studies in heterologous plants suggest that production of trans-flavan-3-ols through lar in planta may require more than the presence of enzymatically competent lar protein. previously, expression of d. uncinatum and m. truncatula lar by constitutive viral promoters in two lar-lacking  plants, white clover  and tobacco , did not lead to the production of trans-flavan-3-ols  <cit> . in the present study, instead of using a constitutive promoter, the arabidopsis anr promoter  was used to express pslar in the arabidopsis seed coat  <cit> . we hypothesized that the anr promoter will express pslar at appropriate developmental stages in seed coat cells, where substrates for pslar are abundant. accordingly, pslar transcript, protein, and catalytic activity were clearly detected from the transgenic arabidopsis siliques ; nonetheless, no restoration of seed coat pa phenotype was observed in anr mutant arabidopsis, and no catechin pa extension or terminal subunits could be detected after phloroglucinolysis analysis from lar-overexpressing wild-type arabidopsis . this result suggests that simply placing active pslar enzyme in the seed coat could not sufficiently redirect the metabolic flux toward trans-flavan-3-ols. with our data in mind, it is noteworthy that a protein complex channelling dihydromyricetin  to gallocatechin  was purified from forage legume, onobrychis viciifolia  <cit> . therefore, although speculative, pslar may need to form an enzyme complex with psdfr in vivo to fully draw a metabolic flux towards trans-flavan-3-ol synthesis. further studies are required to test this model in pea or transgenic arabidopsis.

both pslar and psanr transcript abundance was high earlier in pea seed coat development . pslar showed the highest expression at  <dig> daa and its transcripts were rapidly reduced to a basal level by  <dig> daa. psanr displayed a wider range of expression with substantial transcript levels until  <dig> daa. by  <dig> daa, pa accumulation in the seed coat was approximately half-maximal, reaching maximal levels at  <dig> daa . consistent with this result, the 454-sequencing read number of pslar from the 10– <dig> daa seed coat samples was 17-fold lower than that of psanr . curiously, the molar percent of gc extension units  in ‘courier’ seed coat pas steadily increased from  <dig> daa to  <dig> daa, but pslar transcript abundance was minimal by  <dig> daa . this apparent inconsistency between pslar expression and gc incorporation in pea seed coat pas suggests that a pool of flavan-3-ols is made earlier in seed coat development, and this pool supplies substrates for pa polymerization throughout the remainder of tissue development. alternatively, pslar protein may have an unusually long half-life. an understanding of the mechanism of pa polymerization is required to better address this discrepancy. intriguingly, it was reported that grape anr can synthesize not only ec  but also ct  in 50: <dig> molar ratio by its intrinsic epimerase activity  <cit> , and such epimerase activity was also recently observed in tea anr  <cit> . however, epimerase activity for the conversion of cis-flavan-3-ols to trans-flavan-3-ols could not be found from psanr in our study, suggesting the trans-flavan-3-ols in pea were not derived from psanr epimerase activity.

taking all data together from this work and others, lars from different plants have displayed competent biochemical activity to transform leucoanthocyanidins to trans-flavan-3-ols in vitro; however, the lack of accumulation of trans-flavan-3-ols and their derivatives accompanying expression of lar in heterologous lar-free plants still raises questions. it appears that the analysis of a lar knock-out in trans-flavan-3-ol abundant plants  is necessary to definitely establish in vivo function of lar.

CONCLUSIONS
in this report, our comprehensive chemical analyses of pas from pea seed coat showed that pea pas are composed of both cis- and trans-flavan-3-ols and that substantial quantitative and qualitative variations of pa subunits  are present among different pea cultivars. the transcriptomics analysis of the pa-rich ‘courier’ seed coat identified key biosynthetic genes for both cis- and trans-flavan-3-ol synthesis in agreement with the pa profile in pea. the catalytic identities of the two key genes for pa synthesis  were further confirmed by biochemical assays. despite potent in vitro activity of pslar, expression of pslar in arabidopsis seed coat  was unable to redirect the metabolic flux towards trans-flavan-3-ol synthesis, implying a possible in planta metabolite channelling. we expect that the improved understanding of pa chemical variations and associated biosynthetic mechanisms will help us develop pea cultivars with desirable pa types and quantity.

