BACKGROUND
the hematopoietic growth factor erythropoietin  has long been observed to exert beneficial effects on cognition. upon introduction of recombinant human epo into the clinic, cognitive improvement of patients with chronic renal failure was noted during epo treatment, but attributed to its hematopoietic effects . indeed, anemia after isovolemic hemodilution, induced in healthy volunteers, impairs cognitive performance, which is completely restored by subsequent autotransfusion  <cit> .

however, the finding that epo and its receptor  are expressed in the brain  <cit>   led to the notion that epo exerts direct, hematopoiesis-independent effects on the nervous system. the manufacturing of epo analogues with no hematopoietic but potent neuroprotective properties, e.g. cepo   <cit> , delivered proof-of-principle that brain effects of epo are not necessarily mediated by its hematopoietic actions.

beneficial effects of epo on cognitive functioning have been shown in different animal models of neuropsychiatric diseases, e.g. on place navigation after global ischemia or neurotrauma  <cit> . in a recent double-blind, placebo-controlled, proof-of-concept study in chronic schizophrenic patients, we showed that epo improved schizophrenia-relevant cognitive performance independently of its hematopoietic effects. in fact, epo turned out to be the first compound to exert a selective and lasting beneficial effect on cognition in schizophrenia  <cit> . similarly, an increase in cognitive performance upon epo in patients with chronic progressive multiple sclerosis occurred independently of changes in hemoglobin levels, and persisted for months after termination of epo treatment  <cit> .

recently, the application of a single high intravenous dose of epo in healthy human volunteers was reported to enhance the functional mri-detectable hippocampus response during memory retrieval  <dig> week later, before any effect on hemoglobin was measured  <cit> . however, data on hippocampus dependent memory in healthy human subjects upon epo are still missing. altogether, little is known about potential cognitive effects of epo in healthy individuals. hengemihle et al.  <cit>  reported that  <dig> weeks of low-dose epo treatment increased spatial memory performance, and a conditioned learning task, taste aversion, was enhanced by a single high-dose injection of epo in healthy mice  <cit> .

in summary, the currently available data clearly indicate that epo can improve cognitive function of both rodents and man by directly acting on the nervous system. to be able to fully exploit this beneficial cognitive effect of epo for treatment of neuropsychiatric diseases, it is essential to understand the cellular mechanisms of epo action in healthy brain, where interference of disease-related effects can be excluded. here, we systematically addressed this problem. we developed a reliable, robust model for improvement of cognition by epo in healthy mice and examined correlated effects of epo on hippocampal synaptic transmission and learning/memory-relevant synaptic plasticity. further, we analysed effects of epo on cultured hippocampal neurons at network and single cell levels. our data indicate that epo improves memory by modulating synaptic connectivity of memory-related neuronal networks within the hippocampus.

RESULTS
epo improves hippocampus dependent memory in healthy young mice
first goal of this study was to define an experimental condition to test potential abilities of epo to improve cognitive functions. we used young  male mice. in our experimental set-up with  <dig> intra-peritoneal epo versus placebo injections  every other day for  <dig> weeks , epo-treated mice showed significant improvement of contextual memory in fear conditioning  <dig> week after the last injection, when tested  <dig> h after training in the same context . this effect was still measurable  <dig> weeks after cessation of epo treatment but had disappeared after  <dig> weeks . in contrast, epo had no effect on cued memory . whereas at  <dig> week after termination of treatment, hematocrit was still increased in epo-treated mice , there was no difference anymore between groups at  <dig> weeks , indicating that cognitive improvement and hematopoietic effects of epo are not directly related.

in two additional experiments, epo was given only three times either at the beginning or at the end of the 3-week treatment period while the respective other eight injections consisted of placebo. in this setting, no improvement in cognitive performance was obtained , suggesting that a certain amount of epo treatment is required for improving cognition.

the effect of epo on hippocampus dependent  memory was selective. there was no epo effect on anxiety, spontaneous activity, exploratory behavior, and motor performance . time spent in open arms of elevated plus maze  and time spent in the three different zones of open field was similar in both groups . total distance traveled in open field did not differ between groups nor did exploratory activity in hole board test . over two days of rota-rod testing, both groups did not differ in falling latency , indicating that motor performance and motor learning were comparable. taken together, epo treatment over  <dig> weeks leads to selective and long-lasting improvement of hippocampus dependent  memory in healthy mice, independent of hematopoietic effects.

synaptic plasticity is significantly increased at schaffer collateral ca <dig> synapses in epo-treated mice
one likely explanation for the selective improvement of contextual memory would be a direct influence of epo on synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus. we therefore investigated the effect of epo in acute hippocampal slices from mice at  <dig> week after the last injection . we first performed extra-cellular recordings of field excitatory postsynaptic potentials . input-output curves were obtained by evoking responses from stratum radiatum of the ca <dig> region after stimulation of schaffer collaterals with increasing stimulation strengths . average of fepsp slopes  between stimulus intensities of 110– <dig> μa from all slices yielded no difference between control and epo groups. half-maximal stimulation strength was also comparable . thus, epo treatment for  <dig> weeks, followed by a treatment-free week, does not alter basal excitability.

we then measured paired-pulse facilitation , the shortest form of plasticity at many synapses  <cit> , at different inter-stimulus intervals  in the schaffer collateral ca <dig> pathway as ratio of the second fepsp slope to the first fepsp slope. slices from epo mice showed significantly enhanced paired-pulse facilitation at inter-stimulus intervals 25– <dig> ms . next, the effect of epo on short-term potentiation  and long-term potentiation  at the schaffer collateral ca <dig> pathway was examined . the magnitude of stp was defined as the maximal responses within the first minutes after induction by a train of  <dig> hz stimuli. stp was significantly enhanced in slices of epo mice compared to control . furthermore, the magnitude of ltp, determined as the average of responses between  <dig> and  <dig> min after induction by a train of  <dig> hz stimuli, was also enhanced in slices of epo mice compared to control .

another form of synaptic plasticity is long-term depression . we determined the effect of epo treatment on short-term depression  and ltd at schaffer collateral ca <dig> pathway . magnitude of std was defined as maximal responses within the first minutes after induction by a train of  <dig> stimuli . we found that std was significantly enhanced in slices of epo mice compared to control . on the other hand, the magnitude of ltd, determined as average of responses between  <dig> and  <dig> min after induction by a train of  <dig> stimuli , was not significantly different in slices of epo mice compared to control . collectively, these data show that epo modulates synaptic plasticity and ltp in the hippocampus, but has no significant effect on ltd.

epo differentially influences inhibitory and excitatory synaptic transmission in the schaffer collateral ca <dig> pathway
to study cellular mechanisms of epo action, we performed whole-cell patch-clamp recordings on ca <dig> pyramidal neurons in acute hippocampal slices from mice at  <dig> week after the last injection . compared to control mice, the frequency of spontaneous inhibitory postsynaptic currents  in ca <dig> pyramidal neurons of epo mice was increased, while the amplitude of sipscs was unchanged . in contrast, epo led to a significant decrease of both amplitude and frequency of spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents  in ca <dig> pyramidal neurons . importantly, there were no significant differences in input resistance or basic noise level between neurons of control and epo mice . thus, epo modulates inhibitory and excitatory synaptic transmission inversely.

we wondered whether the neurophysiological changes found in hippocampal slices upon epo treatment would be due to alterations in total volume or synapse counts in the involved areas, ca <dig> and ca <dig>  neither volume of ca <dig>  nor ca <dig> , nor total hippocampal volume  were significantly different. moreover, density of synaptic boutons in ca <dig>  and ca <dig>  was not changed. quantitative rt pcr and/or western blotting using extracts of whole hippocampus did not reveal differences in expression of synaptic proteins , postsynaptic receptor proteins  or bdnf, as potential mediating neurotrophic factor  <cit>  .

epo modulates spontaneous electrical network activity in primary hippocampal neurons as determined by multi-electrode measurements
above data demonstrated distinct and long-lasting effects of temporary high-dose epo treatment on hippocampus dependent memory and synaptic plasticity in hippocampal slice preparations. as the peritoneal applications of epo might have caused indirect effects on nerve cells, we next studied primary hippocampal cultures. we tested whether chronic epo treatment, extending from an advanced developmental stage  to over  <dig> weeks leads to alterations in spontaneous neuronal network activity, and whether such changes would persist upon cessation of epo treatment.

first, our long-term cultures were characterized regarding morphological appearance , total cell numbers , and relative contribution of different cell types . in none of these parameters were differences upon epo found at days  <dig> or  <dig> in culture. also, quantitative rt pcr and protein expression, determined by western blotting, failed to uncover differences in synapsin <dig> or synaptophysin gene expression at any of the time points tested . thus, epo treatment did not cause changes in morphology under our culture conditions.

the bursting channel analysis, presented in figure 5e, showed that epo provoked a consistently higher number of bursts in hippocampal cultures, obvious only at late time points, i.e. 2– <dig> weeks after termination of epo treatment. this effect  was less pronounced as compared to the silencing effect of epo. whereas medians at week  <dig> were not yet significantly different , difference reached significance at week  <dig> . together, the trend of weeks  <dig> and  <dig>  when compared with the almost equal-bursting situation at week  <dig> , confirms that bursting tends to increase as a late consequence of transient epo treatment, in parallel with the persistently high percentage of silent channels.

reduction of synaptic vesicle priming and transmitter release in the epo pre-treated neurons
the finding of long-lasting epo-induced dampening of spontaneous electrical activity in our primary hippocampal cultures together with a selective increase in bursting activity following epo treatment prompted us to test individual neurons. we examined the effect of epo in hippocampal autaptic cultures  <cit> , to directly assess the epo effect on presynaptic transmitter vesicle exocytosis and postsynaptic receptor responses. autaptic neurons are neurons forming synapses on themselves, making electrophysiological stimulation and respective effect determination  simple. cultures were treated with epo  or the respective buffer solution only once at day  <dig> and then measured from days  <dig> to  <dig>  there were no morphological differences detectable upon treatment, and sizes of somata as estimated by measurement of whole cell capacitance were comparable between epo-treated and control neurons .

evoked excitatory postsynaptic current  amplitudes in epo-treated neurons were reduced to about 60% of control , confirming the data obtained in acute slices . this epsc reduction was due to a parallel reduction in pool size of fusion-competent and primed  vesicles, whose release can be triggered by hypertonic solution containing  <dig>  m sucrose  <cit> . epo neurons showed a drastic reduction in readily releasable pool size to 60% of control . vesicular release probability, calculated by dividing the charge transfer during a single epsc by the charge transfer measured during readily releasable pool release, was not different between control and epo neurons . to test whether the reduction of neurotransmitter release in epo neurons can be attributed to a reduction in quantal size, we analysed miniature epscs . mepsc frequency in epo neurons was reduced to about 50% of control, without changes in mepsc amplitudes . the lack of a difference in nmda/ampa ratio indicates a comparable maturation state of cultures . using trains of action potentials we estimated the efficiency of ca2+ triggered release. in general, vesicular release probability closely correlates with depression and steady-state level of epsc amplitude sizes during high frequency stimulation. we therefore monitored epsc amplitudes during  <dig> consecutive action potentials applied at a frequency of  <dig> hz. epo and control neurons showed regular moderate depression of epsc amplitudes . stability of epsc amplitudes during short-term plasticity, which is due to the quantitative balance between priming of synaptic vesicles and number of vesicles released, was identical in presynaptic terminals of each group.

thus, epo treatment of autaptic neurons leads to a reduction in the amount of primed vesicles or number of synapses without altering efficiency of vesicle fusion and vesicle dynamics. counting of synaptic boutons per neuron revealed a considerable increase from day  <dig> to day  <dig> in culture, which, however, was not changed by epo . therefore, epo is likely to reduce the number of active synapses without altering total synapse number.

discussion
we show that young mice, systemically treated with epo for  <dig> weeks, exhibit improved hippocampus-associated memory. this selective improvement was maintained for an epo treatment-free period of another  <dig> weeks, and was unrelated to increases in hematocrit, indicating a hematopoiesis-independent effect of epo on neuroplasticity. the long-lasting effect of epo on neuroplasticity was confirmed by analyses of paired-pulse facilitation, stp, ltp and std, as well as of spontaneous synaptic activity in acute hippocampal slices, obtained from epo-treated mice at the time point of epo-induced enhancement of memory. mea recordings of neuronal assemblies in vitro and the analysis of individual autaptic hippocampal neurons did not only confirm direct effects of epo on neural cells, but also reveal potential mechanisms of action: epo leads to a reduction in the amount of primed vesicles without altering number of synapses or efficiency of vesicle fusion and vesicle dynamics. thus, most likely via increasing the proportion of silent synapses, epo reduces overall spiking activity of neurons and enhances bursting efficiency of selected neuronal networks. most of these data are consistent with epo shifting the balance between excitatory and inhibitory transmission , although other mechanisms cannot be entirely excluded at this point.

in humans, improvement of cognitive function upon treatment with epo has only been demonstrated in disease states  <cit> , i.e. in conditions of reduced/disturbed baseline performance. exploring healthy individuals has therefore been a risky endeavour, although, if successful, promised to deliver a cleaner picture of mechanisms of epo action, lacking interference with potential disease variables. similar to what is observed with endurance and muscular performance during doping  <cit> , where healthy individuals show dramatic improvement, we found significant memory effects in healthy mice. epo-treated compared to placebo-treated mice had a significantly longer duration of freezing, as readout of memory function, during a contextual memory test that is known to be critically dependent on the hippocampus  <cit> . this finding implies that in healthy individuals the potential cognitive capacity is not fully exhausted. although results were obtained in mice, the work of miskowiak and colleagues  <cit>  may indicate that respective effects can be expected in healthy humans.

similar to the findings of miskowiak et al.  <cit> , the effect of epo on hippocampal functions was measurable at  <dig> week after injection. in our setting, treatment for  <dig> weeks  was necessary to obtain positive results on cognitive performance. reduced to only three injections, no measurable effect on the behavioral readout of hippocampal functions was obtained. healthy humans showed increased hippocampal response  in functional magnetic resonance imaging upon memory retrieval already  <dig> week after a single epo dose. however, effects on memory function were also not detectable after this single dose  <cit> . in other words, for cognitive improvement , more than a single injection is needed also in humans. in both studies, the hematocrit seems irrelevant. in the human study, a single dose of epo had not changed the hematocrit after  <dig> week  <cit> . in our study, the hematocrit was already back to control levels when we still observed a significant effect on cognition, and direct effects of epo on synaptic plasticity were found in hippocampal cultures.

the persistent effect of epo on cognition, lasting for over  <dig> weeks after cessation of treatment, indicates alterations in neuroplasticity induced by epo that do not require its continuous presence. interestingly, our studies in ms patients showed beneficial effects of epo on motor function, which lasted for up to  <dig> months after termination of a 6-months treatment  <cit> . in search for a mechanism explaining the lasting influence of epo on hippocampus-associated memory, we detected pronounced epo effects on short-term and long-term plasticity, as well as on excitatory and inhibitory synaptic transmission in the schaffer collateral ca <dig> pathway. these electrophysiological parameters of plasticity have been associated with learning and memory  <cit> .

further exploring mechanisms of action of epo, we employed multi-electrode arrays to study network activity in primary hippocampal cultures. we found that chronic application of epo in a fashion similar to our in vivo approach resulted in persistence of a large population of silent channels but enhanced bursting efficiency of discrete neuronal circuits. in acute hippocampal slices as well as autaptic hippocampal cultures, excitatory synaptic transmission was decreased upon epo treatment, whereas inhibitory synaptic transmission was increased. in line with these data, epo-mediated inhibition of glutamate release has been reported for cerebellar granule cells  <cit> .

together, these findings may point to an enhanced lateral inhibition within the hippocampal neuronal network by epo, leading to amplification of active synaptic connections. a concurrent suppression of surrounding synapses by epo, consistent with lasting functional silencing, may ultimately achieve segregation/refinement of neuronal networks . interestingly, signal transduction pathways known to be activated in hippocampal neurons by epo, include pi3k-pkb/akt <dig> and ras-mapk  <cit> . both, the mapk-mediated pathway  <cit>  and pi3k have been linked to ltp  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
although not providing complete mechanistic insight at this point, our data indicate that the selective enhancing effect of epo on hippocampus dependent memory is mediated via profound changes in neuroplasticity. these plastic changes, in turn, may be based on a more efficient bursting activity of selected synapses together with persistent silencing of other synapses.

