BACKGROUND
the major histocompatibility complex  includes the most polymorphic genes in vertebrates  <cit> . mhc polymorphism is functionally relevant and is thought to be maintained by selection through the mechanisms of heterozygote advantage and frequency dependence, driven by the host-pathogen interactions and, in some cases, disassortative mating preferences . the products of the mhc genes are involved in triggering the adaptive immune response against pathogens  <cit> , and may also play a role in mate choice and individual recognition . because of their functional significance, mhc class i and ii genes have been the subject of continuous interest in the fields of ecology, evolution and conservation .

usually, multiple mhc class i and ii loci are present in a given species. in some species, genes within each class are both structurally and functionally divergent  <cit> . however, in other groups multiple loci may contain similar  alleles, or identical alleles may even be shared among loci  <cit> . repeated expansions and contractions of the number of mhc loci observed in several vertebrate groups are thought to result from frequent duplications followed by a birth and death process  <cit> . in some taxa, concerted evolution through gene conversion appears to be important, and recombination may generate additional variation  <cit> . these processes may be manifested at the population level by the coexistence of haplotypes that differ in the number of loci  <cit> . a comprehensive understanding of the actual mechanisms that generate and maintain copy number variation in the mhc requires substantial population genomic information from multiple species.

a well-established consequence of the presence of multiple loci containing similar or identical alleles and of copy number variation is a relatively broad range of per-individual number of alleles within a population. it has been proposed that in such situations, selection may favor individuals with an intermediate number of alleles . this may be due to the tradeoff between the ability to present the maximum number of pathogen antigens, which is positively correlated with the number of mhc alleles, and the ability to invoke an effective immune response, which may be negatively correlated with individual mhc diversity because a higher proportion of lymphocytes must be eliminated to prevent immune autoaggression problems  <cit> . data from sticklebacks, sparrows and bank voles appear to support the optimality hypothesis  <cit> . however, the hypothesis remains controversial  <cit>  and, for its thorough evaluation, additional data from natural populations of species showing extensive variation in individual mhc diversity is necessary.

mhc structure differs substantially between bird species, even within the same family  <cit> . some species, such as chicken or parrots, have an extremely small, compact mhc, dubbed "the minimal essential mhc"  <cit> . other birds, such as owls  <cit> , exhibit more complex mhc structure with multiple loci that may retain orthologous relationships over long periods of evolutionary time, a situation resembling the patterns observed in mammals  <cit> . the mhc of passerine birds is very complex, commonly consisting of multiple expressed loci and pseudogenes  <cit> . the relationships among passerine mhc genes tend to mirror phylogeny, with sequences of multiple loci generally grouped according to species, indicating that extensive sequence exchange among loci occurs in these birds  <cit> . repeated rounds of duplication and homogenization via gene conversion or exon shuffling among genes  <cit>  are thought to be responsible for this pattern. the approximate number of mhc loci in passerines has been estimated through southern blot experiments followed by limited cloning and sequencing  <cit> . although this approach readily distinguishes between simple and complex systems, and may provide information about the relationships among loci, it is not well suited for studying the patterns of sequence variation in multilocus systems. a comprehensive characterization of such complex systems, which is necessary for the understanding of their evolution, requires extensive sampling of sequences from individuals and across multiple individuals. genomic data on the mhc organization, which provide precise estimates of the number of mhc loci  have been obtained so far only for one passerine species - the zebra finch  <cit> .

because of the presence of multiple mhc loci with generally similar alleles, which may probably be regarded as functionally equivalent, passerine birds are an ideal system for studying the relationship between the strength of immune response, mate choice and individual mhc diversity, as measured by the number and the sequence divergence of mhc alleles. however, an efficient and reliable genotyping method is a prerequisite for such studies.

the presence of multiple, often similar alleles that commonly cannot be assigned to loci and must be genotyped simultaneously poses substantial methodological challenges  <cit> . none of the methods that have been widely used in the field offer straightforward, reliable and accurate genotyping that is scalable to systems of arbitrary complexity  <cit> . the advent of next generation sequencing  technologies  has brought the promise of such a method. indeed one of the ngs technologies,  <dig> pyrosequencing, has already been successfully applied for genotyping complex multilocus mhc systems  <cit> . reliability of  <dig> genotyping in multilocus was verified by cloning  <cit>  and by replicate genotyping  <cit> . next generation sequencing technologies have several key advantages for mhc genotyping. they are equivalent to cloning single-stranded dna molecules derived from amplicons in a cell-free system, thus they avoid artifacts commonly observed during cloning in biological vectors and propagation in bacteria  <cit> . parallel sequencing of clonally amplified templates produces hundreds of thousands of sequencing reads and does not require colony picking, clone handling and sanger sequencing, the costly and time-consuming procedures that have limited the throughput of traditional cloning approaches. with ngs, the coverage of several hundreds or thousands of sequencing reads per amplicon can be achieved at a moderate cost of a few euro per sample, massive multiplexing allowing simultaneous analysis of hundreds or thousands of samples in a single analysis is possible, and analyses can be completed within days. the major problem with applying ngs technologies to mhc genotyping appears distinguishing true alleles from various kinds of artifacts  <cit> . however this problem is common to all pcr-based methods  <cit> .

here, we used  <dig> pyrosequencing to assess the mhc class iib variation in the collared flycatcher with two major goals in mind. first, we used the massive amount of sequence data produced in our experiment to advance the understanding of the evolutionary patterns and processes occurring in the passerine mhc. specifically, we were interested in: i) estimating the number of mhc class iib loci, with special emphasis on expressed loci, ii) comparing patterns of diversity among expressed and pseudogene sequences to infer the mechanisms driving their evolution and iii) evaluating the relationship of the collared flycatcher mhc class iib sequences with the mhc ii of other passerine species. second, we aimed to establish a foundation for genotyping the mhc in a model organism for evolutionary and immuno-ecological studies  <cit> . interpretation of the large body of data regarding parasite load, immune response and mating preferences in this species can greatly benefit from an immunogenetic perspective.

RESULTS
sequencing
a part of the exon  <dig> of the mhc class ii b gene was amplified and sequenced for  <dig> collared flycatchers;  <dig> individuals were amplified twice with different tags and two individuals were amplified three times. thus, a total of  <dig> amplicons were sequenced. we obtained  <dig>  188-bp sequences with complete tags. only  <dig> tagged primers were used for amplification, however theoretically any of  <dig>  possible 6-bp tag sequences could have been generated via errors in primer synthesis and/or sequencing. we obtained  <dig> reads with tags that did not match any of the used tag sequences; these reads comprised  <dig> % of all reads. to estimate the maximum level of misassignment of reads to amplicons, we needed to consider the proportion of unused tags which was  <dig> %. therefore, the maximum level of misassignment was approximately equal to the fraction of reads with tags not used in the amplification primers, i.e.  <dig> %. although the estimated level of misassignment was about two times higher than reported previously  <cit> , it was still low enough to ensure that misassigned reads are rare, and as such will not affect the outcome of genotyping, which requires an allele to be present in multiple reads. moreover, tags differed from each other by at least three substitutions, which reduces the chance of misassignment although does not eliminate it entirely, because of indel mutations.

the mean coverage  was  <dig> ±   <dig> and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  taking into account the misassignment rate given above, we expected an average of less than two misassigned reads per amplicon, but given sequence differences between used tags, probably even less. among  <dig>  unique sequences, there were  <dig>  singletons  and  <dig>  variants represented by at least two reads.

sequence diversity and expression status
in this study,  <dig> sequence variants fulfilled the criteria for distinguishing true alleles from artifacts resulting from pcr  and  <dig> sequencing  and are further considered as putative alleles . cloning and sanger sequencing of cdna from three additional individuals revealed twelve alleles . sequences of all variants were deposited in genbank  the relationships among pa are shown in figure  <dig>  inspection of the tree reveals the presence of two clusters , each with a considerable number of pa. however, the pa in these clusters show dissimilar patterns of divergence. while most pa in cluster i are extremely similar to each other, commonly differing by only one substitution , cluster ii pa are on average much more divergent, forming multiple lineages that are considerably different from each other. the relationships among these lineages are poorly resolved. a group of  <dig> very similar pa  stands out among other cluster ii sequences. group ii.a is strongly supported, with 100% bootstrap support and is separated by a long branch from other cluster ii pa.

the pronounced differences in the degree of divergence among pa in various parts of the tree may indicate that these variants experienced different evolutionary histories. a likely explanation for the dissimilar patterns is that multiple evolutionary mechanisms played a predominant role in shaping the diversity of sequences depicted in figure  <dig>  important insights in this respect are provided by an analysis of expression. all sequence variants obtained from cdnas by cloning and sanger sequencing fell into cluster ii. five of twelve variants supported by at least two clones were identical to pa obtained in the  <dig> run. none of the expressed sequences fell into cluster i or into group ii.a. most of the cluster i pa contained a  <dig> or 2-bp deletion in the middle of exon  <dig>  causing a frameshift. putative alleles in group ii.a contained two deletions, 9-bp and 1-bp, also resulting in a frameshift. taken together, these observations constitute strong evidence that cluster i and group ii.a pa represent nonfunctional pseudogenes. two observations suggest that most of the sequences in cluster ii  may be functional mhc class iib alleles. first, sequences obtained from cdna are widely distributed across the tree, falling into many divergent lineages . second, no frameshift mutations or stop codons occur in any sequences.

it should be noted here, that, due to higher sequence similarity among cluster i pseudogenes compared to cluster ii putative expressed alleles , our criteria for distinguishing artifacts from true alleles  were more conservative for cluster i pseudogenes than for pea. this is because, if many sequences differ by only 1- <dig> substitutions, many of them can be interpreted as chimeras between other very similar sequences. the consequences of this is illustrated by the fact that from  <dig> cluster ii pea which passed the preliminary 2-pcrs-3-copies-in-each criterion,  <dig>  were retained after the pcr chimera filtering step. on the contrary, from  <dig> cluster i pseudogene sequences only  <dig>  were retained. thus, many more of true cluster i pseudogene alleles than the number we estimated are certainly present in the collared flycatchers.

an inspection of the sequences of pas indicated that for the studies requiring efficient genotyping of functional mhc class iib variation, the coverage required may be considerably reduced by preventing amplification of the cluster i sequences by extending the forward primer by one base pair  in the 3' direction, since all cluster ii sequences contain a g in this position, whereas all cluster i sequences have a c or t.

estimating the number of mhc class iib loci
the maximum number of pea per individual provides an estimate of the number of expressed mhc class iib loci in the collared flycatcher. counting only pea present in at least two reads per amplicon, the maximum number of alleles per individual was  <dig>   <dig> ). it is possible however, that some of variants present in any given individual are in fact pcr chimeras identical to pea. to evaluate this possibility we checked genotypes of all nine amplicons with the highest number of peas , and in each amplicon discarded all peas which could have been classified as pcr chimeras of more abundant  peas. in four amplicons there were no such variants, in two aplicons one variant, in two amplicons two variants, and in one amplicon three possible pcr chimeras were present. it should be noted here, that these variants were not necessarily pcr chimeras, because true recombinant alleles may co-occur with both parental sequences in some individuals. thus, excluding all such cases gives a conservative estimate of the maximum number of pea per individual at  <dig> alleles, corresponding to at least nine expressed loci.

estimation of the maximum number of pseudogene loci is more difficult for two reasons. first, as explained in the previous section, a substantial and difficult to estimate number of true pseudogene alleles were excluded from the analysis because they could not be reliably distinguished from pcr chimaeras on the level of the full dataset. second, again due to a very high sequence similarity among pseudogene alleles, on the individual level, true pseudogene alleles may often be explained as chimeras, therefore an analysis similar to this performed for pea in the above paragraph would not reflect any biological reality. signalling these serious limitations imposed by the nature of the data, we do not want to leave the reader without an idea about the maximum number of pseudogene loci. therefore we present maximum numbers based on at least two reads for amplicon, similarly as these for pea. the maximum number of cluster i pseudogene alleles was  <dig>  and that of the group ii.a was  <dig> . these estimates thus point to the presence of at least  <dig> cluster i and at least  <dig> group ii.a pseudogene loci in the collared flycatcher.

replicate genotypes, derived from two or three independent amplicons, were obtained for  <dig> individuals. on average  <dig>  pa were present in both  replicates , and  <dig>  in only one replicate . the respective values for pea were  <dig>  and  <dig> , for cluster i  <dig>  and  <dig>  and for group ii.a  <dig>  and  <dig> . a relatively high number of alleles, which were not confirmed across replicates, again indicate that coverage was not sufficient for replicate genotyping, the effect was particularly strong for pea, as expected. as pea constituted on average 16% of reads, slightly less than  <dig> reads of pea per amplicon were obtained on average, which is not sufficient for reliable genotyping of even  <dig> loci  according to the criteria of galan et al.  <cit>  based on an idealized model assuming equal amplification of all alleles. thus this coverage is even more inadequate for nine loci estimated in the present paper.

signatures of natural selection and recombination
codon-based tests of natural selection were performed separately for putative expressed alleles, cluster i pseudogenes and group ii.a pseudogenes . in order to keep the open reading frame, pseudogene sequences required the removal of some alignment columns and sequences exhibiting internal stop codons. in cluster ii, for both putative expressed alleles and group ii.a pseudogenes, the model of codon evolution allowing for positive selection produced a much better fit to the data than one dn/ds ratio  or nearly neutral  models . however, only the expressed alleles showed a highly significant excess of nonsynonymous substitutions in the putative antigen binding sites , but not in non-abs, and extreme nonsynonymous divergence in abs . in the expressed alleles, the bayes empirical bayes procedure identified thirteen codons as evolving under positive selection  ≥  <dig> ). six of these were located in abs, the proportion of positively selected codons did not differ between abs and non-abs . an excess of nonsynonymous substitutions in either abs or non-abs was not observed for pseudogene sequences . the two positively-selected codons detected in the group ii.a pseudogenes were not located in abs. for cluster i pseudogenes, the nearly neutral model of codon evolution  fitted the data best . all three methods detected recombination in the representative set of  <dig> sequences. the gard method detected recombination at a p level of  <dig>  in all ten datasets of  <dig> randomly selected sequences, whereas the geneconv and maxchi <dig> methods detected recombination in four datasets. overall, recombination appears frequently in the collared flycatcher's mhc ii, as it is easily detected in relatively small subsets of the data.

ω - dn/ds; nearly neutral with beta - for all sites ω ≤  <dig> and the beta distribution approximates ω variation; positive selection - a proportion of sites evolves with ω > 1; p <dig> - proportion of sites with ω ≤  <dig>  p <dig> - proportion of positively selected sites , ω <dig> - estimated value of ω for sites under positive selection; Δaic - the difference between the value of the akaike information criterion  of a given model and the best model.

the average rates of nonsynonymous substitutions per nonsynonymous site  and synonymous substitutions per synonymous sites  computed according to the nei-gojobori method, with standard errors obtained through  <dig> bootstrap replicates in parentheses, and the results of the z test of neutrality. * denotes significant p.

mhc class iib of the collared flycatcher in the context of passerine sequence diversity
the tree in figure  <dig> shows the relationship of a representative set  of the collared flycatcher's mhc class iib sequences to other passeriformes. the collared flycatcher's pea fall into a single moderately supported clade . all expressed sequences from classical mhc class iib loci available for the pied flycatcher , the collared flycatcher's sister species  <cit>  grouped together with cluster ii pea. in fact, of  <dig> the pied flycatcher alleles four had identical sequences to the collared flycatcher's alleles. several bluethroat and nightingale alleles fall into this cluster as well, with some of them forming highly supported  smaller clusters with collared flycatcher alleles. although expressed alleles appear to form a clade, their diversity is comparable to the overall diversity of the available passeriformes sequences. both pseudogene lineages fall outside the expressed cluster, which may indicate their long independent evolutionary history. interestingly the pseudogene sequence reported for the pied flycatcher was identical to one of the cluster i pseudogene alleles reported in the present study.

discussion
we demonstrated an extreme complexity of the mhc class iib in the collared flycatchers, our estimates point to the presence of at least nine expressed and fifteen pseudogene loci, but this latter number is highly uncertain and likely to be a gross underestimate of the actual number of pseudogene loci. hence, it is not surprising that the average coverage of  <dig> sequencing reads per amplicon was not sufficient for reliable genotyping. the massive amount of sequence data, generated in our study from the large population sample was, however, more than sufficient for assessing sequence diversity, contrasting mechanisms driving the evolution of expressed and pseudogene sequences, and advancing our understanding of the mhc class ii structure and evolution in passeriformes.

the biggest challenge in using  <dig> pyrosequencing for genotyping complex mhc systems is distinguishing true alleles from sequence artifacts that may emerge during pcr or sequencing. some of these artifacts may be produced repeatedly, depending on the sequence context, particularly small insertions and deletions in regions with homopolymer runs  <cit> . chimeras may also be generated repeatedly during independent pcrs via in vitro recombination between true alleles. it has been demonstrated that, given sufficient coverage, it is possible to establish frequency thresholds to effectively distinguish true alleles from artifacts. replicate genotyping of a fraction of individuals from independently obtained amplicons is the natural choice for establishing genotyping thresholds  <cit> . for applications requiring exceptionally low genotyping error rates replicate genotyping of all samples may be desirable, and may be easily attained at a moderate cost  <cit> . however, identical chimaeras may occur in replicates, so an extra caution is needed when chimeras are expected to pose a serious problem. pcr protocols are available which should minimize chimera frequency  <cit> . the most important factor here appears the reduction of the number of pcr cycles, but keeping the number of pcr cycles at the low limit may lead to variation in dna concentration among amplicons, low pcr success rate, limiting amounts of pcr product etc. when working with a large number of samples with dna of variable quality, all these factors may impose a considerable logistical burden while not guaranteeing elimination of the chimera problem. therefore it may be desirable to consider post-sequencing approaches for chimera elimination similar to the one outlined in the present paper.

in the present study, we did not achieve coverage sufficient for genotyping, but apparently we were able to eliminate most pcr and sequencing artifacts and obtained a comprehensive picture of the sequence diversity, at least for expressed loci, on the population level. the number of the putative expressed alleles present in the population and the lower bound for the maximum number of expressed loci we report should be close to reality, although may slightly underestimate the actual numbers due to a limited coverage of the pea which constituted on average only ca 16% of reads per amplicon.

on the contrary, several lines of evidence indicate that we have only scratched the surface of the cluster i pseudogene diversity. first, cluster i pseudogenes represented on average 72% of reads per amplicon. if our primers amplify various sequence variants with similar efficiency, then the proportion of reads from a locus should roughly correspond to the number of copies of the locus in the genome. sequences of  <dig> pied flycatcher's 2nd exon alleles  <cit>  span the binding sites of both pcr primers used in the present study. these sequences show excellent match with our primers ensuring efficient amplification of pea. comparison of the proportion of reads from the pea, to the proportion of reads from cluster i pseudogenes may point to the existence of ca.  <dig> cluster i pseudogene loci in the collared flycatcher. second, applying our conservative procedure for chimera elimination to variants identified under the 2-pcrs-3-copies-in-each criterion reduced the number of cluster i pseudogene variants considered as true alleles by almost 90% compared to a modest 7% reduction for the pea.

because of the extreme similarity of cluster i pseudogene alleles, estimation of the per individual number of loci may be challenging or even impossible using pcr-based techniques, because of chimera formation and the relatively high frequency of base-substitution errors. possibly target-enrichment techniques coupled with next generation sequencing technologies, approaches that minimizes the use of pcr  <cit>  could be helpful here.

mhc class iib in the collared flycatcher is comprised of both putative expressed loci and pseudogenes. only expressed alleles exhibited an excess of nonsynonymous substitutions and codons under positive selection in the putative antigen binding sites, as expected for functional mhc sequences  <cit> . pseudogene alleles showed signatures of nonfunctionality: frameshift-causing indels and the presence of internal stop codons in multiple sequences. although codon-based tests of selection detected some signatures of positive selection in group ii.a pseudogene sequences, the evidence was more ambiguous than in the case of expressed loci. because signatures of positive selection may be retained for very long periods of evolutionary time  <cit> , these inconsistent results of selection tests probably reflect ancient pseudogenization of once functional mhc sequences. mhc class iib pseudogenes, also ancient, which diverged from functional loci over  <dig> ma, have been described in a few other passerine species  <cit> .

sequences from expressed and pseudogene clusters differ not only in their signals of historical selection. a remarkable difference was also observed in the degree of divergence among expressed and pseudogene sequences. most pseudogene alleles were very similar to each other , despite originating from a number of loci. two mechanisms may generate extreme similarity of allele sequences among loci. either pseudogenes have recently undergone series of duplications, or they have been evolving in concert through a mechanism of interlocus gene conversion. recent duplications have been described in passerine mhc  <cit>  and gene conversion is thought to be a major mechanism acting in the mhc of birds  <cit>  although its importance has not yet been suggested for mhc pseudogene evolution. distinguishing between these two mechanisms requires more extensive genomic information.

among expressed alleles, both similar and highly divergent alleles occurred. however, these do not form well-supported, divergent lineages that can be interpreted as corresponding to different loci. therefore, extensive genetic exchange among loci must have occurred, a conclusion also supported by the frequent cases of recombination detected among divergent sequences. yet, this process has not homogenized allele sequences in a comparable way to that observed for pseudogenes. it is likely that the divergence has been maintained by selection which favored certain types of genetic exchange between loci such as reciprocal recombination shuffling entire exons, e.g. through recombination in introns  <cit>  or gene conversion involving only short stretches of sequences  <cit> . examining other parts of genes, such as exon  <dig>  <cit>  or the 3' untranslated regions  <cit> , may allow the identification of locus specific sequences. in principle, identification of locus-specific primers may be possible in introns flanking the 2nd exon  <cit> . this approach was used in the pied flycatcher and although intron sequences discriminate pseudogenes and nonclassical mhc ii b loci from classical class iib loci, they do not allow locus-specific amplification of the latter  <cit> . the processes of duplication and interlocus genetic exchange, particularly gene conversion, may have operated synergistically to generate the patterns observed in the collared flycatcher. segmental duplications could have boosted gene conversion, as it is known that physical proximity in the genome facilitates this process  <cit> . an interesting observation comes from the genomic analysis of mhc class ii region in the zebra finch, where balakrishnan et al.  <cit>  found a large number of retroelements which may facilitate gene duplication in passerine mhc ii.

regardless of the details of recombination among expressed loci, the consequence of a high rate of interlocus recombination is a blurring of orthologous relationships and the grouping of alleles in a species-specific manner to the exclusion of other passerine sequences. the grouping of mhc class ii sequences according to species and not gene phylogeny, is common among passerine birds  <cit> . transspecific polymorphism is usually detected only among closely related passerine taxa  <cit> , although exceptions are known  <cit> . the bayesian tree, which places the collared flycatcher's mhc class iib pa in the context of passerine mhc diversity, provides some support for grouping all collared flycatcher pea together. these pea are, however, intermixed with the mhc class iib sequences of three other species from the muscicapidae family, the pied flycatcher  <cit> , the bluethroat and nightingale  <cit> , and form well-supported clusters with them in a few cases  or even show identical sequences as some pied flycatcher's alleles. thus, there is evidence for transspecific polymorphism in the muscicapidae family not only at the genus level  <cit> , but also among genera.

even conservative estimates of the number of mhc class iib loci located in collared flycatchers and bluethroats  <cit>  place them among vertebrate species with the highest number of loci. it remains to be seen whether muscicapidae are an exception among passerines, or whether, as other studies, based on rflp, probe hybridization as well as cloning seem to suggest, possessing tens of mhc class iib loci is the rule in these birds  <cit> . the zebra finch, the only passerine species sequenced so far has four expressed mhc class iib loci and five pseudogenes  <cit> , as inferred from the genome assembly; however there also appears to be variation in the number of loci among individuals as revealed by southern blot experiments in this species. counting the actual number of loci has been notoriously difficult without the availability of genome sequences, and rough estimates of copy number for highly multiplicated mhc i genes have been obtained from blotting experiments  <cit> . next generation sequencing will enable better characterization of copy number variation and allow the study of the relationships among paralog sequences, which is necessary for understanding the evolutionary and population genetic processes that shape their evolution. in any case, an extraordinary number of expressed mhc loci makes the collared flycatcher an excellent model system for testing hypotheses relating to individual mhc diversity, effectiveness of the immune response and mate choice. in this context, it is interesting to try to estimate the sequencing effort needed for reliable genotyping. we suggest that reliable genotyping of pseudogenes may require methods which minimize the use of pcr. extrapolating the results from bank voles, which have at least six loci, where a mean coverage of 200- <dig>  reads per amplicon was sufficient for reliable genotyping of mhc ii  <cit> , a coverage of 400- <dig> reads per amplicon should be sufficient for reliable genotyping of expressed loci in collared flycatchers. the actual coverage may need to be increased because of the co-amplification of the group ii.a pseudogenes. through the examination of sequences of hundreds putative alleles, we identified primers that can amplify all expressed alleles, and preliminary experiments indicate that these primers indeed amplify mostly pea. thus, we have laid a foundation for experimental studies of the relationships between individual mhc diversity, immune response and mate choice in this extremely interesting system.

CONCLUSIONS
we found a highly dynamic pattern of evolution of mhc class iib genes with strong signals of selection and pronounced sequence divergence in expressed genes, in contrast to the apparent sequence homogenization in pseudogenes. our study has broad implications for testing hypotheses relating the individual mhc diversity, effectiveness of the immune response and mate choice. mhc genotyping in species particularly suited for rigorous evaluation of such hypotheses, i.e. showing multiple mhc loci as well as among-haplotype variation in the number of loci, has been notoriously difficult since appropriate methods have not been available. we showed that next generation sequencing is bringing the promise of overcoming this obstacle to progress in the field by offering a universal, affordable method for the characterization and in perspective genotyping of mhc systems of virtually any complexity.

