BACKGROUND
high-throughput dna sequencing has increased the number of genome sequences to over  <dig>  bacterial species from which we can infer their proteomes and often major parts of their metabolism and regulatory pathways. a systems level understanding of cells, however, will require the functional characterization of these proteins and how they work together. in recent years, a growing number of efforts have used high throughput assays to catalog gene expression, protein interactions, localization and metabolic activities. for many of these studies, the first step is to identify and then clone all the open reading frames  encoded by the genome of the organism  <cit> .

here we describe the construction of a comprehensive escherichia coli orf collection in a gateway®  <cit>  entry vector. the library represents  <dig> orfs or 94% of all protein-coding genes. the gateway® system facilitates the transfer of orfs into a large range of expression vectors that are suitable for downstream studies. here we demonstrate the utility of the e. coli orfeome by comparing it to  <dig> other available microbial orfeomes and by testing a set of protein-protein interactions among  <dig> species.

the complete genome sequence of escherichia coli k- <dig> encodes  <dig> protein-coding orfs  <cit>  . kitagawa et al. previously cloned all the e. coli orfs  into an expression vector creating n-terminal 6xhis and c-terminal gfp fusions  <cit> . however, the aska library cannot be used to flexibly transfer orfs into other expression vectors  <cit> . libraries of all open reading frames cloned into highly flexible vectors will be needed to take full advantage of the information found in any genome sequence. we transferred the aska library  <cit>  into an gateway® entry vector  by sfii restriction enzyme cloning . about  <dig> e. coli clones which were not present in the aska library or which were not successfully cloned from the aska library into the gateway® entry vector were cloned directly by gateway® recombination . the entry clone library was then validated by dna sequencing. the resulting library represents  <dig> orfs . the clone collection is freely available to academic users.

the e. coli entry clone library lacks start and stop codons and is thus compatible with both n-terminal and c-terminal expression clone constructions. the clones from the entry vectors can be easily shuttled into different gateway-compatible expression vectors of many types in a high-throughput fashion  <cit> .

RESULTS
e. coli as a model for comparative genomics and biology
e. coli k- <dig> has led basic life science research for more than half a century due to its easy manipulation and its safety as a non-pathogenic organism. we wondered to what extent it can also serve as model for pathogenic bacteria and compared the e. coli orfeome to all other bacterial orfeomes that are available as gateway-compatible clones. figure 1b shows how many e. coli genes have orthologs in these species including vibrio cholerae, yersinia pestis, streptococcus pneumoniae and others. for example, over 80% of e. coli cogs are conserved in pseudomonas aeruginosa . cogs  represent conserved protein families and provide a standard way to compare gene sets  <cit> . we can safely assume that the general molecular function of these e. coli proteins should be similar or identical to these homologues in other bacterial species. however, we cannot easily predict whether small changes in sequence will change the function or specificity of proteins. the availability of complete collections of easily moveable cloned orfs facilitates functional studies in multiple species in parallel, even at the level of whole proteomes. as of today, gateway® clone collections are available for at least  <dig> bacterial species including  <dig> strains of staphylococcus aureus . cogs should also facilitate comparative analysis, given that many of them are present in species for which orfeomes are available. for example,  <dig> cogs are present in at least four of the species for which orfeomes are available .

the e. coli orfeome for protein expression
we verified the functionality of the entry clones by two different downstream applications. first, we tested recombinant protein production in e. coli by randomly selecting ten entry clones from the library that were subsequently cloned into the gateway® gst-fusion expression vector pdest-gst . the expression clones were transformed into the bl <dig> protein expression strain of e. coli and after induction of protein expression with iptg, the cells were lysed in sample buffer and analyzed by western blot . second, we tested protein interactions by the yeast two hybrid assay. about  <dig> entry clones which are known to be involved in bacterial motility  and chemotaxis were cloned into two different yeast two-hybrid expression vector systems and 90× <dig> =  <dig>  protein pair were tested for protein-protein interactions, resulting in  <dig> protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

the e. coli orfeome for functional genomics and protein interaction analysis
the availability of orfeome collections will greatly facilitate comparative functional genomic studies. an example of this is to compare protein-protein interactions among multiple species in order to determine which interactions are conserved. here we used the e. coli orf collection as well as previously generated s. aureus and s. pneumoniae collections  to systematically test, by yeast two-hybrid, whether the recently described protein-protein interactions between the essential e. coli gene products ygjd, yjee and yeaz are conserved in these gram-positive pathogens. these three proteins were selected as an interesting case study because they are highly conserved, essential, and of unknown function. the yjee, yeaz, and ygjd genes are highly conserved throughout eubacterial genomes while ygjd orthologs are also found throughout the archaea and eukaryotes. we found all the interactions that handford et al.  <cit>  reported but there were significant differences between species . for example, yjee and yeaz from e. coli, but not from s. aureus or s. pneumoniae, interacted. the functions of these genes remain poorly understood. in e. coli, yeaz is able to proteolyse ygjd while yjee, an atpase, competes with ygjd for binding to yeaz. the inability of yjee to interact with yeaz in s. aureus and s. pneumoniae may indicate differences in the regulation of the ygjd-yeaz complex in these species. our study of these interactions not only demonstrated differences between the species tested but also showed another advantage of such a comparative approach: the s. pneumoniae yjee as well as the the s. aureus ygjd protein autoactivated the reporter genes when fused to the gal <dig> dna binding domain. this property affects approximately 10% of bait proteins in yeast two-hybrid assays  <cit> . however, while the s. aureus ygjd bait is autoactivating, ygjd of e. coli and s. pneumoniae are not . hence, comparative assays may offer one strategy for circumventing limitations of the yeast two-hybrid method.

additionally, by revealing which interactions are evolutionarily conserved, such comparative studies will greatly enhance our ability to interpret the conserved biological functions of the interacting proteins, and also the computational analysis of high-throughput protein-protein interaction datasets  <cit> . for example, crystal structures are available for all three interacting proteins, but only one from e. coli, namely yeaz . in order to obtain more information for model building and functional interactions, we expanded our test set beyond e. coli and tested the interactions among ygjd, yeaz, and yjee in five different species, including h. pylori and r. prowazekii. in addition to the expected intraspecies interactions, interspecies interactions were observed . the s. aureus yeaz protein associated with the products of the e. coli and s. pneumoniae orthologs of ygjd while the s. pneumoniae yeaz protein was able to interact with h. pylori ygjd. this last interaction was particularly unexpected as yeaz is not conserved in h. pylori, and suggests the possibility that the functions of yeaz may be performed by another protein in this species.

given the availability of orfeomes for more than a dozen species, such comparative analyses can now be carried out quite easily. more importantly, additional biochemical or genetic studies can be done in e. coli for which extensive resources, including deletion strains  <cit>  and comprehensive databases , are available. for instance, our e. coli clones could be used to complement mutants in other species, which would demonstrate their functional equivalence.

CONCLUSIONS
in conjunction with other clone sets and the vast amount of genomics and proteomics data from e. coli, the gateway-orfeome will be another highly useful resource for the e. coli functional genomics community.

