BACKGROUND
the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal peptide  is expressed in specific subpopulations of neurons in the central and peripheral nervous system. two receptors, encoded by distinct genes, bind vip with high affinity: vpac1r and vpac2r  <cit> . vip and its receptors are expressed in those brains regions thought to be involved in learned behaviors, including the hippocampus, cortex, amygdala and hypothalamus e.g.  <cit> . while the physiological actions of this neuropeptide have not been extensively studied, vip regulates synaptic transmission  and intrinsic membrane currents . thus, this neuropeptide can be a potent modulator of neural activity and function in specific circuits in the adult nervous system.

previous pharmacological studies have raised the possibility that vip modulates learning and memory processes. the central administration of vip causes marked impairment in passive avoidance and spatial memory  <cit> . inhibition of vip by use of antagonists also affects spatial learning  <cit> . removal of vip-producing cells by expression of a chimeric vip-diptheria toxin gene caused learning deficits  <cit> . furthermore, vip agonists protect against the impaired spatial learning observed in experimental alzheimer mouse models  <cit> . mechanistically, vip regulates the secretion and expression of neurotrophic factors  <cit>  and vpac receptors are potent activators of the adenylyl cyclase/protein kinase a cascade  <cit>  that has been implicated in the regulation of long-term memory formation . interestingly, recent work found that treatment of pregnant mice with a vip antagonist caused cognitive deficits in the male offspring and lead to the suggestion that these mice may serve as a model of autism  <cit> . together, this literature is consistent with hypothesis that vip signaling could regulate learned behavior in the adult.

there is strong evidence that vip and the vpac2r are critical for the normal functioning of the circadian system. early studies on young rats showed breakdown in locomotor rhythms following application of vip antagonists  <cit> . more recent studies come via the development of transgenic mice lacking vip  <cit>  or vpac2r  <cit> . all of the vip- and vpac2r-deficient mice exhibit disruptions in their ability to express a coherent circadian rhythm in constant conditions although the extent of the arrhythmic phenotype varies from animal to animal. at a cellular level, vip- and vpac2r-deficient mice fail to exhibit the midday peak in electrical activity that is characteristic of impulse rhythms from suprachiasmatic nuclei  brain slices  <cit> . together, these data indicate that vip and vpac2r are critical for the generation of behavioral rhythmicity in mice and that the deficit occurs at the level of the scn. this data also serves to point out the utility of transgenic models in the exploration of the role of vip in behavior.

in the present study, we used vip-deficient mice to determine the role of this peptide in the regulation of contextual fear conditioning. we first determined whether vip-deficient mice exhibited deficits in shock-evoked freezing behavior or corticosterone response. next, we determined whether these mice exhibited deficits in acquisition or recall of contextual fear response. furthermore, we examined whether the loss of vip influenced the daily and circadian rhythms in the recall of the conditioned fear response. finally, we determined whether daily rhythms in the expression of the clock gene period  <dig> could be measured in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice.

RESULTS
acute freezing behavior in wt and vip-deficient mice
we first determined if vip-deficient mice exhibited deficits in sensitivity to foot-shock by testing the direct shock-evoked fear response at zt <dig> . wt and vip-deficient mice were exposed to shocks of a range of intensities  and the freezing response measured . overall, the freezing response to the shock were higher in the vip-deficient mice  compared to wt controls. the vip-deficient mice exhibited significantly  more freezing at the lowest intensity . for the remainder of the study, we used the lowest intensity of shock  that did not produce any significant differences between the genotypes. thus, the vip-deficient mice do not exhibit defects in shock-evoked freezing behavior.

acute corticosterone response in wt and vip-deficient mice
the concentration of circulating corticosterone is actively regulated as part of the stress response exhibited by mice. we sought to determine whether the endocrine response to foot-shock  was altered in vip-deficient mice. for these experiments, we examined corticosterone response to a mild foot-shock in wt and vip-deficient mice in early day . wt mice subjected to foot-shock exhibited significantly higher concentrations  of serum corticosterone than unstressed mice , and vip-deficient mice showed a similar increase in corticosterone concentration upon exposure to acute stress . there were no significant differences in the baseline or stress-evoked serum corticosterone concentrations between wt and vip-deficient mice, suggesting the induction of corticosterone in response to stress is intact in vip-deficient mice.

acquisition in vip ko mice following contextual fear training
given that vip is expressed in brain regions implicated in learning, including the hippocampus, we sought to determine if learning was altered in vip-deficient mice. for these experiments, we examined the acquisition of contextual fear conditioning in wt and vip-deficient mice at zt  <dig> using  <dig> cs-us pairing with  <dig>  ma shock . both wt and vip-deficient mice learned the task  and there were no significant differences in the acquisition between the two genotypes . with a second set of animals, we examined the performance of the two genotypes with a stronger training protocol that consisted of  <dig> cs-us pairings with  <dig>  ma shock . again, statistical analysis did not show any significant difference in the degree of acquisition between vip-deficient and wt mice . thus, the loss of vip does not influence the ability of mice to acquire contextual fear conditioning.

contextual recall  <dig>   <dig>  72-hrs following training
next, we examined if the recall of the contextual fear conditioning is altered in vip-deficient mice. groups of vip-deficient and wt mice  were trained on the weak version of contextual fear conditioning  at zt  <dig>  mice were then tested for the recall of fear conditions at either 24-, 48-, or 72-hrs after training  with each animal being tested only once. there was no difference in  the acquisition of the conditioned fear response, with the group means  all between  <dig> and 70% freezing. all of the groups  exhibited a robust recall of context as measured by freezing behavior . overall, the vip-deficient mice exhibited significant reductions in recall compared to wt controls . post-hoc analysis  indicated that vip-deficient mice exhibited significant reductions in recall compared to wt mice when measured at 48-  and 72-hrs  post-training. at 24-hrs post training, there was no significant difference in contextual recall between the genotypes. to further explore this deficit in longer-term recall, additional groups of wt and mutant mice  were trained on contextual fear conditioning at zt  <dig> and then tested once per day for  <dig> days . overall, the vip-deficient mice exhibited significant reductions in recall compared to wt controls . post-hoc analysis  indicated significant differences between the genotypes when measured at 48- , 72- , 96-  and 120-hrs  post-training. at 24-hrs post training, there was no significant difference in contextual recall between the wt and vip-deficient mice. by  <dig> hrs, the conditioned fear response had extinguished in both groups. together, this data indicates that the vip-deficient mice exhibited deficits in the recall of contextual fear conditioning when tested at least 48-hrs after training.

rhythm in contextual recall under ld conditions
we previously demonstrated that the recall of contextual recall expresses robust circadian variation  <cit>  and that the circadian system of vip-deficient mice is compromised  <cit> . therefore, we first sought to determine if vip-deficient mice exhibit a diurnal rhythm in the recall of contextual fear conditioning. groups of wt and vip-deficient mice  were trained at zt <dig>  the mice were then tested at several intervals after training: 24-, 36-, 48-, 60-hrs . while there was no difference in the acquisition between the genotypes , the vip-deficient mice exhibited significant reductions in recall compared to wt mice . compared to wt, vip-deficient mice exhibited significantly less freezing at 36-hr , 48-hr , and 60-hr  after training. for both genotypes, the recall varied with time  with post-hoc analysis  indicating that freezing at 24- and 48-hrs after training was significantly  higher than the freezing at 36- and 60-hrs for both strains of mice. thus, in ld conditions, both wt and vip-deficient mice exhibited a diurnal rhythm in recall.

rhythm in contextual recall in behaviorally rhythmic and arrhythmic vip ko mice
the next set of experiments was designed to determine whether vip-deficient mice exhibit circadian rhythms in recall. for these experiments, wt and vip-deficient mice were held in constant conditions in cages with running wheels. wt mice all exhibited clear circadian rhythms in wheel-running activity. while all of the vip-deficient mice exhibited disrupted rhythms  <cit> , some of the mutant mice are arrhythmic while others continue to express circadian rhythms in locomotor activity . for these experiments, groups of rhythmic and arrhythmic vip-deficient mice  were trained at ct <dig>  for the rhythmic vip-deficient mice, ct <dig>  was estimated based on wheel running activity. for the arrhythmic vip-deficient mice, ct  <dig> was estimated based on the activity projected from the prior ld cycle. due to the lack of regular activity onset in these mice, a  <dig> hr phase advance was assumed and tau was also assumed to be around  <dig> hr based on the activity patterns of the rhythmic vip-/- mice. both groups of mice were trained in constant darkness at ct <dig> using a stronger training protocol consisting of  <dig> cs-us pairings. there was no difference in the acquisition of conditioning between the  <dig> groups . the mice were then tested for recall 24-hrs after training and every 6-hrs subsequently for a total of  <dig> days . for both rhythmic and arrhythmic groups, the recall varied with time  with post-hoc analysis  indicating that freezing at 24-, 48- and 72-hrs after training was significantly  higher than the freezing at the other intervals. thus, vip-deficient mice that exhibited arrhythmic wheel-running activity still express circadian rhythms in the recall of contextual fear conditioning.

period <dig> message is rhythmically expressed in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice
the genes responsible for the generation of circadian oscillations are expressed in brain regions outside of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, including the hippocampus  <cit> . this rhythm in gene expression in the hippocampus may be critical for the rhythms in recall that we and others have observed under various contextual memory tasks. in order to determine if the message coding for period <dig> is rhythmic in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice, we used in situ hybridization  to measure period <dig> message in the hippocampus of mice at subjective day and night . expression of period <dig> mrna was observed throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the hippocampus and was largely restricted to the pyramidal cell layers and the dentate gyrus. in the hippocampus of the vip-deficient mice, the mean optical density  of period <dig> labeling was significantly higher at subjective day than in the subjective night . the period <dig> expression did not significantly vary between vip-deficient and wt mice. among the hippocampal subregions, the ca <dig> pyramidal cell layers showed the most robust circadian variation in labeling . the period <dig> sense probe did not exhibit labeling in the brain under identical hybridization conditions . these data demonstrate at least one clock gene is rhythmically expressed in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice and raise the possibility that extra-scn circadian oscillators may drive the rhythms in recall in these mice.

discussion
the neuropeptide vip and its receptors are expressed in regions of the brain implicated in the control of learned behaviors including the hippocampus, cortex, amygdala and hypothalamus . in these regions, vip is most commonly expressed in gabaergic interneurons  that may use this peptide to communicate with specific post-synaptic targets. however, it is equally plausible that vip functions more as a paracrine signal acting at sites more distant than just the adjacent postsynaptic neurons. while the physiological actions of this neuropeptide have not been extensively studied, vip regulates synaptic transmission  and intrinsic membrane currents . thus, this neuropeptide can be a potent modulator of neural activity and function in specific circuits in the adult nervous system. given this anatomical distribution and potential physiological functions in both the developing and mature nervous system, the loss of vip may well have been expected to have global influences on learning and memory. however, the present study found that the deficits in the vip-deficient mice were quite selective. deficits were not observed in foot shock-evoked fear behavior. this demonstrates that the basic sensory and motor processes controlling this behavior are intact in the vip-deficient mice. similarly, the shock-evoked corticosterone response was intact in these mutant mice. given that vip is expressed in the adrenals and the circadian system that regulate corticosterone secretion, we felt that it was important to confirm that this aspect of the stress response was functioning in the vip-deficient mice. finally, we observed no deficits in the vip-deficient mice in the acquisition of fear conditioning or in the recall measured at 24-hrs after training. clearly, the circuitry involved in the acquisition of contextual fear conditioning is either not regulated by vip or there is compensation for the loss of this neuropeptide in these transgenic mice.

the recall of the contextual fear conditioning was affected by the loss of vip. these recall deficits were seen in three independent experiments including those mice only tested for recall a single time , those tested daily , and those tested every 12-hrs . these results fit with previous pharmacological studies that have raised the possibility that vip plays a physiological role in the modulation of learning and memory. for example, administration of vip into rat hippocampus following training on a passive avoidance task induced recall in rats tested 24-hrs later, while administration of a vip antagonist enhanced retention  <cit> . other studies have also found evidence that the central administration of vip impairs recall in passive avoidance learning  <cit> . spatial learning as measured by the water maze was also impaired by the ventricular administration of this neuropeptide  <cit> . in contrast, one study reported that the intracerebral administration of a vip receptor antagonist, but not vip itself, inhibited performance on the morris water maze  <cit> . in addition, learning deficits in mice carrying a chimeric vip-diptheria toxin gene have been reported  <cit> . these transgenic mice lost about 20% of vip content as measured by radioimmunoassay and exhibited learning deficits as measured by the morris water maze. taken together, these studies suggest that abnormally high or low levels of vip can interfere with the acquisition and recall of specific learned behaviors.

the vip-deficient mice used in the present study are a traditional transgenic model in which the gene coding for vip has been inactive throughout development. vip is expressed early in the fetal brain  <cit>  with vip binding sites abundant on the floor plate of the neural tube  <cit> . while not extensively studied in central neurons, vip is a neurotrophic factor that can regulate neural growth, migration, and process formation  and, through these developmental mechanisms, influence the neural circuits involved in learning and memory functions. a recent study examined the consequences of pharmacologically blocking vpac receptors during embryogenesis and examining potential cognitive deficits in the adult offspring  <cit> . male, but not female, treated mice exhibited deficits in contextual fear conditioning and social behavior. the selective set of behavioral deficits coupled with the gender difference led these authors to propose these mice as a model for the behavioral deficits of autism. like the vip-deficient mice, these mice treated developmentally with the vpac antagonist did not show deficits in acquisition or in recall measured 24-hrs after training. the male offspring did show recall deficits when measured 48-hrs after training. thus, the memory deficits observed in the transgenic animals in the present study could well be due to a loss of vip early in development.

as described before, there is strong evidence that vip and the vpac2r are critical for the normal functioning of the circadian system . together, these data indicate that vip and vpac2r are critical for the generation of behavioral rhythms in mice and that the deficit occurs at the level of the scn. furthermore, the vpac2r-deficient mice even lose the daily rhythms in clock gene expression that are thought to lie at the heart of the machinery for the generation of daily rhythms  <cit> . given the overwhelming data that the loss of vip influences the generation of circadian oscillations, the finding that these mutants showed no apparent deficiency in the diurnal and circadian regulation in recall was unexpected. this disassociation was particularly striking in the case of vip-deficient mice that exhibited arrhythmic locomotor activity. the  <dig> hr interval in testing may have occluded small changes in peak recall time, which most likely tracks with the intrinsic free-running period of the animals. however, the frequency of testing was sufficient to show that there remains an optimal time of day, which tracks with the same time of day as the initial training exercise, even in mice with arrhythmic wheel-running activity. this is consistent with the phenomenon of "time-stamping" of learned behavior as observed in hamsters  <cit>  and by us in mice  <cit> . what's more, this time-stamp phenomenon may be independent of the scn. lesioning the scn of rats does not affect the time-stamped training of a t-maze reward task  <cit> . previous work has found that these behaviorally arrhythmic vip-deficient mice also exhibit arrhythmic electrical activity rhythms when measured at the level of the scn  <cit> . we now show that these arrhythmic mice exhibited clear rhythms in recall and these rhythms were extremely similar to those exhibited by the behaviorally rhythmic mice. thus, the loss of circadian function in these arrhythmic vip-deficient mice had no obvious impact on the rhythms in recall suggesting that a rhythmic scn may not be necessary for the circadian rhythm in recall. in recent years, it has become clear that many of the "clock genes" are expressed outside of the scn . this raises the possibility that oscillators outside of the scn may drive the rhythms in recall of learned behaviors. while we did not directly address this possibility in the present study, we did examine the expression of one clock gene, period <dig>  in the hippocampus. we found that levels of this gene continue to show circadian differences in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice . this type of rhythmic expression is at least consistent with the possibility that extra-scn rhythms in gene expression may be directly tied to the rhythms in recall observed in fear-conditioned mice.

in mammals, neurons in the hippocampus , olfactory bulb  <cit> , scn , and other brain regions  <cit>  have now been shown to generate oscillations in circadian gene expression. this pool of data contributes to the view that the circadian system is comprised of multiple oscillatory components, with the role of the scn being a master timer synchronizing these disparate cell populations . with this new view of clock genes and circadian organization, it becomes critical to determine the tissue-specific function of these genes. logically, local rhythms in clock gene expression could serve to control the temporal program of gene expression and physiology specific to the hippocampus, as recently demonstrated in liver  <cit> . however, unfortunately, we still do not know much about the functional significance of clock gene expression outside of the scn. the vip-deficient mice with weakened rhythms in scn electrical activity may represent an advantageous model to explore coupling between different circadian oscillators. our data with contextual fear conditioning raise the possibility that these rhythms in recall or memory are only weakly coupled to core time-keeping mechanisms in the scn.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that vip-deficient mice exhibited normal shock-evoked freezing behavior and increases in corticosterone. similarly, these mutant mice exhibited no deficits in the acquisition or recall of the fear-conditioned behavior when tested 24-hours after training. the vip-deficient mice exhibited a significant reduction in recall when tested 48-hours or longer after training. surprisingly, we found that the vip-deficient mice continued to express circadian rhythms in the recall of the training even in those individual mice whose wheel running wheel activity was arrhythmic. one mechanistic explanation is suggested by the finding that daily rhythms in the expression of the clock gene period <dig> continue in the hippocampus of vip-deficient mice. together these data suggest that the neuropeptide vip regulates the recall of at least one learned behavior but does not impact the circadian regulation of this behavior.

