BACKGROUND
an evolutionary tree, or phylogenetic tree, is a model of the evolutionary history for a set of species. with more and more dna and protein sequences have been obtained  <cit> , the problem of inferring the evolutionary history and constructing the phylogenetic tree has become one of the major problems in computational biology. this is because the evolutionary relationship of species provides a great deal of information about their biochemical machinery. for example, rna's secondary structure is most accurately determined by selecting correlated mutations of a class of related species.

a phylogenetic tree is a tree showing the evolutionary interrelationships among various species or other entities that are believed to have a common ancestor. in a phylogenetic tree, each node with descendants represents the most recent common ancestor of the descendants, and the edge lengths correspond to time estimates. each node in a phylogenetic tree is called a taxonomic unit, and the leaves usually denote a set of objects . internal nodes are generally referred to as hypothetical taxonomic units  as they cannot be directly observed  <cit> .

to construct a tree from a set of species, one must have a metric to decide if a tree is better than another one. many criteria have been proposed. but in general, they turn out to be np-hard to optimize. there is still no consensus in the biology community on how to make a good tree.

one way to counteract this problem is to execute many different phylogenetic clustering methods resulting in various starting tree topologies. a choice from the generated trees gives rise to the best one. another way to handle this problem is to use a global optimization technique to derive the optimal topology of the tree. in this paper, ant colony algorithm is applied both as a clustering method and as a global optimization technique so that the optimal tree can be found even with a bad initial tree topology.

during the past years, a number of efforts have been contributed to phylogenetic analyses using genomic sequences, which could be either whole genomes  or complete protein sequence sets  <cit> . there are three main methods for constructing phylogenetic trees: distance-based methods such as neighbour-joining, parsimony-based methods such as maximum parsimony, and character-based methods such as maximum likelihood or bayesian inference  <cit> . the distance based approaches avoid the high computational complexity of multiple sequence alignment  to compute an evolutionary distance and try to construct the phylogenetic trees efficiently. the phylogenetic clustering method in this article belongs to the distance based category.

ant colony optimization  is a new evolution simulation algorithm proposed by italian researchers dorigo et al  <cit> . inspired by studies on biological ant colony, they recognize the similarities between the ants' food-hunting activities and tsp, and successfully resolve the tsp problems using the same principle that the ants have used to find the shortest route to food source via communication and cooperation, and it has been applied to lots of combinational optimization problems  <cit> .

we note that in the ant colony algorithm, ants can volatilize a kind of chemical odour called pheromone when they encounter each other or in the process of seeking their fellows. enlightened by this fact, we first apply weights of rejection and acceptance between the objects to form a complete digraph in which the vertexes represent the objects and the initial weight of each edge between vertexes is the weights of acceptance between the objects. the novel clustering process by artificial ants is illustrated in fig.  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  during the process, the pheromone on each edge of the digraph will be updated with the artificial ants' adaptive movements, and some adaptive strategies are also presented to speed up the clustering progress. finally the clusters got by the ants are used to progressively construct the phylogenetic trees.

RESULTS
constructing a specific digraph for the objects
ants can volatilize a kind of chemical odour called pheromone when they encounter each other or in the process of seeking their fellows. based on this kind of odour, ants will naturally attract those who have similar features and repel those that are different. in this paper, artificial ants were set to travel on the graph and deposits pheromone on the edges they passed. as showed in fig.  <dig> and fig.  <dig>  in each step, the artificial ant selects the next vertex according to the acceptance weight in digraph and some heuristic information. the pheromone on each edge of the digraph will be updated with the artificial ants' adaptive movements, and some adaptive strategies are also presented to speed up the clustering progress.

strong component analysis
the more similar the objects are, the higher the quantity of pheromone may be deposited on the edge between their vertexes. to make full use of the quantity of pheromone on each edge, we omit some connections whose pheromone value is less than a certain threshold to get a new digraph, and the strong connected components of the new digraph forms the finial clusters. this way, the initial objects are separated into a few clusters by the ant sub-colony. finally these clusters obtained by the ants are used to construct the phylogenetic trees progressively.

optimizing the phelogenetic trees
artificial ants in the same sub-colony try to construct an independent phylogenetic tree as a solution of the problem by their cooperation; and different sub-colonies construct different trees so as to maintain diversity of candidates. after optimizing these trees, the performance of these solutions is improved. meanwhile, the pheromones on the edges of high fitness valued trees are increased to strengthen the ants' clustering process.

the phylogenetic tree construction method showed in this paper is tested to compare its results with that of ga, experimental results show that our algorithm is easier to implement and more efficient. comparing to ga, it can converge much faster and obtain higher solution quality.

discussion
reconstruction of the phylogeny is one of the most important problems in evolutionary study, which is very difficult for large data sets in macromolecular databases. the number of possible phylogenetic trees is exponentially large and the space of topologies cannot be searched exhaustively. even heuristic searches can be very slow in this case, especially when computationally intensive optimality criteria such as maximum likelihood  are used.

an exhaustive search for the ml topology is usually computationally prohibitive for more than  <dig> taxa . at the same time, the clustering approach for a phylogeny inference is advantageous for a number of reasons, including the ability to model a variety of factors affecting nucleotide sequence evolution, robustness to violations of model assumptions, and resistance to long branch attractions. the use of stochastic algorithm provides an opportunity to develop new efficient and fast methods for phylogeny analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
the proposed adaptive ant colony algorithm for phylogenetic tree construction method  consists of three components, including initialization, constructing phylogenetic trees through clustering, and phylogenetic tree optimization.

in the stage of initialization, a weighted digraph is built where the vertices represent the data to be clustered and the weight is the acceptance rate between the two objects it connected.

in the course of constructing the phylogenetic trees, the ants travel in the digraph and update the pheromone on the paths it passed. at each step, ants choose the next vertex according to a certain probability depending on the pheromone and the heuristic information of the edge. the digraph is first modified by omitting some edges whose pheromone value is less than a threshold, and then the strong connected components of the updated digraph are computed to form the clusters which are used to construct the phylogenetic trees.

after getting a group of phylogenetic trees, the ant colony and its pheromone feedback system act as a global optimization technique to derive the optimal topology of the phylogenetic tree.

the algorithm showed in this paper is tested using randomly generated sequences. using the same sequences, we also test the ga method. our experiments were implemented on dell precession workstation  <dig> with intelp <dig> hyper threading processor of  <dig>  ghz and  <dig> m front bus speed.

as showed in  <cit> , the simulated data sets used are generated in two different ways. the first set of simulated data consists of trees where the topology of the tree is fixed and randomly generated branch lengths are assigned to each node-to-node connection. the resulting distance matrix is used as input for the methods to be tested. in this way four sets were generated  which consists of distance matrices defining ancestral relationships among  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> objects, respectively. the second sets s <dig>  s <dig>  s <dig> and s <dig> include stochastically generated distance matrices. for these data sets, the optimal tree is not known.

in fact, aaptc not only provides a novel clustering method to obtain a group of good initial tree topologies, but also has global optimization on these trees. in this way, the aaptc produces an ensemble of trees of almost similar quality. whereas the ga method cannot guarantee the topology quality since its sole initial tree topology was generated by some other clustering methods such as nj or fitch. the ensemble of high qualified solutions of aaptc allows experts to decide which topology is most likely since the quality criterion  used does not guarantee the optimal tree topology.

tables  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> show the performance comparison of the two methods. in all the tables, the performance of a method is measured by the fitness value between the original and calculated distance matrices. the number of examined trees is depicted in parentheses. for aaptc the mean, standard deviation, highest, and lowest fitness value derived from  <dig> independent trials are given. the basic parameters are set as m = n ρ =  <dig>  c =  <dig> q <dig> =  <dig> . we also use the vertebrate dataset  <cit>  to evaluate the performance of our algorithm. vertebrate database contains in total  <dig> mitochondrial proteins from  <dig> vertebrates. the results of the neighbour join based phylogeny and taxonomy tree is shown in  <cit> , and ant colony based phylogeny is shown as fig  <dig> 

