BACKGROUND
in vitro evolution of rna has been performed with a given replicase  <cit>  or with a given rna polymerase and a given reverse transcriptase  <cit> . in vitro evolution of rna having a gene region encoding the replicase, that is, in vitro evolution of rna with an evolvable replicase  <cit>  is a next step approaching to synthetic biology on an origin of life. it may be one of the most fundamental experiments of in vitro evolution of a protein. in vitro evolution of a protein has to be coupled with in vitro evolution of its gene and usually is performed with a given translation system. if a synthetic biologist wishes to reconstruct the phenomenon of the origin of life, he should use primitive translation system which can evolve to high efficient system, but such a translation system is not available.

coupling a protein evolution and its gene evolution is realized by a phenotype-genotype linking strategy in the selection process. there are four types of the strategy; ribozyme-type, virus-type, cell-type and external intelligence-type. the ribozyme-type is the strategy of phenotype-genotype linking by carrying both on an rna  <cit> . the virus-type is the strategy by binding a protein to its gene  <cit> . the cell-type is the strategy by enclosing a protein and its gene in a compartment  <cit> . external intelligence-type is the strategy by measuring and picking the fittest protein  <cit> .

in vitro evolution experiments can be classified into two categories; artificial selection-type and natural selection-type. the former is called directed evolution, in which the fitness measure is set by the experimenter. the fitness of the latter experiment is the specific growth rate. pcr is most convenient amplification method in the former experiments, but cannot be used in the latter experiments. one-pot isothermal amplification method is convenient in the latter, because a flow reactor experiment is possible in principle and a serial transfer experiment is easily performed as an approximation of the flow reactor experiment. examples of the one-pot isothermal amplification are qβ replicase method  <cit> , 3sr  <cit> , nasba  <cit> , rna-z  <cit> , etc.

qβ rna replicase is from an rna phage qβ of e.coli and is a hetero-tetramer, in which only β subunit is encoded in the viral genome and other three subunits  are recruited from the host-cell translation machinery  <cit> . for the effective replication of viral genome rna, it requires a host factor hfq, which binds to the specific site of the rna and recruits the replicase  <cit> . when the isothermal amplification of the genomic rna was performed in a test tube, a parasitic short rna called rq rna emerged and it made the amplification of genomic rna difficult  <cit> . yomo and the co-workers demonstrated that the compartmentalization of the reaction solution into a water-in-oil emulsion inhibits the growth of the parasite  <cit> .

yomo’s compartment method is just a cell-type strategy of phenotype-genotype linking and was applied to an experiment of the coupled rna/replicase evolution  <cit> . we are planning an experiment of the coupled rna/replicase evolution by using an isothermal rna amplification and a virus-type strategy called in vitro virus method or mrna display  <cit> . this “in vitro virus” will evolve autonomously in a flow reactor. qβ rna replicase is not adequate for our purpose because it must recruit three proteins from the cell-free replication system and this situation makes population growth dynamics very complex in the test tube containing the cell free translation system. norovirus rna replicase  is a candidate for our in vitro virus, because it consists of a single polypeptide chain and its molecular weight is not so large .

there are several preceding reports on the characteristics of various modes of rna replication catalyzed by the nv3dpolin vitro <cit> . they reported on the activity of making of double-strand rna through complementary strand polymerization on a single strand template with and without a primer, the activity of strand dissociation replication, the activity of making of a hairpin through self-priming and also the terminal nucleotidyl transferase  activity. their reports were not consistent with each other.

therefore we re-examined the activities of nv3dpolin vitro in order to investigate whether we can use this enzyme as an rna replicase in evolution experiments in vitro, instead of qβ replicase.

RESULTS
preparation of nv3dpol
the gene of our nv3dpol was a gift from bml inc., that is, it was same as ref.  <cit> . after construction of ptd-nv3dpol-strep, we sequenced it and confirmed ours was triple mutant at amino acid sequence level from the sequence in ref.  <cit> , which was different from the sequence in ref.  <cit>  . as shown in figure 1a, a band corresponding to about 57 kda of nv3dpol-strep protein was observed on sds-page. from the incorporation of fluorotect™ greenlys trna into the protein during the cell-free translation, only a sharp single band was detected under a fluorescence detection mode . therefore, nv3dpol-strep protein was synthesized correctly in the insect cell-free translation system. nv3dpol-strep protein modiied with strep-tag ii  <cit>  at the c-terminus was able to be highly purified with strep-tactin affinity chromatography . in figure 1a lane <dig>  white arrowhead indicates the protein bands taken from bsa solution . as shown in additional file 2: figure s <dig>  nv3dpol had an rna-dependent rna synthesis activity under the excess bsa condition. therefore, nv3dpol prepared here was not affected with contaminated proteins.

rna amplification reaction with nv3dpol
four kinds of single stranded rna  of which sequences were different in the 3’-terminal three nucleotides  were used as an rna template. as shown in figure 2b, when nv3dpol and the rna template were incubated at 30°c and analyzed on a denaturing page, two reaction products of  <dig> nts and 90– <dig> nts were amplified with time. in the case of temp and temp, rna templates  were amplified as indicated with black arrow in figure 2b  . in the case of temp and temp, rna templates were amplified slightly . in the case of temp, when the amplified product was treated with ribonuclease s <dig>  it was not digested . thus, the amplified products were a double stranded rna . nv3dpol made a dsrna from an ssrna in a primer-independent manner and amplified it. this result is consistent with the report by rohayem et al. <cit>  and fukushi et al. <cit> . in addition to the amplification product of  <dig> nts, amplification products between  <dig> and  <dig> nts were observed in the case of temp, temp and temp  indicated by asterisks and arrow heads). we show additional file 3: figure s3b as a non-denaturing page version of figure 2b which was from denaturing page. in additional file 3: figure s3b, all the templates  temp,  temp,  temp and  temp) gave growing band near 50 bp dsrna size. for , it was confirmed to be actually dsrna by s <dig> nuclease treatment . in figure 2b, for , the growing band was simply  <dig> nts ssrna, but for  - , the growing bands were not only  <dig> nts, but also  <dig> –  <dig> nts ssrna. the possible explanation is as follows: the growing band near 50 bp dsrna in additional file 3: figure s3b  -  corresponds to hairpin rna  ). these must be self-priming products starting from a short stem-loop at 3’-terminus. in fact in each sequence of  -  we found such a small potential stem-loop at 3’-terminus , but in the sequence of  we did not find any small potential stem-loop at 3’-terminus. this result is consistent with the reports by belliot et al. <cit>  and wei et al. <cit> .

the time-course of the primer-independent amplification reaction of temp with nv3dpol was measured and detected on a denaturing page  or a non-denaturing page , and quantified . as shown in figure 3b, dsrna of about 50 bp was amplified with time on a non-denaturing page. in the previous studies  <cit> , a time-course measurement of amplification reaction was not reported. as shown in figure 3c closed square, when the amplification reaction was performed with  <dig> pmol of nv3dpol and  <dig> pmol of temp rna, the rna template was amplified linearly up to 60 min and reached at plateau near 240 min. on the denaturing page , about  <dig> pmol of ssrna  was detected at 240 min, thus nv3dpol amplified  <dig> pmol of ssrna to about  <dig> pmol of dsrna isothermally in a test tube . when  <dig> pmol of nv3dpol and  <dig> pmol of temp rna were incubated and quantified on the denaturing page, the amplification curve was shown by closed circle in figure 3c. in the both amplification reaction, the concentration of temp rna was constant . as shown in figure 3c, the amplification efficiency was depended on the concentration of nv3dpol . activity of our enzyme varied between different lots. but within the same lot the activity was fairly reproducible as shown in figure 3c . thus comparative studies using enzyme from the same lot were meaningful.

3’-terminal sequence dependence of initiation of ssrna replication in a primer-independent manner
rohayem et al. <cit>  indicated the following two points. first, nv3dpol initiated the replication on an oligo cytidine. second, nv3dpol added some cytidines at the 3’-terminus of the synthesized strand. from these results, they suggested that nv3dpol prefers a c-stretch for the initiation of replication in primer-independent manner.

we investigated the number of cytidine for the efficient initiation of replication in primer-independent manner. temp, temp, temp or temp rna, which have from  <dig> to  <dig> cytidine at their 3’-terminus  and have no small stem-loop at their 3’-terminus, were incubated with nv3dpol at 30°c. the time-course measurements of each case were analyzed on a denaturing page  and quantified . at least two cytidines were necessary for the amplification. and in the case of temp rna, the initiation efficiency of replication seemed to be saturated at three cytidines.

we next measured the time-course of amplification reaction using two kinds of  <dig> nts rna template, named td257- <dig> rna and td257-735g734c rna. these rna templates  were not from norovirus genome. thus the initiation efficiency of these rna templates is not related to nv3dpol specificity. and the 3’-terminal structure of both templates is predicted to be a free single strand. td257-735g734c rna was generated by substituting ---ccgc-3’ at the 3’-terminal region of td257- <dig> rna with ---cccc-3’. the reaction aliquots were analyzed on a non-denaturing page , and quantified . by substituting the 3’-terminal sequence to a c-stretch , the amplification efficiency was increased remarkably.

while rohayem et al.  <cit>  showed that nv3dpol does not have an rna synthesis activity on poly-tail, fukushi et al.  <cit>  indicated that nv3dpol has this activity. in order to re-examine this activity, we synthesized an rna bearing an a-stretch of  <dig> nts at the 3’-terminus , and incubated with nv3dpol. our nv3dpol showed a slight activity to poly-tail and the amplified products appeared after 30 min .

terminal nucleotidyl transferase activity and replication of dsrna
in the reaction using temp, the amplified product, sampled at 240 min of incubation, reaching at plateau, was sequenced. the replicated complementary rna ) was reverse-transcribed into cdna using y-ligation technique shown in methods. the determined sequences were shown in table  <dig>  we could observe the addition of 1– <dig> cytidines at the 3’-terminus of rna. but 50% of the sequenced rna had no added cytidine at the 3’-terminus. we could also observe the addition of two nucleotides of adenosine or guanosine.

the result of 3’-terminal sequencing of amplified products  in the reaction using temp shown in figure  <dig>  sampled at 240 min of incubation.

it was reported that the sticky end formed by this tnt activity is favourable for the next round replication of the dsrna  <cit> . we re-examine this point. two kinds of rna template  were incubated with nv3dpol at 30°c and analyzed on non-denaturing page. the secondary structures of these two rna templates at 30°c predicted by mfold  <cit>  were shown in figure 6b. mfold predicted many other structures, but the stem-end  structures were almost always conserved, namely, the probability of other 3’ structures was less than  <dig> %. thus these two rnas are able to be models of dsrnas made in the first cycle replication of an ssrna template  with or without tnt activity. as shown in figure 6c, the band at about 50 bp was amplified in the case of temp, but it was not in the case of temp. it was suggested that nv3dpol replicates a blunt end dsrna preferably rather than a sticky end dsrna.

isothermal amplification of a long rna
to observe the exponential phase in the isothermal amplification of comparatively long rna with nv3dpol, td257-735g734c rna and nv3dpol were incubated at the ratio of  <dig> :  <dig> in a reaction tube. each aliquot was analyzed on a non-denaturing page followed by the staining with sybrgreenii and quantified . the initial rna template  of  <dig> fmol was amplified to  <dig> fmol of dsrna plus  <dig> fmol ssrna in 240 min . the initial apparently exponential phase was observed reproducibly.

primer extension replication
rohayem et al. <cit>  showed the primer extension replication with nv3dpol, but fukushi et al. <cit>  suggested the enzyme does not have such an activity. we examined the activity as follows. a rna template, temp, hybridized with a rna primer  at the 3’-terminal region was incubated with nv3dpol and ntps. here, the 5’-terminus of rna primer was modified with fitc to trace whether nv3dpol elongates the rna primer. that is,  <dig> pmol rna template and  <dig> pmol rna primer were hybridized, and then mixed with  <dig> pmol of nv3dpol and incubated at 30°c. as a control, primer-independent rna synthesis reaction of temp rna with nv3dpol was performed at the same time. the reaction products were analyzed on a non-denaturing page or an 8m urea denaturing page, and imaged . the dsrna generated with nv3dpol was indicated by arrowhead in figure 8b, lane <dig>  in figure 8c, lane <dig>  the band indicated with arrowhead, which was detected with fitc fluorescence was about same molecular weight with dsrna generated in a primer-independent manner . therefore, this product was a dsrna generated in the primer-dependent manner with nv3dpol.

discussion
initiation reaction
when a small stem-loop structure can be formed at 3’-terminus, the self-priming is more favorable initiation reaction for an ssrna template than the primer-independent manner as seen in figure 2b and additional file 3: figure s3b. for , 3’-terminal -ca forms a hairpin stem with -ug- at upstream. for , 3’-terminal -ac forms a hairpin stem with -gu- at upstream. as the template contains -guu- repeat at 3’-terminal region, several hybridization sites can be expected. the fact that there was only one band of double length shows nv3dpol recognizes small loop size ,  <dig> for ).

in this context we comment the self-priming case by belliot et al. <cit> , and wei et al. <cit> . they used an rna template of which 3’-terminal sequence is ---gauccaagcuuacguacgcg-3’  and got a double length replication product. they explained it is the result of the back-priming at mlui palindrome. this explanation is not acceptable based on thermodynamic considerations. we propose another explanation that it was the result of self-priming starting from a small stem-loop  made of ---cguacgcg-3’.

fullerton et al. <cit>  investigated the initiation reaction of rna replication with sapovirus  replicase using  <dig> nts template of which 3’-terminal sequence is ---uuggagccauugcccuccau-3’. they did not get a double length product and concluded the initiation by the primer-independent manner. in fact a potential 3’-terminal stem-loop has loop size eight ). this is not a small size and self-priming can hardly proceed. this results support our conclusion that when there is a small stem-loop  structure exists at 3’-terminus, the self-priming is the most preferable initiation reaction for an ssrna template.

there were at least two amplification reaction products of the template temp ; indicated with asterisk). length of them was between  <dig> and  <dig> nts. if we consider a small stem-loop made with gg:uu stem, the length of self-priming product would be  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> nts according to the loop size  <dig>   <dig>  or  <dig> nts, respectively ). here we neglect loop size  <dig> nts, because it is very unstable because of the steric hindrance and the hairpin thermodynamics. they are probably originated from c and ccc addition to 3’-terminus with tnt activity of the enzyme. the products can make small stem-loops of guuggggc and ggggccc which can make  <dig> nts and  <dig> nts product, respectively ).

when there exists no small stem-loop structure at 3’-terminus and 3’-terminal sequence has c-stretch, the primer-independent initiation proceeds as shown in figure 2b  and in the above mentioned case by fullerton et al. <cit> . rohayem et al. <cit>  also pointed out that nv3dpol prefers c-stretch at 3’-terminus for the replication initiation of the primer-independent manner. importance of the c-stretch was confirmed also the experiment using a long template of which sequence had no relation to norovirus genome. td257-735g734c template showed six times larger amplification than td257- <dig> template. the former is a point mutant of the latter and the 3’-terminal sequence is ---ucccc and ---uccgc, respectively. they have no stable small stem loop at 3-terminus.

although rohayem et al.  <cit>  indicated that nv3dpol did not have an rna synthesis activity on poly-tail, we showed that nv3dpol initiated replication reaction on a-stretch at the 3’-terminus of td257-735-a <dig> template . the rna synthesis activity on a-stretch, however, was considerably lower than the case of td257-735g734c template. therefore, the initiation of primer-independent rna replication reaction by nv3dpol prefers c-stretch at the 3’-terminus rather than a-stretch or poly-tail. the differences between rohayem’s system and ours are the amino acids sequence of nv3dpol, the length of poly-tail, and enzyme concentration used. on the other hand, fukushi et al.  <cit>  already reported that nv3dpol has the initiation activity of primer-independent rna replication on poly-tail. we supposed that the actual 3’-terminal sequence of rna template used in fukushi’s work was ---ugcgc.

it is reported that qβ replicase also favours c-stretch. the initiation efficiency is high when 3’-terminal sequence is ---ccc-3’ or ---cca-3’. the efficient parasite rq rna has also the sequence ---ccc-3’. by the way, we have not yet observed any parasite sequence in amplification with nv3dpol.

in the case of a blunt-end double-stranded rna, the breathing of terminal double helical region makes the enzyme access to cc-stretch at 3’-terminus and start to replication in the primer-independent manner. to investigate whether nv3dpol initiates the replication to dsrna which has a sticky-end preferably rather than the blunt-end  <cit> , we prepared two kinds of rna template, temp and temp shown in figure 6a. the secondary structure predicted by mfold  shows that the former mimics the terminal structure of dsrna added a cytidine by tnt activity and the latter mimics the terminal structure of a blunt-end. as shown in figure 6c, the band at about 50 bp were amplified in the case of temp, but not in the case of temp. this indicates that nv3dpol might initiate the replication from the blunt-end cytidines at the 3’-terminus preferably rather than from sticky-end cytidines. we investigated only about the addition of one cytidine. although the addition of three cytidines was rare , if dsrna which has three cytidines overhung end were used, the initiation efficiency of replication might alter.

the initiation of the extension reaction of a long primer is not favourable for the enzyme as shown in figure  <dig>  rohayem et al. <cit>  reported primer-dependent replication, but fukushi et al. <cit>  reported their nv3dpol had no activity of primer extension. our gene was a gift of fukushi’s group. thus they might miss the faint band.

elongation reaction
the self-priming reaction at a small stem-loop at 3’-terminus is very active, but the extension activity of a long primer is very poor. thus once the enzyme dissociates from the template-polymerizing chain hybrid, it is not easy for the enzyme to bind again. on the other hand as shown in figure  <dig>  the native state page of the amplified product  shows a single sharp band without smear. thus we can draw the conclusion that the processivity of nv3dpol is very high.

nv3dpol can perform also the chain dissociation replication smoothly as shown in figure  <dig>  even in the case of a template having gc-rich regions ). the amplification products must be double stranded and amplification proceeded several times. the dissociated single stranded chain was converted to double strand in a primer-independent manner not so rapidly, because the band of ssrna was visible on the non-denaturing page .

termination reaction 
fukushi et al. <cit>  reported that their nv3dpol had no tnt activity. gene of nv3dpol of our study is a gift from the laboratory in which their study was performed. our results rather accords qualitatively with the report by rohayem et al. <cit> . they reported tnt activity of nv3dpol added at least four cytidines, but we observed -c, -cc and -ccc addition. we also observed about half of products had no addition of c. the c-stretch  at 3’-terminus in our replicate chain may affect the reduced number of addition. we also observe addition of a and g, which accords with the reports by rohayem et al. <cit>  and fullerton et al.   <cit> .

it was also reported that moloney murine leukemia virus  adds some deoxycytidines at the 3’-terminus of reverse transcribed dna, and switches the template utilizing this overhung dc-stretch  <cit> . if nv3dpol has the same template-switching activity as mmlv, the band corresponding to about  <dig> nts, observed in the replication reaction of temp rna ), might be a denatured form of a tandem dimer dsrna made through this activity rather than a double length dsrna which was the product of replication from a self-priming product. based on the fact that initiation efficiency of primer-independent manner at 3’-terminus ggg is significantly lower than self-priming with a small stem-loop, this explanation for  <dig> nts band is not acceptable.

autocatalytic replication
in the non-self-priming and primer-independent replication shown in figure 3b and figure  <dig>  the initial template ssrna was amplified by 16-fold and 6-fold by 240 min with nv3dpol, respectively. in the former, the shape of amplification curve showed two phases; linear amplification phase up to 90 min and plateau phase near 240 min, because the enzymatic activity of nv3dpol is limited by about 120 min, as indicated in previous reports  <cit> . the autocatalytic replication should be realized in this case, but the exponential growth phase was not observed because the enzyme was not excess over the initial template and the linear phase can be explained by the full turnover of enzyme action. on the other hand, in the case of figure  <dig>  the enzyme was excess over the initial template. and the growth curve of rna shows three phases; the initial nonlinear phase, the apparent linear phase and the plateau phase. the final phase was realized by the same reason as in the case of figure 3b. the apparent linear phase was not originated from the full turnover of enzyme action because the enzyme was vastly excess over the existing rna template. this apparent linear phase may be explained by attenuated exponential growth caused by deactivating replicase. the initial nonlinear phase may be explained two fold; the initial part of the exponential phase or the reaction curve of the two-  step reaction. the isothermal amplification of rna with qβ replicase also showed exponential growth of rna under the similar condition  <cit> .

a possible model of molecular mechanism of the isothermal amplification of rna with nv3dpol
rohayem et al. <cit>  showed a protein-primer model of norovirus genomic rna replication in an infected host cell. uridylated vpg protein binds to poly-tail and begins replication starting from the u. our interest is not the viral infection process, but application to in vitro rna amplification for an in vitro evolution. based on the results of this study together with preceding reports, we propose the following model for the isothermal rna amplification with nv3dpolin vitro  for templates having limited terminal sequences. nv3dpol recognizes 3’-terminus -ccc of the template ssrna and begins the synthesis of the complementary strand . thus, in order to sustainable replication, 5’-terminus of the template must be –ggg. nv3dpol prefers, however, a small stem-loop structure at the 3’-terminus and begins rna synthesis in the self-priming manner. thus, both terminal sequences should not make such a small stem-loop. at the end of template synthesis, nv3dpol sometimes adds several c using its tnt activity. thus, 3’-terminus of the replicated strand ) has a c-stretch just as the template ) or sometimes a slightly longer c-stretch, because nv3dpol recognizes the c-stretch at 3’-terminus of dsrna, often accessible when it is breathing, and begins synthesis of the next generation strand using the chain dissociation replication activity.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, it was confirmed that nv3dpol, prepared with cell-free protein synthesis system, was able to perform the isothermal amplification of rna  in vitro. but the initiation efficiency of replication is dependent on the 3’-terminal sequence. and we have to use the 3’-terminal sequence which does not make a small stem-loop, in order to avoid a parasitic self-priming product. thus, nv3dpol can be used as an rna replicase in in vitro rna evolution with the rna of special terminal sequences. nv3dpol, which is a single chain protein, is a candidate of a model protein in in vitro autonomous protein evolution in the form of an in vitro virus  <cit> .

