BACKGROUND
alternative splicing is an important mechanism of gene regulation in the human genome, occurring in around 40-60% of human genes  <cit> . the 5' and 3' alternative splicing events contribute 25% of all alternative splicing instances and such events often result in frameshift mutations or insertion/deletion of amino acids in the expressed proteins  <cit> . recent studies indicated that certain alternative 5'/3' tandem splice site selections are only a few nucleotides apart, and that such short nucleotide length variations can still lead to subtle changes in protein structure through the modification of coding amino acids  <cit> . interestingly, this phenomenon occurs throughout the genome, which could result in many protein isoforms with one amino acid insertion or deletion  <cit> . splicing at junctions that contain gtngt at the 5' splice site or nagnag at the 3' splice site would generate long transcripts  or short transcripts  during the wobble splicing process  <cit> . although tandem motifs are common in human genes, only a small fraction of them can produce wobble splicing isoforms   <cit> . therefore, a complicated mechanism could exist for regulating tandem splice site choice during the wobble splicing process. previous studies have shown that the high fidelity of splice site recognition involves specific networks of rna-protein, protein-protein and rna-rna interactions  <cit> . the mechanism of acceptor site choice requires more complicated control than for donor sites, because the splicing factors interact flexibly with cis-elements such as branch point sequences , polypyrimidine tracts and the acceptor ag site. in our previous studies, we found that selection of acceptor sites in 3' wobble splicing could be affected by  a tandem splice site  and  component sequences occurring between the bps and the nagnag   <cit> . interestingly, we also found that mutations or single nucleotide polymorphisms  at the bps can disturb 3' wobble splicing selections by creating an aberrant branch point  <cit> . this would affect the bps-to-ag nucleotide distance and hence alter the wobble splicing selection pattern. however, the detailed mechanisms for such wobble splicing choices are currently unclear and remain to be studied. in this study, we utilized a minigene approach to demonstrate that the distance between two tandem splice sites or between bps and ag plays an important role in 3' alternative splicing choice at nearby tandem splice sites, and that this phenomenon is indiscriminate.

RESULTS
occurrence of wobble splicing at tandem splice sites separated by a short distance
gtngt- and nagnag-based wobble splicing events are widespread in the human genome, especially the 3' wobble splicing event that, according to an expressed sequence tag  database survey, occurs in 30% of human genes and is active in at least 5% of genes  <cit> . in order to investigate further the distribution of wobble splicing events within the human genome, we have performed an in-depth computational analysis using a well known database--the alternative splicing database   <cit> . the asd is derived from est entries and reports the use of alternative splicing sites within the human transcriptome. in this study, we extracted  <dig>  and  <dig>  explicit alternative sites in 5' and 3' junctions, respectively, removing all ambiguous and conflicting instances. in the analysis of wobble splicing usage, the splice sites used for generating the highest numbers of transcripts according to the asd dataset were defined as dominant splice sites. additional putative alternate splice sites located around dominant splice sites are defined as proximal sites and distal sites as indicated in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  in each splicing instance, the number of ests occurring in relation to the distance from the dominant splice site was tabulated as shown in figure  <dig> and  <dig>  our data indicated that short-distance wobble splicing events at the 3' tandem nagnag motif occur with a higher frequency than 5' gtngt sites , because the 3' end of an intron has a more intricate set of regulatory elements . interestingly, 3' alternative splicing at a tandem acceptor has a higher frequency if the distance between the two tandem splice sites is less than six nucleotides. the frequency decreases significantly when the distance from the dominant splice site increases . however, alternative acceptor choice occurring within six nucleotides of the dominant splice site is more frequent in the exonic region  than the intronic  region  . this is probably because the ppt preceding ag is a required feature for the splicing process; this therefore reduces the occurrence of 3'-as_proximal site choices. surprisingly, we have observed a higher ratio of minor isoforms in the 3'-as_proximal ag selection dataset than in the 3'-as_distal ag dataset even though the alternative ag is closer to the dominant ag  . although we observed a lower frequency of alternative splicing within the intronic region  than in the exonic region , the alternative ag in the intronic region does possess greater potential as an acceptor site. presumably, the spliceosome complex recognizes the branch point and scans downstream for the first ag by the hypothesized linear scanning mechanism  <cit> . the above results indicated that the process of 3' splice site selection may depend on the distance between the proximal ag and the distal ag , or the bps and tandem splice sites . interestingly, we did not observe this feature involved in 5' short-distance wobble splicing. according to the asd screening data, only one high frequency of 5' alternative splicing occurs at four nucleotides upstream or downstream from the dominant splice site  . previous studies indicated that such bias could result from the strong u <dig> snrnp-binding conserved sequence at 5' splice sites  <cit> . we further analyzed the distribution of 5'-as in utr and cds and found that 5'-gt2gt alternative splicing frequently occurs in utr region  . while wobble splicing occurred in utr region, it would not alter open reading frame and could escape from nmd degradation. therefore, it is a possible explanation for overabundance of the 5'-gt2gt wobble splicing.

slu <dig> did not affect 3' wobble splicing at tandem motif sites
the cis elements and trans-acting factors are involved in precise recognition of the splice sites during the splicing process  <cit> . therefore, we first investigated whether trans-acting splicing factor was involved in 3' wobble splicing. the splicing factor slu <dig> has been shown to affect 3' ag selection during step ii of the splicing process in vitro and has been suggested to affect alternative splicing choice in vivo  <cit> . to determine whether the trans protein factor hslu <dig> is involved in 3' splice site selection in wobble splicing events, we used an rnai approach to knockdown hslu <dig>  hslu <dig> rnai treatment led to a 90% reduction in hslu <dig> protein level and affected the exon inclusion/skipping ratio of a target gene, d-aspartate oxidase , changing it from mostly exon skipping to inclusion. this result indicated that as expected, the rnai-mediated reduction in the nuclear level of hslu <dig> had functional consequences in alternative splice choice . however, the patterns of 3'-nagnag-based wobble splicing were not significantly altered by hslu <dig> knockdown , which suggests that hslu <dig> is dispensable for 3'-nagnag-based alternative splicing in very closely linked tandem motifs . this is observed in endogenous genes as well as in transfected minigene constructs. previous studies showed that aberrant ag site selection could be demonstrated by in vitro splicing assay using Δhslu <dig> extracts, while the duplicated ag is located upstream or downstream of the normal ag   <cit> . to further determine whether the distance between ag-to-ag is a critical factor in slu <dig> deciding 3' splice-site choice and the efficiency of our hslu <dig> rnai treatment, we examined the same ag9cag construct used from previous publication   <cit> . as shown in figure 4d, the use of the distal ag site  was decreased and proximal ag site  was significantly activated by reducing hslu <dig> protein level in si-hslu <dig> transfected cells. this result confirmed that the ag site choice modulation effects of hslu <dig> and appropriated distance between duplicate ags might be needed for 3' splice sites selection by the slu <dig> protein. from our bioinformatic and experimental results, the very short distance  between proximal and distal ag sites might not be modulated by slu <dig> alone.

tandem splice site-based wobble splicing depends on the ag-to-ag and bps-to-ag distance
next, we determined whether the physical ag-to-ag and bps-to-ag distance was involved in splice site selection. we constructed two minigene constructs both containing strong 3' wobble splicing tandem motifs . according to est information, one gene  preferentially uses the proximal ag site  and another gene  preferentially uses the distal ag site . as shown in figure 5a and 3b, we inserted cytosine residues to increase the distance between proximal ag and distal ag. this makes the proximal ag become more competitive than the distal ag sites. gradually increasing the number of cytosine residues to four in two minigenes caused the proximal ag to be used almost exclusively. such results support the previous observation that nucleotide distance between proximal and distal ag affects the wobble splicing choice . a short distance of six nucleotides or less could create competition between distal and proximal ag sites . next, we further examined the ag site choice of the nm_ <dig> minigene by increasing the bps-to-ag distance. these minigene constructs with varied bps-to-ag distances were introduced into hela cells and splicing patterns were analyzed by a capillary electrophoresis approach. as shown in figure 5b, c and 5d, increasing the bps-to-ag nucleotide number could significantly reinforce the selection of the proximal ag splice site. when the distance between tandem ag splice sites is reduced to less than five nucleotides, the proximal ag cannot completely compete with the distal ag because of the increased bps-to-ag distance . this implies that the bps-to-ag distance can also affect splice site selection, but also that it cannot influence the occurrence of wobble splicing at close tandem motifs. in conclusion, the choice of tandem acceptor sites during wobble splicing is under the influence of both ag-to-ag and bps-to-ag distance.

discussion
previous studies have shown that the high fidelity of splice site recognition involves specific networks of rna-protein, protein-protein and rna-rna interactions  <cit> . however, the detailed mechanisms for alternative splicing at tandem motifs are currently unclear. previous studies indicated that such tandem motifs at splicing junctions are common in human genes, but only a small fraction of them can generate wobble in splicing selection  <cit> . our data confirmed that a high frequency of 5' wobble splicing events is located at four nucleotides from the dominant donor site and this is hypothesized to be associated with the binding affinity of u <dig> snrna  <cit> . based on this, 5' wobble splicing could occur when one donor site is effectively competing with the other donor site for u <dig> binding. alternatively, 3' alternative wobble splicing seems to occur more frequently at closely associated tandem acceptor sites . thus, the choice between 3' acceptor sites appears to be more complicated than that of 5' donor sites. it is possible that splicing factors flexibly interact with cis-elements, such as bps, ppts and ag splice sites, during 3' splicing. according to the proposed linear scanning mechanism model  <cit> , the spliceosome recognizes the branch point and scans downstream for the first ag. however, in this study we also observed many instances in which use of the distal ag was preferred, which could not be explained by the scanning model alone.

rna surveillance, also known as nonsense-mediated mrna decay , is an mrna quality-control mechanism that degrades abnormal mrnas such as misspliced mrna transcripts  <cit> . by recognizing mrnas containing a premature termination codon, nmd eliminates the production of the truncated protein encoded by the misspliced transcripts that could function to the detriment of cells  <cit> . putative splicing sites located close to the dominant splice site may cause wobble splicing, resulting in small insertion/deletion changes in transcripts  <cit> . our data also showed that nmd is involved in distribution of short-distance alternative splicing. figure  <dig> and  <dig> show that while most of the wrongly spliced mrna transcripts were degraded by nmd, those wobble spliced at tandem motifs, agnag or gtngt , might have a better chance to escape from the nmd surveillance because of the occurrence of an in-frame insertion/deletion of one or two amino acids in these mrnas without generating a premature stop codon. frame-shifting a tandem splice site  has severe consequences for protein function because of the creation of altered protein residues or loss of mrna transcripts by the wobble splicing process. one high frequency 5' wobble splicing is located four nucleotides from the dominant donor site, and most of the frame-shifting transcripts would be disrupted by nmd. in contrast to 5' alternative splicing, a high frequency of 3' alternative splicing occurs at ± three nucleotides , which can increase protein diversity by altering 1- <dig> amino acids. although this only subtly changes the protein sequence, it might influence protein function, for example in nr3c <dig>  drpla, pax <dig>  pax <dig>  igf1r and ing <dig>  <cit> . previous studies indicated that four wobble-splicing isoforms of ing <dig> differ in several functional aspects including protein localization, protein degradation, protein-protein interactions, transcriptional activity and cell spreading and migration  <cit> . moreover, alternative splicing at a 5' or 3' tandem splice site may play an important role in the progression of disease, because reported cases include human genes wt <dig> and abca <dig>  <cit> .

traditionally, alternative splicing is expressed in a tissue type or developmental stage-dependent manner through regulating certain splicing factors. however, most nagnag- or gtngt-based wobble splicing events did not show differential expression patterns of spliced isoforms in various tissues. only a small fraction of these were reported to be tissue specific in genes including itgam, smarca <dig> and btnl <dig>  <cit> . in this study, hslu <dig> failed to alter short-distance wobble splicing, which may be due to the close distance  between proximal and distal ag sites. therefore, the trans-splicing factor, hslu <dig>  might not be involved in the recognition of proximal and distance splice sites in nagnag-based wobble splicing. according features of the neighboring nucleotides around tandem splice sites and g/c content of ppt, shina et al. successfully developed a method to accurately predict of nagnag-based wobble splicing pattern. in this study, we revealed that distance of ag-to-ag and bps-to-ag both influenced choice of tandem acceptor sites during 3'-short-distance wobble splicing. based on these observations, we believe that most of this wobble splicing is most likely caused by steric hindrance from a factor bound at the surrounding tandem motif sequence. based on this hypothesis, wobble splicing could be predicted according to cis-element sequence features as reported  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, this study supplies further evidence of the involvement of acceptor site selection in wobble splicing at close tandem splice sites. overall, our data reveal that the mechanism of short-distance 3' wobble splicing is stochastic and depends on the bps-to-ag and ag-to-ag distance.

