BACKGROUND
for the past two decades, genome rearrangements have been studied and can be modelled to learn more about the evolution of mitochondrial, chloroplast, viral, bacterial and mammalian genomes  <cit> . to evaluate the evolutionary distance between two related genomes in gene order, various rearrangement events acting on genes within or among chromosomes have been proposed, such as reversals   <cit> , transpositions  <cit> , block-interchanges  <cit> , translocations  <cit> , and fusions and fissions  <cit> . most genome rearrangement studies in computation involve the issue of solving the combinatorial problem to find an optimal series of rearrangements required to transform one genome into another.

recently, the study on the genome rearrangement by block-interchanges has increasingly drawn great attention, since the block-interchange event is a generalization of transposition and, currently, its computational models measuring the genetic distance are more tractable than those modeled by transposition. christie  <cit>  first introduced the concept of block-interchange, affecting a chromosome by swapping two non-intersecting blocks containing any number of consecutive genes. block-interchange can be considered as a generalization of transposition, since any exchanged blocks via transposition must be contiguous in a chromosome, whereas those via block-interchange need not be. as a matter of fact, the occurrence of an exchange of two non-contiguous blocks has been suggested in the previous studies related to the biological processes of bacterial replication . christie also proposed an o
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbamrthrhal1wy0l2yhvtyaehbnfgdovwbhrxajfwnaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabawaaegaeaaakeaaimaacqwfoe=taaa@383d@ time algorithm, where n is the number of genes, to solve the so-called block-interchange distance problem that is to find a minimum series of block-interchanges for transforming one linear chromosome into another. later, we  <cit>  designed a simpler algorithm for solving the block-interchange problem on linear or circular chromosomes with time-complexity of o
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbamrthrhal1wy0l2yhvtyaehbnfgdovwbhrxajfwnaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabawaaegaeaaakeaaimaacqwfoe=taaa@383d@, where δ is the the minimum number of block-interchanges required for the transformation and can be calculated in o
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbamrthrhal1wy0l2yhvtyaehbnfgdovwbhrxajfwnaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabawaaegaeaaakeaaimaacqwfoe=taaa@383d@ time in advance. we also demonstrated that block-interchange events play a significant role in the genetic evolution of bacterial  species. very recently, based on this algorithm, we have further implemented a tool, called robin, for analyzing the rearrangements of gene orders via block-interchanges between two linear/circular chromosomal genomes  <cit> . not only gene-order data but also sequence data are allowed to be input into the robin system. if the input is the sequence data, robin can automatically search for the common homologous/conserved regions shared by all input sequences.

it should be noted that the above block-interchange studies were dedicated to genomes containing only one chromosome  for evaluating their evolutionary relationships. however, for biological species with different numbers of chromosomes, the evolutionary history must also consider events of chromosomal fusions and fissions. a fusion occurs when two chromosomes merge into one and a fission takes place when a chromosome splits into two. the reason is that different chromosomes may as well exchange their genetic material with each other and, moreover, this exchange can only be achieved via inter-chromosomal operations such as fusions and fissions, instead of intra-chromosomal operations like block-interchanges. hence, it is worthwhile to study genome rearrangements considering fusions, fissions and block-interchanges altogether. in this paper, we solve such a genome rearrangement problem by designing an efficient algorithm to compute and obtain a minimum series of all the events involving fusions, fissions and block-interchanges that are required to transform one circular multi-chromosomal genome into another, when both have the same set of genes without repeats. although most eukaryotic genomes are linear, most prokaryotic  genomes are circular and some of them consist of multiple circular chromosomes and large plasmids <dig>  for example, some important bacterial pathogens like brucella, burkholderia, leptospira and vibrio species fall into this category. notably, our approach is based on permutation group in algebra, instead of breakpoint graph, a commonly used approach in the study of genome rearrangement.

recently, yancopoulos et al.  <cit>  used breakpoint graph to design an algorithm to solve a genome rearrangement problem in which the considered reversals, translocations  and block-interchanges were given different weights. unfortunately, their algorithm cannot be applied to solving our problem in which the events we considered are unweighted, because a series of weighted events with minimum weights in total may not be a minimum series of unweighted events, provided the events are given different weights.

RESULTS
based on algorithm sorting-by-ffbi developed in this study, we have implemented a web server, called ffbi  <cit> , in which biologists or scientists in genomics can conduct comprehensive analyses of circular genome rearrangements by fusions, fissions and block-interchanges for their scientific interests and needs. furthermore, we used this web server to conduct the rearrangement analyses on the whole genomes of three pathogenic vibrio species, including v. vulnificus, v. parahaemolyticus and v. cholerae, to infer their evolutionary relationships.

each of these three vibrio pathogens consists of two circular chromosomes, and all their genomic sequences have recently been reported in genbank with protein-coding genes annotated . as annotated in genbank , the genomes of v. vulnificus, v. parahaemolyticus and v. cholerae contain  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively. from these protein-coding genes, we identified a total of  <dig>  orthologous genes that are physically located in different positions on the chromosomes . inevitably, there can be a high possibility that some genes with mis-annotated or uncertain protein functions are included in the genome annotation data. we therefore used only those authentic genes whose protein functions are not annotated as hypothetical or putative proteins, or are conserved and not poorly characterized  in the ncbi cogs  <cit>  database of orthologous genes. as a result, there are  <dig> authentic orthologous genes in total remained for the further study of genome rearrangement. the relative orders of these orthologous genes along chromosomes, as well as the annotated cogs of their coding proteins, are detailed in the web site of our server.

for each pair of these pathogenic vibrio species, the variation in their gene orders has suggested that the genome rearrangement events have occurred and their genomes are closely related in evolution. to evaluate the contribution of fusions, fissions and block-interchanges to these observed rearrangements, we used the server developed in this study to compute the rearrangement distance between the gene orders of any two vibrio genomes. consequently, as shown in table  <dig>  the calculated rearrangement distance between v. vulnificus and v. parahaemolyticus is smaller than that between v. vulnificus and v. cholerae and that between v. parahaemolyticus and v. cholerae, suggesting that v. vulnificus is closer to v. parahaemolyticus than to v. cholerae in evolutionary relationship. intriguingly, this result of genome-wide experiment well coincides with those we obtained in the previous chromosome-wide experiments  <cit> . recall that our previous experiments were conducted in a chromosome-by-chromosome style of computing the block-interchange distance between the landmark orders of any two large/small vibrio chromosomes, where the used landmarks are the maximal unique matches  or the locally collinear blocks  that are commonly shared by three large/small vibrio chromosomes.

in fact, the evolutionary relationships of the three pathogenic vibrio species revealed in our experiment of analyzing their genome rearrangements also confirms that obtained by the biological community on the basis of the traditional comparative analysis of 16s rrna gene sequences  <cit> . for confirmation, we here repeated this comparative analysis as follows. the 16s rrna gene sequences of three vibrios were first aligned using the clustal w program  <cit> , from which the distance matrix  was then estimated by the algorithm of kimura's two-parameter model in phylip package  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we studied the genome rearrangement problem between circular genomes with multiple chromosomes by simultaneously considering fusion, fission and block-interchange events. we have shown in the method section that an optimal series of events required to transform one genome into another can be obtained in a canonical order such that all fusions come before all block-interchanges, which come before all fissions. based on this property as well as the concept of permutation groups in algebra, we have successfully designed an o
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbamrthrhal1wy0l2yhvtyaehbnfgdovwbhrxajfwnaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabawaaegaeaaakeaaimaacqwfoe=taaa@383d@ time algorithm to obtain the minimum number of fusion, fission and block-interchange events for the transformation and also to generate an optimal scenario of the required rearrangement events. in addition, we have practically implemented this algorithm as a web server and applied it to analyzing by gene orders the whole genomes of three human vibrio pathogens to infer their evolutionary relationships. as a consequence, our experimental results well coincide with the previous results obtained using the chromosome-by-chromosome comparisons by landmark orders between any two vibrio chromosomal sequences as well as using the traditional comparative analysis of 16s rrna sequences. the algorithm, however, should not be applied on linear multi-chromosomal genomes, because as mentioned in the method section, it is not always possible to have an optimal scenario in a canonical order for linear genomes. further studies in genome rearrangement can still be pursued to solve the problem for linear multi-chromosomal genomes.

