BACKGROUND
protein structure initiative: biology  determines the structures of proteins on a large scale to reveal their biological functions. scientific partnerships  are formed between scientists in the structural genomics centers and those in biological laboratories of the community. through the work of the partnerships, broad and challenging biological questions are addressed  <cit> . example areas of study include metagenomics and microbiomes, whole genomes of organisms and organelles, and proteins along pathways as described by systems biology approaches. the technologies and expertise available in the structural genomics centers enable protein structures to be determined in high-throughput  <cit> .

systematic approaches are utilized for structure determination through the psi, and the methodological pipeline starts with the selection of protein targets  <cit> . summaries of the target selection processes are described in the structural biology knowledgebase  <cit> . one approach to target selection is to choose representative sequences from protein families. an example application of that approach is to obtain the structures of unique folds. that application has been demonstrated through the attainment of representative structures of proteins with unknown folds, as was done in the first two phases of psi . the project is subsequently continued into the third phase of psi, psi:biology.

the resultant structures of unique protein folds are used directly in further studies or they are leveraged to obtain homology models of proteins which have no known structure. applications that are enabled include computational studies such as the interactions with ligands or drugs  <cit> . computational studies to characterize the proteins are thereby supported by psi. follow-on experimental studies are supported through the provision of the dna clones of the determined structures, as available through the materials repository  <cit> .

there are a proportionate number of follow-on functional characterization studies that are performed by the broader scientific community after determination of protein structures by the psi  <cit> . but there is a latency in these functional characterization studies that reflects the natural pace at which these studies are undertaken and completed. with the entrance of psi:biology, there is now more participation of scientists from the biomedical community studying the functions of the structures. this is done in a coordinated manner and it is subject to the nih peer-review process of partnership formation. the resultant psi:biology partnerships direct structural projects from start to finish with regard to the selection of targets and the concurrent functional characterization studies.

the overall impact of the structural results of psi for the biomedical community at large is monitored and assessed in part by accounting for the total number of structures determined. a corresponding online metrics site lists the resultant numbers of structures  <cit> . for the structures determined through psi:biology, the user can examine the numbers of structures represented for different phyla and organisms, e.g. eukaryotic, prokaryotic, and human proteins. the metrics site also lists the number of psi:biology publications, citations, and total journal impact. these can also be used as measures of the biomedical importance of the research being done in psi:biology. these measures account for some of the information that is generated through the psi. but summaries regarding the specific functions of the determined structures, as assessed by external biomedical resources, are necessary. these external measures provide a further understanding of the focus and depth of the structure to function relationships that have been characterized.

in the current study, we describe the biological relevance of the structures determined through psi:biology to estimate the relative impact that the project has for the elucidation of structure to function relationships. a protein here is viewed as having higher biological relevance if it has been studied to a greater extent by the biomedical community. the annotations used in the study are those that represent biological functions that can be attributed to more than one protein. the relative impact of psi:biology is quantified using the objective measures of the rates of annotation assignments made by biomedical resources that are external to psi.

we utilize protein knowledgebases that comprehensively integrate and describe the broad array of biological functions of proteins. the uniprot knowledgebase is used, which characterizes protein sequences on the scales of all known proteomes  <cit> . also used are the functional annotations obtained through the structural biology knowledgebase  from sources external to psi  <cit> . these annotations and others from open sources described herein provide a perspective regarding the wide range of functions that are attributed to the determined protein structures.

to see the relative impact of psi:biology, we examine the average rates at which annotations are assigned to psi:biology structures relative to other structural projects. one comparison is for psi:biology relative to psi:1& <dig>  a second is for structures determined through the psi:biology partnerships as compared to structures determined by us authors in which they do not participate in such partnerships.

RESULTS
comparison of psi:1& <dig> to psi:biology
for this comparison, we measure the impact of psi:biology relative to psi:1& <dig> to see the differences in the trends of the annotation rates of structures. figure  <dig> compares the potential impact of psi:biology structures with those coming from psi:1& <dig>  specifically, we calculated the ratios of the mean number of assignments per structure for a range of annotations from multiple data sources. psi:biology structures are more highly annotated across most of the resources that describe functional and phenotypic associations. these results are statistically significant as judged by the student’s t-test . for example, psi:biology structures are relatively more highly annotated in the orphanet resource, , a resource that describes associations of proteins with rare disease  <cit> . from the perspective of annotations assigned to particular residues within the structures, we also see that rates of psi:biology are higher than psi:1& <dig>  see figure  <dig>  these results support the assertion that psi:biology has focused on structure determinations of higher biomedical interest than those examined during psi:1& <dig>  see additional file 1: tables s <dig> and s <dig> for the data used in the plots.

as assessed from the perspective of a broad spectrum of biomedical annotations shown, most annotation assignment rates are higher across psi:biology structures relative to psi:1& <dig>  the types of functions well represented in psi:biology tend to be those that are associated with higher order biological processes rather than molecular level functions. for example, we see that gene ontology biological processes and uniprot disease keyword annotations are greater for psi:biology, but the rate of gene ontology molecular functions is lower. we also see a greater percentage of mammalian and human source organism assignments when viewing the organism annotations for psi:biology relative to psi:1& <dig>  we infer that this higher representation of complex biology characterizes psi:biology.

the numbers of structures served as a metric for the first two phases of psi, psi: <dig> and psi: <dig>  it measured the progress toward the goals of these phases which included the development of methods for high-throughput structure determination and the determination protein structures that address different protein sequence families. the metric is applied for psi:biology where structures are determined in high throughput using the methods, coordination, and expertise developed during the first two phases. we see that the psi:biology numbers of structures metric describes the degree to which high throughput is sustained, but it does not address all the progress towards its goals of determining biomedically relevant structure to function connections. the inference is made based on the result that there are a greater number of annotation rates that are higher in psi:biology compared to psi:1& <dig>  to more fully address the progress, we introduce the annotation metric as a way to more fully capture the numbers of structure to function connections addressed in psi:biology. as applied, it is an objective metric since it utilizes annotations of function that are made by biomedical sources that are external to psi.

the annotation metric assesses a broad range of functions and can be viewed as a complement to the established metric of counting the numbers of structures. further, it is complementary to another established metric of the impact of psi that is based on the corresponding publication records of the structures. these are described in the sbkb’s publication portal  <cit> . we see that the annotation metric can be considered in the context of the established metrics. for example, there are proteins that are biologically relevant that have yet to be studied to great extent by the scientific community, such as those developed through protein design  <cit> . these proteins will have a low number of annotations yet they will maintain a relatively high biomedical relevance. a more optimal measure of impact for such structures may be based on their corresponding publication records. also an additional measure of the rate of follow-on studies based on the structure is to be considered. one such measure has been developed to examine psi- <dig> structures  <cit> , and may continue to be applied to psi:biology structures. we see that the publication records, numbers of structures metric, and annotation metric provide complementary perspectives regarding the impact of psi:biology.

comparison of psi:biology partnerships to us non-sg ensemble
we next compare structures determined as a result of the psi:biology partnerships to non-structural genomics structures determined by us authors available from the pdb . there are  <dig> structures identified as resulting from psi:biology partnerships, and  <dig> structures are identified in the us non-sg ensemble. a stated goal in the composition of the psi:biology partnerships is to determine protein structures that address broad, challenging biological questions  <cit> . these projects are subject to the nih peer-review process. the comparison set is the us non-sg ensemble, which represents all structures determined by us authors exclusive of structural genomics.

figure  <dig> shows that the partnership structures tend to have higher annotation rates than structures from the pdb us non-sg ensemble. for the comparison, we see that there is a focus on higher order biological processes and diseases. one illustrative example is a higher focus on signaling pathways related to human cancer, as exhibited in the representation of proteins in the national cancer institute’s pathway interaction database  <cit> . a second illustrative example is a greater focus on coding sequence diversity, which includes complex annotations of splice variants  <cit> . uniprot domains are also higher, which indicates a focus on biologically relevant domains. noteworthy exceptions are enzymes, annotated with ec numbers, and relevant ligands, as suggested by biocyc small molecule entries. we interpret this finding as a result of a selection bias against enzymes within the psi:biology partnerships. see additional file 1: table s <dig> for data used in figure  <dig> 

there is a separate structural genomics initiative that focuses on enzymes  <cit> , which was excluded from the us non-structural genomics pdb ensemble. thus, there appears to be higher emphasis on biological relevance in psi:biology partnership structures versus us, non-structural genomics structures in the pdb. we believe that most of the us, non-structural genomics structures in the pdb represent structures determined under the auspices of individual investigator funding mechanisms .

for the comparison between psi:biology partnerships and the pdb subset, the mean number of annotation assignments for a representative group of annotation types based on the uniprot keyword system is also examined  <cit> . see figure  <dig>  inset. these keywords address different types of functions of proteins and aid in the reduction of redundancy in the data. they also have the quality of being manually reviewed  or assigned by rules   <cit> . the uniprot keyword annotations were normalized according to their relative occurrence, and the average of the normalized annotation rates were used to estimate an overall degree to which a protein structure is annotated. this comparison indicates that there are approximately 30% more annotations per protein on average when comparing psi biology partnership structures to the structures from the pdb us non-sg ensemble. analyses of the average ratios and the normalized ratios indicate that they are statistically different between these groups. see table  <dig> 


p
the mean numbers of annotation assignments for the pdb us non-sg ensemble and the structures determined by psi:biology partnerships are shown in the first two columns respectively. the third column shows the ratios of these means. the average of the eight ratios is calculated for an overall mean ratio. a 1-tailed unpaired t-test is performed to test the null hypothesis that the overall mean ratio is greater than  <dig> . in the fourth and fifth data columns, the normalized means are shown, where the normalization is done by dividing by the rates of annotation assignments by their corresponding means for the entire pdb for structures deposited during the relevant time frame . a 1-tailed unpaired t-test is performed on the data sets to test the null hypothesis that the average of the means for psi:biology partnership structures is greater than that for the pdb us non-sg ensemble .

we also see that the rates of the residue annotation assignments based on the uniprot system further support the finding that there is approximately a  <dig>  times higher assignment rate for psi:biology partnership structures relative to the pdb us non-sg ensemble. the residue assignments are based on uniprot’s system of identifying sequence features. we view these residue level assignments as addressing different functions, and we see that they can be accumulated at the same scale to give an overall assignment rate per residue for each data set. see figure  <dig> with the supplementary data provided in additional file 1: table s <dig>  as a further test, we excluded the annotation types that we regarded as largely computational derived, e.g. compositional bias, transmembrane, coiled coil, domain, repeat, signal, and zinc finger. the results show that annotation rates for the residue level assignments for psi:biology partnerships are higher than for the pdb us non-sg ensemble, p-value =  <dig> ×10- <dig> 

the highest rate difference for the residue level assignments was for transit peptide. that makes sense given that there is a mitochondrial protein partnership that determines structures of associated with mitochondrion  <cit> . also prevalent are proteins that are alternatively spliced. such proteins are seen as a relative focus given their importance in protein disorder  <cit> , which is relevant to psi:biology projects that involve signaling networks  <cit> . we see that further review of relative prevalence of the residue level annotations across the range of highly specific functions further reveals details of the relative focus of the psi:biology partnerships.

CONCLUSIONS
there are two major findings from these analyses. first, psi:biology indeed has a higher focus on proteins documented as being biomedically relevant than psi:1& <dig>  this finding validates the annotation rate metric is a means to measure the impact of psi:biology with regard to the numbers of structure to biological function connections examined. the metric is complementary to established metrics of the numbers of structures and the corresponding publication record of the structures. second, there is clear evidence that psi:biology partnerships have determined structures that are found to have a higher biomedical relevance than that found for us generated, non-structural genomics structures. as more structures are determined through psi:biology partnerships and more data is evaluated, we expect this trend to become more apparent based on the many annotation types analyzed.

an inference of the second finding is that psi:biology partnerships provide an added value towards the goals of psi:biology with regard to the resultant biological relevance of the determined structures. we interpret the result as evidence that psi:biology partnerships are focusing on the determination of protein structures for which there is a higher interest to the biomedical community as judged through the representative annotation types. these representative annotations are based on the uniprot keyword system and based on the system developed by uniprot to identify different residue level assignments of function. through the elucidation of structures, we see the team-based psi:biology partnerships as tying together the varied functional information of proteins that have high biomedical relevance.

we assess that the added value of the psi:biology partnerships is something that has not previously been quantified, and represents some of the progress toward the goals of psi:biology. the nih’s implementation of peer-reviewed structural projects that involve the formation of well established collaborations between structural genomics centers and biomedical scientists in the community are seen as providing a viable means to achieve more valuable structures. we see that the annotation metric can be used to monitor the progress towards the goals of psi:biology. in particular we see the metric as a means to quantify the added value and benefits of the synergies realized through psi:biology partnerships.

to facilitate access to the results of the psi:biology projects based on the annotation rates, a website with interactive charting is available  <cit> . the site describes the datasets used in the study in interactive form, and it provides access to current updates of the annotations across all structures in the pdb. a corresponding weekly updated analysis of the annotation rates of psi:biology structures is available.

