BACKGROUND
infectious diseases cause million of deaths as reported by the world health organization . in this context, emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases - such as flu, aids, tuberculosis, hepatitis - stress the need to accelerate and rationalize the development of better diagnostics, treatments and preventions. it is widely accepted that appearance and severity of infectious diseases depend on the ability of viruses to interfere with host cell functions and defence. indeed, during virus-host co-evolution, hosts have selected an arsenal of complex defence mechanisms to eliminate viruses from the organism. conversely, because of their high replication and propagation rate, viruses have evolved strategies, at least in part driven by molecular interactions, to circumvent host cellular defence and to maintain their control on the cellular machinery. comprehensive understanding of how viruses and their host interact appears as a major milestone in the quest of deciphering viral infection processes and the molecular aetiology of some complex diseases.

owing to new advances in high-throughput profiling of an infection, i.e. infectomics, it is now possible to investigate viral infection at the systems level. the virus-host interactome, i.e. the whole set of protein interactions occurring within virus-infected cells, has been investigated in the last decades by the mean of low scale experiments focusing on single viral proteins. recently, interactomics relying on high-throughput technologies  have boosted virus-host systems biology  <cit> . improved procedures for rna interference allow large-scale functional screening and provide a promising source of information to systematically identify host factors essential for the replication and propagation of viruses  <cit> . these functional genomics studies have underlined the importance of high-quality "-omics" datasets and the development of integrative and standardized system for their comprehensive analysis, such as the virhostnet knowledgebase dedicated to virus-host protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

from the late nineteenth-century, koch's postulates were routinely applied to identify microbial origins of diseases. more recently, molecular postulates were introduced to unravel mechanisms associated to virulence  <cit> . indeed, virus-induced diseases originate from the accumulation and combination of perturbations, some of them being driven by direct interactions between viral and cellular components. therefore, robustness of the virus-infected cell system should correlate to the complex architectural organization and functional regulation of the cellular protein interaction network as well as to the topological nature and intensity of the attack of this network by the virus. we have previously shown that hepatitis c virus  interacts with highly central and bottleneck proteins in the human interactome and built a network model of molecular pathways that are co-deregulated during chronicity  <cit> . we have also recently compared how viruses interfere with the type i interferon response throughout protein-protein interactions  <cit> . however systematic associations between viruses and known diseases remain to be explored. in this context goh et al. explored the diseasome network to investigate the molecular basis of genetic diseases throughout integration of the cellular protein interaction network and the comprehensive dataset of disease-gene associations  <cit> . whether alteration of the host protein network by viruses participate or combine with these genetic predisposition factors to cause complexes diseases is an opened question and has to be investigated at the systems level.

here, we aimed at providing a systems biology rational to koch's postulates by deciphering the molecular basis and the complexity of viruses-induced diseases through the comprehensive analysis of virus-host connections to the human diseasome. a bottom-up approach was used to reconstruct the human infectome network , as a systemic model of virus-infected human cell based on a protein-protein interactions scaffold. the topology of the protein interaction network was first explored and detailed insights on the functional essentiality of host proteins targeted by viruses were given. we next simulated in silico topological perturbations associated to viral infection and profiled new candidate targets that could be suitable for drug design. finally, a prototype of a human infectome diseasome network  based on omim annotations of genes involved in human multi-factorial genetic diseases was designed. this framework was applied to explore in more details molecular basis of the hepatitis c virus-induced diseases and to question the dual role of viruses in the susceptibility to type  <dig> diabetes mellitus .

RESULTS
bottom-up reconstruction of the human infectome network 
in a systems virology perspective, a virus-infected cell was modelled as an integrated system driven by physical interactions between viral and host cellular proteins - the human infectome network . the reconstructed hin is composed of  <dig> viral proteins  that are connected to a reconstructed human interactome  throughout  <dig>  manually curated virus-host protein-protein interactions . although partial, this viral proteome remarkably interacts with a large panel of host cellular proteins - the targeted proteins  - representing roughly 5% of the human proteome . the probability distribution of the viral targeting intensity, kv - i.e. the number of viral proteins interacting with a host protein - showed that 32%  of targeted cellular proteins interact with more than one viral protein. at the taxonomic level, we observed that 28% ,  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  of the targeted cellular proteins interact with more than one virus, family and baltimore's group respectively. these results are highly suggestive of convergent molecular mechanisms based on protein interactions independently selected during the evolution of viruses.

approximately 50% of the human proteins  have been shown to interact with at least one interacting partner. in our study, a total of 92%  of the targeted proteins  are also directly and physically interconnected within the human cellular interactome. these results are in good agreement with previous observation made for the hepatitis c virus  <cit> . this large panel of targeted host proteins  as well as the high connectivity of viral proteins in the cellular network  - as reflected by the distribution of the number of cellular proteins targeted by a viral protein ) - could directly correlate with the functional pleiotropy of viral proteins and with the diversity of molecular strategies they evolved to subvert the host cellular machinery and to evade from the cellular antiviral defence.

viruses target highly connected and central host proteins
to better characterize to what extent viral proteins affect the functioning and the robustness of the cellular network, we next analyzed topological properties of targeted proteins within hin . as described above, the connectivity  of a viral and/or a host protein in the hin network corresponds to the number of direct interacting partners. the number of host partners of a targeted host protein is denoted kh. the centrality  measures the number of shortest paths   that pass through a given protein. the centrality of a protein is used to estimate the theoretical flux of information that is potentially controlled by this protein. we also used the shortest path length observed between human proteins as an unbiased measure of functional relationships as observed within molecular pathways or complexes of proteins.

deconvolution of hpin reveals "hot-spots" modules
the host cellular machinery is controlled by a highly complex, dynamic and regulated modular protein interaction network  <cit> . to understand how the viral proteome interplays with these functional protein modules, we first performed a topological deconvolution of the human protein interaction network into a network of inter-connected modules. the cfinder  <cit>  clustering algorithm was applied to hin and identified a network of  <dig> inter-connected modules comprising  <dig>  distinct cellular proteins . gene ontology functional enrichment analysis showed that most of the characterized topological modules is assigned unambiguously to at least one cellular function , including molecular transport, cytoskeleton, metabolic pathways, apoptosis, cell cycle and cellular differentiation. analysis of this modular framework in the specific context of a viral infection showed that 38% of the modules  are targeted by at least one viral protein, with  <dig> highly targeted host-spot modules , while other modules are poorly targeted  . the overlap of proteins observed between modules was finally used to define modules linkers . interestingly, a statistically significant proportion of these linkers  are targeted by at least one viral protein, suggesting that viruses have a tendency to perturb functional cross-talks between functional modules .

targeting bottleneck proteins, an apparent stealth-attack of viruses
we observe a significant correlation between the level of connectivity of host targeted proteins ) and the intensity of viral targeting ). nevertheless, the strength of this correlation remains week . although we cannot totally rule out that this partially results from virus-host and host-host interactome incompleteness, it is also highly suggestive of viral strategy based on targeting of poorly connected proteins within the human interactome.

indeed, the majority of human proteins are poorly connected with 50% of them interacting with only one cellular protein  even when considering the high-quality hpin. most of these poorly connected human proteins are also characterized by heterogeneous measures of centrality within the human interactome as already reported  <cit> . hence, following previous observations made on the hepatitis c virus protein infection network  <cit> , we next focused on bottleneck properties of targeted proteins defined by their bridging centrality  .

interestingly, when focused on the low-connectivity proteins, the analysis revealed that viral proteins significantly interact with bridging proteins, i.e. proteins characterized by a higher-level of bridging centrality as compared to the human proteome counterpart . because no statistical differences between connectivity of the targeted proteins and the human proteome counterpart is observed at low-connectivity level, we can reasonably conclude that this trend is statistically independent of connectivity properties , emphasizing the role of bridging properties per se. using the high-quality dataset, targeting of bridging bottlenecks remains statistically significant, showing the robustness of the data against false positive detection bias . we hypothesized that this category of proteins, by bridging highly connected parts of the cellular network with a limited number of binding events, could be critical checkpoints for the control and regulation of the cellular information flow. in good agreement with this hypothesis, proteins spanning distinct modules of proteins  exhibit significant higher bridging centrality than non-overlapping proteins . taken together, these results support the notion that viruses have evolved highly tuned mechanisms to control host cell functioning. this control can be achieved not only by directly targeting central modular functions, but also by controlling how these functions are co-regulated by targeting molecular bridges.

to further estimate the functional impact of virus-host protein interactions on host cell functions, we next measured topological robustness of the cellular network in a theoretical and simplified model of preferential attack on highly connected, central or bridging proteins. in silico simulation of molecular perturbations engendered by protein removal showed that the cellular network exhibits stronger robustness against deletion of bridging proteins as compared to hubs and central proteins removal . therefore viral targeting of molecular bridges is likely to have a weak impact on the cellular network architecture, minimizing collateral drawbacks on global cellular functioning. however, whether viral targeting of bridging proteins modulates the dynamic and the regulation of essential cellular functions and participates to complex human diseases onset needs further investigation.

functional essentiality of targeted proteins for the viruses
to address whether targeted proteins are essential host factors for viral infection, six recent functional rna interference genomic screens - designed to identify host factors controlling retroviruses and single stranded rna viral infectivity and replication - were gathered and mapped onto the human infectome network  <cit> . a total of  <dig>  essential host factors  are listed in additional file  <dig>  the rational of this integrative approach relies on the potential existence of pan-viral host co-factors  <cit> , as a result of shared viral lifecycle steps - including virus integration, replication and egress from the cell - and similar cellular defence mechanisms subverted by viruses. we observe that 10%  of the ehfs are directly targeted by viral proteins as compared to the reference human proteome . based on the "guilty by association concept"  <cit> , direct neighbourhood of targeted proteins  was also investigated to identify indirect interference of viruses with essential host factors. strikingly,  <dig> % of ehfs  were found significantly over-represented within tp-n as compared to the reference human proteome . topological analysis also revealed that these essential host factors targeted either directly or indirectly by viruses exhibit a significant higher level of connectivity  and centrality  but similar values of bridging properties, as compared to not-essential host factors , i.e. proteins that interact with at least one viral protein, but that was not identified as an ehfs by rna genomic screens . taken together, these results suggest that preferential targeting of highly connected and central proteins either directly or indirectly correlate, at least in part, with their essentiality for the viral lifecycle.

virus targeted proteins and diseasome
to decipher the molecular basis of viral infection pathophysiology, the omim annotations  <cit>  of  <dig>  human genetic diseases related proteins  were downloaded  and layered onto hin . this integration process showed that 13%  of targeted proteins are significantly directly associated to a least one disease . this means that a human protein that directly interacts with a viral protein has roughly  <dig> times more chance to be involved in a human disease than human proteins not targeted by a virus . this proportion increased to  <dig> %   when neighbourhood targeting was integrated in the analysis. this strongly suggests that targeted proteins and diseases are tightly connected at the molecular level either directly and/or indirectly. conversely, 50%  of the diseases reported in omim were also found connected either directly or indirectly to at least one virus. statistical enrichment analysis using omim ontology identified  <dig> diseases significantly linked to viruses, the majority of them being related to cancers  and neurodegenerative diseases . interestingly, we also showed that the number of diseases associated to tp-ns is partially correlated to the targeting intensity of these proteins by viral families .

network properties of proteins targeted directly or through their neighbourhood were also assessed in the context of the human diseasome. surprisingly, drps directly and indirectly targeted exhibit significant higher bridging values than proteins not connected to any diseases . interestingly, we have also shown that targeted drps exhibit significant higher bridging centrality as compared to not-targeted drps . this indicates that the viral attack on molecular bridges might participate at least in part to the molecular onset of human diseases.

networking the human infectome and diseasome
according to the apparent tight linkage between viruses and diseases, a prototype of a human infectome-diseasome network  was designed . in good agreement with omim enrichment analysis, cancers are central to this network and appear mainly connected with dna viruses  with the noticeable exception of the hepatitis c virus, which is associated with chronic infection and chronic diseases. the hidn model was next applied to explore, without a priori, the molecular basis of diseases associated to hcv infection. to take into account potential indirect associations between hcv proteome and drps, proteins targeted through their neighbourhood were also included in the analysis . in a model of molecular perturbations triggered by virus-host protein interactions, we hypothesized that this neighbourhood could to some extent participate to virus-induced diseases. unsupervised hierarchical clustering of this hcv extended hidn helped us to profile aetiological relationships between hcv proteins and some well-described hcv-related clinical syndromes , such as hepatocellular carcinoma  , cirrhosis   and to automatically classify and highlight molecular determinants of the diseases. in good agreement with the clustering of core and hepatocellular carcinoma, the role of hcv core in this disease was previously reported in transgenic mice  <cit> .

the extended hidn was next applied to decipher the molecular aetiology of autoimmune diseases for which viral infection is suspected to play an important role in interaction with genetic factors  <cit>  . a large number of autoimmune diseases catalogued from omim also appeared connected to viruses within hidn . among them is the type  <dig> diabetes mellitus  that exhibits a central position. whether t1d - an autoimmune disease affecting islet beta cells of the pancreas producing insulin - has a viral origin is still a debate  <cit> . based on the extended hidn, we first highlighted a direct connection between different members of the paramyxoviruses family and t1d. this connection is mediated by an interaction between the viral v protein and the host interferon-induced helicase . based on the extended hidn, we also extracted  <dig> proteins that are targeted by viruses and directly connected to t1d. these proteins could be yet undiscovered predisposition factors that might contribute to the multi-factorial aetiology of t1d. in good agreement with this hypothesis, this set of  <dig> targeted candidates appeared significantly enriched in functions associated to immunity that could be perturbed during an autoimmune event   <cit> . moreover, the mapping of t1dbase expression dataset and qtl information onto t1d hidn confirmed respectively that 100% of the highlighted candidates are expressed in beta cells and that 50%  of them are localized within genetically identified t1d susceptibility regions either in human, rat and mouse  <cit>  . among, these putative genetic factors is the intermediary protein visa, which is localized in both mouse and rat susceptibility regions.

discussion
the human infectome diseasome network provides a state-of-the-art gateway model towards systems virology. although the virus-host interactome and the diseasome search space is clearly far from being totally explored, the systems-level analysis proposed here covers more than hundred viruses and thousand of human diseases. the compilation of data summarized  <dig> years of intensive research on virus-human protein-protein interactions and gene-disease associations. all virus-host protein-protein interactions were manually inspected, guarantying that this resource is not prone to errors of annotation and is strictly composed of physical protein-protein interactions. careful annotation of the interactions according to psi-mi standards helped us to address the overall quality of our resource with more than 30% of the interactions  supported by at least two-independent experimental procedures. for the remaining 70% interactions, most of them come from large y2h screens for which validation rates are closed to 80%, indicating the overall high-quality of our dataset and its robustness for meta-analysis study. this open resource can thus be used as a gold standard for the analysis of pathogen-host interactome but also for the investigation of viral aetiology of human diseases. this resource is available both throughout the virhostnet website  and as a supplemental table .

in depth analysis of well annotated cellular pathways and functions associated to targeted host proteins has previously shown a clear enrichment of cellular functions triggered by the cell in response to pathogens such as innate and adaptive immune response and apoptosis, but also shed light on cellular functions not thought to be associated with viral infection or virus-induced disease  <cit> . here, the network topology of hin was intensively studied without any other prior knowledge than protein-protein interaction and then was confronted to independent functional genomics and genetics data.

first of all, by projecting rna interference functional genomics data onto hin, we observed that viruses have a strong tendency to directly and indirectly target proteins that are essential for viral infectivity and replication and that these proteins are characterized by high values of connectivity and centrality in the cellular network. these cellular "hubs" may appear as potential drug targets in the pharmaceutical quest of viral replication inhibitors. however, because of the functional centrality of these targets and their large impact on protein network architecture and robustness we can anticipate that drug designed on this rational could generate molecules with high toxicity. as an emergent topological property of hin, we also highlighted a massive attack of viruses on bridging proteins. as suggested by the analysis of modules extracted with the cfinder algorithm, these bridging proteins may participate to cross-talks between defined functions and contribute to the plasticity of the whole cellular system  <cit> . because of the difficulties of partitioning highly connected networks, the improvement of clustering algorithms and/or network pre-treatments procedures should be considered in further studies to accurately delineate those functional modules and bridging proteins connecting them in a more specific context, for instance by integrating transcriptomic and/or proteomic changes induced by viral infection. as suggested by recent reports and our data, these bridging proteins could be key targets for drug development  <cit> . indeed, we showed that perturbations associated to molecular bridges disruption have a lower impact on network topology than highly connected and central proteins. it should be noted however that integrative analysis of rnai data did not revealed specific bridging properties for ehf. any conclusion drawn from available rnai experiments and virus-host interactome must be taken cautiously regarding the relative small number of viruses for which functional and physical mapping were performed. however, because the cellular network is robust to the targeting of bridging proteins it can reasonably be assumed that these proteins express their essentiality in a combinatory way rather than in isolation. interestingly our analysis of directly or indirectly targeted bridges revealed that these proteins could play a role in predisposition to some diseases. such significant proportion of essential host factors indirectly targeted by viruses is really promising in the specific context of antiviral drug discovery focusing on host proteins, as viral adaptation against these "stealth targets" is unlikely and will not favour appearance of drug resistance. altogether, our results suggest that multiple targeting of bridges could be an innovative network-based drug-discovery strategy to increase the anti-viral arsenal with low toxicity molecules.

comprehensive combination of virus-host interactome with other "-omics" data  and genome-wide association studies will allow deciphering of virus-host complex relationship as well as a better understanding of the role of viruses in the aetiology of some complex multi-factorial human diseases. the simplified model that is proposed here will have to be improved for instance by measuring how interactions between viral and host proteins are essentials for the virus or yet dispensable for the life of the host. it will be also of great interest to better formalise and quantify how do the viral proteins interact with the cellular proteins to completely abrogate the function of the host proteins and how often do they modulate their functions by hijacking the cellular proteins for their own needs.

the human infectome and diseasome network framework also helped us to revisit and complete koch's postulates, initially developed to characterize microbial causation of infectious diseases, with the fresh eye of molecular systems virology  <cit> . indeed, by taking into account molecular connectivity between viruses and diseases, the human infectome-diseasome network generates new mechanistic hypothesis concerning their molecular relationships. even if partially biased towards best-studied viruses or proteins, a comprehensive analysis of hidn shows that these infectious agents, such as hcv, are central to a wide range of pathologies, most of them being related to cancers. this observed association between viruses and cancers, although statistically highly significant, remains low most likely because the omim database annotates almost exclusively inherited diseases linked to germinal mutations. association would likely be much stronger if diseases linked to somatic mutations were included in the study. it is also important to note that the actual data cannot accurately distinguish between the causative and preventive role of virus-host protein-protein interactions in the onset of human diseases, which would require additional in vitro and in vivo validation analysis. however, our results suggest that accumulation of molecular perturbations triggered throughout virus-host protein-protein interactions could participate to the aetiology of diseases along with genetic or environmental predisposition. this may be the case for the ifih <dig> protein targeted by paramyxoviruses. interestingly, ifih <dig> gene has recently been identified by two independent genome-wide association studies as a susceptibility locus for t1d  <cit> . ifih <dig> is a cytoplasmic helicase triggering interferon antiviral signal in response to viral rna exposure. nejentsev et al. hypothesized that frequent variants of ifih <dig> are selected to efficiently fight viral infection whereas rare variants disrupting the native ifih <dig> function may protect from t1d risk. it is noteworthy that v-ifih <dig> protein-protein interaction inhibits production of interferon-β, a cytokine directly involved in the pathogenesis of t1d  <cit> . interestingly, it has been suggested that a viral infection could abrogate an ongoing autoimmune destruction of pancreatic cells, mainly through immuno-modulatory mechanisms  <cit> . one non-restrictive scenario would be that modulation of ifih <dig> by paramyxoviruses participates to this event. another major protein of innate immunity is directly targeted by hcv and connected to t1d via ns5a-oas <dig> protein-protein interaction  <cit> . based on the extended hidn framework, we also explored the direct protein partners of known t1d-related proteins that are directly targeted by viruses. in this context we introduce the "pris la main dans le sac"  concept, a new concept to pinpoint the functional importance of those proteins targeted by pathogens that will undoubtedly provide a rational for prioritizing new molecular susceptibility factors. among the  <dig> "pris la main dans le sac" candidates indirectly interacting with disease related proteins, visa is known to be involved in the production of ifn-β in an ifih1-dependent pathway and could be crucial role in t1d susceptibility. although too preliminary to draw general conclusions on the viral aetiology of autoimmunity, these observations nevertheless support the idea that a comprehensive analysis of virus-host protein-protein interactions and their immuno-modulatory consequences at the systems level is a powerful approach for the identification of susceptibility factors and new therapeutic strategies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
by merging the human infectome and diseasome networks, we provided the first bottom-up systems-level mapping of molecular associations between viral infection and human diseases based on virus-host physical protein-protein interactions. this association is consistent with the hypothesis that the onset and the pathogenesis of some chronic diseases, even mainly attributed to genetics, lifestyle and environment factors may also be modulated by infectious agents. the human infectome diseasome networks also provide an original platform and resource to rationally identify therapeutic targets.

