BACKGROUND
amino acid similarity matrices define a quantitative measure of likeness between each of the  <dig> canonical amino acids. they are utilized throughout computational biology in areas such as phylogenetics, protein structure modeling, and prediction of protein ligand interactions. depending on the application, different measures of similarity are appropriate. for example, the commonly used pam and blosum matrices  <cit>  have been built based on the frequencies of amino acid substitutions observed in aligned protein sequences. this measure, routinely used in programs such as blast  <cit> , represents both evolutionary and functional similarity between amino acids.

our group has been interested in amino acid similarity in the context of peptides binding to proteins. given binding data for several peptide ligands, the challenge is to predict the affinity of any peptide of arbitrary sequence. our specific interest is in peptide binding to proteins involved in antigen processing and presentation, such as the tap transporter  <cit>  and mhc molecules. in recent large-scale benchmark studies, the best performing prediction method for peptide:mhc class i binding is the netmhc artificial neural network, outperforming linear methods such as smm  <cit> . netmhc is trained using a blosum matrix based encoding of peptide sequences  <cit> . this provides the neural network with information on amino acid similarity, and allows it to predict the impact of residues on binding that are not represented in the training set.

in this study, we tested the hypothesis that amino acid similarity in the context of peptide binding to mhc molecules is distinct from previously defined metrics. we further examined if this similarity measure can be used to improve peptide:mhc binding predictions, and if incorporating it into the smm approach can close the gap in prediction quality to netmhc.

RESULTS
combinatorial peptide library binding affinity data
a library of combinatorial peptide mixtures was used to measure the binding affinity contribution of each residue in a 9-mer peptide to an mhc molecule. the library contains mixtures of 9-mer peptides all sharing the same residue type at one position, while the remaining positions are allowed to sample all residue types. for instance, 'xaxxxxxxx' represents a mixture of peptides with an alanine at position p <dig>  and any one of the possible residues at the remaining positions. a total of  <dig> mixtures covering  <dig> residue types in all positions of a 9-mer peptide were synthesized, and tested for binding to  <dig> mhc class i molecules listed in the methods section. thus, a total of  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig> binding affinities in terms of ic <dig> values were measured . we then transformed these values to approximate a relative binding energy contribution of an amino acid aa at peptide position pos for a given mhc molecule:  

building the peptide:mhc binding energy covariance  matrix
to quantify how similar two amino acids aa and aa' are in the context of peptide:mhc binding, covariance of their relative binding energy contributions, Δeaa, pos, mhc and Δeaa', pos, mhc, was calculated as follows:  

variables Δeaa and Δeaa' are averages over all positions and mhc molecules for amino acids aa and aa', respectively. these covariance values define the peptide:mhc binding energy covariance  matrix. a positive covariance between two residues indicates that, on average, they contribute similarly to binding free energy in different environments. conversely, a negative covariance indicates that when one residue contributes favorably to binding, the other contributes unfavorably. figure  <dig> shows the pmbec matrix, which is symmetric and has dimensions of  <dig> ×  <dig>  the matrix is also provided as a text file . clustering amino acids based on their covariances resulted in amino acid groupings similar to their classically known physicochemical properties: aromatic ; hydrophobic ; acidic ; basic ; small ; small and polar ; and polar . this indicated that the pmbec matrix was in agreement with existing heuristic groupings of amino acids.

comparing the pmbec matrix to previously established measures of amino acid similarity
numerous amino acid similarity matrices have been published to date. some of more prominent matrices such as blosum series have been, in fact, used in peptide:mhc binding predictions to represent peptide sequences, despite fundamental differences in context of their use  <cit> . apparent success of their use indicates that it is worthwhile to investigate how similar the pmbec matrix is to these matrices.

toward this end, we retrieved all  <dig> matrices out of  <dig> without missing entries from the aa index database  <cit> , centered these matrices, and calculated their pearson's correlation coefficients with respect to the pmbec matrix . table  <dig> lists the  <dig> matrices from the aa index database that are most similar to the pmbec matrix. in the table, blosum <dig> has the highest correlation coefficient of  <dig> , followed by optima, johnson & overington, blosum <dig>  and blosum <dig>  among others. optima was derived by optimizing a matrix to distinguish between remote homologues and non-homologues. the johnson & overington matrix was derived from a tabulation of amino acid substitutions observed in sequences that were aligned using three-dimensional protein structures. furthermore, blosum-x matrices with increasing x  decrease in similarity to pmbec. taken together, these observations indicate that the pmbec matrix most strongly resembles amino acid similarity matrices that were assembled based on alignment of evolutionarily distant protein sequences.

from the aa index database  <cit> , all complete  <dig> amino acid similarity matrices out of  <dig> were downloaded and compared to pmbec based on their pearson's correlation coefficients in the second column. see methods for details. also shown are correlation coefficients with respect to blosum <dig> in the third column.

another observation one can make about the matrices in the table is that the pmbec matrix falls outside the cluster of matrices that most resembles it. specifically, in contrast to a correlation coefficient of  <dig>  between pmbec and blosum <dig>  seven out of ten matrices in the table have more than  <dig>  with respect to blosum <dig>  this further adds to evidence that the pmbec matrix is novel.

to further characterize the pmbec matrix, we carried out additional comparisons with blosum <dig>  figure  <dig> plots correlation of matrix elements between blosum <dig> and pmbec with a correlation of  <dig> . blosum <dig> was chosen because it is representative of the matrices in table 1; it has high correlations  with most of the matrices in the table including blosum <dig>  also, it is widely used in programs such as blast.

accordingly, figure  <dig> depicts detailed comparisons between the matrices for three residues: serine, glutamic acid, and histidine. while serine-specific amino acid similarity profiles of blosum <dig> and pmbec share a high correlation of  <dig> , those of glutamic acid share a relatively low correlation of  <dig> . a closer look at the substitution profiles indicates that pmbec highly disfavors substitution of oppositely charged residues, glutamic acid  with arginine , while blosum <dig> is neutral. similarly, pmbec disfavors substitution of glutamic acid  with lysine , while blosum <dig> favors this slightly. for histidine specific profiles, we see that substitution of similarly charged residues, histidine  and lysine /arginine , are favored by pmbec while blosum considers them essentially neutral. furthermore, five amino acids with the lowest correlation coefficients include glutamic acid , cysteine , asparagine , lysine , and aspartic acid  . taken together, these observations indicate that differences between blosum <dig> and pmbec are most pronounced where charged residues are involved.

in the following sections, a novel peptide:mhc binding prediction method smmpmbec is introduced, and its benefits are illustrated. smmpmbec improves upon the original smm approach  <cit>  by using pmbec as a bayesian prior. the details of how a bayesian prior used in the smm approach is described in the methods section.

smmpmbec can compensate for the absence of important subset of binding data
peptide binding affinity measurements available for mhc class i molecules can vary from less than a hundred to thousands for each allele. furthermore, peptide sequence space coverage in the binding data can be limited even for alleles with large data sets, due to biases when selecting peptides for binding measurements. here, we examined how well smmpmbec addresses the problem of missing data. we then compared its performance to that of smmblosum, which uses blosum <dig> as a prior.

to establish a reference point, smm was trained on the  <dig> peptide binding affinity measurements available for hla a* <dig>  <cit> , resulting in a  <dig> ×  <dig> scoring matrix. because smm has been shown to train an accurate model for this allele and because of the large amount of data available, we assumed that the scoring matrix closely approximated the 'true' binding specificity. the smm matrix entries for peptide position p <dig> for  <dig> residues are shown as black bars in figure  <dig>  according to this scoring matrix, lysine, arginine, methionine, and histidine  contribute the most favorable binding energies ; while aspartic acid, glutamic acid, proline, and asparagine  contribute the least favorable binding energies .

we then derived a subset from the original binding data for hla a* <dig> such that all peptides with an alanine at p <dig> were excluded. when smm was trained on this subset, its scoring matrix gave a value of zero at p <dig> for residue alanine since smm had no information on it available from the training data. when training smmpmbec on this subset, its scoring matrix entry for alanine at p <dig> gave a non-zero value. this step was repeated for the remaining  <dig> residues, and their corresponding scoring matrix entry values are shown as gray bars in figure  <dig>  in the figure, three out of four residues with the most favorable binding energy contribution - arginine, lysine, histidine  - are shared between smm and smmpmbec. similarly, three out of four residues with the least favorable binding energy contribution - glutamic acid, aspartic acid, and proline  - are shared between the two methods. the binding energy profiles of smm and smmpmbec had a pearson's correlation value of  <dig> . thus, these observations indicate that smmpmbec can infer binding energies of missing residues from those present in the binding data.

when we repeated this exercise for smmblosum, resulting in a binding energy profile shown in blue in figure  <dig>  we saw that smmblosum can also infer binding energies of missing residues . however, approximated binding energies for lysine  and histidine  are sharply different between smmpmbec and smmblosum. the obvious benefit of using smmpmbec for hla a* <dig> binding data set is by no means true for all other data sets. however, this example highlights what can be achieved with a properly tuned amino acid similarity matrix.

smmpmbec consistently outperforms smm over a wide range of training data set sizes
to further compare smmpmbec and smm, we tested whether smmpmbec can outperform smm over a wide range of training data sizes. figure  <dig> shows averaged prediction performances of smmpmbec and smm trained on randomly sampled data sets for each size, all sampled from the binding data of hla a* <dig>  the allele hla a* <dig> was chosen mainly because of its relatively large data size, thereby allowing data sampling with a wide range of data sizes. five-fold cross validation was used for each data set sampled . the figure shows that for small training data sets where a lack of sequence coverage is more likely, smmpmbec has statistically significant performance improvements over that of smm. for example, for the data set size of  <dig> measurements, averaged prediction performances for smmpmbec and smm are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively .

application of smmpmbec in peptide:mhc-i binding predictions
motivated by the promising performance of smmpmbec, we carried out a large-scale performance evaluations as described in  <cit> , where neural network based netmhc  <cit>  was shown to be the best performing method, followed by smm, which uses scoring matrices  <cit> . prediction performances of smm, smmpmbec, and netmhc are shown in table  <dig> for  <dig> alleles.

for each mhc-specific binding data set, 5-fold cross validation was carried out using one of the four methods listed. area-under-curve  from the 5-fold cross validations are presented here. also shown are p-values of average auc values calculated using student's t-test  with respect to the smm and netmhc prediction methods.

when looking at these measured prediction performances in table  <dig>  some precautions are in order. it has been observed earlier that accuracy of a predictor tends to increase with more training data  <cit> . likewise, reliability of a predictor's accuracy also increases with more training data, because larger peptide sequence space is sampled. thus, apparently high prediction accuracy of a predictor for patr b* <dig>  for instance, should not be taken at its face value, because the predictor was trained on relatively small training data .

with these precautions in mind, as shown in table  <dig>  smmpmbec outperformed smm in  <dig> out of  <dig> cases, and the average performance of smmpmbec was higher than smm . the small but consistent improvements are statistically significant with p-value of  <dig>  using student's t-test . the same comparison for smmpmbec and netmhc indicated that their difference of average performances was not statistically significant . thus, the use of pmbec as a bayesian prior improves performance for smmpmbec, yielding a performance that is overall comparable to that of netmhc. given that netmhc uses neural networks to represent a model of peptide:mhc binding specificity, it is noteworthy that the use of a simple scoring matrix coupled with a bayesian prior can match its prediction performance.

a closer look at table  <dig> reveals that the most significant performance improvements of smmpmbec over smm tend to come from alleles with smaller data sets . this is in agreement with what has been observed earlier that at smaller data size, the benefits of pmbec as a bayesian prior compensating for missing binding data are more apparent.

we have also carried out performance evaluations for smmblosum . the difference between averaged prediction performances of smmblosum and smmpmbec was  <dig> , which is not statistically significant . we attribute their similar performances mainly to a feature of smm approach where prior is relied on less as more binding data become available for training. in fact, when prediction performance differences of smmpmbec and smmblosum are plotted against training data set sizes, a clear pattern emerges where larger training data sizes correlate with smaller performance differences . about 80% of data sets are contained within ±  <dig>  auc of zero performance difference.

of the remaining 20% of the data sets, we see that three mhcs with the highest performance differences favoring pmbec have binding motifs with strong preference for glutamic acid at the anchor residue position.  this latter observation supports one of the main arguments made in the present work that amino acid similarities involving glutamic acid are the most prominent difference between pmbec and blosum. this in turn suggests that those mhc's with glutamic acid as anchor residues is where smmpmbec's prediction performances will be superior to those of smmblosum.

discussion
we have derived a novel amino acid similarity matrix  for peptide:mhc class i binding. rather than relying on sequence alignments, the matrix was derived from experimentally measured binding affinities of combinatorial peptide mixtures. the use of combinatorial peptide mixtures afforded us an unbiased sampling of peptide sequence space. in total, a panel of  <dig> mhc class i molecules was probed, corresponding to  <dig> binding affinity measurements of individual residues in diverse contexts of both peptide ligand and receptor molecule. this approach can, therefore, directly evaluate amino acid similarities in the context of peptide:protein binding.

once the pmbec matrix was derived, its comparisons with all complete  <dig> amino acid similarity matrices taken from the aa index database have shown that the matrix is different from previously established amino acid similarity matrices. to determine where pmbec most differs, detailed comparisons with blosum <dig>  have revealed that pmbec considers pairs of amino acids with opposite charges to be very dissimilar, while blosum <dig> considers them a neutral exchange. these differences are most likely due to different molecular consequences of substituting an amino acid in a protein, and in a peptide bound to mhc. specifically, in protein sequences, most charged residues are on the surface, and a reversal of charge can often be tolerated well, as it preserves hydrophilicity. for peptide ligands, on the other hand, a reversal of charge is likely going to adversely affect their binding affinities.

because of these peptide:protein specific features, we expect the pmbec matrix will be useful in modelling peptide similarities in the context of immune recognition. in addition, we also expect that the matrix will be of use to those studying other types of peptide:protein interactions . in hindsight, we are surprised that a novel amino acid similarity matrix such as pmbec can still be discovered. our work further underscores the importance of application-specific amino acid similarity matrices in computational biology, since molecular context determines which matrices are more meaningful.

in the context of predicting mhc class i binding peptides, we have shown that smmpmbec - which uses pmbec as a bayesian prior - has a significantly better prediction performance than smm. for those alleles with small data sets, performance improvements were more apparent, indicating that the use of pmbec as a bayesian prior is likely compensating for inadequate peptide sequence coverage. we have also shown that smmpmbec's ability to infer 'true' binding energy contributions of intentionally excluded residues from others present in the binding data is limited. this is probably due to subtle differences of mhc molecule binding specificities that have so far not been appreciated. for comparison, a bayesian prior based on blosum <dig> also displays this property.

we have also shown that the average performance difference of smmpmbec and netmhc  is not statistically significant. our results indicate that, at least for peptide:mhc class i binding predictions, scoring matrices can provide competitive prediction performances. this close prediction performances between a non-linear model and a linear one suggests that the limit of a linear model has been reached. from a practical standpoint, the key advantages of using a scoring matrix are that the model is easy to understand, interpret, and communicate.

lastly, although the use of pmbec improves prediction performance, the simplicity of the approach comes with a number of inherent limitations. one notable limitation is that the same set of amino acid similarity rules encoded in pmbec is used for all peptide positions. since there are position dependent influences observed for peptide:mhc binding motifs, such information may be used in the near future with more experimental data.

CONCLUSIONS
pmbec is a novel amino acid similarity matrix derived for peptide:mhc class i binding. one prominent feature of the matrix is that it disfavors substitutions of amino acids with opposite charges. this is likely a general feature of peptide:protein interactions. we have also demonstrated the usefulness of pmbec in the context of peptide:mhc class i binding predictions, by using it as a bayesian prior in a new prediction method smmpmbec. results from a large-scale benchmark indicate that its prediction performance rivals that of one of the best performing methods in the field.

