BACKGROUND
although gene microarrays enable us to measure the abundance of gene transcripts, they fail to capture any changes in transcription factor activity  after transcription, for example, during the translation process or by the interaction of the transcription factor with other proteins or cofactors. the discrepancy between the activity of a transcription factor  and its expression profile may be substantial.

consequently, tfas might need to be modelled as hidden variables as has been suggested in several publications  <cit> .

reconstruction of hidden transcription factor activity
liao et al.   <cit>  propose network component analysis  which estimates hidden tfas based on known connections between tfs and their target genes. sabatti and james   <cit>  present a bayesian latent component algorithm for transcription regulatory networks based on work by west   <cit> . in this bayesian framework, priors incorporate biological knowledge of interactions between tfs and target genes. an advantage of a bayesian approach is also the ability to identify unknown network connections using priors that encourage sparsity of the connections. pournara and wernisch   <cit>  provide an overview and comparison of these and similar approaches based on factor analysis. such approaches make no use of the order in time and the dynamics of the data. a state space model with linear dynamics is suggested in sanguinetti et al.   <cit> . pournara and wernisch   <cit>  extend the bayesian factor analysis approach for reconstructing tfas and connections by integrating correlation between time points. once a tfa is reconstructed it can be further exploited to predict unknown target genes. for example, barenco et al.   <cit>  present a differential equation based model to estimate the hidden tfa of p <dig> and then predict the target genes of p <dig> using the hidden tfa derived from the model. this method assumes a log-linear relationship between a tf and its target genes.

in general we expect a target gene to respond to its regulator in a nonlinear fashion due to saturation and threshold effects   <cit> ). so it is more realistic to assume both linear and nonlinear interactions between a tf and its target genes. furthermore, despite using time course gene expression data, the above methods either fail to account for time continuity of a tfa or assume linear dynamics on the tfas.

state space model with gaussian processes
in this study, we propose a novel strategy to estimate the hidden tfa of a regulator and to predict its target genes. this approach makes use of gaussian processes  to account for possibly nonlinear dynamics of the hidden tfa, and to model nonlinear target gene responses of regulated genes.

to reconstruct hidden tfas from the microarray data, we applied and extended the gaussian process dynamic model , which was previously used for tracking human motions  <cit> . in the gpdm, nonlinear state maps are used to model the dynamics of hidden tfas and output maps reflect nonlinear regulation of the target genes. both the state and output maps are defined by gaussian processes. we use a modified implementation of the gplvm matlab code provided by lawrence   <cit> . the details of the model implementation and extensions are described in the methods section.

intuitively, given a training set of f-dimensional input data points with known output values, a gaussian process fits a smooth nonlinear interpolation surface representing this output relation as a function . in this work, motivated by our interest the dosr regulator, we only use one input dimension, f =  <dig>  but the approach can be easily generalised to more than one regulator and higher f. the smoothness of the interpolation, which is estimated in a training phase, is mostly guided by the "roughness" of the input data and the choice of smoothness priors.

each of the d input dimensions is linked to a relevance parameter. if this parameter is small, the interpolated function is flat in this dimension and this particular dimension cannot exert much influence on the output. thus relevance parameters provide a principled way to decide which genes might be under the influence of a regulator: if the relevance parameter is small the gene response is unlikely to depend on the tfa of this regulator.

we use two types of gps in our approach: one for the dynamics and another for the output. the dynamics is modelled by a gp mapping the value of the regulator at a time point to its value at the next time point. the output gps  map the regulator value at a time point to the value of the gene at the same time point. if the relevance parameter of one of these output gps is low it means that the gene is unlikely to be regulated by the regulator.

in the training phase, both the smoothness  parameters as well as the hidden values of the regulator need to be estimated. we achieve this by simple maximum a posteriori  estimation. for longer time series or larger number of regulators, map estimation of the hidden values might not work so well any more and alternative methods, such as markov chain monte carlo methods, need to be considered to sample from the hidden values   <cit> ). for comparison we also derive the hidden regulator profile using the nca algorithm .

the binding motif of dosr is known. the presence of this motif in the upstream region of a gene is an additional indication that the gene might be regulated by dosr. consequently, we combine the relevance parameters of a gene with a score for the presence of the dosr binding motif in a logistic regression to improve on the prediction whether a gene is regulated by dosr or not. the results of applying the gp model to the p <dig> data from the literature and to our gene expression data are presented in the results section. more details about how we used gps and logistic regression can be found in the methods section.

gene expression studies of dosr regulon
time course microarray data were obtained from m. tuberculosis samples cultivated in a chemostat in order to estimate the tfa of the dosr regulator. as one of the most extensively studied regulons in m. tuberculosis, dosr plays a major role in mediating hypoxia response in the organism  <cit> . several studies attempt to identify dosr-regulated genes through comparison of the changes in the gene expression levels in wild type and dosr mutant strains  <cit> .

there is some discordance between these studies. one has to consider though that the dosr regulon can be stimulated by different environmental stimuli  <cit> . it is likely that individual environmental perturbations may affect different subsets of genes in the regulon. the batch cultures used in the previous studies provided constantly changing environmental conditions. consequently, the resulting bacterial population was physiologically heterogeneous with increased intrinsic biological noise in the subsequent microarray analysis. different normalisation methods and statistical analyses used in the above studies are also likely to contribute to the discrepancy in the identification of dosr-regulated genes.

chemostat cultures
in contrast, the use of chemostat cultures produces a well defined and controlled environment for the bacteria. chemostat cultures are kept under completely controlled conditions and have a constant inflow of defined nutrients and an outflow of waste products that is monitored until steady state is reached before further experiments  are undertaken. homogeneity of the culture guarantees that all bacterial cells experience identical conditions that change in just a few defined and controled aspects. the cause-and-effect relationship between the changes of gene expression levels and environmental stimuli can be effectively established  <cit> . the time course data used in this study comprises nine time points with steadily reduced oxygen supply   <cit> ). this allows us to measure gene expression trajectories instead of the simple on-and-off signals from two-condition comparisons. it is generally difficult to conduct this type of time course experiments in batch cultures since there it is almost impossible to avoid local fluctuations in environmental conditions and the concentrations of metabolites.

RESULTS
estimating the hidden transcription activity profile of p53
the gpdm model was evaluated on the time course microarray data from barenco et al.   <cit>  reconstructing the hidden tfa of p <dig>  barenco et al.  use a differential equation model for the hidden dynamics of the profile of p <dig> activity which is estimated from the expression profiles of five known p <dig> target genes. profiles consist of seven time points with three replicates at each time point.

we applied our gp based dynamic model to the same data as obtained from arrayexpress . for comparison, the same five genes were used in the gp model and the median of replicates was taken for each gene and log <dig> transformed for further analysis. figure  <dig> displays the estimated tfa from the differential equation model in barenco et al.   <cit> . it can be seen that the predicted p <dig> activity profile shows a reasonable match to the one determined experimentally by western blot  for the first three time points , the prediction is less convincing for the rest of the time course .

the table lists the means of squared differences  after standardization and the correlations between the experimentally determined p <dig> concentration and the estimated p <dig> activity profiles from the gp model , the nca model  and the model used by barenco et al . rep <dig>  rep <dig>  and rep <dig> are the estimations using three replicates, respectively, from barenco et al.

estimating the hidden transcription activity profile of dosr
the tfa of dosr was estimated using  <dig> documented dosr-regulated genes, which also contain the dosr binding motif   <cit> . figure  <dig> displays the predicted tfa of dosr according to the gp model as well as the nca algorithm. the profiles are quite similar, but we will see below that gp relevance scores are much better suited to idenfify dosr dependent genes than the nca scores. the operon encoding dosr consists of three genes: rv3134c , rv3133c , rv3132c . when compared with the gene profiles of dosr operon , it might be seen that the estimated tfa of dosr is strikingly close to the mrna profile of gene dosr itself  even though dosr was not included in the training gene set for estimating its tfa. the close match between the expression pattern of dosr and the tfa of dosr can be expected, since the dosr operon has been reported as an auto-regulated operon  <cit> . however, dosr is part of an operon starting with gene rv3134c, which was used in the training set. interestingly, there is a noticable discrepancy between the profile of rv3134c and tfa of dosr .


the table shows the rankings of the  <dig> training genes with respect to different scores: xmotif denotes motif scores, xnonlin stands for nonlinear scores and xlin linear scores in the equation .  and  are the nonlinear and linear relevance scores in the leave-one-out cross validation tests which exclude the corresponding genes in the first column from estimating dosr tfa. note that since each leave-one-out test produces its own ranking, rank numbers are not unique in the last two columns.

genome-wide search of dosr-regulated genes
as outlined in the introduction and detailed in the methods section, estimated relevance parameters of the output gp can be used to assess the strength of the influence of the reconstructed tfa of dosr on genes. the profile can also be used to estimate gp parameters for a new gene not involved in the training phase. two parameters are of interest, one  representing the linear component of the regression of the profile of gene g on the tfa, and one  representing the nonlinear component. essentially, gp training tries to fit a linear regression if possible and adds a nonlinear component only in case there is too much variability unexplained by a linear relationship. we also calculate a motif score  for the presence of the dosr binding motif in the upstream region of gene g.

for each of the  <dig> operons in the genome of m. tuberculosis the first gene was selected to represent the operon . operon definitions were taken from the biocyc database  <cit> . genes were removed from the time course data if the expression level at the last time point  was lower than that at the first time point , since we are only interested in genes which are upregulated by dosr. the relevance scores ,  and motif scores   were calculated for the remaining  <dig> genes.

the relevance and motif scores can be used separately as a discriminator for ranking genes for regulation by dosr. figure  <dig> shows how many of the  <dig> documented dosr-regulated genes used for training of the dynamic model are among the highest scoring genes. the figure also shows the disappointing performance of scores taken from the nca. although the nca profile is in good agreement with the gp profile , the weights linking this profile to the genes are completely unsuitable for discrimination between regulated and nonregulated genes. table  <dig> displays the ranks of dosr genes by decreasing relevance and decreasing motif scores.

despite having one of the highest motif scores, gene rv <dig> has low ranks in terms of relevance scores, possibly because rv <dig> exhibits a different expression pattern  from the rest of dosr-regulated genes in the training set. it was up regulated from time point  <dig> instead of time point  <dig> as was the rest of dosr-regulated genes. this is likely due to the high promoter affinity of rv <dig>  which may cause saturation of transcription activity as early as at time point  <dig> 

figures  <dig> shows a comparison of the sum of relevance scores derived from the gp model with the motif scores. figure  <dig> show that the relevance scores outperform motif scores as a discriminator for ranking dosr-regulated. however, neither is able to identify all the documented dosr-regulated genes. moreover, they seem to be complementary as discriminators as seen by the clear separation in figure  <dig>  we therefore use a logistic regression of the binary outcome regulated/nonregulated on the relevance score and the motif score  to combine these scores for predicting dosr-regulated genes.

the logistic regression results in a probability preg that a gene is regulated by dosr given its scores. as can be seen in figure  <dig> the separation between dosr regulated genes and the rest is quite clear. this is of course due to the  <dig> genes being used as training genes in the logistic regression. in order to obtain further genes potentially regulated by dosr looked at the top  <dig> genes in the ranking of logistic scores. this includes ten novel genes, which we plan to investigated for dosr regulation in future experiments. three more genes  in this list have dosr-binding motifs in their upstream region these genes were previously reported as only indirectly regulated by dosr  <cit> .

one objection to the current analysis might be that the  <dig> dosr-regulated genes were used in training as well as prediction. we therefore repeated the analysis calculating scores for each of the  <dig> genes in turn using only the remaining  <dig> genes for training. figure  <dig> displays the estimated tfa of dosr in this leave-one-out analyses. we observed that the exclusion of any training dosr-regulated gene had little impact on the estimated tfa. the same was found for predicting novel target genes. in fact, all the leave-one-out analyses resulted in exactly the same rank order among the  <dig> training genes with respect to the two relevance score and the same predicted dosr-regulated genes as those from the analysis including all the documented dosr-regulated genes in the training data .

the  <dig> top ranking genes according to the logistic score. genes with one * are the novel dosr-regulated genes detected in this study, while those with two * are the documented dosr-regulated genes in the training data. genes with no * were previously reported as indirectly regulated by dosr, but were found to contain dosr-binding-motifs in this study.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we proposed the use of gaussian process regression for reconstructing the hidden tfas from time course gene expression data. the proposed approach, in contrast to previous methods for the same purpose, allowed us to model complex dynamics in tfas and nonlinear and linear interactions between tfs and target genes. through the application to two experimental data sets we show that the gp model is able to reconstruct the hidden tfas from time course microarray data reliably.

the m. tuberculosis time course microarray data used here have been generated from chemostat cultures, where changes in gene expression levels can be contributed to a single environmental stimulus, in this case, a rapid drop in oxygen tension. this is an advantage over previous dosr regulon studies  <cit>  using batch cultures, where uncontrolled local heterogeneity in the conditions of the cultures is a major problem. using the estimated tfa of dosr, we proceeded to detect dosr-regulated genes in a low oxygen environment. by combining the relevance parameters derived from a gp model and sequence information, we confirmed all the documented dosr regulated genes. by and large the motif scores and relevance scores agree and are larger for dosr-regulated genes. however, there is enough complementary information left in both so that a combination of both scores by a logistic regression improves the classification considerably. this gives confidence that further target genes can be found by ranking genes according to this score. we identified new putative target genes, which will become the focus of our future research.

