BACKGROUND
protein phosphorylation is one of the most important and best characterized post-translational modification  among the hundreds so far described  <cit> . reversible site-specific phosphorylation of serine , threonine , or tyrosine  by concerted actions of kinases and phosphatases plays a central role in virtually all cellular processes  <cit> , especially in cell signaling of prokaryotes and eukaryotes, including plants  <cit> . phosphorylation of a protein can occur at multiple sites and can be catalyzed by different kinases, often in crosstalk with other types of ptm  <cit> . phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of specific amino acids in proteins can have profound effects on protein structure, activity, stability, subcellular localization and interaction with other biomolecules  <cit> , and it can create binding sites for specific modular domains  <cit> . interestingly, in the flowering plant arabidopsis thaliana, the percentage of genes predicted to encode protein kinases  is about twice as high as in mammals  <cit> . protein phosphorylation events have been found to be connected with the plant's response to diverse intrinsic and extrinsic factors, such as light, invasion of pathogens, hormones, temperature stress, and nutrient starvation  <cit> .

recent progress in mass spectrometry -based technologies and phosphopeptide enrichment methods have allowed to map in vivo phosphorylation sites for a wide variety of organisms in a high throughput manner  <cit> . this progress has prompted the creation of dedicated web-resources in the plant field, such as phosphat  <cit>  and p3db  <cit> . the availability of experimentally verified a. thaliana phosphorylation sites now enables in silico analyses of different phosphorylation site patterns on a proteome-wide scale. recently, the conservation of protein phosphorylation sites within selected gene families could be shown in different plant species  <cit> . in non-plant species, where the databases of phosphorylation sites are much more comprehensive than in a. thaliana, the in silico analysis of phosphoproteomic data has already produced interesting insights into evolutionary features of protein phosphorylation  <cit> .

a loss of a single phosphorylation site by a non-synonymous  single nucleotide polymorphism  that mutates the amino acids s, t, or y at a phosphorylation site into any other amino acid can have profound effects on the molecular properties of the corresponding protein. in particular, the disruption of phosphorylation sites by such non-synonymous mutations can be associated with human diseases such as cancer. for example, the phosphorylation of t <dig> in wildtype cyclin d <dig> by the kinase gsk3b initiates its nuclear export and subsequent degradation in the cytoplasm  <cit> . the authors suggested that the loss of this phosphorylation site by a somatic mutation is involved in causing nuclear accumulation of cyclin d <dig> in esophageal cancer and a generally increased oncogenic potential.

in a. thaliana, genomic dna polymorphisms have been studied extensively during the last few years, initially using gene expression microarrays in order to identify single-feature polymorphisms   <cit> . especially snps, in several inbreed accessions can be applied to study the effects of these polymorphisms on other genome-wide features, such as phosphorylation sites.

given the importance of protein phosphorylation, we were interested to study how phosphorylation sites and their patterns are affected by natural variation, namely nssnps in a. thaliana. in this study we analyzed the distribution of all phosphorylation sites taken from the recent version of phosphat   <cit>  in the proteome of a. thaliana and we related their position to nssnps thus identifying losses of phosphorylation sites. for that purpose, we made use of a. thaliana snps identified recently by applying re-sequencing arrays  <cit>  and by re-sequencing with ultra-deep sequencing technologies such as illumina/solexa  <cit> . our aim was to analyze how the a. thaliana phosphorylation sites and their patterns are influenced by these nssnps.

because the current dataset of experimental phosphorylation sites in a. thaliana is far away from covering the entire proteome, the results obtained from the experimental phosphorylation site dataset were contrasted with results produced by similar analyses of predicted phosphorylation sites in a. thaliana to attain more global hypotheses on protein phosphorylation patterns and the influence of nssnps on them.

RESULTS
description of the phosphorylation site sets used in this study
experimental phosphorylation sites from different phosphoproteomic studies in a. thaliana  <cit>  were taken from phosphat   <cit>  comprising a total of  <dig>  unambiguously identified phosphopeptides mapping to  <dig>  protein-coding loci. the proportional frequency of phosphorylated s, t, y residues  in this experimental set was similar to distributions reported previously, with  <dig> % of ps,  <dig> % pt, and  <dig> % py  <cit> .

we were able to confirm that the majority of phosphorylation sites  occur outside conserved protein domains, as noted previously  <cit> . specifically, ps and pt occurred within domains in only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the cases. however, phosphorylated tyrosines were located inside protein domains in  <dig> % of the cases. similar behavior was observed for the set of predicted phosphosites .

the set of predicted phosphorylation sites used in this study was also taken from phosphat   <cit> . it comprised  <dig>  high-confidence phosphopeptides , identified in  <dig>  protein-coding loci. the relative frequency of phosphorylated s, t, y residues in this set of predicted phosphorylation sites was  <dig> % ps,  <dig> % pt and  <dig> % py.

based on our sets of experimentally identified as well as high-confidence predicted phosphorylation sites , we looked for under- and overrepresented plant go slim terms among different sets of phosphoproteins: i) all proteins containing at least one ps; ii) all proteins containing at least one pt; iii) all proteins containing at least one py; iv) all proteins containing at least one ps or at least one pt ; v) all proteins containing at least one phosphorylated residue  . a comparison of the go annotation of the p-protein sets based on experimental and predicted sites is shown in the figure included in additional file  <dig>  in both, experimental and predicted datasets, the terms "catalytic activity", "kinase activity", "transferase activity", and "protein modification process" were overrepresented among proteins containing p sites. also, several stress-related terms were found overrepresented in both. in experimental as well as predicted p-protein sets, proteins with function in "translation", "rna binding", "biosynthetic process" were determined as underrepresented. however, the plant go slim terms "transcription factor activity" and "transcription regulator activity" were found overrepresented among the predicted p-protein set, while underrepresented in the experimental set.

for both, experimental and predicted phosphorylation sites, we then computed the agreement of go slim terms between protein sets representing different sites or combination of sites. we evaluated the significance  of the correlation between the following pairs of datasets: ps-pt, ps-py, ps-p, ps-p, pt-py, pt-p, pt-p, py-p, py-p. for each dataset in the pair we registered whether a given go slim term was present or absent, and then compared the obtained binary series using the pearson's correlation coefficient. none of the compared profiles were correlated in the experimental dataset, but in the dataset of predicted phosphoproteins we found a moderate correlation of overrepresented plant go slim term profiles between ps-p and py-pt, with correlation coefficients of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

distribution of phosphorylation sites across proteins
most of the a. thaliana phosphoproteins contained only a few experimental phosphorylation sites, whereas a few proteins were phosphorylation hubs with a large number of phosphorylation sites. noticeably, there is a long tail of the distribution of the number of phosphosites per protein, i.e., the proportion of proteins with a large number of phosphorylation sites is higher than expected by chance alone. this is especially evident for the predicted phosphosites. additionally, proteins with a single phosphorylation site appear more often than expected, for both the experimental sites and the predicted sites, highlighting the physiological importance of phosphorylation . proteins with a large number of phosphorylation sites are of special interest as potential sites of integration  in regulatory pathways.

phosphorylation hotspots within proteins
for proteins with many experimentally identified phosphorylation sites, we analyzed the location of those sites within the protein, to identify potential hotspots of phosphorylation.

based on the experimental sites, we determined several hotspot-containing proteins using window sizes of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> amino acids . we then applied the phosphorylation hotspot analysis to the predicted phosphorylation site dataset to get a more global view on potential phosphorylation hotspots in the a. thaliana proteome. for predicted sites as well, we were able to determine several phosphorylation hotspots in proteins for window sizes of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> amino acid residues .

using experimental phosphorylation sites, and for a window size of ten amino acids,  <dig> potential phosphorylation hotspots in  <dig> different proteins were identified . figure  <dig> shows three hotspots with the highest number of experimental phosphorylation sites  in a window of  <dig> amino acids. these hotspots were identified in a protein of unknown function , in a reticulon family protein , and in a protein kinase  based on tair <dig> annotation.

in general, phosphorylation hotspots were preferentially located outside conserved protein domains .

to identify over- or underrepresented biological functions among the proteins containing at least one phosphorylation hotspot that consists of experimental phosphorylation sites, these proteins were tested against a reference set which contained all proteins with at least one experimental phosphorylation site. go enrichment analyses revealed that the go slim term "nucleoplasm"  was significantly overrepresented . this was confirmed by the proteins with hotspots consisting of predicted phosphorylation sites . interestingly, among the proteins with predicted phosphorylation hotspots, "catalytic activity"  was significantly underrepresented .

effect of snps on proteins
the mapping of snps onto coding sequences allowed us to evaluate their effects on the coded amino acids, and thus the expressed proteins. there were  <dig> , <dig> amino acid residues in the non-redundant set of the protein models represented in the reference genome. in total,  <dig>  amino acids and  <dig> stop codons were affected by snps , either in a synonymous  or non-synonymous  way.

as expected, there is a moderate positive correlation between the proportion of synonymous substitutions  for each amino acid and the number of codons encoding the respective amino acid . in order to account for amino acid abundances throughout the proteome, we performed a 2-way contingency table analysis on the number of non-synonymous substitutions affecting each amino acid and the total number of a given amino acid in the whole non-redundant proteome . the strong underrepresentation of l, f, g, w and y residues being affected by substitutions suggests a stronger global functional or structural constraint on these amino acids. most snps caused synonymous substitutions .

interestingly, s and t, two phosphorylatable amino acids, are more likely to be affected by nssnps than expected. by contrast, y residues were  <dig> to  <dig> times less frequently affected by snps than s or t residues .

effects of snps on phosphorylation sites
we tested whether there was any association between substitutions caused by snps affecting experimental phosphorylation sites compared to non-phosphorylation  sites, but we did not observe any overall trend . we then looked at the effect of each individual amino acid substitution . we found that amino acid substitutions do rarely occur, when requiring two or three nucleotide substitutions . the only observed cases were for s to d, s to k, t to y, and y to e, although even in these cases, the substitution only occurred in non-phosphorylated s, t or y residues. we also found that in all cases substitutions were either more frequent in phosphorylated sites than in non-phosphorylated sites or vice versa, never equally affecting both types of sites.

in case of the predicted phosphorylation sites, we found for threonine a significant enrichment of non-synonymous substitutions in phosphorylated compared to non-phosphorylated threonine residues . analyzing the effect of each individual substitution in the predicted dataset, we observed several amino acid substitutions with a substitution cost of two that occurred in phosphorylation sites . regarding the enrichment and depletion of individual substitutions between phosphorylated and non-phosphorylated sites, we found that all substitutions were as likely to occur in predicted phosphorylation sites as in non-phosphorylation sites, except for the substitution t to n, which was more likely to occur in predicted phosphorylation sites than in non-phosphorylation sites, and the synonymous substitution t to t, which was more likely in non-phosphorylation sites. in that respect, it is important to note that asparagine  has been shown to mimic a phosphorylated serine, in a mutant of the a. thaliana k+ channel akt <dig> . asparagine is an uncharged amino acid, but it is larger than both s and t. mimicking the phosphorylation site could arise due to steric effects as suggested by michard et al.  <cit> . thus, a substitution t to n might generate a constitutive phosphorylation site.

losses of experimental phosphorylation sites
among the experimental phosphorylation sites, we identified  <dig> sites  that were lost in at least one of the a. thaliana accessions by an exchange of a phosphorylation target amino acid s, t, or y to any other amino acid . for four proteins  the phosphorylated s was substituted to more than one other amino acid in the accessions analyzed. for example a ps  of the nodulin mtn <dig> family protein  was exchanged to t in most of the accessions with the only exception of bur- <dig>  where an n was introduced by the nssnp.

interestingly, we found that among these  <dig> proteins, the go slim categories "receptor activity" was significantly overrepresented, but there were no underrepresented categories. using a reference set comprising all a. thaliana proteins with at least one phosphorylation site, no over- or underrepresented categories could be identified.

remarkably, some losses of experimentally verified phosphorylation sites are located in phosphorylation hotspots. this concerns the following a. thaliana proteins: two proteins of unknown function ; a calmodulin-binding protein-related , and the protein esp <dig> ; binding , based on tair <dig> annotation.

gains and losses of predicted phosphorylation sites
using the dataset of predicted high-confidence phosphorylation sites for a more global analysis, we found  <dig>  proteins in which predicted phosphorylation sites could potentially be lost in at least one of the a. thaliana accessions studied . in  <dig>  cases, the snp caused an amino acid substitution to an amino acid that cannot be phosphorylated, while in the remaining  <dig> proteins, the score of the phosphorylation prediction changed from a high-confidence positive score  to a value smaller than or equal to - <dig>  regardless of the type of putative phosphorylated amino acid at the given position in the neighborhood of the affected phosphorylation site. a prediction value of score ≤ - <dig> is taken as high-confidence prediction of the amino acid not being phosphorylated.

in contrast, we observed that  <dig>  proteins gained a predicted phosphorylation site . the majority of gained phosphorylation sites  emerged by the change of a non-phosphorylatable amino acid to an s, t, or y residue and a resulting prediction score ≥ <dig> of the newly generated putative phosphorylation site. in the remaining  <dig> cases, the gain of the phosphorylation site was based on the score alone, the prediction score increased from a negative score  to a score higher than or equal to  <dig> due to nssnps that resulted in amino acid exchanges in the neighborhood to s, t and y residues thus creating a new phosphorylation site target motif.

we found that the go categories "receptor activity", "binding" and "signal transducer activity" were significantly overrepresented in all three datasets regardless of the reference set used . additionally, in proteins which gained a phosphorylation site, and in all proteins with a gain or a loss, the category "response to stress" was overrepresented, regardless of the reference set used . in the dataset including gain and loss of phosphorylation sites, the categories "transporter activity", "catalytic activity", "metabolic process", "biosynthetic process" and "cell" were underrepresented using the set of predicted phosphoproteins as reference set . the figure in additional file  <dig> presents all over- and underrepresented go slim categories in the protein set with losses and gains of predicted phosphorylation sites.

discussion
with regard to the isolation of phosphorylated proteins from complex samples as well as their mass spectrometric and computational analysis the progress that has been made in a. thaliana is quite impressive. however, the connection of protein phosphorylation with genetic variation in natural occurring ecotypes at a proteome-wide level in plant species has not been addressed so far. in this study we made use of experimental and predicted phosphorylation sites available in phosphat  <cit>  and mapped the data onto the a. thaliana genome annotation. this is currently the largest phosphorylation site dataset in a. thaliana comprising  <dig>  experimentally verified unique phosphorylation sites assigned to  <dig>  protein-coding loci. the combined data set represents phosphorylation sites identified from different tissues/cell types representing varied developmental stages and responses.

since the assigned proteins cover only one-sixth of the predicted a. thaliana protein-coding loci, we extended our study by also including predicted phosphorylation sites to achieve better proteome coverage in our analyses, attaining a coverage of 80% of all protein-coding loci in a. thaliana.

the relative frequency of  <dig> % ps,  <dig> % pt, and  <dig> % py in our experimental set was similar to distributions reported previously in a. thaliana  and in humans  <cit> . in the predicted dataset, the fraction of tyrosine residues was much higher  compared to the experimental set . this discrepancy may result from a bias in the training set of experimental phosphopeptides that has been used for the phosphorylation site predictor or from a lack of accuracy of the predictor. in addition, we cannot exclude that the experimentally identified phosphorylation sites may in general be biased by experimental restrictions such as specific phosphopeptide enrichment methods  <cit>  or by a focus on specific stress conditions or subcellular compartments. thus, this distribution may still shift by including new phosphorylation sites from future studies. however, since in general experimental and predicted data show similar distribution among and within the proteins, the inclusion of predicted data in the scope of this study is justified.

multisite phosphorylation in proteins has been discussed as points of integration of different signal transduction pathways  <cit> . however, a major difficulty in studying multisite phosphorylation from a system's perspective has been the uncertainty whether simultaneous or successive phosphorylation occurred at the different sites on the same protein and whether the multiple sites were phosphorylated by the same or different protein kinases. dependencies among phosphorylation sites in a single protein can be intricate  <cit> , and the position and the number of phosphorylated residues can affect the biological outcome  <cit> .

in the experimental dataset, we observed that the identified number of phosphorylation sites per protein was largely in agreement with the expected values, except for large values of phosphorylation sites and a single phosphorylation site. this observation was more noticeable for the predicted dataset. this suggests that there are at least three discrete regions in the distribution: i) a region of overrepresentation of single phosphorylation sites, ii) a region where the number of phosphorylation sites is proportional to the total number of s, t and y; i.e., the more sites can be phosphorylated, the more will and proportionally, and, iii) a region where phosphorylation sites appear more often than expected given the total number of s, t, y. similar behavior was previously suggested to result from a rich-gets-richer process for the accumulation of phosphorylation sites  <cit> , however the low coverage of the experimental dataset in this study does not allow us to arrive at such a conclusion. nevertheless, the data in figure  <dig>  strongly suggests that once a single phosphorylation event happened in a protein, further phosphorylations will accumulate depending only on the abundance of phosphorylatable residues, until reaching a threshold whereafter further phosphorylations will happen even more rapidly than dictated by the abundance of phosphorylatable residues .

our finding that the phosphorylation hotspots occur preferentially outside conserved domains suggests that, indeed, they may serve as sites of signal integration as they are outside of regions such as catalytic domains or protein-protein interaction domains. multisite phosphorylation occurring outside structured regions was shown for single nuclear proteins in several studies. this is the case for the human protein ets- <dig>  multiple ca2+-dependent phosphorylation sites in an unstructured flexible region of this transcription factor act additively to produce graded dna binding affinity  <cit> . our result that nucleus-related go terms are overrepresented in hotspot-containing proteins is in line with studies that indicate a central involvement of many nuclear proteins as integration hubs for phosphorylation-dependent signaling  <cit> .

in an ms-based phosphoproteomics study in a. thaliana, it was suggested that the mrna splicing machinery is a major target of protein phosphorylation  <cit> . our results support this hypothesis. one third  of the proteins with nine or more experimentally determined phosphorylation sites are involved in metabolic processes associated with nucleic acids, especially with "rna splicing" .

disease resistance genes, s-locus proteins and receptors had previously been shown to display a high variability between different wild varieties of a. thaliana  <cit> . in combination with our findings this indicates that receptors belong to the more variable proteins in a. thaliana accessions, and gains or losses of phosphorylation sites in rapidly evolving and variable regions of receptors could facilitate the evolution of kinase-signaling circuits  <cit> . the importance of specific phosphorylation sites in a. thaliana receptor proteins for receptor dimer formation and activation of signaling events was concluded from experiments on the bri1/bak <dig> receptors  <cit> . similarly, in different human receptor proteins the importance of their site-specific phosphorylations could be demonstrated, for example in receptor tyrosine kinases of the erbb family  <cit> .

the potential contribution of the identified losses and gains of the phosphorylation sites by nssnps to adaptive responses of the various natural accessions will be an interesting field to be analyzed in future association studies.

CONCLUSIONS
by mapping nssnps onto phosphorylation sites, we identified losses and gains of phosphorylation sites, which can be important in adaptive responses of the natural accessions in their different environments. especially receptor proteins were affected by losses of experimental phosphorylation sites. based on the observed gains and losses of predicted phosphorylation sites it can be expected that beyond receptor proteins also other proteins involved in signaling and stress response are affected by changes, whereas proteins involved in metabolism, catalytic activity and biosynthesis are less affected. these findings suggest a relatively high variability of signal transduction-related proteins and receptors and more conserved regulation in metabolism. since receptors and signaling processes are primarily involved in recognition and response to environmental cues, the overrepresentation of phosphorylation sites  in these functional classes indeed supports the view of nssnps as evolutionary means of adaptation.

