BACKGROUND
the vast majority of angiosperms are hermaphrodites having bisexual flowers and nearly 10% of the flowering plants produce unisexual flowers  <cit> . sexual systems are coupled with the numerous combinations of unisexual and hermaphrodite flowers. there are about 6% angiosperms which are dioecious bearing male and female flowers on separate individuals  <cit> . literature study suggests that dioecious plants have evolved independently and multiple times from their bisexual progenitors  <cit> .

in comparison to animals, dioecious plants show relatively recent origin of sex chromosome evolution  <cit> . sex determination in dioecious plants may be either genetically or environmentally controlled phenomenon  <cit> . some dioecious plant species have fertile bisexual relatives  <cit> , which are excellent system for sex chromosome study. the occurrence of sex chromosomes in dioecious plants is surprisingly rare and only  <dig> species are known to have heteromorphic sex chromosomes  <cit> . the heteromorphic sex chromosomes are well-studied in silene latifolia , in which male and female plants carry xy and xx sex chromosomes respectively  <cit> . the y chromosome is reported to be the largest of all chromosomes  <cit>  and it consists of three sex determining regions viz., gynoecium suppression factor , stamen promoting factor  and male fertility factor   <cit> . other well-studied dioecious plants are rumex acetosa exhibiting x to autosome ratio  <cit>  and poplar known for zw system  <cit>  for sex determination. in papaya, sex determination is controlled by a pair of recently evolved sex chromosomes, y controlling male and yh controlling hermaphrodite  <cit> . thus, sex chromosome study in different dioecious plant species provides an insight for better understanding of plant sex chromosome evolution.

plant sex determination genes were so far identified from monoecious species by map based cloning approach because there is no recombination suppression at the sex determination loci  <cit> . recent genomic technologies augmented the identification of x- and y- linked genes and allowed the detection of dosage compensation of x- linked genes in s. latifolia  <cit> . in papaya,  <dig>  mb hermaphrodite-specific region of the yh chromosome  and its  <dig>  mb x chromosome counterpart were sequenced and annotated for identification of sex determination genes  <cit> .

it is now well documented that silver nitrate  as well as silver thiosulfate  have masculinizing effect on many dioecious and monoecious plants  <cit> . beyer  <cit>  reported that agno <dig> acts as an anti-ethylene agent and induces male flowers by suppressing female reproductive organs. evidences are also there that agno <dig> can modify sex via inhibition of ethylene  <cit> . however, a study in silene latifolia, contradicts this hypothesis and proposes that sex modification might be mediated by inhibition of sulfahydryl enzymes upon application of silver thiosulfate  <cit> . janousek et al.  <cit>  showed that 5-azacytidine treated male plants of s. latifolia developed hermaphrodite flowers due to hypomethylation. this indicated the possible role of epigenetic control in sex determination and modification. another unique case of sex modification is observed due to smut fungus  infection in silene latifolia. this fungus was reported to induce the development of anthers in female flowers  of silene latifolia  <cit> . however, in this case, pollens were found sterile indicating the decisive role of y chromosome in fertility of pollens. investigations on sex modification in dioecious plants may enhance our knowledge on how a genetically controlled program gets modified to an altered state.

unlike silene latifolia , rumex acetosa , carica papaya , spinacia oleracea  and populus   <cit> , which have been well characterized to understand the mechanism of sex determination, coccinia grandis, a member of cucurbitaceae family having an inferior ovary received comparatively less attention. coccinia is a small genus comprising  <dig> species, all dioecious in nature  <cit> . it is one of the few dioecious plant species, in which presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes is reported. the chromosome constitution of male and female plants is 22 + xy and 22 + xx respectively  <cit> . literature survey suggests that sexual dimorphism in c. grandis is determined by a large y chromosome  <cit> , which appears to be of comparatively recent origin  <cit> . however, the genes involved in sex determination of c. grandis are not yet known. genome of c. grandis is almost six times smaller than that of silene latifolia and is closely related to four fully sequenced genomes of cucurbitaceae species  <cit> . y chromosome of c. grandis is the largest one found in land plants; and it is heterochromatic, differently from the euchromatic y chromosome of s. latifolia  <cit> .

in addition to male and female sex forms of c. grandis, kumar and viseveshwaraiah  <cit>  reported a gynodioecious form in which male flowers of the hermaphrodite plants were sterile. earlier, holstein and renner  <cit>  recorded a sexual phenotype of c. intermedia having male and female flowers/fruits on the same node. in the present investigation, we have identified a rare gynomonoecious plant , bearing hermaphrodite  and pistillate  flowers on the same plant. the presence of this naturally occurring gym plant provides a great opportunity to study the genetic basis of sex determination in c. grandis.

to understand the floral development and sex expression in c. grandis, we aimed at a comprehensive characterization of sexual phenotypes through morphometric, histological, chromosomal and molecular approaches. in the present investigation, it was observed that foliar spray of agno <dig> is able to induce hermaphrodite flowers in wild type female plants. to determine whether organ identity genes  have any role in differentiation of the sexes, expression studies were carried out in male, female and gym plants. to our knowledge, no such report for c. grandis is available in the literature.

RESULTS
morphological differences amongst three sexual phenotypes
while there exist striking similarities in inflorescence, sepal and petal characters, differences in the morphology of mature flowers were clearly observed amongst the three sexual phenotypes. mature male flowers were seen to be composed of three whorls having five sepals, five united petals and five  synandrous stamens . in contrast, the female flowers were composed of four whorls. while sepals and petals were identical to male flowers, the stamens were found to be arrested as rudimentary staminodes. the gynoecium consisted of three carpels having a fused style with three bifid stigmas . the gym plants bear two different types of flowers  hermaphrodite  and  pistillate  . the gym-h flowers had four whorls, almost similar to the flowers of female sex; the only difference being here that the staminodes gradually developed to mature stamens . it was also observed that some of the gym-h flowers exhibited incomplete growth of stamens  as well as petaloid stamens . the organization of floral organs in gym-f flowers of gym plant was found to be similar to that of wild type female plant . we observed random positional distribution of gym-f and gym-h flowers in gym plant and the ratio of these flowers was found to be approximately 30: <dig> during the months of april to july. the phylogenetic analysis using matk and trnsgcu-trngucc intergenic spacer region, revealed that the gym plant is another sexual phenotype of coccinia grandis . except for the three sexual phenotypes of coccinia grandis , sequences for constructing the phylogenetic tree were used from the previously published data  <cit> . seed content of fruits from female plant  was observed to be higher than that of fruits from gym plant .figure  <dig> 
morphology of mature flowers of
coccinia grandis
. macroscopic view of staminate flower  of male plant, pistillate flower  of female plant, hermaphrodite   and pistillate   flowers of gynomonoecious  plant with petals cut open. petals removed from staminate flower  of male plant, pistillate flower  of female plant, hermaphrodite   and pistillate   flowers of gynomonoecious  plant to show inner floral organs. st: stamens, c: carpels, rst: rudimentary stamens, o: ovary. scale bars =1 cm.



histological analysis
to understand the sequential development of sex organs, histological analysis was carried out at different stages of flower development for all three sexual phenotypes .figure  <dig> 
longitudinal sections  of flower buds at different developmental stages.  are the sections of staminate flowers of male plant,  are the sections of pistillate flowers of female plant,  and  are the sections of hermaphrodite  and pistillate  flowers of gynomonoecious  plant respectively. p: petals, s: sepals, c: carpels, st: stamens, rst: rudimentary stamens, o: ovary. scale bars are 500 μm in a, 1 mm in b, c, f, g, h, k, l, p and q, and 2 mm in d, e, i, j, m, n, o, r, s and t.



male: histological observation of male flowers  showed the presence of sepals, petals and stamens having no sign of carpel initials . even in the later stages of flower development, any rudimentary carpel was not observed. however, the possibility of presence of carpel initials in primordial stages of flower development cannot be completely ruled out. further growth of stamens was observed in the successive stages of male flower development . finally, in stage  <dig> , mature pollens were found inside the anthers when petals were about to open .

female: whereas female flowers  exhibited the presence of sepals, petals, stamen initials and carpels having an inferior ovary in four whorls . while development of the androecium remained arrested in early stages, growth of the gynoecium was noted in successive stages of development . at stage  <dig> , when the petals were about to open, the gynoecium was found to be completely developed .

gym: presence of sepals, petals, stamens and carpel initials along with an inferior ovary was observed in four successive whorls of gym-h flowers at early stages of development . further growth of the gynoecium and androecium occurred in successive stages of development  and at stage  <dig> , growth of the gynoecium and androecium was found to be complete . however, development of gym-f flowers in gym plant was found to be identical to that of wild type female plant .

chromosomal study
in order to have a better understanding of the relation between male, female and gym plants of c. grandis growing in the same environment, comparative cytological studies were carried out. the somatic chromosome number of male, female and gym plant was found to be 2n =  <dig> . sex chromosomes were heteromorphic and in male plants y chromosome was conspicuously large . in wild type female and gym plants, the chromosome constitution is 22 + xx . the karyotype of wild type female and gym plant showed similarity to a considerable extent . meiotic studies of male sex showed end to end pairing between x and y chromosomes . in contrast, normal pairing of homologous chromosomes were found in gym-h flowers of gym plant .table  <dig> 
numerical data on somatic chromosome complements of
c. grandis
 plants)



chromosome numbers
chromosome size * 
f%
position of centromere
male
female
gym
male
female
gym
male
female
gym
y1
*mean of  <dig> metaphase plates. gym: gynomonoecious, m: metacentric, nm: nearly metacentric, sm: submetacentric. the karyotype of male and female plants was compared with the gynomonoecious  chromosomes. y1: single y chromosome present in male sex.
metaphase chromosomes of
c. grandis
. mitotic metaphase chromosomes showing 2n = <dig> chromosomes of male  , female  and gynomonoecious   plants. meiotic metaphase chromosomes showing  <dig> bivalents of male  , gynomonoecious   plants. scale bar =5 μm.



agno <dig> induced sex modification
different concentrations of silver nitrate  solution were sprayed on the basal leaves of male, female and gym plant . newly emerging flower buds of wild type female plants showed enhanced growth of stamens after application of agno <dig> solution  whereas; male flowers did not show any changes in floral structure. histological studies further confirmed the dose dependent stamen growth in wild type female flowers . however, concentrations higher than 35 mm had lethal effect. at dosages of  <dig> and 35 mm of agno <dig>  the morphology of newly developed flowers was comparable to gym-h flowers after 10- <dig> days of observation . interestingly, all mature flowers in gym plant were found to be hermaphroditic after application of agno <dig>  indicating that even the staminodes of pistillate flower buds have developed into mature stamens .figure  <dig> 
effects of silver nitrate  solution on female plant.  are the pictures of female flowers after spraying of agno <dig> solution showing gradual enhanced stamen growth. magnified view of stamens in  pistillate flowers of agno <dig> treated female plant and  hermaphrodite  flowers of gynomonoecious  plants. scanning electron micrographs of top view of  pistillate flowers from agno <dig> treated female plant and  hermaphrodite  flowers of gynomonoecious  plants. petals and sepals have been removed to better view sexual structures. longitudinal sections  of flower buds of silver nitrate treated female plant . h, i – flower buds of stage  <dig>  j – flower bud of stage  <dig> and k – flower bud of stage  <dig>  p: petals, s: sepals, c: carpels, st: stamens, o: ovary. scale bars are 300 μm in f, 1 mm in g, h and i, and 2 mm in j and k.



mating experiments and pollen fertility
mating experiments were designed to investigate the fertility of pollens from male flowers and gym-h flowers . the crosses between male and emasculated gym-h resulted in  <dig> % of fruit setting. no fruit setting was recorded in crosses between gym-h and wild type female flowers. it was also noted that 90% fruit setting occurred in crosses between male and wild type female . similarly, the crosses between the wild type male and the pistillate flowers of gym plant also yielded 93% of fruit setting. however, no fruit setting was achieved in crosses between gym-h and gym-f flowers and by selfing gym-h .table  <dig> 
mating design and percentage of fruit set in
c. grandis



mating design
pollen source
no. of fruit set
% fruit set
remarks
replications = <dig>  n = <dig>  no. of crosses/ mating design are  <dig> for all the above sets.

gym-h: hermaphrodite flower from gynomonoecious  plant, gym-f: pistillate flower from gynomonoecious  plant.



for viability assays, pollens were isolated from opened flowers of male, gym-h and converted flowers of agno <dig> treated female plant. pollens from male flowers took aceto-carmine stain; whereas pollens from gym-h flowers and converted flowers of agno <dig> treated female plant did not retain any stain . these results were reconfirmed with fda test . in addition, pollen germination was also tested for male, gym plant and agno <dig> treated female plant. highest frequency of pollen germination  was achieved when pollens of male flowers were incubated in 5% sucrose solution containing required amount of ca <dig> and h3bo <dig> . in contrast, pollens of hermaphrodite flowers of gym and agno <dig> treated female plant did not show any germination when incubated in different germinating media. from the above results, we concluded that pollens of male flowers are fertile and pollens from gym-h and converted flowers of agno <dig> treated female plant are sterile in nature.figure  <dig> 
viability tests of pollens from male, gynomonoecious  and agno
3
treated female plants. pollens stained with 1% acetocarmine from male , gynomonoecious   and agno <dig> treated female  plants. ,  and  are the fluorescein diacetate  stained pollens from male, gynomonoecious  and agno <dig> treated female plants respectively. pollens stained with acetocarmine  and fda  are viable. scale bars are 10 μm in a, 5 μm in b, 50 μm c, and 25 μm in d, e and f.  highest germination of male pollens in 5% sucrose solution. scale bar =50 μm.  graphical representation of the germination percentage in different concentrations of sucrose solutions. means ± standard errors are reported in the graph; n =  <dig> 



identification and expression analysis of organ identity genes 
in order to understand whether b and c class organ identity genes  have any role in determining the sex of the developing flowers of male, female and gym plant, cgpi  and cgag  were isolated and an expression analysis was carried out using quantitative real-time pcr . the degenerate primers based on the conserved amino acid sequences of pi  and ag , yielded ~350 bp of pistillata  and ~250 bp of agamous  homologs through rt-pcr reaction. the partial sequences for cgpi  and cgag  have been deposited in ddbj. full length transcript sequences were deduced from 5′ and 3′ race products and amplicons of cgpi  and cgag  were obtained . cdna for cgpi and cgag coded for putative proteins of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids respectively. the deduced amino acids sequences for both the genes showed high conservation when aligned with other pistillata and agamous like genes . two consensus regions, mads domain and k-box were found on the deduced amino acid sequences .figure  <dig> 
full length
cgpi
and
cgag
transcript isolation and multiple sequence alignment of deduced amino acid sequences.  amplification of full length cgpi and cgag transcripts from total rna harvested from flower buds.  comparison of cgpi with other piistillata-like genes.  comparison of cgag with other agamous-like genes. conserved regions are shaded in black. at_pi, cg_pi, cs_cum <dig> and cm_pmads <dig> are pistillata like genes from arabidopsis thaliana, coccinia grandis, cucumis sativus and cucumis melo respectively. cg_ag, cs_mads <dig>  cm_agamous, mc_mads_box <dig>  at_agamous are agamous like genes from coccinia grandis, cucumis sativus, cucumis melo, momordica charantia and arabidopsis thaliana respectively. mads domain and k-box are identified by ncbi’s conserved domain database and marked accordingly.



cgpi, a b class gene required for petal and stamen development, was found to be expressed in male, wild type female and gym flower buds . expression of cgag, a c class gene essential for stamen and carpel development, was also noted in male, wild type female and gym flower buds . our results showed that both these genes are expressed in all developmental stages   of flowers from male, female and gym plant. cgpi had a significant difference of expression across all three sexual forms during early, middle and late developmental stages , while cgag showed significant differential expression in buds of early stages only . we have also noted that cgpi expression is comparatively high in male flower buds than that of wild type female buds. however, gym flowers exhibited an intermediate level of cgpi expression in early and late staged buds . further, our results for stamen-specific expression analysis showed a significant difference for both cgpi and cgag levels between stamens of male, gym-h, agno <dig> treated female plant, rudimentary stamens of gym-f and wild type female plant . surprisingly, rudimentary stamens of gym-f showed higher cgpi expression than stamens of gym-h flowers .figure  <dig> 
expression analyses of organ identity genes  from
c. grandis. expression patterns of cgpi
 and cgag
 in flower buds of male, female and gynomonoecious  c. grandis at different developmental stages  by quantitative real time pcr . stamen specific expression patterns of cgpi
 and cgag
 from flowers  of male, female , hermaphrodite  and pistillate  flowers of gynomonoecious  and converted flowers of agno <dig> treated plants. error bars indicate sd  of three biological replicates each with three technical replicates. asterisks indicate statistical differences as determined using single factor anova . early: from 3rd to 5th stages, middle: 6th to 8th stages, late: 9th to 12th stages.



discussion
carpel and stamen differentiation programmes follow independent pathway
in contrast to silene latifolia, where rudimentary gynoecium is found in male flower  <cit>  histological study revealed the absence of carpel initials even at early stage of development  of male flower in c. grandis . though stamen initiation occurs in female plants, its growth is arrested at early stages  of flower development  leading to the retention of sterile staminode in mature flower. this indicates a functional interference in the male differentiation pathway of female flowers as was reported in silene latifolia  <cit> . in gym-h flowers, androecium and gynoecium develop simultaneously till maturation  and arrest of stamen or carpel growth is not observed . however, in pistillate flowers of gym plant, arrest of stamen growth occurs at early stages like the flowers of wild type female plant . the development of mature carpel with arrested stamen growth as evidenced by the presence of rudimentary staminodes in pistillate  flowers and the synandrous stamens with fully grown carpel in gym-h flowers indicate that the carpel and stamen differentiation programmes follow independent pathway.

gynomonoecious  c. grandis - is not a y-deletion mutant
while investigating the morphological differences between male and female sexes, we have recorded the existence of a gym plant in the north eastern part of india  that exhibited morphological characteristics similar to that of male and female sex forms of c. grandis. the morphological characterization and the phylogenetic analysis, based on the tree constructed with matk and trnsgcu-trngucc intergenic spacer regions clearly establish the identity of the gym plant to be another sexual phenotype of c. grandis.

the present record of diploid chromosome number 2n =  <dig> in both male and female sexes  and the presence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in male plants corroborate previous findings and validate xy sex determination system  <cit> . the characteristic end to end pairing between x and y chromosomes  indicates recombination between pseudo autosomal region   <cit>  and that there are non-recombining regions between x and y chromosomes as was suggested by other researchers to explain the genetic basis of sex determination in some dioecious plants  <cit> . the absence of carpel initial in male plant suggests that the y chromosome has a dominant gynoecium suppressor gene at the non-recombining region like that of s. latifolia  <cit> . the karyotype of gym plant shows high degree of similarity to that of wild type female . the smallest bivalent found in metaphase i of hermaphrodite flower does not match with the size of x chromosome of heteromorphic pair found in male sex . therefore, it requires further test to assume the smallest chromosomes as x chromosome  <cit>  and at this stage, it remains inconclusive due to the unavailability of x- specific probes in c. grandis. the absence of male specific y chromosome in gym plant and normal pairing between homologous chromosomes  indicate that gym plant also possesses 22 + xx chromosomes and contains genetic information necessary to produce both pistillate and hermaphrodite flowers. the lability of the expression of hermaphroditism suggests that the gym plant is genotypically a female individual and not a y- deletion mutant. the questions that might arise are firstly, in absence of the y chromosome, how does the development of stamens occur in hermaphrodite  flowers of gym plant? and secondly, what factors contribute to the development of hermaphrodite  and pistillate  flowers in the same plant?

factors stimulating stamen development in gym plant in absence of y chromosome
in contrast to fertile and viable pollens of male flowers , pollens of gym-h flowers are sterile in nature and remain immature even at later stages of development . the results of breeding experiments negate the possibility of self-fertilization and thus fruit setting occurs only through allogamy or cross pollination when pollens from male sex act as donor . this indicates that viable and fertile pollens are produced in male plants only and that male fertility factor is located on y chromosome. evidently, male fertility is controlled by the y chromosome and it plays a decisive role in determining sex in c. grandis  <cit> . similar to silene latifolia  <cit> , our experimental results suggest that in c. grandis, at least three key factors: gynoecium suppressor, stamen promoting factor and male fertility factor have assembled and possibly rearranged during evolution of the y chromosome. however, development of the stamen with sterile pollens in gym-h flowers of genotypically female gym plant suggests that the factors stimulating stamen development might be present elsewhere in the genome, while the male fertility factor may be absent. scutt et al.  <cit>  reported that infected female s. latifolia with xx sex chromosomes can develop morphologically normal stamens. whereas, farbos et al.  <cit>  have shown that in silene latifolia, gynoecium suppression factor  and stamen promoting factor  regions of y-chromosome behave as linked dominant traits and that spf is absent in female plants with xx sex chromosomes. in the absence of y or truncated y chromosome, the mechanism of stamen development in gym-h flower of c. grandis is not clear but needs further investigation.

phenomenon of silver nitrate induced stamen development resembles that of gym plant
silver nitrate stimulated stamen development in female plants of c. grandis mimics the pathway of stamen development in gym plant . y chromosome is absent in both of these sexual phenotypes and pollens of converted flowers of agno <dig> treated female plant are sterile in nature like the pollens of gym-h flowers . this suggests that stamen development is induced in wild type female by an unknown pathway which is independent of y-mediated mechanism as was reported in silene latifolia  <cit> . but there is no clue how this signal is transmitted from leaves to flowers that leads to sex modification. however, silver nitrate effect is transient and normal female flower develops after a period of 15- <dig> days. this may be due to the fact that the effective agno <dig> concentration below the threshold level cannot impede the molecular mechanism leading to the formation of gynoecium with arrested stamen growth. it appears that agno <dig> at an optimum concentration stimulates stamen development in wild type female and gym-f of c. grandis possibly by a temporary delay in functional interference of male differentiation pathway. in such a condition, possibility of the presence of male repressive factor in untreated plants and its de-repression by agno <dig> molecule in treated wild type female and gym-f cannot be ruled out.

differential expression of oigs and the development of the three different floral phenotypes
the b and c function genes viz. cgpi and cgag show homology to cum <dig> and mads <dig> of cucumis sativus respectively. qrt-pcr studies suggest that like silene latifolia  <cit> , the male flowers of c. grandis had higher cgpi expression compared to wild type female flowers . this observation was also true for stamen specific expression analysis . the high expression of cgpi in stamens of gym-f and reduced expression in stamens of gym-h flowers cannot be explained currently and would require future investigations. this study indicates that oigs might be under differential regulation in male, female and gym plant leading to the development of male, wild-type female and gym-h as well as gym-f flowers. to this effect, further studies are required to understand the role of acs  and wip <dig>  genes, which were shown to govern sex expression in a related species, cucumis melo  <cit> . the sex-determining locus a of melon encodes an ethylene biosynthesis enzyme, cmacs- <dig>  that represses stamen development in female flowers. the g locus of melon encodes cmwip <dig>  a transcription factor that represses carpel development in male flowers. also, it has been shown that the role of acs gene is conserved in another member of the family cucumis sativus  <cit> . future investigation on functional validation of these genes would be necessary to decipher their role in sex expression and modification.

CONCLUSIONS
there is no doubt that the ‘female suppressing’ functions of the y chromosome in male c. grandis is an initial event towards the establishment of the sexual dimorphism. the process of stamen initiation occurs in wild type female and gym plants even in the absence of y chromosome but the arrest of further development of stamens suggests a possible interference in ‘stamen promoting’ functions . the pollens of gym-h and converted flowers of agno <dig> treated female plants were sterile indicating that the male fertility factor is located on y chromosome which is solely responsible for pollen fertility. the significance of gym plant of c. grandis lies in its ability to develop stamens with sterile pollens because such evidences were not reported in any other plants including gynomonoecious silene species  <cit> . the characteristic development of stamens in hermaphrodite flowers of gym having xx sex chromosomes and agno <dig> modified wild type female flowers is mediated by an unknown mechanism bypassing the y-linked spf regulatory pathway. our experimental findings together with all other previous chromosomal and molecular cytogenetical data strongly support the view that c. grandis could be used as a potential model system to study sex expression in dioecious flowering plant.

