BACKGROUND
host − parasite coevolutionary dynamics can be studied using experimental frameworks . however, given the increasing evidence that coevolution is highly sensitive to environmental variation, and thus possibly affected by experimental conditions , it is crucial to assess the strength of coevolutionary interactions in the wild. obtaining field data for coevolutionary dynamics presents practical difficulties, such as the necessity of long-term surveys. despite that, field studies over time have been conducted within some natural host − parasite systems, e.g., in daphnia–microparasites , chytrid–diatoms  <cit> , bryozoans–myxozoans  <cit> , plants–fungi , and freshwater snails–trematodes . in these and in many other field surveys to date, genetic variation over time has been investigated for the host alone, in most cases because of difficulties in obtaining suitable molecular markers for parasites. given that time-lagged coevolution requires changes in the population genetic structure of both players  <cit> , there is a need for studies directly tracking such changes in natural populations of parasites, in addition to their hosts.

genetic studies of parasite populations over time have focused mainly on human parasites or economically important plant pathogens . for example, in fungal rust epidemics of cultivated flax, changes in allele frequencies were tracked at pathogen infectivity loci  <cit> . this deep insight at the allelic level became possible only because the genetics behind the plant − pathogen interactions had been studied for a long time . beyond the scope of such societally important pathogens, there has been relatively little work on genetic changes in parasite populations over time. interactive effects among gene flow, local adaptation and the level of sexual reproduction will shape spatial and temporal population structures of parasites during host − parasite coevolution  <cit> . however, relevant studies in natural animal − microparasite systems have become feasible only recently, due to progress in the development of molecular markers for parasites.

one of the recently established models for host − parasite coevolution involves waterfleas of the genus daphnia , key components of zooplankton in many lakes and ponds across the globe, and their microparasites . in natural populations of daphnia, however, temporal changes within gene pools, resulting from host − parasite coevolution, have thus far been studied for host populations only . for example, it has been observed that the most common daphnia genotypes decreased in frequency over successive generations across several heavily infected host populations, whereas such decreases were not detected in uninfected populations  <cit> . these results are consistent with the idea that parasites track common host genotypes and, consequently, exert negative frequency-dependent selection on their hosts  <cit> . we do not know, however, if and how the apparent changes in the relative genotype frequencies of hosts trigger responses in the relative genotype frequencies of parasites infecting these populations. although genetic markers, such as allozymes  or, more recently, microsatellites , have been widely applied to track changes in genotype frequencies in natural daphnia populations, markers for their microparasites are in a developmental phase  <cit> .

in the present study, we analysed infections of daphnia species from the d. longispina hybrid complex. in europe this complex includes, among other taxa, the widespread and ecologically important species d. cucullata, d. galeata and d. longispina, as well as their interspecific hybrids  <cit> . these daphnia are frequently infected by a variety of parasites . among these, the protozoan caullerya mesnili  is particularly common. caullerya forms spore clusters in the gut epithelium of daphnia  <cit> . this parasite is likely to cause significant selection pressure on daphnia populations because of its high virulence . indeed, our previous laboratory and field results indicate that caullerya can alter host genetic structures, both at the community and population levels  <cit> . for example, in artificial communities consisting of a mixture of several genotypes from two daphnia species, the competition outcome between species and genotypes differed between caullerya-infected and non-infected treatments  <cit> . since caullerya causes apparent changes in its host genetic structure, this parasite might, in turn, respond genetically to its changing host. to address potential genetic responses in populations of caullerya, polymorphism in the internal transcribed spacer region  of ribosomal dna can be used  <cit> . specifically, applying this its marker revealed that caullerya populations collected from three geographically isolated lakes were distinct from each other  <cit> .

here, we applied the same its marker to study genetic changes in caullerya populations in more detail. we studied parasite genetic variation over space . we expected to observe substantial spatial isolation among parasite populations, as caullerya appears to have no transmission vector other than its passively dispersing daphnia hosts  <cit> . we then followed changes in parasite population structure over time . we hypothesized that caullerya populations should change genetically, to remain infective to their ever-changing host. for caullerya populations from three of the studied sites, we simultaneously collected genetic data from their individual daphnia hosts. at this point, we aimed to compare the distribution of parasite genotypes across different coexisting host daphnia species and their hybrids. we expected that host species would exhibit differing spectra of parasite genotypes, as previous experimental studies showed a varying likelihood of infection when these species were exposed to caullerya  <cit> .

RESULTS
parasite: spatio-temporal variation
altogether,  <dig> zooplankton samples, collected across seven water reservoirs in the czech republic , were used for caullerya genotyping. all  <dig> samples had been genotyped after pooling of  <dig> infected hosts, per sample. additionally, three of those samples were genotyped on the individual level: ten infected hosts per sample  <cit> . in total,  <dig> unique caullerya its sequence variants were identified among  <dig> obtained its sequences. these its variants were further assigned by statistical parsimony network analysis to ten different representative sequence variants, tcs-types ; 40% of sequences were classified to the most abundant tcs-type, c <dig>  in contrast, four tcs-types  were present just once among  <dig> analysed sequences  <cit>  and were therefore excluded from subsequent analyses. the spatial and temporal population structure of parasites is displayed in a pca plot based on frequencies of specific tcs-types in  <dig> parasite population samples . the Římov, vír and Želivka samples from  <dig>  which were analysed from pooled host dna, clustered together with the subsamples from the same three populations processed independently by analysing parasite dna from single hosts, confirming that both methodological approaches result in comparable patterns see  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
location of sampling sites in the czech republic and schematic outlines of their morphology. a small arrow indicates the position of the dam and outflow of each reservoir. map modified after seda et al.  <cit> .
summary of analysed
caullerya mesnili
samples from seven lakes in the czech republic



dna
lake
year
tcs-type
no. of its

extraction
c1
c2
c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
c8
c9
c10
sequences

 <dig> pooled hosts/lake sample
a

 <dig> single hosts/lake sample
b
specifically, the number of its sequences obtained from c. mesnili parasite dna, as well as their assignment to representative sequence variants  by statistical parsimony analysis  are provided. parasite dna was either extracted from  <dig> individual daphnia hosts per sample or  <dig> pooled daphnia hosts per sample. table modified after giessler and wolinska  <cit> .


aparasite data from giessler and wolinska  <cit> .


bparasite data from wolinska et al.  <cit> .


cparasite dna from these samples was analysed using both approaches .
spatio-temporal population structure of
caullerya mesnili
parasites. principal component loadings on the pca-axes are based on the frequency of parasite tcs-types; the first two axes account for 84% of the variation in the data. parasite dna was obtained from daphnia hosts originating from seven lakes; some of the populations were sampled over a period of two to five years, resulting in  <dig> samples altogether . if the same lake was sampled 3– <dig> times, the samples are connected by a line. three additional subsamples, for which  <dig> infected individuals  were genotyped individually , are shown in grey.



parasite populations from different lakes were in most cases separated and the spatial separation usually persisted over time. however, populations from different lakes sometimes clustered together at the same point in time  or after a shift in time . the extent of the spatial and temporal separation of caullerya populations was supported by hierarchical analysis of molecular variance . the spatial  variance component was significant in all three cases analysed , explaining up to ~22% of the parasite genetic diversity . the temporal  component was also significant in all three cases , and explained up to 12% of the variation in the parasite data .table  <dig> 
results of amova to explore spatial and temporal population structure in
caullerya mesnili
parasites



lake samples
source of variation
df
percent variation
p
-value

spatial variation

temporal variation
calculations were based on the frequency of representative its-sequence variants  in c. mesnili parasite dna . significance levels from separate analyses to test for structures in space and time, respectively, were bonferroni corrected .



parasite and host: genetic associations
parasite its-data were obtained from individual daphnia hosts selected from Římov, vír and Želivka, sampled in  <dig>  these individual daphnia  were analysed at  <dig> microsatellite loci. the position of daphnia individuals relative to reference genotypes in the fca plot  revealed that these individuals belonged to three species, d. cucullata, d. galeata and d. longispina, and no hybrids were detected in this small dataset. overall, the distribution of parasite representative sequence variants  was more similar across different host species originating from the same lake than within host species from different lakes . this was confirmed by amova, where the degree of variation explained by the differences among host species was negligible , indicating that all host species were infected by the same array of parasite genotypes.figure  <dig> 
distribution of representative its-sequence variants  in
caullerya mesnili
. parasite dna was isolated from daphnia hosts belonging to three different species , and sampled across three different lakes. species identity of daphnia hosts was derived from the allelic variation at  <dig> microsatellite loci . distribution of tcs-types varied among lakes but not among host species: n: number of host individuals per lake and species; **p < <dig> , ***p < <dig>  .
results of amova to explore the association between
caullerya mesnili
parasite genotypes and the genetic  identity of
daphnia
hosts



dna extraction
source of variation
df
percent variation
p
-value

 <dig> single hosts/lake sample

daphnia species identity was assigned using  <dig> microsatellite loci . calculations were based on the frequency of representative its-sequence variants  in c. mesnili parasite dna .



host: spatial variation
out of the larger subset of randomly selected daphnia from Římov, vír and Želivka, sampled in  <dig> , the only host species present in all three lakes was d. galeata . amova tests revealed that a significant amount of genetic variation in the d. galeata dataset was explained by the among-lakes component . thus, d. galeata populations were significantly structured across space.table  <dig> 
results of amova to explore the spatial population structure in host species 



source of variation
df
percent variation
p
-value
calculations were based on the frequency of alleles at  <dig> microsatellite loci in daphnia host dna. dna was extracted from d. galeata representing a random host population sample, i.e., consisting of uninfected and infected individuals originating from three lakes sampled in  <dig> .



discussion
the reservoirs studied are geographically isolated, preventing any direct dispersal of daphnia hosts or their parasites through flowing water. indeed, we show here that caullerya populations originating from seven lakes were significantly structured across space, as were their host populations . the latter finding is consistent with previous studies on the d. longispina complex; daphnia populations from different lakes are often genetically differentiated even within a single region at relatively small spatial scales . the major dispersal pathway for the host, daphnia, is most likely via transport of their diapausing eggs by water birds, which are enclosed in a protective structure called an ephippium  <cit> . immigrant genotypes, however, have a low likelihood of becoming established in already developed populations  <cit> . in the case of caullerya, their spread seems not to be linked directly to this major dispersal stage of the host, diapausing eggs, because eggs and embryos of infected mothers are not themselves infected  <cit> . instead, if infected daphnia are ingested by waterfowl, it is likely that caullerya spores  could survive the passage through the bird’s gut because of a thick and robust spore wall  <cit> , and then be excreted into another lake. alternatively, infective stages of parasites might be transported independently of the daphnia host on the body surface of waterfowl. however, even if parasite spores are spread by birds in this way, such dispersal pathways would need to provide infective doses high enough for successful transmission .

the significant genetic differentiation of spatially separated caullerya populations observed here might also be influenced by processes other than limited gene flow. in particular, temporal changes within caullerya populations, as were observed in the studied reservoirs, may cause rapid genetic divergence. moreover, environmental differences among the studied lakes such as the trophic level  might promote different parasite genotypes . finally, a low level of sexual reproduction  in ichthyosporeans  <cit>  might also result in a high level of population structuring.

in addition to significant spatial genetic variation, we found support for temporal variation in caullerya. in lakes Římov and vír, for example, the genetic composition of caullerya populations varied substantially during the five-year study period. again, it cannot be excluded that the observed temporal changes are not only a result of adaptation of the parasite to its changing host, but fluctuating environmental conditions might play a role too. indeed, genotype-by-environment interactions have been previously observed in the daphnia − caullerya system  <cit> . as far as we know, studies looking at temporal changes in microparasite populations infecting wild animal host populations are still rare . thus, the daphnia − caullerya system appears to be an attractive model for studying host − parasite coevolution in the wild, because of its accessibility , the short generation time of both players and, finally, the insights already available from molecular markers.

another important finding of our study is that different co-existing daphnia host species were all infected by the same genotypic array of the parasite caullerya. this is surprising at first sight, because a prerequisite for parasite-driven, negative frequency-dependent selection is a strong genetic specificity for infection, resulting in genetically different hosts being infected by genetically different parasite strains  <cit> . in other words, parasite populations should be well structured with respect to the host genotypes they can infect . despite this, patterns similar to our results have already been observed elsewhere. for example, tight interactions between parasite and host genotypes were reported in a bumblebee–trypanosome system at the level of spatially isolated colonies within a single host species  <cit> , but identical parasite clones were found across several coexisting bumblebee species  <cit> . such horizontal transmission of parasites was argued to be favoured by niche overlap between bumblebee host species  <cit> . this might also be the case in the d. longispina system studied here, where different daphnia species coexist despite some differences in their ecological preferences  <cit> . another mechanism that might facilitate the homogenous distribution of caullerya genotypes between different daphnia species is host hybridization. specifically, daphnia hybrids might serve as ‘stepping stones’ that allow parasites to switch among host species . regardless of its cause, multi-host species infection might have important consequences for parasite epidemiology. theory predicts that parasites which do not depend on the population dynamics of a single host species should consequently be able to maintain large effective population sizes and high evolutionary potential  <cit> , a prediction further supported by empirical work  <cit> .

interestingly, previous field and experimental surveys have shown that coexisting daphnia host species and even genotypes differ in their likelihood of becoming infected with caullerya . still, as indicated by present genetic results, same parasite genotypes seem to be able to establish across various daphnia species. however, we should take the latter observation with caution, because the conclusions are based on screening of a limited number of samples and host individuals. thus, this hypothesis should be further tested, for example by conducting genetic analyses of a high number of infected and randomly chosen daphnia from lakes where different daphnia species coexist which is a common phenomenon . if a sufficient number of suitable samples from caullerya-infected populations is obtained, host species can be assessed for the likelihood of infection , and parasite genotypic arrays among host species can be compared to test for potential specificity once the host defence is broken. experimental tests should follow as well, where different daphnia host species are exposed to a mixture of parasite genotypes, and the genotypic array of successful parasites is compared among these hosts .

finally, the molecular approach used in this study, involving the combination of a transformed its dataset and dna-pooling of a moderate number of infected host specimens, proved to be a simple but reliable method to address parasite population differentiation over space and time . in the long term, however, results derived from a multi-copy gene should be confirmed by single-copy molecular markers . one also has to keep in mind that we have used rather neutral genetic markers, both for daphnia  and for caullerya . although these markers would still be linked to loci under selection in our  clonal host − parasite system, the outcome of coevolution actually depends on the loci coding for resistance in hosts and infectivity in parasites see . nevertheless, in terms of the parasite caullerya, its is the only available marker to date. the its dataset generated here, by standard sanger sequencing, may in future serve as a useful reference for higher-resolution datasets obtained from more powerful markers and advanced sequencing technologies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, by analysing its sequences, we successfully addressed spatial and temporal variation in the genetic structure of the ichthyosporean microparasite caullerya mesnili infecting the cladoceran daphnia host. our results suggest that caullerya can evolve rapidly and is thus likely to adapt to its hosts, as we detected significant genetic variation in parasite populations across space and time. when upcoming molecular and bioinformatic tools allow changes in genotype frequencies of parasites and hosts to be tracked together on a large scale and over the long term, the daphnia − caullerya system might become a useful model for host − parasite coevolution in the wild. moreover, the methods proposed here allow access to molecular studies of other microparasite species, for which sequence variation in the its or other highly variable genome regions has been documented but other types of polymorphic markers are lacking.

