BACKGROUND
clustering of biological samples based on microarray gene expression data is now standard practice in clinical, biological, toxicological and pharmacological studies  <cit> . however, there are limitations to various clustering algorithms. for instance, the classic k-means clustering algorithm  <cit>  uses euclidean distance to measure dissimilarity and to cluster objects while the k-modes algorithm  <cit>  only supports categorical or qualitative data through a simple matching objective function as a measure of dissimilarity. the inability of clustering algorithms to incorporate biological data in the grouping process can limit thorough interpretation of the data and its underlying biology.

several approaches to incorporate biological data associated with samples into the analysis of gene expression data have been proposed recently. shannon et al.  <cit>  utilized mantel statistics to correlate gene expression measurements with clinical covariates. the correlations are based on separate distance matrices computed using gene expression data and clinical covariates. pearson correlation is used to assess main effects, whereas partial correlation coefficients are used to assess correlation between gene expression and a subset of the sample covariates conditioned on other sample covariates. another approach introduced by sese et al.  <cit>  describes an itemset constrained clustering method where the optimal cluster that maximizes the interclass variance of gene expression with pathological features between groups is computed. informative gene expression clusters annotated with disease descriptions of the liver were revealed. kasturi and acharya  <cit>  proposed a model-free clustering method called information fusion, which uses soms kohonen learning to update the weights for clusters and to essentially correlate microarray gene expression patterns with repeated motifs in the upstream region of genes. a potential limitation to this approach is that the grid of the nodes for the som has to be defined beforehand and the results of the clustering are dependent on the geometry of the grid. the development of additional methods to simultaneously cluster samples based on microarray gene expression data with associated biological information is reasonably expected to improve the grouping of samples and to enhance the discovery of biological processes that are correlated with phenotypic end-points.

recent work has shown that better inference of genomic indicators for an outcome is obtained by integrating gene expression data with clinical or phenotypic data. for instance, gevaert et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that partial integration of clinical measurements with gene expression data through separate bayesian networks that are joined by a single phenotype variable, improved the prediction of the prognosis of breast cancer. others have used principal component analysis with an analysis of variance or partial least squares to associate gene expression data with clinical measurements for improved classification or prediction of an outcome  <cit> . in addition, a novel clustering approach that incorporates epigenetic  and phenotypic data , was shown to group tumor samples sufficiently well enough for discovery of informative pathways that adhere to strict heritability in breast cancer  <cit> . the approach, called heritable clustering, was suggested to be a framework to integrate other biological data. however, the extension of the algorithm for the analysis of high dimensional gene expression data integrated with clinical data as continuous measurements and phenotypic data as categorical values simultaneously has not been investigated.

since the k-means and k-modes algorithms are efficient for processing large numeric and categorical data sets respectively, the combination of objective functions for measuring dissimilarity has been applied in the k-prototypes algorithm as a practical approach to extend the k-means-like algorithm for clustering large data sets with categorical values  <cit> . to test the utility of the k-prototypes algorithm for clustering samples based on numeric microarray gene expression data and clinical chemistry evaluations with histopathological observations as categorical values, we introduce a modk-prototypes algorithm. the approach follows the k-means paradigm with randomization of initialization of the algorithm and is evaluated initially using two data sets. a simulated data set and a heart disease mixed type data set for proof-of-principle. the strategy involves constructing an objective function from the sum of the squared euclidean distances for numeric data with simple matching for categorical values in order to measure dissimilarity of the samples. separate weighting terms are used to control the influence of each data domain on the clustering of the samples. the dynamic validity index for numeric data was modified with a category utility measure in order to determine the optimal number of clusters in the mixed type data. a cluster's prototype is formed from the mean of the values for numeric features and the mode of the categorical values of all the samples in the group. the cluster's prototype is taken as a representation of the feature values that depicts the phenotype of the samples in the group.

further rigorous investigation of the modk-prototypes clustering method is then pursued by applying it to gene expression data and associated phenotypic evaluations from acetaminophen-exposed rat liver samples. acetaminophen, which is an analgesic, causes centrilobular necrosis in the rat liver at high dose exposures. using a chi-square test and go annotations of selected genes which significantly distinguish differences between prototypes of clusters of the acetaminophen data set across all three data domains, phenotypic prototypes were obtained which were descriptive of, and anchored to, necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver. this is an end-point manifested from high dose exposures of acetaminophen in the rat liver.

RESULTS
clustering mixed data types
the data sets used for clustering and the components of the modk-prototypes algorithm are shown in figure 1a. the α, β and γ weighting terms influence how much each data domain contributes to the clustering of the samples. an objective function with the sum of the squared euclidean distances for numeric data and simple matching for categorical values is used to measure the dissimilarity of the samples. samples are grouped using k-means clustering based on numeric attributes and k-modes clustering for attributes with categorical values. the dvi and cu measures comprise the dvi_cu score that measures the validity of the clustering. the modk-prototypes algorithm is shown in figure 1b and is a modification of the original k-prototypes algorithm  <cit> . for k =  <dig> to n number of samples and for b iterations, assignment of each sample is made to one of the k clusters based on the minimal distance of the sample to the prototypes of the clusters. the prototypes are updated and the samples are reassigned repeatedly until there is no more change in cluster assignment. the dvi_cu score is computed for the final assignment of the samples. the number of clusters in the data is estimated by finding the assignment of the samples, over all b initializations and all k partitions, which yielded the optimal validity score.

initial validation of the modk-prototypes algorithm was performed by evaluating the clustering of the samples in the simulated and the cleveland clinic heart disease mixed data sets. clustering of the simulated data was performed with adaptive weighting of the numeric and categorical data. after  <dig> trial clustering attempts over  <dig> to k possible clusters in the data, the modk-prototypes algorithm partitioned the data into  <dig> clusters with the samples in their respective class group . figure s <dig> in additional file  <dig> illustrates the minimization of the dvi_cu index at k =  <dig> 

clustering of the cleveland clinic heart disease data was performed with equal domain weighting. a plot of the dvi_cu validity measure at all values of k shows a minimum at k =  <dig>  implying that the estimated number of clusters is two . additional file  <dig> shows the assignment of the samples to either of the two clusters along with the categorical value for the chest pain type attribute. cluster  <dig> has  <dig> patient samples grouped together with pain type of angina suggestive of having heart disease  while cluster  <dig> has  <dig> patient samples grouped similarly together with non-angina representative of being without heart disease . the accuracy of the clustering of the patients into the two groups was 79%. this is on par with, or better than, the classification accuracy of the samples by the ntgrowth, c <dig> and classit, and conceptual clustering classification algorithms which were reported to the university of california at irvine repository for machine learning as 77%,  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively. this analysis indicates that the modk-prototypes algorithm can effectively cluster mixed data types leading to relatively accurate assignment of the samples to clusters with the appropriate clinical label.

similarly, application of the modk-prototypes algorithm with equal domain weighting to the acetaminophen mixed data indicates a minimum value for the dvi _cu validity measure at k =  <dig> , implying that there are three clusters in the data. ten samples were grouped into cluster  <dig>  nine into cluster  <dig> and  <dig> into cluster  <dig> . the samples in cluster  <dig> are comprised mostly of low dosed  samples and high dosed  samples at  <dig> hrs except for  <dig> animals  that had low alt and ast enzyme levels . elevated levels of alt and ast correlate with liver injury. cluster  <dig> contains all samples exposed to a high dose of acetaminophen for  <dig> or  <dig> hrs. cluster  <dig> has samples exposed to high dose of acetaminophen for  <dig> hrs, except for moderate responder rats #s  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  that were dosed for  <dig> or  <dig> hrs and had moderately elevated alt and ast enzyme levels.

validation of clustering the acetaminophen mixed data
we next assessed the ability of the algorithm to cluster the samples according to the level of liver necrosis. at toxic doses of acetaminophen, glutathione is depleted leading to the formation of a reactive intermediate that covalently binds to sulfhydryl groups of several cellular proteins  <cit> . these adducts are thought to contribute to tissue necrosis  <cit> . the indicator variable representing the histopathological observations made by board-certified pathologists on the centrilobular region of the liver was removed from the data set prior to running the modk-prototypes algorithm. this variable was then used as an external indicator to validate the assignment of samples to the three clusters. this observation has four feature values for all the exposed samples denoting either no, minimal, mild, or moderate severity of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver. using the modk-prototypes algorithm with k set at  <dig> and equal weighting of the microarray, clinical chemistry and histopathology domain data, 90% of the cluster assignments of the acetaminophen-treated samples had an adjusted rand index r' value greater than  <dig>  when compared to the groups of the samples according to the observed level of necrosis . since there were three clusters generated in the mixed data, yet four classes of acetaminophen-exposed centrilobular necrosis of the liver, perfect agreement was not possible, but the achieved clustering approached maximal validity given the external classification .

weighting schemes for clustering the acetaminophen mixed data
proposed weighting of the domain data
differential weighting of the domains may lead to further improved accuracy of the clustering procedure, as proposed by lance and williams  <cit>  who introduced a clustering algorithm dependent on the weight of dissimilarity between objects  <cit> . user defined weights for clustering permit more or less influence to be given to particular components of the dissimilarity function. several investigators at the niehs/national center for toxicogenomics responded to a survey in which they were asked to propose weights for clustering the acetaminophen microarray, clinical chemistry and histopathology data sets by assigning values for the modk-prototypes algorithm parameters α, β and γ respectively. their suggestions are listed in table  <dig> 

two respondents, numbers  <dig> and  <dig>  suggested different weighting schemes according to whether the end goal of the clustering of the samples was to either identify biomarkers related to histopathological changes following exposure to a toxicant, or to ascertain biological processes and pathways related to the phenotype of the samples. one respondent suggested two weighting schemes, one which is purported for data containing microarray, clinical chemistry and histopathology measurements  and one for molecular validation of toxicological evaluations of the samples . two other respondents, numbers  <dig> and  <dig>  suggested that the domain data be weighted according to preferred outcomes in the analysis of the data. the former proposed  equal weighting or  coupling biology with phenotype whereas the latter proposed clustering based on  general effects of the treatment,  specific injury and end-points from the exposure or  the affected pathways. the averages of the suggested weights were  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for α, β and γ respectively. the standard deviations of the suggested weights were low . however, the standard deviations of the β and γ weights were less than that of the α weight.

simultaneous clustering using domain weights
the highest agreement among all weighting schemes tested was achieved when the clinical chemistry data was given all of the weight. however, utilizing only the microarray data in the clustering process resulted in partitioning of the samples into just two groups with r' =  <dig> . excluding the microarray data from the analysis by weighting the clinical chemistry and the histopathology data equally yielded three clusters and r' =  <dig> . placing all the weight on the histopathology data or splitting the weighting equally between the microarray and histopathology data resulted in the poorest agreements  of the cluster assignments. interestingly, having the weighting shared between at least the microarray and clinical chemistry domain data appears to be advantageous for clustering the data irrespective of the balancing of the weights. surprisingly, no weighting scheme that included the histopathology data resulted in cluster groups with k >  <dig>  however, partitions with k =  <dig> and k =  <dig> were obtained respectively, when clinical chemistry data alone and microarray with clinical chemistry data were used for clustering the samples. the latter resulted in r' =  <dig> . with the weight of the microarray data set >  <dig>  and some weight given to the histopathology data, weighting schemes for clustering of the biological samples validated with r' =  <dig>  and k =  <dig> .

phenotypic prototypes
end-point components of the prototypes
the groups of samples from the modk-prototypes algorithm were analyzed next for phenotypic prototypes by extracting histopathological feature value labels, clinical chemistry measurements, and genes from the prototypes of the clusters that  distinguish between pathologic outcomes and  best represent the underlying biology of the data. this analysis was performed on the acetaminophen microarray, clinical chemistry and histopathology data  with k =  <dig> and the α, β and γ weights set at  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . table  <dig> lists partial prototypes of the resulting clusters  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> that represent samples grouped with moderate, no and mild levels, respectively, of necrosis of the centrilobular region. samples in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> were qualified by moderate and mild necrosis. by contrast, the majority of the samples in cluster  <dig> were either low dosed  at any of the durations of exposure, or high dosed  for short durations . except for  <dig> altered-responder rats  that were dosed for  <dig> or  <dig> hrs . these exposures were expected to give at least a mild hepatotoxic phenotype. however, the alt and ast levels for these animals were far below the treatment group average for these enzymes . clusters  <dig> and  <dig> contained only high dosed samples  with the durations of exposure beyond  <dig> hrs . in cluster  <dig>  most of the samples  were exposed for a time frame in which partial recovery from the treatment is expected , whereas cluster  <dig> only contains samples dosed for either  <dig> or  <dig> hrs. the samples in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> also showed markedly and moderately elevated alt and ast enzyme levels, as well as moderate and minimal congestion of the sinusoid region, respectively. furthermore, the samples from the rats in cluster  <dig> were represented by a histopathologic prototype characterized by minimal inflammatory cell infiltration in the centrilobular region, regeneration and degradation of the hepatocytes. the latter observed in the left medial lobe region. samples from rats #s  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were dosed with  <dig> mg/kg acetaminophen for either  <dig> or  <dig> hrs durations, but had only modest elevations of alt and ast. finally, from the prototype, samples in cluster  <dig> were observed to have minimal hypertrophy of the hepatocytes predominantly. the rest of the histopathology feature values for the three clusters were not informative  and therefore not included as representative features in the phenotypic prototypes.

of the clinical chemistry measurements listed in table  <dig> for each cluster prototype, alt and ast levels clearly distinguish cluster  <dig> samples labelled with the prototype feature as moderate necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver from the two other clusters. in addition, elevated levels of tba and decreased blood cholesterol differentiate samples in cluster  <dig> from samples in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> reasonably well.

gene expression component of the prototypes
differences in gene expression levels between each cluster are shown in figure 4a. the cluster  <dig> prototype labelled with no necrosis of the centrilobular region had the least amount of differential gene expression of the samples in the cluster. samples in clusters  <dig> and  <dig> with moderate and mild necrosis of the centrilobular region as representative indicators respectively, had numerous genes with over 2-fold differential expression. the most dramatic gene expression differences were observed in the comparison of no versus moderate  necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver, while the moderate versus mild comparison showed only slight differences in magnitude of expression between gene expression prototypes.

to extract genes from the pairwise comparisons of the expression component of the prototypes for the clusters that could statistically distinguish between levels of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver, a chi-square goodness-of-fit test was employed using the observed difference in a gene's expression ratios between two prototypes and the expected gene expression differences of all pairwise comparisons for all genes in the prototypes. with α set at  <dig> ,  <dig> genes, including several cytochrome p <dig> genes and heme oxygenase  <dig>  were identified as significant and unique in distinguishing contrasts between different levels of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver . a subset of the genes is shown in table  <dig>  in particular, the go biological processes cell growth and/or maintenance, amine metabolism and stress response discerned between clusters of samples grouped according to no and moderate necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver. mild and moderate centrilobular necrosis appeared to involve amine metabolism.

a clearer picture of the differences between the samples in the clusters labelled with either no, mild or moderate necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver was obtained by comparisons of clusters  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> using just the expression values of the  <dig> genes extracted from the prototypes . about 75% of the genes progressively increase or decrease in differential expression as the level of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the liver transitions from no to mild to moderate. finally, hierarchical clustering of the biological samples reveals very good grouping of the low dosed and high dosed samples. the latter very prominent and tight within time groups . interestingly, as shown in figure  <dig>  the nine no- or moderately-responding rats  were distinctly different from their counterpart dose-by-time group subjects in terms of alt enzyme levels. the high dosed  <dig> hrs rats differed from the high dosed  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hrs rats by a small cluster of genes that include an activator  of the c-jun n-terminal kinase  pathway, a transactivator of thyroid-stimulating hormone beta, and a regulator of neuronal differentiation and development.

discussion
clustering of microarray gene expression data has matured by virtue of the growing number of analytical approaches for partitioning data. k-means is one of the most widely used unsupervised clustering methods for gene expression data. unfortunately, k-means clustering, and other approaches such as soms do not guarantee globally optimal partitioning, require specifying the number of clusters or the configuration of the underlying classification structure, and suffer from inflexibility with respect to incorporation of associated biological data. more importantly, most clustering algorithms support only quantitative or qualitative data but not both simultaneously. huang  <cit>  introduced the k-prototypes algorithm that utilizes the clustering objective function of k-means for numeric measurements and k-modes for categorical values to partition data. we have proposed modifying this algorithm by adding an objective function to support and weight multi-domain, mixed type biological data within the k-means clustering paradigm. the advantage of our modk-prototypes algorithm is that simultaneous clustering of gene expression data with clinical chemistry evaluations and histopathology observations results in informative clusters that are formed with prototypes of genes and values from end-point variables that are anchored to the phenotypes of samples with similar biological outcomes.

our method is one of a class of approaches that seek to incorporate biological data directly into the clustering process  <cit> . using necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver following acetaminophen exposure as an end-point to couple with gene expression profiles, clinical chemistry evaluations and histopathological observations, simultaneous clustering of the data with the modk-prototypes algorithm revealed phenotypic prototypes which were capable of distinguishing between no, mild and moderate levels of necrosis of the liver . for instance, non- or moderately-responding rats to acetaminophen exposure were distinctly different from their counterpart dose-by-time group subjects. furthermore, the high dosed  <dig> hrs rats vs the high dosed  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hrs rats differed by a small cluster of genes involved in signal transduction and growth regulation. not surprisingly, cytochrome p <dig> genes and heme oxygenase  <dig>  which have functions in detoxification and redox regulation in response to oxidative stress, were found to be indicators of toxicity in the gene expression component of the phenotypic prototypes that differentiated between levels of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver . several published reports of gene expression data generated from treatment of biological samples with toxic agents describe the altered expression of genes such as these in well-known biological pathways that are perturbed subsequent to incipient toxicity  <cit> .

weighting of the terms in the modk-prototypes algorithm offers the flexibility to balance the influence of each domain of the data while simultaneously clustering the mixed data . this is advantageous for semi-supervised clustering when different goals for analyzing the data are in mind. the interest might be to cluster biological samples based on gene expression data with clinical chemistry measurements and histopathology observations for the purpose of finding biomarkers related to histopathological changes, or identifying which biological processes and pathways are related to the phenotypic end-point. from empirical analysis of acetaminophen-treated rat liver sample data using adaptive weighting or different weighting schemes, giving some weight to histopathology observations and at least half of the weight to the microarray data set is advantageous to clustering the data . interestingly, although applying all the weight to the clinical chemistry data gave the best fit between cluster assignment and histopathology evaluation of centrilobular necrosis, the number of clusters in the data was overestimated. this indicates that improper weighting of the domain data can potentially bias the clustering of the samples. further work is being done to weight the domain data heuristically.

the high dimensionality of data has challenged the efficiency and reliability of clustering algorithms for quite sometime. in high dimensional space, data points become sparse making the use of some distance measures meaningless. however, results from experiments on real-world high dimensional data have shown that distance measures based on the minkowski ld metrics, where d is either  <dig> or  <dig>  increases or remains constant as the dimensionality of the data increases  <cit> . our modk-prototypes algorithm is based on the euclidean  distance metric for the high dimensional microarray data and clinical chemistry data. given the aforementioned theoretical work plus our own simulation of a smaller scaled data set and reduction of the high dimensional numeric data , we are convinced that the clustering of the samples using the modk-prototypes algorithm is not dependent on the scale or dimensionality of the data. the simulation results also provide evidence that the algorithm is at least able to find a small number of true/known clusters when they exist. furthermore, the phenotypically anchored genes that were acquired from the prototypes of the clusters from the acetaminophen-exposed samples suggest that the modk-prototypes algorithm forms groups of samples that are biologically meaningful. additional applications of the method to a variety of simulated and real data sets are underway. these should also help in determining its usefulness over a range of scales and data dimensions.

as more biological data becomes available, sophisticated methods for clustering integrated data will be necessary in order to glean more meaningful information about the underlying biology of the samples. efforts such as integrative genomics, systems biology, toxicogenomics, pharmacogenomics and biomedical informatics are generating volumes of biological data and information spanning transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, toxicology, pharmacology, clinical biology and genetics to leverage each domain data for a more informed assessment of biological outcomes  <cit> . case in point, the work of baskin et al.  <cit>  to collectively analyze microarray, clinical data and pathology observations revealed that gene expression patterns were very much consistent with the clinical outcomes, gross pathology and histopathology from influenza virus-infected pigtailed macaques primates. however, the identified clusters may not contain genes that are directly associated with the appearance of clinical signs or pathological indications of tissue infection because the domains of data were analyzed independently.

the modk-prototypes algorithm is well-suited as a clustering method for grouping biological samples constrained by integrated data and feature values. it yields representatives of the clusters  which can potentially provide an initial insight to the biological mechanism driving the similarities of the samples and the phenotypes associated with gene expression. this concept of phenotypic anchoring has been proposed and tested as a means to link the cause of a disease or response with gene expression patterns and the altered biological processes that follow the observed effect  <cit> . we propose that the modk-prototypes clustering method will provide a feasible computational alternative to embark on bridging multi-domain data analysis frameworks for integrative genomics, systems biology, pharmacology and toxicology.

CONCLUSIONS
many existing methods for clustering gene expression data do not incorporate phenotypic data about the samples. we developed the modk-prototypes algorithm using an objective function with the sum of the squared euclidean distances and simple matching for clustering biological samples based on numeric data and categorical values respectively. it is a formal approach to cluster gene expression data with phenotypic data. the algorithm is based on the original k-prototypes algorithm but is adapted along the k-means paradigm, it contains weighting terms for microarray, clinical and histopathology data, and is designed to determine the number of clusters in the data by minimizing a dvi_cu measure over all possible numbers of clusters and randomization of the initialization of the algorithm.

the advantage of simultaneous clustering of gene expression data with clinical chemistry evaluations and histopathology observations is that informative clusters are formed with prototypes of genes and end-point features that are linked to the phenotypes of samples with similar biological outcomes. following modk-prototypes clustering of the acetaminophen data with weighting of the domain data, informative genes from the cluster prototypes were identified that are descriptive of, and phenotypically anchored to, levels of necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver. from empirical analysis of acetaminophen-treated rat liver sample data using adaptive weighting or different weighting schemes, having some weight given to the histopathology observations and weight of the microarray data set >  <dig> , are advantageous to clustering the samples. clustering the mixed data types in this fashion was better than typical k-means style clustering of either microarray or clinical chemistry numeric data alone  and better than k-modes clustering of the samples based solely on the histopathology data. we found that the expression profiles of several cytochrome p <dig> genes and heme oxygenase  <dig> were significant in their differentiation between levels of centrilobular necrosis of the rat liver. cytochrome p <dig> genes are in high proportion in the liver and produce detoxification enzymes to metabolize toxicants. furthermore, the high dosed  <dig> hrs rats vs the high dosed  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hrs rats differed by a small cluster of genes containing an activator of the c-jun n-terminal kinase pathway, a transactivator of thyroid-stimulating hormone beta and a regulator of neuronal differentiation and development. but overall, cell growth and/or maintenance, amine metabolism and stress response were biological processes that discerned between no and moderate levels of acetaminophen-induced necrosis of the centrilobular region of the rat liver. the use of well-known and traditional measurements directly in the clustering process provides some guarantee that the resulting clusters will be meaningfully interpretable. however, we realize that improper weights for the domain data can bias the clustering of the samples. in future work, we will investigate weighting the domain data heuristically.

