BACKGROUND
assessing variation within and between species provides information relating to taxonomic relationships  <cit> , as well as population structure, demographics and biogeographic patterns  <cit> . microscopic animals that are collectively known as the meiofauna present a series of challenges to studies of variation. despite their small size , meiofauna form an integral and vital component of the soil food web, playing a fundamental role in soil ecosystem processes, particularly in nutrient recycling and decomposition processes. twenty of the  <dig> recognised animal phyla have meiofaunal representatives,  <dig> of which are exclusively meiofaunal  <cit> , the implication being that in a handful of soil or sediment there is likely to be a high level of biodiversity. in more extreme environments, such as those of the antarctic, meiofauna may constitute the majority of, and in some cases the only, metoazoan element present in the soil ecosystem  <cit> . meiofauna are a focus of research from many sub-disciplines , as well as providing model organisms for studies of evolutionary development  and the evolution of sex . these tiny animals are difficult to see, often smaller than the particulate matter that comprises the substrata they inhabit, and thus difficult to separate from sediment, detritus and non-target species. within taxonomic groupings there may be few visible distinguishing characters, and those that are present may be subtle, requiring specialist and increasingly scarce taxonomic expertise  <cit> . nevertheless, accurate species identification is an essential first step to any scientific study.

molecular phylogenetic techniques take advantage of developments in our ability to detect variation in dna, effectively increasing the resolution available in comparison with morphological or phenotypic variation. this can be particularly useful when dealing with morphologically conserved groups. each base change in a dna sequence is analogous to a distinct morphological character in a phylogenetic analysis, which means many hundreds of characters can potentially be included in a single gene analysis. models have been developed to take rates of evolution and homoplasy into account  <cit>  providing molecular phylogenetic inference with a robust theoretical basis  <cit> . the concept that variation in a suitable and defined length of dna sequence may be used as a bar code for species identification is becoming increasingly appreciated  <cit> .

an important advantage of molecular data is that independent replication is possible. a phylogeny based on a single gene provides information regarding the history of and relationships between the taxa sampled. however, the information is limited to the occurrence of mutations and results in what is known as the genetree/species tree problem  <cit> . a significant event in the history of a lineage will only be recorded in a phylogeny if a mutation occurs at or just after the event. conversely a high mutation rate may lead to a confused signal in cases where, for instance, an informative mutation reverts back to its ancestral state, or further changes to a state present in another lineage . furthermore, there are processes, such as selection, that may affect the evolution of a gene, thereby confusing the signal of evolutionary history of the organism. these caveats may be at least partly countered by conducting independent analyses on several unlinked genes in order to generate a general consensus of phylogenies that more closely reflects the "true" evolutionary history, or by concatenating sequences to produce a super phylogeny  <cit> .

it is often not appreciated that transferring molecular techniques from the few "model" organisms that are the focus of intense laboratory research to the more numerous but less studied groups is not straightforward. conversely, molecular ecologists who work on meiofauna and other invertebrates may be surprised when they find their difficulties are not appreciated by the wider scientific community. dna quantity is a major issue with tiny organisms. to increase dna yield, the whole organism or, more often several pooled individuals, are used in extractions and, thus, problems with contaminants from gut contents or commensal organisms arise  <cit> . the difficulties working with understudied species are often only evidenced by the lack of published literature available. for example, as far as we are aware, there have only been three assessments made of intraspecific variation in any species of the meiofaunal phylum tardigrada  <cit> . this may be partially due to tardigrades and other meiofaunal groups falling outside economic and charismatic categories that influence the direction of science programs, but it is also likely to be due to the difficulties involved in obtaining genetic data from these members of the meiofaunal community. recently a variety of techniques have been developed or demonstrated as suitable for dna extraction from a variety of meiofauna  <cit>  providing a basis for basic evolutionary studies and the development of molecular tools for identification or classification  <cit> .

tardigrades are found in most terrestrial, freshwater and marine habitats, including some remote antarctic nunataks where they are found in the absence of the otherwise ubiquitous nematodes  <cit> . they are one of the few phyla with representatives found from the highest and coldest terrestrial environments to the deepest oceans. they have featured in high impact publications mostly due to their uncertain phylogenetic position in the tree of life  <cit> , although their ubiquitous distribution makes them ideal candidates for historical biogeographic reconstruction  <cit> . molecular phylogenetic work to date is strongly concordant with morphological based systematics  <cit> , supporting both tardigrade monophyly and monophyly in the constituent classes eutardigrada and heterotardigrada  <cit> .

in this paper we describe a method that enables the quantitative and qualitative assessment of morphology and genetic variation among individual tardigrades. the method includes a novel technique for separating all organisms from their substrate as compared with "cherry-picking" visible organisms under a dissecting microscope, a simple dna release technique applicable at the individual level, and a general protocol for amplifying genomic dna from multicopy and single copy genes. previous studies have amplified multi-copy 18s and high-copy number  genes from tardigrades  <cit> , but this is the first time single copy nuclear genes have been amplified from genomic dna extracted from a single tardigrade. we demonstrate that this method allows for informed re-assessment of morphological variation, allows independent replication of phylogenetic analyses and is suitable for assessing within population variation enabling population genetic studies.

RESULTS
sample collection and preparation
separating meiofauna from the substrate can be done in two ways: "cherry-picking" individuals using a pipette or irwin loop under a microscope, or mechanically separation, usually using a density gradient. "cherry-picking" is a fast technique if only a few specifically targeted individuals are required and the organisms are easily identifiable from the substrate. however, if quantitative biomass and diversity data are required this technique will be biased towards larger, vagile and more or less pigmented organisms . where quantitative and qualitative results are required to extract all individuals from a substrate the cherry-picking approach is inappropriate and such studies have adopted mechanical separation using density gradients . however, the media used, such as ludox am   <cit> , percoll   <cit>  or 50% sucrose  <cit>  may have detrimental downstream effects, particularly for pcr. using optiprep™ – density gradient media  we were able to isolate and identify all individual tardigrades and eggs from habitat substrata . substrata used included fresh, frozen and dried herbarium moss specimens. contrasting with previous protocols optiprep is non-ionic, non-toxic and does not require washing to remove the media. it has been used to fractionate sub-cellular organelles and does not interfere with marker enzyme activities, allowing fractions of cell organelles to be analyzed without removal of the gradient medium  <cit> . in the current study it proved to be clean and efficient at extracting meiofauna from substrata, allowing biodiversity and biomass from each sample to be determined, and detailed morphological examination without affecting subsequent dna extraction or downstream biochemical processes. furthermore, tardigrades extracted from fresh and frozen samples remained alive after the extraction process.

dna extraction
taking into account the limited amount of dna available in a single tardigrade we opted for a dna release method rather than an extraction method to maximise the amount of dna available. we trialled several different release methods . all these techniques were sufficient for amplification of 18s rdna, as many more expensive commercial kits have proven to be  <cit> . however, we found a  <dig> min boil in  <dig> μl of 5% chelex the most reliable technique across all gene regions, possibly because the chelex beads inactivate inhibitors that would otherwise prevent reliable amplification. obviously the risk of contamination and competition in pcr is significant and all precautions are advised to prevent inadvertent introduction of foreign dna. fortuitously this technique is cheap and rapid and the only reagent necessary  is inexpensive and readily available in many molecular laboratories.

dna quantification
in order to quantify dna concentration we used a picogreen™ assay , a sensitive technique for determining concentrations of dna in a solution. after extensive optimization to reduce the volumes of template required and level of background fluorescence, we were unable to detect dna in any of our extractions. however, we were able to successfully amplify ribosomal 18s and mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit  <dig>  products from most of our tardigrade extractions – even from animals extracted from rehydrated herbarium samples that had been stored dry for  <dig> years. recently kiel et al  <cit>  extracted  <dig>  μg of genomic dna from ~ <dig> pooled hypsibius klebelsbergi, indicating that each tardigrade contributed ~ <dig>  ng of dna to the extract. for amplification using polymerase chain reaction,  <dig> –  <dig> ng of dna is usually recommended in a  <dig> μl volume. clearly this will never be possible at individual level for many meiofaunal groups – particularly tardigrades – making studies of individuals rather than pooled samples challenging. even with the advent of whole genome amplification, to achieve representative amplification of the genome a minimum starting quantity of  <dig> μl of  <dig> ng/μl is recommended .

polymerase chain reaction 
our strategy for amplifying genomic dna was to use nested or hemi-nested pcr . rarely was product visible on a gel after a single round of pcr. however, re-amplifying from the first reaction using at least one internal primer resulted in reasonable amplification of the desired product. large gene regions  were amplified in overlapping fragments; first the whole region was amplified, then using this reaction mix as template three overlapping fragments were amplified. products amplified in this way generally returned clean sequences. two of the three 18s fragments amplified reliably on all templates, fragment one was difficult to amplify in heterotardigrades, while co <dig> was less reliable and wingless amplified only template from fresh or recently frozen samples. we were also able to amplify alpha spectrin  and elongation factor  <dig> alpha  from some individuals. we were able to verify that the aspec sequences we obtained were homologues but we were unable to verify these as originating from tardigrada. we were able to obtain ef1a sequences from most individuals, however, up to  <dig> different paralogues were identified, each with remarkably conserved coding sequence making orthologue-specific primer redesign difficult . genbank accession numbers and sample details can be found in the additional information file associated with this paper.

each sequence corresponds to one of two oligo-nucleotide primers used for each specific reaction. in addition, all forward primers were tailed with m13_rev  and all reverse primers were tailed with m <dig> –  <dig> . primers for 18s were adapted from  <cit> . lco/hco primers for co <dig> were designed by  <cit> . mtd <dig> was designed by  <cit> . wingless and alpha spectrin primers were sourced from  <cit> . elongation factor  <dig> alpha primers were designed from genbank alignments of onychophora, tardigrade, drosophila and artemia.

phylogenetic reconstruction
using maximum likelihood methods we have constructed phylogenies from nuclear ribosomal 18s, mitochondrial co <dig> and nuclear wingless regions . as we were unable to amplify heterotardigrades using wingless primers we used milnesium sp. as an out-group in this case as it is believed to represent a basal eutardigrade  <cit> . for the 18s and co <dig> phylogenies we used heterotardigrades as out-groups to root the trees and explore the relationships within the eutardigrades. although all studies to date have relied on a small number of taxa , results of both molecular and morphological work indicate monophyly of heterotardigrades and eutardigrades, and order apochaela holding a basal position within the eutardigrada  <cit> . our results are consistent with these findings. the most striking feature contained in these phylogenies is the non-monophyletic relationship between the eutardigrade families hypsibiidae and macrobiotidae and murrayidae, with macrobiotidae and murrayidae a clade nested within hypsibiidae. although not discussed, this is also evident in the phylogeny of jørgensen and kristensen  <cit>  and has recently been independently identified by kiehl et al  <dig>  <cit> . by utilizing our current method, further work is planned to fully explore phylogenetic relationships among and within tardigrade families.

identifying molecular variation
an important advantage of analysing sequences from individuals rather than a pooled sample is that variation that is difficult to distinguish using morphology is likely to be identified. for example, macrobiotus sp. is clustered into two groups, one containing individuals from near ville de jumelles, st maur créteil, france, the other containing individuals from charcot island, antarctica . the individual macro- <dig> was obtained from near ville de jumelles, st maur créteil, and yet is clearly different to other individuals identified as conspecifics from the same sample of moss. similarly acutuncus sp. was collected from jubany station, king george island, antarctica. there were clearly two different taxa represented at this one site – one taxon likely to be hypsibius.

misidentification in these kinds of studies is not surprising as identification can only be carried out under low power in order not to compromise material for subsequent molecular study . rigorous taxonomic identification requires permanent mounting and viewing under 1000× magnification . thus the limitation of potential misidentification is common to all current molecular studies of tardigrades. our protocol allows for individual molecular variation to be assessed. then, where unexpected variation occurs, an informed re-assessment of morphology can be made. to demonstrate this, we took a second sample of substratum from jubany station, re-extracted the tardigrades present and mounted multiple individuals to be observed under high power magnification. in this sample acutuncus antarcticus and two undescribed species of hypsibius were identified . furthermore an egg of acutuncus antarcticus,  was taken from the sample and dna extracted, amplified and sequenced, and the sequence then used to verify which of our samples were acutuncus and which were the unknown .

one other study has used individual tardigrades to explore diversity in environmental samples  <cit> . in this study remarkable unexpected diversity was present, even between morphologically similar groups, which would have been confused if samples had have been pooled. pooling mixed taxon samples would at best mask the diversity present or, at worst, generate false sequence due to pcr recombination  <cit> . indeed, pcr recombination was detected in our study. a blast search of the full sequences of the two aberrant echiniscus testudo 18s specimens  closely matched echiniscus sequence previously deposited on genbank. however, blasting a small  anomalous region of the sequence perfectly matched the yeast candida sp. indicating that the variation in these pcr products was a chimeric artefact generated from two competing templates.

utility for population comparisons
traditionally in population studies a suite of variable markers are developed and used to screen many individuals to explore intraspecific population structure using allele frequency  and genotype frequency  approaches. more recently, studies have taken advantage of the genealogical information available in sequence data to investigate contemporary and historical population processes  <cit> . our method potentially enables multiple gene sequences to be obtained from individuals allowing genic, genotypic and genealogic analyses  <cit> . there has only been a single molecular population genetic study of tardigrades  <cit> . this study provides an important contribution to the field as it indicates that echiniscus testudo has a high migration potential. importantly though, the data were collected from pooled individuals and are based on a single gene  which may not accurately reflect the true population structure  <cit> . to thoroughly explore population structure, multiple independent markers are required and intrapopulation variation needs to be evaluated  <cit> . from our example we can demonstrate intraspecific variation in dactylobiotus sp. samples in all three gene regions examined  and  <dig> sequence variable alleles at the wingless locus for ramazzotius oberhaeuseri from a single clump of moss.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a method that allows for extraction of individual meiofaunal specimens from their substratum. our protocol for assessing between-individual variation is guided by but independent of morphology. we have demonstrated that phylogenetic analyses using data gained from individuals rather than pooled samples allow the detection of hidden diversity and assists in distinguishing true diversity from errors. sequence data obtained from multiple genes will also have application in improving resolution in population level studies. we are currently employing the techniques described here to conduct large-scale phylogenetic and biogeographic studies of tardigrades.

