BACKGROUND
the identification and characterization of transgenic insertions within the host genome is considered good practice for a number of different reasons. for instance, it can verify whether a transgenic animal is either homozygous or hemizygous for the transgene, an important aspect of breeding strategies. it is also useful for discerning targeted integration events from random ones, particularly when inappropriate gene expression and/or unexpected phenotypes are observed and insertional inactivation of a host gene is suspected. transgenic insertion mapping has recently led to the discovery of a novel locus on proximal chromosome  <dig> associated with a congenital abnormality of the brain structure in mouse  <cit> , and has also enabled the finding of an association between a dominantly inherited cone degeneration in a mouse model and a locus on chromosome  <dig> orthologous to a genomic region linked to a number of inherited retinal disorders in humans  <cit> .

physical mapping of transgenic insertions by fluorescence in situ hybridization  in rodents is a well established and cost-effective technique which can be applied either independently for chromosomal assignment and zygosity status assessment  <cit> , or as a validation route in cases where high-resolution mapping has previously been obtained by molecular methods, like dna sequencing  <cit> .

fish mapping of transgenic insertions  in mouse and rat usually entails hybridizing a dna probe, homologous to the transgenic sequence, on metaphase chromosome spreads obtained from short term fibroblast cultures from tail or ear biopsies. the procedure normally involves tissue dissociation - done either mechanically or enzymatically - and culture of the resulting fibroblasts for one or more weeks prior to harvesting  <cit> .

chromosomal assignment is typically achieved by simultaneous g-banding or by means of multi-color fish protocols, whereby the transgenic probe is co-hybridized with one or more differently labeled chromosome-specific probes. while interpretation of g-banding patterns is laborious and can be particularly challenging for the less experienced investigator, fish-based methods, especially with the help of specifically designed software for digital image analysis, are more user-friendly. however, according to the specification of the fluorescence imaging system used, the "transgenic probe plus single chromosome-specific probe" approach may require many consecutive fish hybridizations to establish eventually the chromosomal location of the transgenic insertion.

it has been previously shown that fast and accurate chromosomal assignment of transgene insertions in mouse can be achieved by sequentially combining fish mapping with spectral karyotyping   <cit> . sky is a fish-based technique that makes use of multiple, differently labeled dna "paints"  and spectral cube/interferometer technology to analyze the spectral signature of each image pixel and simultaneously visualize and identify all the chromosomes in a karyotype at once. the combined use of fish and sky for transgenic detection has also the potential to identify transgene-induced chromosomal rearrangements, and accordingly is recommended as the most suitable approach for detecting unexpected genetic events associated with transgenic technology  <cit> .

in the present report we describe a technical development whereby even faster chromosomal assignment of transgenic insertions at the single cell level in mouse and rat can be obtained by an efficient, combined hybridization procedure for multiplex fish  and the detection of transgene insertions, the latter of which are easily labeled with ultra-bright quantum dot  conjugates.

m-fish is a protocol for multicolor karyotyping, different in design but similar in purpose to sky, wherein a combinatorial labeling algorithm enables simultaneous identification of all chromosomes at once as well as the accurate delineation of chromosomal aberrations  <cit> , an often challenging task in species like mouse and rat in which inter-homologous differences in chromosome morphology and banding patterns are often non-conspicuous.

quantum dot nanocrystals  are inorganic fluorophores, made of semiconductor materials, which are orders of magnitude brighter than organic fluorophores. they are also more photo-stable, with hardly any noticeable photo-bleaching. crucially for multiplex labeling experiments, qds are available in multiple resolvable colors and have narrow emission bands with minimal spectral overlap. while qds have a broad excitation spectrum, the excitation range is the same for each class of qd regardless of its emission wavelength, which makes it possible for them to be simultaneously excited, but distinguished from other fluorophores in a single exposure. although the use of qd technology in fish analysis is a relatively new field of investigation, a number of independent research groups have already explored their possible applications to chromosomal studies  <cit> . however, to our knowledge this is the first attempt at combining qd technology with multicolor karyotyping by m-fish for physical mapping purposes. it should be noted that both m-fish probes for mouse and rat, and qd-conjugated antibodies and affinity molecules such as streptavidin are now commercially available.

RESULTS
we have devised an improved method for mapping of transgenic insertions in mouse and rat models. this procedure, which is described in detail in the materials and methods section, relies on m-fish analysis for fast and accurate chromosomal identification in rodents, and differs from similar, previously described multicolor fish-based mapping protocols for mixing in a simple, more efficient "single-step" hybridization the multiplex probe for the simultaneous recognition of all chromosomes and the transgene-specific probe for the detection of the integrated exogenous sequence . this development was accomplished by combining the use of organic fluorophores and qd nanocrystals in the same fish experiment.

the chemical and spectral properties of qd are crucially different from those of other fluorophores, allowing for a critical degree of flexibility in the experimental and analytical steps. briefly, the technique consists of co-hybridizing the directly labeled m-fish multiplex probe for the animal species under investigation together and the indirectly labeled transgenic probe to the chromosome preparation, previously fixed on slide. each of the chromosome-specific "paints" in the commercially obtainable multiplex or m-fish probe is labeled with a finite number  of distinct organic fluorophores  in a unique combinatorial fashion, while the single transgenic probe is labeled in-house with a reporter molecule . following the probe manufacturer's instructions, after  <dig> hours incubation at 37°c, post-hybridization washes and dapi counterstaining, the slides are analyzed on the microscope. no detection step is required at this stage as the m-fish probes are directly labeled. the initial goal is simply to acquire a number of informative m-fish images  for either simultaneous or subsequent karyotype analysis. following image capture, the slides are briefly washed and detection of the biotin-tagged transgene carried out at once with qd conjugated-streptavidin. unlike in previously described protocols, there is no need for re-denaturation of the specimen and further overnight incubation , and there is also no need for "bleaching out" the m-fish probes fluorescence . using the previously acquired m-fish images as a reference, metaphases of interest are traced back and new images captured using the required filter for visualization of the specific qd emission.

the requirement for two separate imaging steps is dictated by the current specifications of the optical setup and specialized software for m-fish analysis. m-fish relies on a multiplex probe set of chromosome specific "paints", each labeled with a finite number of spectrally distinct fluorophores, and a set of filters for achieving optimal color separation for all fluorophores employed. if a combined imaging strategy is applied the qd fluorescence properties of broad excitation and strong emission end up interfering with the color separation and, as a result, scramble the automated decoding of the different labeling combinations, which is mandatory for the rapid m-fish karyotyping. while we cannot exclude that these current hardware and software "limitations" might be addressed and resolved in the near future by the interested parties, two separate imaging steps - that is m-fish imaging to be followed by qd detection - are presently the safest route to achieve clear-cut results with our combined m-fish/qd protocol.

we have successfully applied this procedure for the transgenic insertion mapping and zygosity status evaluation in the b <dig> cg-tg mouse model  <cit> . to identify the chromosome holding the transgenic insertion in the mouse model, a clone for the opn1lw gene and its upstream region from a human fosmid library was labeled with biotin and, after co-hybridization with the m-fish probe, subsequently detected with a qd  <dig> streptavidin conjugate . as well as carrying out image acquisition in sequence on two different microscopes, specifically a cytovision® system equipped with a set of filters and interface software for m-fish karyotyping  and a nikon te-2000-e fluorescence microscope specifically equipped with qd filters from chroma , most conveniently, we were able to observe the qd  <dig> emission on the cytovision® fish workstation alone, using a dapi/fitc/texas red triple filter set  under dapi excitation . while the emission spectrum of qd  <dig> only overlaps partially with the emission window of texas red , the qd brightness is so high that it efficiently bleeds through into the emission channel and appears as ultra-bright points of light against the stained chromosomes on the monochrome ccd camera image. when observed through the ocular, the red qd  <dig> is easily distinguished from the blue dapi background by eye and annotations can be made onto the monochrome images.

while the strength of the qd bleed-through may initially appear surprising, its origin lies in the brightness of the qd and their ability to efficiently absorb light at uv wavelengths: as a comparison, the molar absorbance of qd  <dig> is nearly  <dig> times that of dapi at  <dig> nm and more than  <dig>  times at  <dig> nm . when all the components of the microscopy system  are taken into account with the qd and dapi optical properties using a web-software tool developed by c boswell and g mcnamara at the university of arizona http://www.mcb.arizona.edu/ipc/fret/index.html, the light output of qd  <dig> is calculated to be  <dig> times greater than dapi when using a triple dapi/fitc/texas red filter set under dapi excitation .

light output values take the emission lines of the mercury arc lamp, filter sets, and dye absorbance and emission spectra into account to determine the light output of particular fluorophores given a particular optical configuration. note that a "triple" filter and dichroic refers to a standard multichroic or emission filter with multiple bandpasses for dapi/fitc/tritc, typical on a cytogenetics workstation. light output values were obtained using "fluorescent spectra: an interactive exploratory database", a web-software tool developed by c boswell and g mcnamara http://www.mcb.arizona.edu/ipc/fret/.

visualization of the transgenic insertion and zygosity status evaluation in the second animal model under investigation - a transgenic rat carrying a human bacterial artificial chromosome  - was carried out by detecting the biotin labeled bac probe as described above, but using a different qd streptavidin conjugate, namely the qd  <dig> . using this specific conjugate, it was not possible to unequivocally visualize the qd signal using the dapi/fitc/texas red triple filter set under dapi excitation. this was probably due both to the lower extinction coefficient of qd  <dig> as compared to qd  <dig> and to the spectral properties of the triple filter set used, which blocks light emitted at  <dig> nm to a large degree. image acquisition could only be carried out in sequence on the two different systems, namely the fluorescence microscope equipped with filters and interface software for m-fish analysis and the fluorescence microscope equipped with the specific qd filter . therefore for the most rapid method of transgene localization, using filters sets commonly used by a typical cytogenetics laboratory, we would recommend using qd  <dig> 

the same parameters used for standard fish signal interpretation with organic fluorophores should be applied to the qd images. it is usually possible to discriminate true signals from false positives through experience and logical deduction. to start with, the signal/noise ratio should be reasonable. indeed, if the fluorescent background is too high  and no single signal stands out, the slides should go through additional post-hybridization or post-detection washes, and should effectively be reprocessed for detection. as in conventional fish analysis, fluorescent signals not lying on top of chromosomes, and sitting outside the chromosome or nuclei contours, should be deemed aspecific background and excluded from the signal count. for confident chromosomal assignment the investigator should expect a doublet signal  to be consistently found on the same chromosome in a minimum of 10- <dig> m-fish metaphases per transgenic sample. for instance, in our samples, we observed 89%  of transgenic signals to be present as "doublets", while the remaining 11%  appeared as "singlets" . metaphases with "null" signals were not imaged.

the size and brightness of the transgenic signal as detected by qd conjugate after the m-fish analysis both on metaphase chromosomes and interphase nuclei was very much similar to the signal for the same transgenic insertion detected by fitc- or tritc-avidin in standard fish mapping experiments that were carried out as controls . with both qd and organic fluorophore detection, it is also possible to estimate whether the insertion site is likely to contain one or multiple copies of the insert, either by taking in consideration the expected size of the insert or by direct visual comparison of the transgenic insertion size to the corresponding endogenous fish signal on the control species from which the transgene originates, or by direct visual comparison of two different insertions within the same karyotype .

CONCLUSIONS
we describe a simple "single denaturation mixed hybridization" procedure combining multi-color karyotyping by multiplex fish , for simultaneous and unambiguous identification of all chromosomes at once, and the use of a quantum dot  conjugate for fast chromosomal assignment of transgenic insertions at the single cell level in mouse and rat models. to our knowledge this is the first report of a purpose-designed molecular cytogenetic protocol in which the combined use of qds and standard organic fluorophores is specifically tailored to assist gene transfer technology.

