BACKGROUND
high-throughput gene expression profiling across samples constitutes one of the primary tools for characterizing phenotypes at molecular level. one of the main advantages of the rapidly evolving massive scale cdna sequencing assay for this purpose , over the hybridization-based microarray technology, is a much larger dynamic range of detection. however, the extent to which this feature is fully exploited depends entirely on the way the resulting data is analyzed when addressing a particular biological question. for instance, in the identification of genes that significantly change their expression levels between groups of samples, also known as differential expression .

for de analysis, after some pre-processing steps that include the alignment of the sequenced reads to a reference genome and their summarization into features of interest , raw rna-seq data is transformed into an initial table of counts. this table should then be normalized  <cit>  in order to adjust for both technical variability and the expression properties of the samples, such that the estimated normalization factors and offsets applied to the rna-seq count data describe as accurately as possible the relative number of copies of each feature throughout every sample. as opposed to the continuous nature of log-scale fluorescence units in microarray data, rna-seq expression levels are defined by discrete count data, and therefore, require specific de analysis techniques.

detection of de genes using rna-seq data was firstly based on using models assuming a poisson distribution  <cit>  with one single parameter, the mean, which simultaneously determines the variance of the distribution. given that the observed variation in read counts is much larger than the mean , researchers have proposed the use of negative binomial  distributions  <cit>  which are defined by two parameters: the mean and the dispersion. however, the larger power of rna-seq to capture biological variability can potentially introduce into count data not only overdispersion, but also oddities such as zero-inflation  and heavy tail behavior , specially when many biological replicates are available. under these circumstances even a two-parameter nb distribution may not provide an adequate fit to the data . in turn, this may lead to incorrect statistical inferences resulting in lists of de genes with a potentially increased number of false positive calls and poor reproducibility. to overcome this problem, methods based on the nb distribution  <cit>  use sophisticated moderation techniques that borrow information across genes and exploit the mean-variance relationship in count data to improve the estimation of the nb dispersion parameter. this requires, however, that the parameter configuration is calibrated for the most appropriate moderation regime which may depend on features such as sample size, the magnitude of the fold-change, the variability of expression levels, the fraction of genes undergoing differential expression and the overall expression level.

in this paper we propose to approach this problem by using other count data distributions that fit expression profiles better than the nb without the need to alter configuration parameters. the rest of the paper is organized as follows. using a large rna-seq data set of hapmap lymphoblastoid cell lines  derived from n= <dig> unrelated nigerian  individuals  <cit> , we start by assessing the goodness of fit of extensively replicated expression profiles to the nb distribution, showing a lack of fit for an important fraction of genes. we illustrate how a more flexible family of count-data probability distributions, called the poisson-tweedie, provides a better fit to these expression profiles. we provide data supporting the hypothesis that the lack of fit to nb distributions may be related to the dynamics of gene expression unveiled by rna-seq technology. we then introduce a new test for differential expression analysis in rna-seq data based on the poisson-tweedie family of distributions. we demonstrate with simulations on synthetic and real rna-seq data how a single run of our approach provides p-values that are equally or more accurate than nb-based competing methods calibrated with a variety of configuration parameters. finally, by surveying the tiny fraction of sex-specific gene expression changes in lcl samples, we approach the problem of assessing accuracy in de analysis with real rna-seq data and show that, in the context of extensively replicated rna-seq experiments, tweedeseq yields better performance than competing nb-based methods without the need to make an informed decision on the configuration of parameters. this improvement is reported in terms of precision and recall of de genes and reproducibility of the significance levels with respect to matching microarray experiments.

RESULTS
the results we provide in this paper are based on data from a previously published large rna-seq experiment  <cit>  and on our own simulated count data. we downloaded and pre-processed the hapmap lcl raw rna-seq data, consisting of n= <dig> samples from unrelated yri individuals, with our own pipeline . the resulting table of counts consists of  <dig>  genes by  <dig> samples. we filtered out genes with very low expression levels and used different normalization methods  <cit>   to ensure that the results described below do not depend on this fundamental step. in fact, we have observed that normalized counts can lead to quite different ma-plots depending on the normalization method, thus potentially affecting de detection power and accuracy .

the statistical methods proposed in this paper are implemented in a package for the statistical software r, called tweedeseq which forms part of the bioconductor project  <cit>  at http://www.bioconductor.org. we have also created an experimental data package, called tweedeseqcountdata, which contains the previously described data set and is also available at the same url. all results presented in the paper were obtained using these and other packages from r version  <dig> . <dig> and bioconductor version  <dig> , and can be reproduced through the scripts available as additional file  <dig> to this article.

review of competing methods
there is currently a large body of literature on de analysis methods for rna-seq data  <cit> , nearly all of them based on the nb distribution and developed to deliver their best performance with few replicates. anders et al.   <cit>  argued that for large number of individuals “... questions of data distribution could be avoided by using non-parametric methods, such as rank-based permutation tests”. however, rank-based methods require similar count data distributions between sample groups. due to the large variability across groups  <cit>  captured by rna-seq data, this assumption will most likely be broken in this context. for example, panels e-f in figure  <dig> illustrate the case of gene nlgn4y , a gene located in the male-specific region of chromosome y and reported to have sex-specific expression, which shows remarkably different count data distributions between male and female samples. permutation tests are also underpowered since distribution tails are not well estimated , which is important when correcting for multiple testing.

in this paper we will focus our comparisons on the two most widely used methods for de analysis of rna-seq data, edger <cit>   and deseq <cit>   and explore those parameter configurations in these methods that we found most relevant for large rna-seq data sets, according to the available documentation. both, edger and deseq, assume that expression profiles from rna-seq data follow an nb distribution and borrow information across genes to first estimate a common dispersion parameter. then, for each gene, they estimate its genewise dispersion and moderate it towards the common one. the way in which this moderation takes place depends on the method and its configuration parameters. deseq <cit>  allows switching between common  and genewise  dispersions. it provides a straightforward strategy  to choose between common and genewise dispersions by taking the largest value for each gene. edger allows one to calibrate, using the prior.df parameter, the transition from a purely genewise dispersion estimate  to the common one  by using an empirical bayes approach. by default prior.df= <dig> which implies that a large weight is given to the common dispersion. however, according to the documentation, if the number of samples is large, the common dispersion becomes less important in the moderation step. additional options in deseq and edger that may be relevant in the context of large rna-seq data sets are, in the case of deseq, whether dispersions are estimated from the entire pool of samples  or separately per sample group . in the case of edger, whether the de test is performed using a likelihood ratio test  function) or a quasi-likelihood f-test  <cit>   function), after dispersions are estimated. table  <dig> summarizes these eight combinations of methods and parameter configurations and contains the key to the terms used in some figures to distinguish among them.

different gene expression dynamics require different distributional assumptions on count data
we assessed the goodness-of-fit of every expression profile in the lcl rna-seq data to an nb distribution  by means of quantile-quantile  plots  and about 10% of the genes show a substantial discrepancy with respect to the nb distribution in the counts . such a discrepancy is absent from data simulated from nb distributions with a similar number of genes including a small fraction of them changing between two conditions .

this result suggests that nb distributions may be too restrictive for an important fraction of expression profiles in large rna-seq data sets. among the possible causes underlying the lack of fit of those genes to an nb distribution, a clear candidate is that the presence of many samples can potentially introduce features such as zero-inflation or heavy-tails . so far, extensive biological replication in rna-seq experiments has been the exception rather than the rule. however, it is becoming increasingly clear  <cit>  that in the coming years larger rna-seq data sets will be required to justify scientific conclusions and provide reproducible results. therefore, we can expect to see more often gene expression profiles with emerging features, such as zero-inflation and heavy tails, that challenge rna-seq methods based on the nb distribution.

we propose to address this problem by adopting the poisson-tweedie  family of distributions  <cit>  to model rna-seq count data directly. pt distributions are described by a mean , a dispersion  and a shape  parameter  and include poisson and nb distributions, among others, as particular cases  <cit> . an important feature of this family is that, while the nb distribution only allows a quadratic mean-variance relationship, the pt distributions generalizes this relationship to any order  <cit> . we have implemented a maximum likelihood procedure for the estimation and simulation of these parameters from count data. these procedures are available in the tweedeseq package through the functions mlepoissontweedie(), dpt() and rpt().

the main difference between the pt and nb distributions lies in the additional “shape” parameter a of the pt distribution which provides further flexibility . using the lcl data processed with different normalization methods, we show in figure  <dig> all values of the shape parameter a for every gene as function of its mean expression level, illustrating the huge variability of this parameter in rna-seq count data. this wide range of values involves distinct possible distributional assumptions  <cit>  beyond poisson and nb, such as poisson-inverse gaussian, pólya-aeppli or neyman type a. similarly to the ma-plots of figure  <dig>  the cqn normalization method seems to make the largest impact on count data and, in this case, on the shape parameter.

we have investigated whether this diversity of count distributions underlying rna-seq data is related to different expression dynamics in genes. using the test for the goodness of fit to an nb distribution  we have considered as nb those genes that do not reject the null hypothesis at p> <dig>  and as clear-cut non-nb genes those with p<2− <dig>  by mapping all these genes to the gene expression barcode catalog  <cit>   we obtained an independent and unbiased estimation of their expression breadth. the results in figure  <dig> suggest that the expression breadth of nonnb genes approaches that of housekeeping genes closer than nb genes do, irrespective of the normalization method.

in fact, fisher’s exact tests for enrichment of non-nb genes among human housekeeping genes are significant  for every normalization method . these observations suggest that genes with different expression dynamics can produce different count data distributions, and underscore the flexibility of the pt statistical model to capture these dynamics revealed by extensively-replicated rna-seq experiments.

accurately testing differential expression
for the purpose of a de analysis between two groups of samples, we have developed a two-sample pt-test for differences in means  implemented through the function tweede() in the tweedeseq package. we will assess the accuracy of this pt-based test using the lcl data as well as synthetic count data from two different simulation studies. the first simulation study with synthetic data provides an assessment of the type-i error rate under four different scenarios involving distinct count data distributions between sample groups . here we compare tweedeseq with the configurations of edger and deseq which are closer to a straightforward nb model. additional file 2: figures s <dig> to s <dig> show that tweedeseq properly controls the nominal probability of a type-i error while edger, deseq and non-parametric tests  fail to do so when data are not simulated from nb distributions. as expected, these methods perform correctly when data are generated under an nb model  as expected. additional file 2: figure s <dig> also shows that in the calculation of very low p-values, tweedeseq clearly outperforms permutations tests. in order to provide a practical recommendation on the minimum sample size required by tweedeseq to yield accurate results we have estimated the probability of a type-i error across different sample sizes. additional file 2: figure s <dig> indicates that  <dig> samples per group should be sufficient for tweedeseq to correctly control for a nominal significance level α= <dig> .

in the second simulation study we have first assessed the accuracy of the p-value distribution under the null hypothesis of no differential expression with real rna-seq data by making repeatedly two-sample group comparisons within males and within females samples such that we recreate the null hypothesis of no de with real rna-seq data and no de gene should be expected to be found. the raw p-value distributions from such analysis should ideally be uniform.

we have formally tested this hypothesis for every gene by means of a kolmogorov-smirnov  goodness-of-fit test to a uniform distribution and examine the resulting p-value distribution by means of q-q plots displayed in figure  <dig>  under the null hypothesis that all genes are not de, the ks p-values should lie along the diagonal of the q-q plot. the figure, however, shows large discrepancies to this criterion by some of the methods and configuration parameters, indicating that they may not be adequate for large rna-seq data sets.

the method introduced in this paper, tweedeseq, is consistently closer to the diagonal than every other method throughout the two male and female comparisons and the two normalization methods. more informally, the visual inspection of the histograms of raw p-values given in additional file 2: figure s <dig> also reveals that tweedeseq provides p-value distributions closer to the uniform under the null hypothesis of no de simulated from extensively replicated real rna-seq data.

as other authors have shown, in the context of analysis of rna-seq data with very limited sample size  <cit> , small deviations from uniformity of p-values under the null hypothesis can substantially affect fdr estimates of de genes. we have also assessed the calibration of p-values and false discovery rates  with synthetic count data of similar dimensions to the rna-seq lcl data set, concretely with p= <dig>  genes and n= <dig> samples. working with this type of data allows to assess fdr estimates for a known subset of de genes under a variety of simulated scenarios, which we defined by considering the combination of three different amounts of de genes  and three different magnitudes of fold-change . similarly to  <cit> , data were simulated from a hierarchical gamma-poisson model with and without simulated library factors .

from every simulated data set, raw p-values for the two-sample de test were obtained with each method and configuration parameters. using the qvalue bioconductor package  <cit>  we estimated q-values and the fraction of de genes from each p-value distribution. q-values provide a nominal estimation of the fdr for each gene and in figures  <dig> and  <dig> we show the empirical fdr  as a function of the nominal q-values for the simulations with constant and variable library factors, respectively. the dashed diagonal line indicates a correct calibration of p-values whose nominal fdr equals the observed efdr. lines above the diagonal correspond to liberal de analysis methodologies and below to conservative ones.

to facilitate the comparison of methods across all simulated data sets we have calculated the mean squared error  between the efdr and the nominal fdr and ranked the methods by increasing mse. in tables  <dig> and  <dig> we can find the mse values and in tables  <dig> and  <dig> the corresponding ranks of the methods according to the mse values. as it follows from the rankings in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  tweedeseq provides the best calibrated p-values in most of the simulated data sets.

data in this table correspond to the mean squared error  values between the empirical false discovery rates  and the nominal q-values obtained from the simulation study shown in figure  <dig> in which library factors were held constant.

data in this table correspond to the mean squared error  values between the empirical false discovery rates  and the nominal q-values obtained from the simulation study shown in figure  <dig> in which library factors were variable.

data in this table correspond to the rankings of every method by the mean squared error  values shown in table  <dig> 

data in this table correspond to the rankings of every method by the mean squared error  values shown in table  <dig> 

the previous calculations of q-values with the qvalue package  <cit>  provide us also with estimates π^ <dig> of the fraction of genes under the null hypothesis of no differential expression. this, in turn, allows one to derive an estimated number of de genes as p with p being the total number of genes. in principle, more precise p-values both under the null and the alternative hypotheses should provide more accurate estimates of the number of de genes. we show such an assessment for the previous simulations in additional file 2: figures s <dig> and s <dig>  to summarize those results we have divided each estimate of the number of de genes by their actual simulated number of de genes and aggregate those ratios throughout the different simulation scenarios to ease the comparison among the methods. we find this comparison in figure  <dig> and it follows that tweedeseq produces p-values that lead to the most accurate estimation of the number of de genes, closely followed by edger with prior.df= <dig> when library factors are not held constant. in both settings, deseq leads to extremely conservative estimates of the number of de genes.

identification of sex-specific gene expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines
assessing performance of de analysis methods without using simulated data is a challenging problem due to the difficulty of knowing or ensuring the exact differential concentration of rna molecules in the analysed samples. in this respect, sex-specific expression constitutes a useful system to assess the accuracy of de detection methods due to the vast literature on genes contributing to gender-specific traits. for this reason, in order to illustrate the accuracy of tweedeseq with real rna-seq data, we have searched for genes changing significantly their expression between female and male individuals of the rna-seq experiments on lcls analyzed in this paper. again, we have compared different normalization procedures and parameter configurations of edger and deseq. next to considering the raw un-normalized data and the data normalized with cqn, tmm normalization was used for edger and tweedeseq, while deseq was used with its own normalization method. we have used a single significance cutoff of fdr < <dig>  at which genes were called de. since lcls come from a non-sexually dimorphic tissue and are outside their original biological context, the fraction of sex-specific expression changes we could expect should be rather small.

in an attempt to verify the accuracy of these lists of de genes between female and male individuals, we searched for genes reported in the literature to be potential contributors to sexually dimorphic traits. this list of genes with documented sex-specific expression was obtained from genes in chromosome x that escape x-inactivation  <cit>  and from genes in the male-specific region of the y chromosome  <cit>  . this resulted in a gold-standard set of  <dig> genes mapping to ensembl gene identifiers , which we shall denote by xie and msy genes, depending on their origin. for every predicted set of de genes by each combination of de detection method and normalized data set, we calculated precision and recall with respect to the gold-standard, and the f-measure which summarizes the trade-off between these two diagnostics.

in figure  <dig> we can see that tweedeseq provides better performance than the other competing methods under different parameter configurations. the improvement is small with respect to the second best-performing method and parameter configuration but we would like to emphasize that tweedeseq does not require any informed decision on a parameter configuration, as opposed to edger and deseq. to assess the robustness of this figure, we have run this comparative assessment with a more stringent filter on lowly expressed genes and, as additional file 2: figure s <dig> shows, tweedeseq keeps performing better than the other methods, this time however only when data are normalized.

in additional file 2: table s <dig> we report the complete list of  <dig> de genes detected by tweedeseq from the data normalized with cqn, which is when it yields the best precision-recall tradeoff. more than a half of genes in this list  are located in either the x or y chromosomes and where the first  <dig> with largest fold-change contain  <dig> from the gold-standard set of msy and xie genes. among the other  <dig>  we find ttty <dig>  a testis-specific non-coding transcript from the y chromosome and the other two lack functional annotation in ensembl release  <dig> 

reproducibility with respect to microarray data
the yri lcl samples we have analyzed have been previously assayed using microarray chips  <cit>  and this enables a comparison between the gene expression read out of both technologies. in particular, we wanted to assess the degree of reproducibility of the significance levels of de. while there may be many aspects from both technologies that can potentially bound the extent to which we can reproduce rankings of de, we postulate that more accurate p-values in de genes should lead to higher reproducibility of significance levels of de genes.

with this purpose, we applied limma <cit>  on the microarray data and called genes de at 10% fdr, just as we did with rna-seq data, and then compared the − log <dig> units of the raw p-values from de genes called in rna-seq by each de detection method to the − log10p-value units from genes called de by limma. in additional file 2: figure s <dig> we show this comparison for every gene that is called de either by limma in microarray data or by the other compared method in rna-seq data. although we can observe a significant linear relationship between p-values in every compared method, the low fraction of variability explained by the fitted linear model  in every of those comparisons indicates a rather poor level of reproducibility for every method.

a closer look to genes in that figure indicates that the lack of reproducibility mostly comes from genes called de by one method and technology but not by the other . there may be many reasons, unrelated to the de detection method itself, why a gene is not called simultaneously de in two completely independent rna-seq and microarray experiments on the same biological material, such as different isoforms being probed in the microarray and summarized in rna-seq or differences in sample preparation. therefore, for our current goal of assessing reproducibility of de detection methods, we believe it makes sense to restrict this comparison to those genes that are called de by both, limma in microrray data and the corresponding method in rna-seq data.

we can find this restricted comparison in figure  <dig> which reveals that in this case only tweedeseq attains a significant  linear fit with respect to the p-values from limma with a level of reproduciblity  substantially larger  than the second best method  with r2= <dig> .

finally, we have carried out a comparison between the entire output of de genes obtained with tweedeseq in rna-seq data with the entire output de genes obtained with limma in microarray data. in figure  <dig> we show the resulting volcano plots where we have highlighted with black dots those genes that are exclusively profiled by each technology. as the figure suggests, many more of these genes occur in rna-seq than in microrray, one remarkable case being the xist gene which shows the largest fold-change and significance level and corresponds to the x-inactive specific non-coding rna gene which acts as one of the key regulators in silencing one of the copies of chromosome x in females. blue and red circles denote msy and xie genes, respectively. as expected, all msy and xie de genes report significantly higher expression in males and females, respectively, except for the xie gene nlgn4x in rna-seq, likely due to low expression from the inactive x chromosome in female samples  <cit> . surprisingly the volcano plots show that limma on this microarray data set is able to detect a few more such genes than tweedeseq on rna-seq data. last, but not least, an important difference between the volcano plots of figure  <dig> is the fact that expression changes larger than 2-fold in these microarray data are nearly synonymous of statistical significance while with rna-seq a sizeable fraction of genes with 2-fold or larger changes show very poor significance levels. this is likely due to the larger variability of gene expression measurements in rna-seq experiments with many samples and underscores the importance of using methods that properly assess the statistical significance of the observed changes.

CONCLUSIONS
the increased amount of biological variability revealed by extensive replication in rna-seq experiments brings new challenges to the task of identifying genes whose change in expression is both, biologically and statistically significant. in microarray data, large fold-changes derived from large data sets were nearly synonymous of statistical significance. the volcano plots in figure  <dig> and the examples of specific genes in figure  <dig> illustrate why this is not true anymore with rna-seq count data. those figures unveil that one of these new challenges is to distinguish statistically significant changes among those that are already large in magnitude. in this paper we provide an approach to this problem by using the pt family of distributions, showing that it captures a much richer diversity of expression dynamics in rna-seq count data than the statistical models based in the nb distributions alone . we have implemented a two-sample pt-test in a software package for r, called tweedeseq, for detecting de genes and demonstrated with simulations that produces more accurate p-value distributions that lead to better calibrated q-values and fdr estimates.

we have made an attempt to assess de detection accuracy with real rna-seq data by comparing male and female lcl samples normalized with three different methods and comparing the results to a gold-standard set of genes with documented sex-specific expression. this assessment also shows that tweedeseq provides a better precision-recall tradeoff than the compared nb-based methods . we have also made a comparison with matching samples hybridised on microarray chips which allowed us to verify that tweedeseq yields a higher degree of reproducibility of significance levels with respect to microrray data.

all these different comparative assessments have been performed against two of the most widely currently used methods for de analysis of rna-seq data, edger and deseq, under four different parameter configurations each, since their default parametrisation is tailored towards very limited sample size. making an informed decision on what is the most appropriate setup is not trivial for the non-expert user and, for this reason, it is important to underscore that tweedeseq is competitive with all of the methodologies that follow from the different configurations of edger and deseq without the need to set a single parameter.

the fact that the volcano plots from tweedeseq and limma, derived from rna-seq and microarray data, reveal that limma is able to find a larger number of de genes from the gold-standard, suggests a long way still ahead of us to fully exploit the rna-seq technology for de. not only regarding experimental aspects, but also statistical ones such as properly detecting and adjusting for unwanted sources of non-biological variability, for which there is currently no well-established available techniques, as in the case of microarray data.

other applications of high-throughput sequencing technology that output counts of molecules, like in copy number variation  analysis, could potentially benefit of models based on the pt-distribution. it is our perception that richer count data models of this kind will become increasingly necessary to draw accurate conclusions from data as technology brings us closer the actual biology of the cell.

