BACKGROUND
efficient and accurate prediction of whole body growth is very important in animal husbandry, particularly in marine aquaculture, a rapidly developing and important source of food. feed development is largely dependent on accurate growth prediction, and it has significant economical and environmental consequences. however, the growth of living organisms is a complex process, affected by both external and biotic factors. thus, organism growth is extremely difficult to predict, particularly over long periods of time. mathematical models of varying complexity often serve as tools for the prediction and simulation of animal growth  <cit> , although usually with a short prediction horizon of several days . earlier attempts to describe whole body growth were mainly conducted for the design of feed and were mostly based on empirical functions . these models were largely based on data sets derived from multiple experiments and were valid only under specific conditions. thus, they could only be applied with confidence within a relatively small range of conditions. for example, growth in pigs, cattle, and chickens has been addressed using several dynamic models developed in recent years  <cit> . these simple models effectively predicted growth and body composition under a narrow range of environmental conditions. a few mechanistic models were also developed to simulate the growth of fish  <cit> . these models did not attempt to describe protein metabolism or the regulatory mechanisms of the animal, and they could not predict features such as amino acid  retention, an important nutritional and economic property. moreover, the models did not take into account the dependence of protein metabolism on environmental factors, although these have been shown to have a strong impact on marine organisms. in particular, fluctuations in temperature strongly influence marine organisms. most marine organisms are ectothermal, and their growth response is highly sensitive to variations in water temperature  <cit> . temperature affects protein synthesis in a linear manner  <cit> ; however, despite a large number of studies, temperature's effect on protein degradation is still unknown, probably due to the difficulty of measuring in vivo rates of protein degradation  <cit> . this temperature-degradation rate relationship is critical to any study of the growth of aquatic life forms.

complex regulatory networks affect most inter- and intracellular processes, including cell growth  <cit> . nutrients from the feed intake are mobilized and utilized de facto on many levels of regulation, which also respond to external stimuli. regardless of their framework, earlier predictive models incorporated neither cell regulation nor environmental effects, which are naturally not multiscaled. conversely, structured mathematical models that do incorporate regulations recurrently have elucidated the link between the processes that affect homeostasis and growth  <cit> . such a framework also has practical applications due to the potential for the accurate prediction of growth and tissue composition, even in the presence of temperature variations.

the concept of the model presented here is based on a previous model of fish growth  <cit> . our research attempts to integrate the complete set of bodily functions , with inter- and intracellular regulation, to provide a multiscaled predictive tool for modeling fish in aquaculture rearing conditions. our first-principles modeling approach includes the metabolic and regulative networks that are believed to have a large impact on growth. these are divided into functional compartments, namely, protein, lipid, and central metabolic processes, that are interconnected by mass flow. the input variables of the model are determined by the feeding process. moreover, the output variables, i.e., the quantity of body lipids, proteins, carbohydrates, oxygen, co <dig>  and nh <dig>  are all measurable , providing an experimental basis for model validation. the model setup was data-driven; the level of detail was chosen such that the values for model parameters were either known from the literature, or they could be estimated from available experimental data. in other words, almost all model parameters were identifiable. the parameters that had not been reported in the literature or that could not be estimated from experiments, particularly parameters involved in intracellular processes, were mainly estimated from data for other species of fish, or from mammal or yeast cell data. these processes  cycle and aa catabolism) are, however, fundamentally similar in most species. as a consequence, like other models developed for similar purposes , the overall model includes mechanistic descriptions at the level of chemical reactions  as well as phenomenological functions , summarizing complex regulatory pathways that are not known in detail. ho et al.  <cit>  refers to the latter as an 'unstructured model'.

here, we extended the model in  <cit>  in several respects. first, we included the experimentally reported temperature dependence of protein metabolism  in the modeling framework. to the best of our knowledge, the effect of temperature was modeled relatively accurately for the first time in this type of model. we approximate the relationship between temperature and protein degradation in fish as a parabolic function. second, we integrated several feedback control mechanisms, such as atp-regulated fluxes in the tca submodel, to account for the maintenance of constant energy atp/adp ratios. third, we accounted for the channeling of aas produced by protein degradation into re-synthesis in the protein metabolism cycle. homeostasis in the previous model was achieved by two functions, lumping together the complete regulatory mechanism of the tca cycle. this, however, was highly inaccurate, and resulted in a large discrepancy in the rapid dynamics that produced strong oscillations in the long-term dynamics . to counter the problem of strong oscillations, the model was adapted to include most of the known regulatory mechanisms in the tca cycle  <cit> , particularly the effect of the α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and the pyruvate carboxylase enzymes. moreover, several regulation mechanisms involved in protein metabolism were included in the new model. they allowed for a better description of the aa pathways, improving both long-term  and short-term  predictions. these modifications resulted in increased accuracy of the short timescale dynamics, and, consequently, more stable long-term predictions. we provide comparisons with experimental data on the long timescale of several months for overall growth and body composition, and on a shorter time scale of hours for the regulation of energy balance and aa dynamics.

the simulation results show that our model accurately predicts growth and body composition over a long time period of several months. furthermore, despite the difficulties involved, we demonstrate that multiscale models are able to efficiently predict many dynamic properties for a wide variety of conditions , and glucose on growth and body composition).

in comparison to the previous model, the refined model gives qualitatively and quantitatively more accurate predictions of whole body growth, especially under widely fluctuating temperature conditions. due to improved regulation on the short timescale , energy balance is much better captured, which is also reflected in better and more stable predictions on the long time scale. as a consequence, we were able to make accurate predictions over a timespan of 5- <dig> months, whereas the old model only gave useful results for a span of less than two months. we also observed an improvement in the prediction of aa retention. finally, we mention here that marine fish appear to be an important future source of food. thus, small increases in the accuracy of predictions, by only a few percent, can already assist in finding optimal feeding strategies that will have large economical and environmental consequences.

RESULTS
the long timescale: mass and body composition
the model was tested against experiments with diets containing different aa profiles and fat compositions  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows that the growth curves predicted from the previous model  <cit>   and the revised model , for a timespan of  <dig> days, with feeding of the fph <dig> diet every  <dig> hours, and at slightly varying temperatures, are close to the experimental data . the body mass prediction was less accurate during the first  <dig> days of feeding, with a prediction error of about 10% for both models. this discrepancy probably arose from the lack of acclimation of the fish to the experimental conditions  <cit> . however, in the new model, the error was diminished to approximately 2% after  <dig> days, which is well within the bounds of the measurement error for all diet compositions. growth was overestimated in the old model, leading to a bias of  <dig> g at the end of the simulation period. this discrepancy was due to the decreasing temperatures during the last  <dig> days of the experiment, and the behavior was better captured by the revised model. moreover, due to improved regulation, the artificial strong growing daily fluctuations in the old model have disappeared in the new model. we also compared the body composition simulated in the new model with predictions from the old model for the same feeding scenario. results are shown in figure  <dig>  prediction of protein levels  closely followed the experimental data , whereas the prediction of lipid levels from the new model  was overestimated by ~2% in comparison to the experimental data . we note that the lipid content in the old model was calculated by estimating the protein levels as the sum of aas, because crude protein was not available in that model. we also note that the data on fat composition from  <cit>  was only a calculated estimation, and the real value may be higher.

the model was compared to a large scale experiment  in which  <dig> atlantic salmon  were fed standard commercial diets from july to december  <dig> under strong ambient temperature fluctuations. measurements were taken at days  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  including weight and body composition. here, the differences between the two models became even more apparent . high temperatures during the first  <dig> days resulted in a high rate of feed intake  and excessive nutrient mass accumulation. consequently, the old model predicted increasing oscillations, first at short timescales  and later at long timescales , until an instability occurred at day  <dig>  the new model, however, managed to handle the large nutrient intake in a stable manner. while both the final mass and the protein content were almost perfectly predicted in the new model, the results were much less accurate for the old model, particularly for fat deposition , probably due to incorrect temperature dependence in the model as well as the numerical instabilities. the mass was overestimated by ~50%. underestimation of the fat content in the new model , towards the end of the simulations, may indicate faulty fat deposition dynamics at low temperatures .

the short timescale-energy balance and amino acid dynamics
the prediction of essential aa dynamics was compared to experiments in which rainbow trout  were fed commercial diets followed by short periods of starvation  <cit> . results are shown in figure  <dig>  we observed that the predicted dynamics of some aa concentrations  were generally in good agreement with the experimental results. lysine, which is considered the limiting aa in salmonids, showed levels that were well within the boundaries of the data reported by  <cit>  and  <cit> . this is important because a bias in the limiting aa has a strong effect on muscle buildup and growth. however, we also note that  <cit>  reported much higher lysine concentrations. the steady-state level of arginine was slightly overestimated. peaks of leucine and methionine levels were smaller than the experimentally measured levels, but the steady-state aa levels were better captured for these two than for arginine.

these discrepancies could have several sources. for example, the aa requirement profiles of the two species  that were compared for protein building were different. these profiles are inserted into the model in the profile filter of the protein metabolism model . unfortunately, we do not have the time-series data available for salmon. another source of the discrepancy could be the composition and consistency of the diets used in the experiments. these diets can vary with respect to protein type , fat, and carbohydrates, as well as with respect to the processing to which the ingredients were subjected  <cit> . these differences  have a large effect on the digestion and absorption of the nutrients in the gut, particularly on the aas. it is likely that the concerted effect of these unmodeled factors resulted in the observed experiment-to-experiment variation. further investigation is necessary.

we also mention that the predicted peak values occurred earlier  than those reported in the experiments  for almost all aas. two factors could explain this deviation: nearly all fish in the experiments were force-fed and, therefore, stressed, which has a strong impact on the absorption and digestion rates of nutrients  <cit> . additionally, although the metabolic model presented here may have been accurate, the digestive model may have been too simple. the simplified digestive model used here did not account for many of the interactions between nutrients, e.g. competition of the aas for the carriers during absorption, rate of digestion of the diet, nutrient breakdown in the gut due to enzyme interactions, density of the commercial diets as a result of processing, the quantity and type of lipids in the diet, and the general effects of lipids on absorption. all of these unmodeled factors  may have resulted in earlier aa absorption, and, consequently, earlier simulated peaks compared to the experiments. a more comprehensive model of the digestive system is under preparation in order to increase the accuracy of the aa metabolism model.

although not originally in the scope of this model, the short-term predictions  were reasonably captured, in spite of the unmodeled dynamics. because short-term and long-term predictions are interconnected , a serious deviation in either of the timescales would be a matter of concern, as it would lead to faulty predictions on both timescales. by capturing the short timescale correctly, the model assures the credibility of the longer timescale.

effect of temperature
amino acid retention
the new model for protein metabolism allows for better prediction of aa retention, as can be seen in figure  <dig>  aa retention is directly affected by both protein degradation  and the recycling of aas into protein synthesis. the largest improvements in aa retention modeling were reported for tyrosine , threonine , and phenylalanine . the mean squares errors were  <dig>  for the earlier model  <cit>  versus  <dig>  for the model presented here.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
the multiscale model presented here allowed prediction of growth, body composition, and aa retention under varying temperatures for a period of several months, with relatively low deviation from the experimentally measured quantities. first-principles  modeling, combined with empirical observations, appears to be crucial to achieving successful predictions over long periods. earlier models could indeed predict growth over some timescales  <cit> , but the predictions were almost always limited to only a few properties for each model, as is common in static models, such as the regression and bioenergetic models  <cit> . even dynamical models that predicted several properties simultaneously  <cit>  could not guarantee accurate predictions for more than several weeks. our model was able to predict over a long timespan and under variable temperatures. in this model, energy regulated most molecular processes and the flux balance between metabolic compartments . maintaining homeostasis  in the model, via the regulation of metabolite fluxes from one compartment to another, assisted in the accurate prediction of growth and yielded better prediction of tag and protein levels in tissue.

temperature has a large impact on animal growth  <cit> , but, to the best of our knowledge, most existing models  that consider temperature only do so for a constant temperature . the complex effect of temperature on the various processes in the body, and, in particular, on the protein degradation process, is mostly obscured and cannot always be measured  <cit> , rendering the effect of temperature on growth difficult to model. due to its dynamical characteristics, the model proposed in this study can account for instantaneous changes in the temperature, down to a resolution of seconds. therefore, it can be applied to systems with considerable temperature fluctuations, such as those which naturally occur when the seasons change. in the model presented here, we used the measured effect of water temperature on protein synthesis and empirical data on temperature's concerted effect on growth to estimate the effect of temperature on protein degradation and lipid metabolism. the simulation results were reassuring: the simulated total growth correlated well with the growth data from experiments, and the effect of protein turnover was accurately captured . this indicated that the concerted effect of temperature, its effect on the individual processes , and particularly on the protein degradation were all correctly modeled. it was suggested here that temperature influences protein degradation in a parabolic manner, as described by equation . this hypothesis was reasonable because the consensus of experimental data  suggests that protein synthesis is linearly affected by temperature  <cit> , and growth has a bell-shaped dependency  <cit> . however, we assumed that temperature linearly affected other processes , which is not necessarily the case. nevertheless, given that more than 80% of fish mass consists of protein and water  <cit> , the remaining processes are not expected to exert a large perturbation on the overall growth model. for comparison, a linear protein degradation-temperature dependence  appeared to yield a faulty response . we emphasize that the parabolic dependence of degradation on temperature is an interesting result in its own right, which might motivate further experimental investigations.

the model described here is composed of processes that occur on very different timescales. concentrations of tca intermediates change within seconds and minutes . aa concentrations , which rise rapidly within minutes of nutrient uptake, exhibit fast dynamics in the model. a large decrease in atp concentration, within hours of feeding, occurs due to the large consumption of atp during protein synthesis. atp levels relax back nearly to steady-state conditions, by way of several regulatory mechanisms, after several hours . the consumption of aas in response to feeding occurs on a timescale of hours. in contrast, the buildup of protein tissue and tag reserves occurs over days and weeks, and considerable changes to the progress of growth occur over a timescale of many days or even months . thus, all timescales within this wide range are relevant to model development, implying a variety of challenges for model assessment. first, errors in the short timescales of seconds and minutes can rapidly accumulate and render the long-term growth prediction unreliable, as we have seen in the previous simulations . errors in the short timescales should be limited to ensure valid long timescale predictions, but the relevant intracellular variables are usually difficult to measure. second, dimension reduction methods via separation of timescales, such as quasi-steady-state or rapid equilibrium approximations, probably fail here, because the relevant timescales vary over a wide range  and cannot be separated. the time needed for the atp/adp ratio to return to its steady-state may be longer than the time between two feeding scenarios , which can cause growing oscillations on the long timescale . hence, we cannot apply a quasi-steady-state approximation for atp. third, interrelated processes with large differences in timescales usually translate into stiff differential equations, which require advanced numerical integration methods. this is also currently a limitation of the model. because we found that implicit methods implemented in matlab failed here, we used a fixed step size that was manually adapted to the fast timescale, making the simulation calculations rather slow. moreover, stiffness can lead to a variety of problems for methods such as bifurcation or sensitivity analysis. these issues constitute only some of the difficulties inherent in solving multiscale problems. despite these challenges, omitting any of the regulatory mechanisms incorporated at different timescales  indeed degraded the prediction accuracy. we concluded, therefore, that multiscale modeling is often important for accurate predictions of complex systems.

we did not make use of any potentially available real-time measurements during long period experiments. because fish in rearing conditions grow over a period of four years, we expect a significant discrepancy in the results, particularly because the feeding regime and composition changes during this time. unmodeled dynamics, such as the effect of aging, are also a major concern for discrepancies when simulating long timespans . however, it is possible to increase the accuracy of the prediction by acquiring measurements of several variables  and use this data to correct for discrepancies along the way. this procedure is equivalent to applying feedback from measurements in engineering control theory. it will also allow re-optimization of the feed to adjust for unmodeled variations due to, for instance, water salinity, stress in the rearing facility, and change in water ph values.

to conclude, the multiscale model presented here is able to predict growth, body composition, and aa retention relatively accurately over several months. predictions hold even when strong temperature fluctuations occur, a key property for any model that is applied to the design of feeding experiments. we suggest that the protein degradation process in fish has a parabolic shaped dependency on temperature, but this hypothesis requires further investigation.

