BACKGROUND
metagenomics studies the genomic content of microbial communities, acquired through dna sequencing technology  <cit> . the main advantage of this discipline is that it can overcome the limitations of individual genome sequencing, which requires isolation and cultivation of individual microbes. bypassing the cultivation step, metagenomics is able to acquire microbial genomes unattainable through individual sequencing, since less than 1% of the microbes present in nature can be cultured  <cit> .

previous study showed that the sequencing technologies have different biases, in acquiring the dna sequences of a microbial community and of a single organism. indeed, biases in population distribution of a metagenome may differ according to the approach adopted to obtain sequence data  <cit> . moreover, there is the possibility that key members of a community might be poorly represented in sequenced data  <cit> . from single dna sample study, it was shown that different technologies can also have different biases in sequencing and hence different coverage patterns of the same sequence of an organism  <cit> . even sequencing errors and artifacts depend on the technology  <cit> .

here we focus on the comparative analysis of metagenomic sequencing data: we investigate how well different technologies represent information related to a considered organism of interest, and whether it is beneficial to combine information obtained using different technologies. the chosen microbe, candidatus ‘brocadia fulgida’, belongs to the important bacterial group of the anammox bacteria. anaerobic ammonium oxidizing  bacteria obtain energy via oxidation of ammonium to dinitrogen gas in the absence of oxygen  <cit> . they belong to the order brocadiales within the phylum planctomycetes <cit> . many studies in the last decade showed that anammox bacteria are present in many oxygen-limited marine and fresh-water ecosystems, and the process contributes significantly to the global loss of fixed nitrogen  <cit> . moreover, the anammox process has been applied successfully as an environmentally friendly and cost-effective alternative to conventional wastewater-treatment plants  <cit> .

the choice of an anammox bacterium as the organism of interest is motivated by the lack of genomic information for this bacterial group, due also to the difficulty of acquiring it. among the candidate genera of anammox bacteria that have been identified  <cit> , detailed genomic information is available only for candidatus ‘kuenenia stuttgartiensis’  <cit>  . indeed, standard sequencing approaches cannot be applied to acquire the genomes of these bacteria: the cultivation of anammox bacteria is challenging due to their long generation times  and low biomass yields  <cit> ; moreover, no anammox species have been isolated in pure cultures up to now  <cit> . therefore metagenomics has been used for acquiring the genomic content of anammox bacteria  <cit> .

we used the genomic information of the anammox bacterium candidatus ‘brocadia fulgida’  as a model for comparing three single-technology approaches and the multi-technology resulting from their combination. metagenomic data containing this bacterium were acquired through three metagenomic sequencing projects conducted on the same microbial community  <cit> . these metagenomes were generated by the following dna sequencing technologies: roche  <dig> flx, sanger sequencing with shotgun library  <cit> , and sanger sequencing with fosmid library  <cit>  . we reported earlier a qualitative analysis of these metagenomes focused on anammox metabolic genes  <cit> .

first we studied the metagenomes with respect to their taxonomic population distributions and the gc-content of the reads. then we analyzed comparatively the sets of b. fulgida orfs that were recovered by the different sequencing technologies; the recovered orfs were compared with respect to the coverage pattern, and the percentage of covered amino acids . we also studied the orfs with respect to their functional content and their location on the genome.

RESULTS
taxonomic annotation and gc-content analysis of annotated reads
blastx-based taxonomic annotation of the datasets was performed to identify the b. fulgida reads. despite the metagenomes were generated with different sequencing technologies, the obtained population distributions were not very dissimilar, as shown in figure  <dig>  this result is consistent with that of a previous work, where the population distribution biases were shown to depend more on dna-extraction method rather than on sequencing technology  <cit> ; however, our metagenomic data did not allow us to verify directly this phenomenon, because the three protocols differ only from the library preparation step onward. comparison of the population distributions with cell count estimation performed in a previous study  <cit>  showed that b. fulgida was underrepresented in the sequenced data . indeed, while b. fulgida constituted 70-80% of the community cells, in each dataset 11-15% of the total base pairs of the annotated reads belonged to b. fulgida.

this gap between b. fulgida cell count and its abundance in the metagenomes was due to an overrepresentation of other organisms having gc-content higher than the one of b. fulgida. indeed, the gc-content distribution of the reads indicated that the three datasets were biased towards gc-rich members of the community . in previous works it has been shown that if a bacterial genome is split into equally size non-overlapping sequences, the distribution of the gc-content of the sequences  will be similar to a normal distribution centered on gc-content of the genome  <cit> . consequently, the gc-content of reads sequenced from a single bacterium is expected to roughly follow a normal distribution and the gc-content of a metagenome could be approximately modeled by means of a mixture of normal distributions. in our case, for each technology, the distribution of the gc-content of the reads resembled the combination of two normal distributions: the one centered on gc between 38% and 50% included reads assigned to b. fulgida; the other one was centered between 65% and 67%. for each technology, 50% to 58% of the reads belonged to the distribution with high gc-content  and therefore were sequenced from gc-rich bacteria. this shows that the metagenomes were biased toward gc-rich bacteria, because these microbes actually constituted less than 20-30% of the cells . according to blastx, these gc-rich bacteria mostly belonged to classes alphaproteobacteria and betaproteobacteria.

reads assigned to b. fulgida had low gc-content, consistently with their annotation. nevertheless, a possible hypothesis is that other at-rich reads belonging to b. fulgida were wrongly assigned by blastx to other species. however, less than  <dig> % of the reads were assigned to other bacteria belonging to b. fulgida’s phylum - planctomycetes. moreover the population distributions obtained from different sequencing technologies were very similar; therefore, this hypothesis would require a significant difference in orfs composition between b. fulgida and the other planctomycetes, kuenenia included. for each technology, the gc-content of the reads assigned to b. fulgida roughly followed a normal distribution, centered between 45% and 48%. this result is in accordance with the expected gc-content of b. fulgida, estimated to be close to 41%, that is, kuenenia’s gc-content. however, from 42% to 50% of the reads had gc-content below 55%; since the corresponding distribution was centered between 38% and 50% of gc-content, there were other reads of this distribution with a gc-content compatible with b. fulgida.

in summary, these results show that gc-rich bacteria were overrepresented in the metagenomic data, for all the considered sequencing technologies. this indicates that adjustments of sequencing protocols are desirable in order to prevent overrepresentation of these microbes in the data at the expense of at-rich b. fulgida. this bias toward gc-rich organisms might depend on dna-fragmentation procedure, as speculated in literature  <cit> . coherency of the three population distributions obtained is consistent with the hypothesis that they are biased because of the shared dna-extraction method  <cit> . nevertheless, one cannot exclude that other steps of the sequencing protocol could as well contribute to these phenomena.

comparative analysis of recovered b. fulgida orfs
according to the blastx annotation we performed,  <dig> recovered many more proteins than the other two technologies . specifically,  <dig> recovered  <dig> % and  <dig> % more proteins than shotgun and fosmid, respectively. however, these differences were smaller when only b. fulgida orfs were taken into account. in that case,  <dig> recovered  <dig> % and  <dig> % more b. fulgida orfs than shotgun and fosmid, respectively . similar relations held for the sum of proteins amino acids. the two technologies based on sanger had similar retrieval performances: they shared about 70% of the recovered orfs .

shotgun and fosmid had similar mapping qualities, as shown by the distributions of recovered orfs with respect to the size of their recovered parts . in particular, the percentage of the orfs that they recovered almost completely was remarkably high: for each of the two technologies, about 25% of the recovered orfs had mapping above 95%. this was probably due to the high average read length  of shotgun and fosmid, that allowed them to recover some orfs entirely with just one read. mapping quality of  <dig> dataset was lower that the ones of the other two: mean and median mapping were both about 54%, and less than 3% had mapping above 95%.

 comparing the sets of recovered orfs for different mapping thresholds, we can see that the higher the threshold was, the more the technology biases diverged . indeed, the higher the mapping threshold was, the smaller the intersections between sets of orfs recovered with a feasible mapping by different technologies became . this trend was particularly clear for  <dig> and it affected its intersections with fosmid and with shotgun in the same way. for threshold value equal to 0%,  <dig> recovered about 90% of each of the sets of orfs recovered by another technology; for a mapping thresholds of 50% and 80%, this percentage dropped to about 55% and 14%, respectively. the number of recovered orfs that were shared by shotgun and fosmid decreased as well, but at a lower rate. while for a mapping threshold of 0% these two technologies shared about 70% of their recovered orfs, for mapping thresholds of 50% and 80%, this percentage dropped to about 59% and 38%, respectively.

the coverage variability obtained with different technologies were compared using pearson correlation coefficient. the correlation analysis of the per-amino acid sequence coverage depths performed on each b. fulgida orf recovered by a pair of technologies indicated that the sanger-based technologies and  <dig> coverage patterns were not related . indeed, for more than 50% of the orfs recovered by  <dig> and shotgun/fosmid, the correlation was between - <dig>  and  <dig> , and hence not significant. on the contrary, there was a significantly positive correlation  for about half of the orfs recovered by both shotgun and fosmid. this indicates that the coverage depths obtained with the two technologies increased or decreased together for the same orf.

the fact that different technologies resulted in dissimilar coverage patterns and vastly different sets of orf with high mapping was observed to be beneficial for improving the orf recovering. the enhancement was achieved by using together all the reads assigned to b. fulgida in the three datasets. the combination of all the three technologies resulted in the recovering of more orfs than any other combination or any single technology , with a neat increase of the number of orfs recovered for at least 95% of their length . using all the datasets together, in particular, the number of orfs recovered for at least 80% of their length was at least twice the one obtained using the reads of a single technology. a detailed analysis of the effect of combining results from the three datasets is given in the additional file 1: section  <dig> 

comparative analysis of functional content and orf location distribution
functional content distributions based on cog classification did not show significant differences across technologies . for all the technologies, the most abundant characterized category was cog category c . all the categories related to information storage and processing  were equally abundant. the only category for which there were significant differences was t , that was present in a percentage of less than 2% for  <dig>  and around 6% for the other two technologies.

the location distribution of the recovered orfs on the putative b. fulgida genome was quite uniform . however, some areas of the genome had a lower coverage depth than the others, and these biases were consistent among different sequencing technologies .

anyway, these two analyses could be affected more than the others by a potential loss of b. fulgida genomic information resulting from the adopted annotation method. indeed, since b. fulgida proteins had not previously been described, we assumed that all reads assigned to the related anammox bacterium kuenenia and all recovered kuenenia orfs belonged to b. fulgida. however, given that the two anammox bacteria are phylogenetically related but not very closely for being two microbes of the same genera  <cit> , it might be possible that b. fulgida contains orfs not present in kuenenia. hence, if these b. fulgida orfs existed, they would not be recovered by our method; in particular, the functional content and the genome location biases would be different from what we found. nevertheless, as mentioned before, few reads were assigned to other members of b. fulgida’s phylum. recovering b. fulgida information not present in kuenenia through a de novo assembly of the metagenomes can lead to unreliable results, given that the coverage is below 20x  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
anammox bacteria are present in many ecosystems and have important applications in industrial wastewater-treatment. however, genomic information about these bacteria is still very limited. we analyzed the genomic information of the anammox bacterium b. fulgida contained in three metagenomes; the metagenomes were acquired from the same community but with different sequencing technologies.

our analysis indicates that adjustments of sequencing protocols are desirable in order to prevent underrepresentation of b. fulgida in the data. this underrepresentation does not seem to be related to a genome location sequencing bias. sequenced data alone would have given a distorted view of population distributions in the studied community, as observed for other metagenomes  <cit> . the adoption of pacbio  <cit>  platform could be beneficial for b. fulgida genome acquisition, because it seems less biased by gc content.

the population distributions of the three metagenomes were not very dissimilar, despite different sequencing technologies were adopted. this phenomenon is compatible with the hypothesis that dna-extraction method contributes more to the bias in the population distributions than the sequencing technology  <cit> . however, one cannot exclude that other steps of the sequencing protocol could as well contribute to the bias; indeed, dna-fragmentation procedure might have induced the bias toward gc-rich microbes  <cit> . nevertheless, our metagenomic data did not allow to directly confirm any of these hypotheses, because the three protocols differ only from the library preparation step onward.

our results show that the combination of data obtained by different sequencing technologies can allow to recover relevant information of underrepresented organisms. indeed, even if different technologies recover a microbe in similar abundance, they could do it with significantly different genome-level biases. in our case, technologies coverage patterns revealed to be unrelated for many b. fulgida orfs; moreover, the sets of orfs recovered by the technologies for a large part of their lengths were vastly different.

