BACKGROUND
infectious disease is a major contributor to morbidity and mortality among infants, children, and other young animals. ideally, strategies should be practiced at an early age to confer protection from infectious disease-related morbidity and mortality experienced later in life. vaccination is a commonly used disease intervention strategy; however, there are many issues that complicate vaccinating neonates including vaccine safety and vaccine efficacy. vaccination regimens may be unsuccessful in stimulating protective immunity in neonates due to both ontogenic immune immaturity and passively acquired maternal derived immunity  interfering with active immune development.

mdi is a critical contributor to the neonatal immune response. mdi is passively transferred to neonates across the placenta and via colostrum and milk in humans and mice  <cit>  but only via colostrum and milk in pigs  <cit> , horses  <cit> , and cattle  <cit> . mdi is directly responsible for preventing or reducing the impact of infectious diseases in the neonate. in piglets mdi has been shown to be at least partially protective against many agents including escherichia coli <cit> , mycoplasma hyopneumoniae   <cit> , transmissible gastroenteritis virus   <cit> , and porcine circovirus type  <dig>   <cit> . however, mdi may interfere with adaptive immune responses following vaccination, i.e. passive interference. for example, young pigs vaccinated in the face of antigen-specific mdi have suppressed antibody responses to m. hyopneumoniae <cit> , bordetella bronchiseptica <cit> , pseudorabies  <cit> , swine influenza virus   <cit> , and classical swine fever   <cit> . further, while both cell-mediated immune  and antibody-mediated immune  mediators are transferred to neonates via colostrum, the amount of transferred maternal antibodies can often be correlated to the level of inhibition of neonatal ami responses. effects of maternal derived cmi on neonatal immune response development are less well understood. whether neonatal cmi responses following vaccination or challenge are inhibited in the face of mdi is unclear.

maternal cmi that is transferred to neonates across the placenta or in colostrum clearly participates in the neonatal cmi response. transfer of functional tuberculin-specific immune cells, as evidenced by delayed-type hypersensitivity , has been demonstrated in infants from vaccinated mothers  <cit> . transfer of cmi sensitivity to trichinella spiralis and coccidioides immitis antigens, as evidenced by antigen-specific proliferation and nematode load, and dth, respectively, has been demonstrated in neonatal mice born to vaccinated dams  <cit> . further, lymphocytes isolated from calves having received colostral cells from bovine viral diarrheal virus  vaccinated mothers demonstrated greater cmi responsiveness to bvdv compared to lymphocytes isolated from calves receiving acellular colostrum  <cit> . we have shown that maternal colostral cells from m. hyopneumoniae vaccinated dams are transferred to piglets and participate in the in vivo neonatal cmi response to m. hyopneumoniae upon antigen challenge  <cit> . still, it is unclear whether maternal derived cmi participates in immune interference or otherwise affects active cmi response development in the piglet. in other words, whether piglets vaccinated in the face of mdi develop antigen-specific cmi responses remains to be elucidated.

cmi is critical in the immune response to m. hyopneumoniae <cit>  and maternal m. hyopneumoniae-specific cells participate in the immune response following m. hyopneumoniae antigen challenge in piglets  <cit> . this study was conducted to test the hypothesis that piglets respond to m. hyopneumoniae vaccination with cmi but not ami responses when vaccinated in the face of m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi in a field setting. piglets with m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi failed to show vaccine induced ami responses. in contrast, piglets with m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi and vaccinated against m. hyopneumoniae developed primary and secondary m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi responses.

RESULTS
sow response to vaccination
prior to experimental vaccination, sows had m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibodies  as expected due to prior on-farm vaccination. m. hyopneumoniae experimental vaccination of sows increased m. hyopneumoniae-specific ami responses in blood and colostrum  and m. hyopneumoniae-specific lymphoproliferative responses in colostrum . sows vaccinated in this study had significantly higher m. hyopneumoniae-specific serum antibody sample to positive  ratios compared to before vaccination  and compared to sows not vaccinated as part of this study . similarly, experimentally vaccinated sows had significantly greater m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratios in colostrum compared to nonvaccinated sows . colostral mononuclear cells  from experimentally vaccinated sows demonstrated significantly greater m. hyopneumoniae-specific proliferation compared to cmc from nonvaccinated sows .

passive transfer of m. hyopneumoniae-specific immunity to piglets
newborn piglets are naïve to m. hyopneumoniae , and there is no evidence of transplacental infection with m. hyopneumoniae. prior to colostrum ingestion piglets did not demonstrate m. hyopneumoniae-specific immunity, either ami  or cmi . following colostrum ingestion, piglets from vaccinated sows had significantly greater m. hyopneumoniae antibody s:p ratios compared to piglets from nonvaccinated sows . blood mononuclear cells  isolated from piglets of vaccinated sows 24 hr after suckling proliferated significantly more in response to stimulation with m. hyopneumoniae antigen compared to bmc isolated from piglets of nonvaccinated sows . there was no difference in m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratios or lymphoproliferation relative to piglet treatment group prior to piglet vaccination .

piglet response to vaccination
m. hyopneumoniae vaccine was administered when piglets were  <dig> d of age. piglets were vaccinated at  <dig> d of age in an attempt to stimulate endogenous immunity in the presence of transferred antigen specific mdi. m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody levels did not differ among piglets from nonvaccinated sows relative to piglet vaccination status 7 days post vaccination  or  <dig> dpv . two piglets that were considered m. hyopneumoniae-antibody negative based on s:p ratio did respond to vaccination with ami responses by  <dig> dpv, though the magnitude of the response was not great enough to result in a difference between piglet groups. while the m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratio among piglets from nonvaccinated sows appeared lower at  <dig> dpv and  <dig> dpv compared to 24 hrs after suckling, this difference was not significant and there was no decrease  <dig> dpv to  <dig> dpv. m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratios among piglets from vaccinated sows were not different  <dig> dpv relative to piglet vaccination status . there was no change in mean m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratio among nonvaccinated piglets from vaccinated sows  from  <dig> dpv to  <dig> dpv; however, vaccinated piglets from vaccinated sows  had lower m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody s:p ratios at  <dig> dpv compared to  <dig> dpv . vs np piglets had greater m. hyopneumoniae antibody s:p ratios compared to vs vp piglets  <dig> dpv .

to assess piglet m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi ex vivo, m. hyopneumoniae-specific proliferation was assessed. proliferative responses to concanavalin a  were detected from bmc across piglets at both  <dig> dpv and  <dig> dpv . vaccination in the presence of mdi  resulted in earlier m. hyopneumoniae-specific proliferative responses  compared to all other groups of piglets . interestingly, bmc isolated from vaccinated piglets proliferated significantly more in response to stimulation with m. hyopneumoniae compared to bmc isolated from nonvaccinated piglets regardless of sow vaccination status  <dig> dpv . there was no difference in proliferation by bmc isolated from ns vp compared to vs vp piglets at  <dig> dpv. bmc isolated  <dig> dpv from vs vp piglets proliferated more in response to stimulation with m. hyopneumoniae than bmc isolated from the same group of piglets at  <dig> dpv. similarly, m. hyopneumoniae-specific proliferative responses from ns vp piglets at  <dig> dpv were significantly greater than those from the same group of piglets at  <dig> dpv.

to assess piglet m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi in vivo, dth testing was performed. in control dth tests, piglets across treatment groups responded to phytohemagglutinin  and none responded to saline at both injection times . m. hyopneumoniae-specific dth lesions were detected in some piglets across all treatment groups at both time points . vs vp piglets had significantly larger m. hyopneumoniae-specific dth lesions  compared to all other treatment groups at  <dig> dpv . m. hyopneumoniae-specific dth lesions among nonvaccinated piglets did not differ in orthogonal diameter  <dig> dpv . the mean orthogonal diameter of m. hyopneumoniae-specific lesions of nonvaccinated piglets was smaller than that of ns vp piglets  and vs vp piglets    <dig> dpv. in contrast to proliferative responses, m. hyopneumoniae-specific dth lesions of vs vp piglets were significantly larger than that of ns vp piglets   <dig> dpv. the mean orthogonal diameter of m. hyopneumoniae-specific dth lesions was significantly larger at  <dig> dpv compared to  <dig> dpv for ns vp piglets only.

discussion
maternal derived antibodies and lymphocytes acquired across the placenta or postnatally in colostrum or milk are critical participants in the neonatal immune response. neonatal vaccination has been practiced across a variety of antigens in an effort to confer protection from specific pathogens during the period in which the neonatal immune system matures and maternal antibodies wane. however, mdi may interfere with immune priming and the generation of memory responses following neonatal vaccination.

this study was conducted to determine whether neonatal piglets respond with ami and/or cmi responses to m. hyopneumoniae vaccination when vaccinated in the face of maternal m. hyopneumoniae-specific immunity. to determine whether cmi and ami responses could be induced in piglets with mdi, piglets from m. hyopneumoniae vaccinated and nonvaccinated dams were vaccinated against m. hyopneumoniae at  <dig> d of age. piglet m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibody, lymphoproliferative, and dth responses were measured  <dig> dpv and  <dig> dpv. vaccination of piglets from vaccinated sows did not induce ami responses in those piglets; there was no rise in m. hyopneumoniae s:p ratios following piglet vaccination. in contrast, evidence from both antigen-specific proliferation and dth testing demonstrates that m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi priming and anamnestic responses are induced following vaccination of piglets with m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi. taken together, neonatal piglet m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi responses induced by vaccination are not  inhibited by passive interference with m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi.

in the present study, there is no evidence that piglets vaccinated in the face of mdi developed active m. hyopneumoniae-specific ami responses within  <dig> dpv. these results are in agreement with hodgins et al.  <cit>  who showed no rise in serum m. hyopneumoniae antibody titer 9 weeks post vaccination in piglets vaccinated at  <dig> d of age in the presence of high levels of antigen-specific mdi  <cit> . the lack of rise in m. hyopneumoniae antibody s:p ratios in piglets vaccinated in the face of mdi is most likely due to passive interference; however, this cannot be concluded with certainty in the current study as a group of vaccinated piglets lacking m. hyopneumoniae-specific maternal immunity was not included. however, piglets with low levels of maternal m. hyopneumoniae-specific ami at the time of vaccination did produce m. hyopneumoniae-specific antibodies following vaccination, indicating that vaccination can induce ami responses in  <dig> d old pigs dependent upon the level of maternal antigen-specific ami in agreement with  <cit> . it is possible that more piglets responded to m. hyopneumoniae vaccination with igm responses; however, the elisa test used lacked isotype specificity and igg likely overshadowed any igm response in all samples tested. while including a group of spf piglets may have resulted in more clear interference results, spf piglets are not representative of most commercial pigs. further, as m. hyopneumoniae vaccination is one of the most commonly used vaccines across swine farms  <cit> , the data in this report represent field conditions. it is unclear why m. hyopneumoniae s:p ratios were greater in vs np piglets compared to vs vp piglets at  <dig> dpv; this difference may be attributable to inter-animal variation.

there is a plethora of data demonstrating passive interference by maternal immunity with neonatal ami responses following vaccination; however, reports assessing cmi responses following neonatal vaccination in the face of mdi are limited. not only is there a paucity of information regarding the neonatal cmi response to vaccination in the face of mdi, the information that does exist is largely restricted to in vitro studies. for example, antigen specific proliferative responses and cytokine production have been demonstrated in infants vaccinated against measles virus  <cit> , and neonatal mice vaccinated against measles virus  <cit>  and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus  <cit>  following vaccination in the face of antigen-specific mdi. notably, humans and mice are exposed to mdi during gestation, and the detection of antigen-specific reactivity in the neonate may be a result of antigen priming while in utero <cit> . the lack of exposure to mdi prenatally make pigs, cattle, and horses excellent models to study the role of colostral immunity in the neonate, yet few reports have investigated cmi following neonatal vaccination of these species. the current study shows that piglets with mdi respond to m. hyopneumoniae vaccination with antigen specific cmi responses, and unlike previous studies, we show evidence of cmi stimulation in vivo. dth testing is a valuable measure of cmi since the dth test is an in vivo test and dth responses are by definition anamnestic responses.

in agreement with the present study, bouma et al.  <cit>  showed that 3-week-old piglets challenged with pseudorabies virus developed virus-specific proliferative responses regardless of maternal pseudorabies status. further, piglets with pseudorabies-specific mdi and vaccinated against pseudorabies had lower pseudorabies virus antibody titers than their counterparts without pseudorabies-specific mdi  <cit> . similarly, calves vaccinated against bvdv in the face of mdi developed cmi responses and did not show evidence of anamnestic ami responses upon re-exposure to the antigen  <cit> . interestingly, calves vaccinated against bvdv are protected from disease even in the absence of a specific ami response  <cit> . therefore, just because neonates fail to develop detectable anamnestic ami responses following vaccination in the face of mdi does not signify that there is an inhibition of the immune response. rather, vaccination may induce cmi responses that are protective. collectively these studies show that neonates are capable of generating cmi responses in the face of mdi and that passively transferred mdi may not interfere with neonatal cmi.

neonatal vaccination in the face of passive immunity does not always result in cmi responses. the capacity for neonates with mdi to generate cmi responses following vaccination may depend on their age and immune maturation at vaccination. further, the concentration of maternal ami at the time of vaccination may play a role in the neonatal immune response since the level of interference may be dependent on the level of maternal ami in the neonate  <cit> . for example, piglets vaccinated against siv  <cit>  or csf  <cit>  do not experience cmi stimulation when vaccinated in the face of high levels of antigen-specific maternal ami but do show evidence of cmi stimulation following vaccination when levels of maternal antibodies are low. further, the capacity for neonates to generate specific cmi responses in the face of mdi may be reliant on the administration method of the vaccine. for example, piglets with mdi specific for and vaccinated against pseudorabies shed less virus when vaccine was administered intranasally compared to intramuscularly  <cit> . vaccine type or immunogenicity may also influence the neonate’s response to vaccination. dna vaccines are an especially alluring neonatal vaccination paradigm since they replicate in vivo but do not pose a risk of infection. some dna vaccines induce immune responses in neonates when administered in the face of mdi  <cit>  while others do not  <cit> . further, adjuvants that enhance cmi or antigen presentation  may help the neonatal immune system overcome the opposing effects of maternal ami  <cit> .

differences in neonatal responses to vaccination may also be due to the presence of functional maternal lymphoid cells at the time of vaccination. various studies have shown that transferred maternal cells augment the neonatal response to nonspecific  <cit>  and specific  <cit>  antigens. in the current study piglets vaccinated against m. hyopneumoniae in the face of m. hyopneumoniae-specific mdi  exhibited greater m. hyopneumoniae specific cmi responses  <dig> dpv compared to all other groups. therefore, cmi priming and anamnestic responses at  <dig> dpv depended upon piglet vaccination and transferred antigen-specific mdi. capozzo et al.  <cit>  showed that neonatal mice vaccinated against measles virus in the face of measles virus-specific mdi exhibited greater measles-specific cmi responsiveness  compared to neonatal mice vaccinated against measles but without virus-specific mdi. taken together, these studies suggest that mdi plays a role in the vaccine-induced cmi response detected in neonates.

capozzo et al.  <cit>  suggested that the cmi responses observed in mice vaccinated against measles virus in the face of measles virus-specific mdi was due to neonatal t cells that were stimulated by endogenous dendritic cells that had engulfed maternal antibodies bound to measles antigens  <cit> . in support of the idea proposed by capozzo et al. that neonatal cells are responding to vaccine antigen, in this study, since dth lesions and proliferative responses were greater in ns vp piglets compared to ns np piglets  <dig> dpv, it is reasonable to conclude that piglet derived t cells are contributing to the neonatal response to m. hyopneumoniae antigen. in addition to neonatal cells responding to vaccination, we suggest that the cmi responses observed at  <dig> dpv are also due to the functional activity  of transferred antigen-specific maternal lymphocytes that are restimulated via neonatal vaccination. we have previously shown that maternal lymphocytes primed during vaccination are transferred to and are functional in piglets  <cit> . here we show that transferred maternal cells may be stimulated via piglet vaccination—at  <dig> dpv lymphoproliferative and dth responses by vs vp piglets were greater than those of ns vp piglets. further research is required to determine if these responses are protective.

evidence suggests that maternal microchimerism  persists into adulthood  <cit> ; however, it is unclear for how long maternal cells are functional in the offspring. in terms of strategizing vaccination regimens to take advantage of both endogenous and passive immunity, the persistence of functional activity of maternal cmi in the recipient warrants elucidation. whether the persistence of function rather than merely presence  of maternal cmi in the recipient requires antigen stimulation is to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study, we showed that maternal m. hyopneumoniae-specific ami and cmi is transferred to and detectable in piglets. further, transferred maternal m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi is functional and works in concert with vaccine stimulated endogenous m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi to respond to m. hyopneumoniae in the piglet. we also demonstrated that vaccination was sufficient to prime a 7 day-old piglet’s immune system. piglets developed m. hyopneumoniae-specific cmi responses when vaccinated in the face of mdi. in conclusion, vaccination of neonatal pigs against m. hyopneumoniae in the face of antigen-specific mdi results in cmi priming and anamnestic cmi responses following subsequent exposure to m. hyopneumoniae antigen.

