BACKGROUND
silage fermentation is promoted mainly by the microbial activities of lactic acid bacteria . during the fermentation process, lab produce lactic acid anaerobically as the major end product of central carbohydrate metabolism, which reduces the ph of the surrounding environment. these anaerobic and acidic conditions prevent the propagation of detrimental microorganisms such as listeria, clostridia, yeasts, and other fungi. however, the acid production level tends to be insufficient if silage is prepared in cold weather conditions because of the impaired activity of lab, thereby yielding lower quality silage. therefore, the inoculation of appropriate lab as a silage additive is required to enhance silage fermentation in low-temperature environments.

previously, we isolated a novel psychrotrophic lactobacillus species, lactobacillus hokkaidonensis, from timothy grass  silage in hokkaido, a subarctic region of japan  <cit> . l. hokkaidonensis can grow at temperatures as low as 4°c , and its type strain looc260t was shown to decrease ph even in cold conditions when used to inoculate pilot-scale grass silage. thus, l. hokkaidonensis is expected to be suitable for use as an effective silage inoculant in cold regions.

l. hokkaidonensis is classified as an obligate heterofermentative lab in the l. vaccinostercus group  <cit> , which includes five species  that form a clade distinct from the well-known heterofermentative clades, which include l. reuteri, l. brevis, and l. buchneri. they share common phenotypic features such as the presence of meso-diaminopimelic acid in their peptidoglycan cell walls and faster assimilation of pentoses compared with hexoses, but little is known about their genetic background or genomic information.

in the present study, we performed whole-genome sequencing of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t and comparative genome analysis, where we focused on the unique gene repertoire of the l. vaccinostercus group. in addition, determining the complete genome may provide a better genome-wide understanding of mobile genetic elements, thereby highlighting how flexible genome rearrangements contribute to adaptation to various ecological niches. thus, we aimed to provide insights into the genomic features of the l. vaccinostercus group, which is poorly characterized at present, as well as to clarify the silage fermentation mechanism from a genomic perspective, particularly in cold conditions.

RESULTS
genome features of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t
whole-genome sequencing was conducted with the pacbio single-molecule real-time  sequencing system to determine the genome sequence of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t. de novo assembly using the hierarchical genome assembly process  method  <cit>  generated seven contigs, which were further assembled and verified to finish the single complete genome. the genome of looc260t comprises one circular chromosome  and two circular plasmids designated as plooc260- <dig>  and plooc260- <dig> . two prophage regions were predicted, which are described in detail in the following section. no clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat  loci were detected in the genome. the general genomic features of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t and four other species in the l. vaccinostercus group are summarized in table  <dig>  figure  <dig> shows the genome atlas of looc260t as well as blastp alignment results with its four close relatives, as described above. sharp transitions in the gc-skew value were observed at both the predicted oric site  and its opposite site . in particular, genes involved in metabolism  were densely encoded in the region from 300° to 360°. several genes in this region were missing from all or some of the members of the l. vaccinostercus group, which may reflect the adaptation to specific ecological niches during the diversification of this group. similar position-specific features have also been reported in l. plantarum  <cit>  and l. casei  <cit> , where they are considered to be lifestyle adaptation islands.table  <dig> 
genome features of
l. hokkaidonensis
looc260
t
and
l. vaccinostercus
group species



strain
status
no. of sequences
total bases
% gc
cdss
rrna operons
trnas
insd/sra accession no.






#this study. *formerly named l. durianis. **sra accession no.
genome atlas of
l. hokkaidonensis
looc260
t
. a) chromosome. the outer four circles  represent cdss on the forward strand, cdss on the reverse strand, rrnas  and trnas , and insertion sequences/transposases, respectively. the next four circles  represent the shared amino acid identities of the blast alignments with four closely related species: l. oligofermentans dsm 15707t, l. vaccinostercus dsm 20634t, l. vaccinostercus dsm  <dig>  and l. suebicus kctc 3549t, respectively. the inner two circles represent the gc content and gc skew. b, c) plasmids plooc260- <dig> and plooc260- <dig>  from the inner to outer circles: cdss on the forward strand, cdss on the reverse strand, insertion sequences/transposases, gc content and gc skew. the cdss are colored according to the main cogs functional classification categories: red, metabolism; blue, information storage and processing; red, cellular processes and signaling; gray, unknown function.



diverse mobile genetic elements harbored by l. hokkaidonensis looc260t
bacterial genomes include several repetitive sequences such as multiple copies of ribosomal rna operons and insertion sequences or transposases. these regions are generally difficult to reconstruct from relatively short sequencing reads, and thus de novo assembly often yields collapsed and/or fragmented contigs for such regions. we used the pacbio sequencer to correctly assemble these repetitive regions with much longer reads , thereby obtaining a genome-wide perspective of mobile genetic elements such as plasmids and prophages.

insertion sequences
in total,  <dig> orfs, including partial orfs and pseudogenes, were annotated as putative insertion sequences within the genome. in particular, three types of insertion sequence elements were annotated, with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> copies that shared almost 100% identity, and these new insertion sequence elements were registered in the isfinder database  <cit>  as islho <dig>  islho <dig>  and islho <dig>  respectively. they shared 66% amino acid similarity with islre <dig> , 75% with islrh <dig> , and 60% with islre <dig> , respectively.

plasmids
the ratio of the mapped read number normalized against the sequence length for each replicon was approximately 1:1: <dig> . thus, the plasmid copy number in the cell was estimated as one for plooc260- <dig> and multiple for plooc260- <dig> 

the first plasmid, plooc260- <dig>  had a composite structure that comprised regions from several lab species, such as l. plantarum, l. casei, l. brevis, and l. coryniformis, thereby indicating the occurrence of numerous rearrangements and recombination events during its evolution. the plasmid mobilization protein, mob, gene was present, which probably facilitated the transmission of plooc260- <dig> in the presence of other conjugation mechanisms. another interesting characteristic was the presence of a gene cluster related to fatty acid synthesis , which was absent from the chromosome. to the best of our knowledge, plasmid-encoded fatty acid synthesis genes have not been reported previously in other lab species.

the other plasmid, plooc260- <dig>  was considered to be a conjugative plasmid. it possessed a tra conjugation gene cluster, which shared high similarity and colinearity with the plasmid pwcfs <dig> from l. plantarum wcfs <dig>  for which conjugative transfer was demonstrated experimentally  <cit> . a similar gene organization in the tra region is also observed in several plant-associated lab, such as l. brevis kb <dig>  isolated from a japanese fermented vegetable  <cit> , l. oryzae, isolated from fermented rice grains  <cit> , and l. coryniformis, frequently isolated from silage.

prophages
two prophage loci were predicted in the chromosome, φlh- <dig>  and φlh- <dig> . we also found 12-bp direct repeats  flanking φlh- <dig> and 22-bp direct repeats  flanking φlh- <dig>  which appeared to constitute the core regions of phage attachment sites . a contig obtained by de novo assembly contained a misassembled region, which was presumably derived from an excised circular phage dna, and thus spontaneous excision of the prophage must have occurred in a fraction of the cells. to confirm this prediction by pcr, two sets of primers were designed for each prophage so the fragments could be amplified only when the prophages were excised from the chromosome . the expected pcr products were obtained, and the direct repeats located at the phage attachment sites were identified by sequencing the amplicons . in the l. vaccinostercus group, these prophages are the first instances whose sequences have been determined and whose excision has been demonstrated.figure  <dig> 
phage attachment sites. a) schematic representation of the integration and excision of prophages. attp, attb, attl, and attr represent the phage attachment sites. inward red arrows and outward green arrows indicate the pcr primers designed to amplify the attb and attp regions, respectively. b) primer sequences for φlh- <dig> and φlh- <dig>  c) nucleotide sequences of the attachment sites for φlh- <dig> and φlh- <dig>  red letters represent the core sequences of the phage attachment sites. blue and orange letters correspond to the left and right sequences of the prophage regions.



integrated and conjugative elements
integrated and conjugative elements , sometimes known as conjugative transposons, are self-transmissible mobile genetic elements, which can be integrated into or excised from the host chromosome  <cit> . ices often contain accessory genes that confer advantages on their hosts, such as resistance to antibiotics, heavy metals, or phages  <cit> . ices have been reported frequently in streptococci and enterococci, and they are well characterized, but only two previous studies have described ices in the genus lactobacillus: one in l. paracasei  <cit>  and the other in l. salivarius  <cit> . no other ices are registered in the two ices/transposable elements databases: iceberg  <cit>  and tn number registry  <cit> .

we identified a putative ice in the genome of looc260t in the chromosome region  <dig> – <dig>  kbp , which was deposited as tn <dig> in the tn number registry.

the amino acid sequences of the genes in the ice region of looc260t were compared against all the sequences in the ncbi non-redundant protein database, and similar gene organizations with high levels of sequence identity  were found in four species of plant-related lab: l. vini lmg 23202t , l. nodensis jcm 14932t , l. paracasei lpp <dig> , and l. coryniformis . the level of shared nucleotide identity was also high between them . in particular, the 20-kbp upstream and 11-kbp downstream segments of tn <dig> were almost identical to the putative ice from l. vini lmg 23202t, but tn <dig> had more accessory genes, especially for heavy metal resistance, in the middle 21-kbp region. the integrase genes were adjacent to the 3′-end of the gmp-synthase gene, and direct repeats of 5′-gagtgggaata-3′ were identified at both the 3′-end of the gmp-synthase gene and the 5′-end of the cell wall protein gene. the 3′-end of the gmp-synthase gene is reported to be an integration hotspot for genomic islands, and the consensus sequence of the direct repeats agreed with our findings  <cit> . however, in looc260t, we found the same repeat sequence only at the integrase end and not at the opposite end because of the truncated 5′-end of the cell wall protein gene. therefore, tn <dig> may no longer be capable of excision.figure  <dig> 
comparisons of integrated and conjugative elements from
l. hokkaidonensis
and several species in the genus
lactobacillus. green and red correspond to the nucleotide identity based on blastn alignments and the numbers indicate the identity. small black arrows represent direct repeat sequences flanking the element.



the shared sequence identities were high only within the strains described above. in particular, the four integrase genes shown in figure  <dig> shared over 96% amino acid identity, whereas they exhibited lower identities  with other known integrase genes. this suggests that these ices compose a single family and integrate themselves into the downstream region of the gmp-synthase. heavy metal resistance genes are beneficial for plant-associated bacteria due to the fact that plants are exposed to metals in the soil, and may even absorb them. however, given their distinct ecological niches, it is unlikely that these ices were transferred directly between each strain. this suggests the existence of a large shared gene pool among plant-associated lab.

cold adaptation strategy
cells exposed to low temperatures undergo significant physiological changes, such as decreases in membrane fluidity and stabilization of the secondary structures of nucleic acids, thereby resulting in less efficient transcription and translation  <cit> . in bacterial cell membranes, cold temperature induces fatty acid profile changes, such as the conversion of saturated fatty acids into unsaturated fatty acids and the preferential synthesis of short-chain, branched-chain, and/or anteiso fatty acids  <cit> . however, we found no distinctive characteristics related to the modification of fatty acid composition; we identified no genes involved in the synthesis of unusual fatty acids, such as unsaturated or branched-chain fatty acids, and we found that the number and order of the genes in the fatty acid biosynthesis gene cluster were identical to those in other species, except that they were encoded in the plasmid and not in the chromosome. low temperatures also induce the production of several proteins such as cold shock protein a , which functions as an rna chaperone, and rna helicase dead, which prevents the formation of structured nucleic acids  <cit> . however, the numbers of these proteins differed slightly from those in the other  <dig> lab strains included in the comparative analysis.

the cold stress response is also associated with different types of anti-stress mechanisms. compatible solutes are chemical compounds, such as betaine and carnitine, that act as osmolytes and confer osmotic tolerance. they also facilitate psychrotolerance, although this physiological mechanism still needs clarification  <cit> . the uptake and accumulation of compatible solutes in a cold-stressed environment, and the contributions of these solutes to psychrotolerance have been reported in several microorganisms, including listeria monocytogenes, yersinia enterocolitica, and bacillus subtilis  <cit> . in l. hokkaidonensis, we found four transporters that were probably responsible for the uptake of these osmolytes: one bcct family transporter  and three abc transporters . the gene repertoire of these transporters was identical to that of l. sakei, a psychrotrophic lab, in which the accumulation of compatible solutes is considered to be a key factor during acclimation to cold and saline environments  <cit> . another notable feature was a bifunctional glutathione synthase encoded in the ice region, gshf , which allows glutathione to be synthesized via two-step ligation from its constituent amino acids  <cit> . two key genes involved in the redox cycle of glutathione were also encoded: glutathione peroxidase  and glutathione reductase . glutathione, which maintains cell redox homeostasis, also protects membrane lipids from the oxidative stress induced at cold temperatures  <cit> . in l. hokkaidonensis, gshf shared high similarity with that in l. coryniformis, which was a predominant isolate when we screened for psychrotolerant lab in timothy grass silage , thereby indicating that glutathione may facilitate psychrotolerance in both species.

bacterial defense systems that protect against cold environments involve a wide range of proteins, including those related to modifications of cell membrane lipids, transcription and translation mechanisms, and various stress proteins  <cit> ; therefore, it is difficult to elucidate their direct evidence solely from the viewpoint of genomics. hence, we will be conducting further investigations, including an expression study using whole-transcriptome sequencing .

unique gene repertoire of the l. vaccinostercus group
to clarify the characteristic gene features of l. hokkaidonensis and its close relatives, a comparative analysis was performed using four strains in the l. vaccinostercus group and  <dig> strains from representative lab species. we generated all-against-all bidirectional blastp alignments between l. hokkaidonensis looc260t and each reference strain. an ortholog table was constructed based on the alignment results. figure  <dig> shows some of the table, and additional file  <dig> contains the whole dataset. the phylogenetic tree of the  <dig> strains included in the analysis and the summarized metabolic pathway prediction results obtained using the kegg automatic annotation server  are shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig> and in additional file  <dig>  respectively.figure  <dig> 
ortholog table. constructed based on the all-against-all blastp alignments between each two species. in the vertical direction, the proteins are shown in order of appearance in the genome of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t. in the horizontal direction, the species included in the comparison are shown. for each row, the bit scores were normalized by dividing by the maximum value. the number of each cell represents the normalized score, and the cells are colored varying shades of red, according to their values, with a deeper color corresponding to a higher value.



central metabolism
similar to the well-characterized heterofermentative lab, l. buchneri  <cit> , all four species in the l. vaccinostercus group possessed phosphoketolase, a key enzyme in heterolactic fermentation, but they lacked two genes involved in the embden–meyerhof pathway: phosphofructokinase- <dig> and fructose-bisphosphate aldolase. this was consistent with their classification as obligate heterofermentative lab. they also possessed two key genes involved in the nonoxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway: transketolase and transaldolase. both l- and d-lactate dehydrogenase were encoded, which agrees with the phenotypic trait that both l-lactate and d-lactate are produced. in contrast to many of the obligate heterofermentative lab, they lacked genes involved in the arginine deiminase pathway, which differentiates this group from the relatively closely related l. reuteri group. the reconstructed carbohydrate metabolism pathway is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig> 

the species in the l. vaccinostercus group can assimilate pentoses, such as l-arabinose, d-ribose, and d-xylose, more rapidly than d-glucose, thereby indicating a preference for pentoses over hexoses  <cit> . the weak capacity for glucose utilization may be attributed to the cellular redox imbalance caused by insufficient regeneration of nad+ because the l. vaccinostercus growth rate on glucose is accelerated by adding electron acceptors, such as aldehydes and ketones, to the medium  <cit> . these characteristics are similar to fructobacillus species, which lack the adhe  gene for regenerating nad+ in the latter stage of heterolactic fermentation  <cit> . by contrast, members of the l. vaccinostercus group possess adhe, which suggests that another mechanism is active.

as a starter culture for silage fermentation, the ability to assimilate pentoses is advantageous when utilizing substrates derived from plant cell walls. hemicellulose is one of the major components of the plant cell wall, which is composed of a branched heteropolymer of saccharides  <cit> . during the ensiling process, hemicellulose is partially hydrolyzed to yield pentoses, such as xylose and arabinose, which are then fermented into lactic and acetic acid via the phosphoketolase pathway  <cit> . in addition, acetic acid acts as an effective inhibitor that prevents the growth of aerobic spoilage microorganisms, such as yeasts and molds, thereby improving stability against aerobic deterioration after silos are opened for feeding  <cit> . in addition to the genes necessary to ferment pentoses, the presence of several copies of β-xylosidase genes in l. hokkaidonensis  indicates the ability to utilize xylooligosaccharide.

nadph generation
unique mechanisms were found for nadph generation in the l. vaccinostercus group lab. l. hokkaidonensis, l. vaccinostercus, and l. suebicus possessed membrane-bound nad transhydrogenase pntab, which mediates the transfer of a hydrogen from nadh to nadp+ to produce nadph using the electrochemical proton gradient  <cit> . in addition, l. vaccinostercus and l. suebicus possessed nadp-dependent glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, gapn, which catalyzes the one-step conversion of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate to 3-phosphoglycerate, with the concomitant reduction of nadp+ to nadph  <cit> . in conventional glycolysis, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate is converted into 3-phosphoglycerate via a two-step reaction, which is accompanied by the formation of nadh and atp.

the major cellular source of nadph is considered to be the oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway, where hexoses are decarboxylated into a c5-moiety. however, pentoses are assimilated without passing through this branch; thus, these enzymes may provide an alternative route for generating nadph. analogously, gapn in streptococcus mutans, which lacks the oxidative part of the pentose phosphate pathway, has been suggested to participate in nadph generation  <cit> . nadph mainly functions as an electron donor in anabolic reactions, whereas nad+ mainly functions as an electron acceptor in catabolic reactions. therefore, both pntab and gapn are favorable, particularly in the biosynthetic process because they produce a higher nadph/nadp+ ratio and a lower nadh/nad+ ratio.

with the exception of the meat-borne l. oligofermentans, the l. vaccinostercus group lab members encode a relatively high number of genes for amino acid biosynthesis. these nadph generation systems may support the diverse biosynthetic abilities of l. hokkaidonensis and its close relatives and may reflect the optimized utilization of pentoses as growth substrates.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we successfully reconstructed the complete genome of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t by whole-genome sequencing using the pacbio smrt sequencing system and de novo assembly based on the hgap method. we found that the complete genome of l. hokkaidonensis looc260t contained various previously unreported mobile genetic elements, which included three new types of insertion sequences, two prophage loci, one ice, and two plasmids, one of which was considered to be a conjugative plasmid. ice contained many genes related to heavy metal resistance and shared several components with other plant-associated lab. the ice may have mediated the dissemination of genes that contributed to niche adaptation in plant-associated lab species. our comparative genome analysis also provided insights into the characteristic gene repertoire of this group, such as preferential pentose assimilation. although our study could not obtain direct evidence of psychrotolerance, we detected possible factors that may contribute to psychrotolerance in this species, such as the uptake of compatible solutes and the synthesis of glutathione. these findings merit further investigations, and the genomic information obtained in this study should facilitate the development of an appropriate silage inoculant for use in cold regions.

