BACKGROUND
some of the most dramatic evolutionary changes within a species’ range can occur at its distributional margins where individuals tend to be exposed to extreme environments within the species’ range. crucial processes such as hybridization, population fragmentation and increased genetic drift may occur more often at the margins than in the core of a species’ range . changes in climate that force the species’ range to shift might even increase these dynamics through species interactions.

past climate changes have had significant effects on the distribution of species, and the locations of species margins have fluctuated through time  <cit> . at the end of the last glacial period, species ranges generally shifted towards higher latitudes, so that today, one might be able to distinguish a leading edge and a rear edge. woody species recursively tracked the changes in climate during the latest deglaciation  <cit> . hampe and petit  <cit>  argue that the rear edge populations have sometimes persisted over long periods of time and have, therefore, been more stable than other populations from the range. a meta-analysis revealed that lower latitudinal populations of a species tended to show a higher degree of divergence between populations, even after controlling for geographic distance  <cit> . this implies that these populations at the current rear margins often persist in isolation during a species’ range shift. in contrast, populations at the current leading edge tend to expand and may not be isolated for long periods. because different species/populations react in different ways in response to climate changes and have ranges covering different latitudes, the rear edge of a species may, at some point, be in contact with the leading edge of another. consequently, such environmental change may result in sympatry and be due to the interaction of once geographically isolated species at their boundaries.

a relatively large proportion of extant biodiversity diverged recently , and these relatively young species may be particularly susceptible to hybridization due to the absence of postzygotic isolation  <cit> . most hybrids have lower fitness than parental species in the parental niches  <cit> , but they could be also equivalent to, or have higher fitness than, parental species depending on hybrid genotypes and environments  <cit> . nonetheless, hybridization with viable hybrid offspring occurs in roughly 10% and 25% of animal and plant species, respectively  <cit> , and subsequent hybridizations between hybrids and parental species, which result in gene transfer into recipient species , can sometimes lead to adaptive evolution . a recent study suggests that contemporary climate changes could force a species’ range to expand and induce hybridization  <cit> . climate oscillations must have induced repeated range shifts  <cit> , and may have increased the chance of hybridization and introgression between the species at their boundaries. since hybridization can be a major evolutionary driver  <cit> , contacts between species of recent evolutionary origins and subsequent gene flow may be a common feature of biodiversity dynamics at range margins. this species interaction  newly induced by climate changes as a result of the response of the species may ultimately contribute to increased genetic variation and provide genetic resources when the species undergoes natural selection in changing environments.

yakushima  offers a unique environment for testing differences in impact of past and contemporary climate change on range distribution and its evolutionary consequences at the northern and southern limits of species range. due to its latitude  and range of altitudes , the island harbors vegetation types ranging from subtropical to alpine, and serves as the southern limit of more than  <dig> temperate plant species in japan , and as the northernmost limit for some subtropical-tropical species that are distributed from mainland china to southern japan through a string of islands.

rubus palmatus thunb., and rubus grayanus maximowicz are wild raspberry species distributed in asia, including yakushima island. r. palmatus is an endemic temperate species in japan and is divided into three varieties: var. palmatus in western japan, var. coptophyllus in north-eastern japan, and var. yakumontanus on yakushima island. r. grayanus is distributed in subtropical climates including southeast china and japan. both species are diploid species belonging to the genus rubus, subgenus ideaobatus. a major ecological difference between these species is in leaf seasonality . the species co-exist only on yakushima island, where the southernmost population of r. palmatus is present at high altitude and the northernmost population of r. grayanus is present at low altitude. yakushima island was connected with the southern kyushu island during the last glacial maximum , and putatively served as refugia for temperate forests  <cit> . this implies that some temperate species, including r. palmatus, persisted as marginal populations over the glaciation period on and around the island. if postglacial climate change led to parapatry of these rubus species on the island, then subsequent hybridization may have bridged the genetic resources of these two closely related species, which are otherwise ecologically distinct, possibly helping them to respond more rapidly to new selection regimes in a changing climate.

in this study, we studied how the marginal populations of two closely related but ecologically distinct species  responded to postglacial climate change at the southern and northern range limits, respectively, and the genetic consequences. we hypothesized that differences in the species’ response to postglacial climate change led to range contacts, which may have resulted in increased opportunities for hybridization if the species were able to hybridize. to test this, we first examined the dynamics of the marginal populations of the species by coalescent analysis using nuclear sequence data. we then tested the hybridization of the contact zones along the altitudinal gradients on yakushima island at the species boundary by coalescent analysis using both nuclear and chloroplast sequences. since we did not have enough paleobotanical information for the current species boundaries for rubus or rosaceae, we projected current and past distributions of the environmental envelop of these species, using an ensemble forecasting approach to compare the results of the genetic analysis.

RESULTS
genetic diversity in r. palmatus and r. grayanus
the partial sequences of  <dig> functional nuclear loci, totaling  <dig>  bp in size, were obtained from  <dig> and  <dig> individuals sampled from morphologically pure populations of r. palmatus and r. grayanus, respectively, around the species boundaries . sequence reads contained 106 bp of a non-coding region in the cop1-homolog gene and 92 bp in the gstf-homolog gene. we identified  <dig> segregating sites when both species were considered, and  <dig> and  <dig> segregating sites within r. palmatus and r. grayanus, respectively. a total of  <dig> fixed sites between species in total were found in four loci . the eight other loci had only shared polymorphisms. the wright fixation index, fst, between the two species varied among loci, but was generally high .figure  <dig> 
locations of sampled populations and species distributions.  open circles represent rubus palmatus sample locations , and closed circles indicate sample locations of r. grayanus . r. palmatus southern limits  and r. grayanus northern limits  are shown. geographic coordinates and altitudes are given in table  <dig>   sampled populations along altitudes on yakushima, where the two species’ distributions merged, are indicated as shaded squares . some individuals from the pyk population  were located along anbo lane at high altitude and included in the analysis of the contact zones. the dashed line indicates the approximate sampling areas for pyk and gyk populations.
sample population locations for the phylogeographic study at species boundaries and for the study at contact zones



species
location
code
species
latitude
lontitude
altitude 
n
θ
π
the contact zone were located on the yakushima where r. palmatus’ range and r. grayanus’ range are contacted. some individuals in pyk, located on the anbo lane were also included in the analysis for contact zones . n is the number of sequence data ; θ and π is gene diversity.



the average, within population nucleotide diversity, π , was generally higher in r. palmatus  =  <dig> - <dig> ) than in r. grayanus  =  <dig> - <dig> ; table 1). nucleotide diversity was highest in r. palmatus populations: peb  followed by pbs . the highest nucleotide diversity in r. grayanus was found in gyk  followed by gam  and the lowest was found at okinawa . the levels of diversity were intermediate or high, within the range of silent nucleotide diversity in model and tree species  <cit> .

neutrality tests were carried out over loci; and the results for both tajima’s d and fu and li’s d significantly departed from a neutral expectation in the yakushima population  of r. grayanus. in r. grayanus, the southern populations  had significantly negative tajima’s d . the peb population in r. palmatus, which had the highest nucleotide diversity, had a significantly positive fu and li’s d value. fu and li’s d was positive and marginally significant  in the southernmost population of r. palmatus . none of the genes studied here were significant for the maximum likelihood analysis of the hka test.

divergence and migration within species
as a result of the structure analysis for the populations at the species boundaries, the most likely value of k was  <dig> when evanno et al.’s  <cit>  method was used, and  <dig> when pritchard et al.’s  <cit>  method was used .figure  <dig> 
population structure of
rubus palmatus
and
r. grayanus
based on snps from  <dig> nuclear genes. the plots were obtained with the bayesian clustering analysis program structure  <cit> .



the demographic parameters estimated in the im models are listed in table  <dig>  four additional models were run with different prior sets for a subset of models, and the demographic estimates were generally consistent regardless of priors . the posterior distribution of the divergence time in the two-population model with pyk and gyk  showed a clearer peak when the prior for migration rate was exponentially distributed, than when it was uniformly distributed . thus, we used an exponential prior for the migration rates in further simulations . among r. palmatus populations, the lower 95% hpd for divergence time between each pair of populations was estimated to be before the lgm , except between the two eastern populations . among r. grayanus populations, the more southerly populations  had deeper divergence compared to the more northerly ones. estimates of divergence time between pairs of populations in r. grayanus were relatively smaller within the three northern populations  and the smallest divergence time was between the two northernmost populations, gyk and gtn .table  <dig> 
estimated demographic parameters for the population pairs assuming isolation with migration


model
pop <dig>  2
t
θ
1
θ
2
θ
a
2nm <dig> <2
2nm1>2
within r. palmatus
within r. grayanus
highest probability densities  and 95% hpd in parentheses of demographic parameters, in isolation with migration models of two species populations : divergence time in million years ago  of two focal populations, population size in thousands in population <dig> , population  <dig> , ancestral population , and migration rate from population  <dig> to  <dig>  and from population  <dig> to  <dig> .

migration rates  were tested by likelihood ratio tests ; *p <  <dig> , **p <  <dig> , ***p <  <dig> .



the estimates of divergence time between the two species were approximately consistent among all pairs of populations . a significant migration was detected only with the between-species models. these models detected significant migration from r. palmatus to r. grayanus  and from r. grayanus to r. palmatus .

genetic structure at the contact zones on yakushima
the partial sequences of  <dig> nuclear loci, in addition to one chloroplast locus, totaling 6302 bp in size, were obtained from  <dig> individuals sampled from the contact zones on yakushima island . most individuals from the contact zones had an r. grayanus cpdna haplotype . assuming k =  <dig>  a clinal genetic admixture was detected along the two altitudinal gradients on the island . clines were also observed in the hybrid index along the altitude , assuming pyk* and ab <dig> populations as the parental populations based on the result of the structure analysis. among the  <dig> tested individuals,  <dig> % were classified as pure r. grayanus,  <dig> % as backcrosses with r. grayanus,  <dig> % as advanced-generation hybrids,  <dig> % as backcrosses with r. palmatus, and  <dig> % as pure r. palmatus . interspecific heterozygosity ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> , and some hybrids had lower interspecific heterozygosity than expected . the ima simulation, based on the putative parental populations , estimated significant migration from r. palmatus to r. grayanus , but gene flow in the opposite direction was not significant.figure  <dig> 
population structure of populations along altitude on yakushima.  haplotypes of cpdna  illustrated in green  and red .  structure analysis based on snps from  <dig> nuclear genes, assuming k =  <dig> 
hybrid index assuming that the pyk*  and ab <dig>  populations are parental populations.  hybrid index of each population, where hybrid index 0 = r. grayanus and 1 = r. palmatus.  interspecific heterozygosity vs hybrid index based on snps of  <dig> nuclear genes. colored dots indicate broadly defined hybrid classes  <cit> ; bcg as backcrosses with r. grayanus; bcp as backcrosses with r. palmatus; fn as advanced-generation hybrids.



species distribution models
according to thuiller et al.  <cit> , the area under the curve  of an roc for true skill statistics  and kappa statistics indicated a good-to-excellent model performance, when averaged across all replications for all modeling techniques under current climatic conditions ; the expected kappa value of cta for r. palmatus =  <dig> . the ensemble forecasting, based on six different modeling techniques, for the distributions of r. palmatus and r. grayanus under current climates predicted slightly wider distributions compared to the known distributions .figure  <dig> 
an ensemble forecasting of current and past distribution of
r. palmatus
and
r. grayanus
based on the bioclimatic variables. sets of uncorrelated bioclimatic variables were used for each species. probability of occurrence maps  and projected distribution of the suitable climates in the past  in r. palmatus
 and r. grayanus
. dashed lines indicate the known current southern and northern limits of r. palmatus
 and r. grayanus
, respectively.



projections of past distribution during the lgm  are shown in figures 5c and d. the projection for r. palmatus shows a southern retreat from the major parts of its current distribution. the projection of past distributions of r. grayanus shows decreased probabilities of occurrence at the current northernmost range limits. moreover, the most suitable habitats during the lgm were the southern islands, including amami-Ōshima island and okinawa main-island . a limitation in the accuracy may be due to the small amount of geo-reference data for r. grayanus, but in general, the current distribution had a higher occurrence probability in both species .

discussion
range dynamics at species boundaries with postglacial climate change
the range shifts associated with climate change often leave a signature in the population genetic structure. because of repeated bottlenecks during range expansion, the high-latitude limits of species that migrated after the lgm tend to have less genetic diversity than that of more southern locations  <cit> , unless they are derived from an admixture of populations that originated from multiple refugia  <cit> . in contrast, the rear edge populations at low-latitudinal limits of species’ range can be slightly older because of latitudinal displacement of the distribution range, or can be more stable and the oldest populations within a species range, because of the persistence of relict populations during the climate changes. this has been observed in a number of species, based on phylogeographic surveys . the range shift in response to climate change differs among populations and species. the differences might create opportunities to encounter other species, which may induce interspecific interactions such as competition and hybridization or lead to isolation from currently interacting species.

this comparative study of two related species, based on the coalescent analysis, suggests that the temperate species, r. palmatus, maintained its current southern limit populations on the island during the lgm and the population encountered expanding populations of its subtropical relatives, r. grayanus, after the lgm on the island. the relatively deep divergence without gene flow after divergence in populations within r. palmatus implies that the current populations were derived from multiple refugia. the lower bounds of the 95% hpd of the estimated time since divergence between the yakushima population  and other nearby populations  are  <dig>  years ago . given that the lgm ended  <dig> – <dig>  years ago, yakushima island likely served as an isolated refugium for r. palmatus under the current climates and under past climates during the lgm. yakushima island was once geographically connected to the south of kyushu island, and probably served as a refugium for temperate evergreen forest species during the lgm  <cit> . in the case of r. palmatus, which is currently distributed at high altitude on the island, the island may have provided isolated habitats for the species, even during the lgm. the topography of the island may have offered a climatic niche for r. palmatus during the lgm and contributed to the stability of the southernmost population. most of the species is endemic to this island, occurring at higher elevations  <cit> , which may explain the historical isolation of the island in a phylogenetic context with cool temperate species. on the other hand, the island is less likely to have served as a refugium for the subtropical species, r. grayanus. our analysis of r. grayanus suggests a recent range expansion from more southerly-located populations. we found a recent divergence among the northern populations of r. grayanus. the estimated divergence time of approximately  <dig>  years ago, between the northern populations  and the nearest population , suggests a population decline or the complete retreat of the current northern tip of the distribution during the lgm. the ecological niche modeling also suggests both the stability of the southern population of r. palmatus and the population decline or complete retreat of r. grayanus from yakushima island during the lgm.

r. grayanus can be found on the strip of islands that extend to china, including yakushima island, which indicates that the seeds have the capacity to disperse over sea, perhaps by animals  <cit>  including migrant birds  <cit> , as was observed in other rubus species. considering the high probability of a post-glacial population divergence on yakushima and tanegashima islands from the more southerly located islands, the initial colonization may have occurred with seed dispersal by animals from nearby islands. after the divergences, the lack of any significant migration indicates that current seed dispersal between the islands is very rare. a rise in sea-level during the post-glaciation period increased the distances between islands, perhaps also decreasing the probability of seed dispersal among the islands.

we detected a significant gene flow between r. palmatus and northern r. grayanus populations. this violation of the im model may have biased the parameter estimates, though the 95% hpd can often include the true values  <cit> . nonetheless, r. palmatus likely kept its southern limits on the island and the range expansion of r. grayanus that was due to past climate change resulted in the current contact between the species on the island.

current and past introgression at species boundaries
hybridization between r. grayanus and r. palmatus and asymmetric introgression with backcrosses were observed at intermediate altitudes on yakushima island, where the two species merged relatively recently at the species boundaries. this result agrees well with previous studies showing that the significant introgression was triggered by increased sympatry of species distributions following environmental changes  <cit> , including contemporary climate changes  <cit> . in this study, we detected not only current active hybridization but also past introgression. the structure analysis indicated a clear divergence between the morphologically pure species at the species boundary near yakushima island, suggesting that recent hybridization in these populations is limited. on the other hand, coalescence analysis that considers all migration since the two species diverged, indicated the presence of past hybridization events, probably as a consequence of past species contacts due to climate oscillations. the repeated range expansions and retreats  <cit> , occurring with oscillations in climates, might have induced repeated contacts at the margins of the ranges for these two closely related, but ecologically distinct species, leaving a complex signature of introgression.

in the hybrid zones of rubus, backcrosses with both parental species revealed clinal trends in the hybrid index. while hybridization and backcrosses could occur in both directions, most of the hybrids had r. grayanus as a seed donor and the introgression was asymmetric towards r. grayanus in the current hybrid zones on the island. introgressive hybridization is occasionally asymmetric, which could be due to natural selection  <cit> , pre- and post-zygotic reproductive isolation  <cit> , or differences in population demography, such as relative abundance  <cit>  and population growth rate resulting in “gene surfing”  <cit> . relative abundance may play a role in asymmetric introgression since a rarer species would have a greater chance of receiving foreign genes from a more abundant species than vice versa, and first generations of hybrids tend to backcross with the most common parent at the local scale  <cit> . based on our phylogeographic study, r. grayanus is the late colonizer on the island, perhaps starting from a small population size. thus, the abundance theory does not fully explain the pattern. instead, our observation is consistent with the expectation of gene surfing and introgression from an expanding species. currat et al.  <cit>  used simulations to predict that demographic difference on its own could cause asymmetric introgression from a local species to a recently colonized and expanding species until colonization is complete, because the number of copies of an allele introgressed in the incoming species will quickly increase due to its high rate of population growth. thus, regardless of differences in abundance, asymmetric gene flow will take place from a local to a colonizing population. if the distribution of cpdna reflects the population growth of r. grayanus as it expanded northwards during the past climate change, then r. grayanus may have more reproductive outputs compared to r. palmatus, which is supported by currat et al.’s  <cit>  prediction.

the observed structure of the hybrid zones was consistent with successive generations of hybrids. a range of interspecific heterozygosity in advanced-generation hybrids suggests that these populations corresponded to a mixture of early- and later-generation hybrids with recombination. we also found a discontinuity in the clinal hybrids zone , which suggests reproductive isolation between hybrids and one side of the parent species, r. palmatus. steep clines have been observed with assortative mating and strong postzygotic barriers  <cit> . since pre- and post-zygote barriers can result in asymmetric introgression  <cit> , this may also be a cause of asymmetry of the hybrid zones. we are currently testing reproductive isolation by artificial crossing between r. palmatus and r. grayanus. nonetheless, backcrossing with both ecologically divergent parental species was not a rare event in the hybrid zones, and it may lead to adaptive introgression by transferring adaptive traits at species boundaries with environmental selection  <cit> . although some of our sequenced genes were found to be adaptive in other species; e.g., phytochrome in european aspen  <cit> , we did not detect significant effects of selection in any of the loci we studied and these sequences behaved neutrally, at least in our dataset. observations of genome-wide genetic variants and phenotypic variation in a common garden experiment of hybrids are currently being performed to detect natural selection for adaptive traits.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we found significant differences in the response to past climate change in the populations of two ecologically distinct, but related species, at the margin of their species ranges. the fluctuations in range changes likely led to repeated contacts between closely related species thereby increasing the chance for hybridization. genetic variation from other species can be a source of adaptive variation to respond to environmental changes as with standing variation and new mutation  <cit> , and genes provided by introgression can be a crucial source of variation to respond to selection . introgressive hybridization induced by climate changes at the species boundaries, where populations may be isolated but still an important source for further range shift in response to climate change, could provide essential genetic variation to facilitate the recovery of population size and range expansion. further detailed investigation of genomic clines and hybrid fitness along the hybrid zones at the margins of the ranges would provide insights into the roles of hybridization in population persistence and expansion in a changing environment.

