BACKGROUND
parasites, through effects on host survival and reproduction, can modify the morphology, life history and behavior of their hosts. parasites may also influence the dynamics of host populations thereby shaping communities  <cit> . hosts in turn may also have important effects on their parasites. many parasite species, whether endoparasites or ectoparasites, remain closely associated with their hosts through much of their life cycle  <cit> , and often rely on their hosts for dispersal. dispersal, in turn, influences gene flow and therefore genetic structure and diversity of a species; across a broad range of taxa, less dispersal is associated with increased spatial structure and differentiation  <cit> . not surprisingly, spatial genetic structure of a parasite frequently reflects dispersal of its host. for example, population genetic structure of parasitic nematodes of cattle, sheep and white-tailed deer is explained by host movements  <cit> . however, relative to their hosts, parasites often show higher levels of genetic differentiation. as such, analysis of the trematode parasite  permitted more detailed information on population assignments in its host, the steelhead trout  than could be obtained by examining genetic variation in the host itself  <cit> . in addition to dispersal, parasites and hosts may have experienced correlated demographic and range dynamics  <cit>  which will also be reflected in their population genetic structure; for instance, patterns of genetic variation among populations of the parasitic nematode heligmosomoides polygyrus have revealed demographic and historic events affecting its host, the field mouse apodemus sylvaticus  <cit> . furthermore, differences in regional abundance of two apodemus species likely caused differentiation of both the apodemus host and their heligmosomoides parasite species  <cit> .

however, it has recently been shown that a strong link between host dispersal and parasite genetic structure is not ubiquitous, and depends on factors that include the degree of association with the host and host mobility  <cit> . here, we investigated spatial genetic structure and past demography of an ectoparasite that is associated with highly mobile flying hosts, and would be considered a weak generalist based on its association with a number of different host species that are closely related to each other  <cit> . our study complements a body of work on spatial genetic structure and phylogeography of various ectoparasites associated with hosts having higher mobility .

insects in the genus cimex  are temporary ectoparasites of homeothermic animals. they do not remain on their host at all times but rather remain in nests or roosts between blood meals  <cit> . most cimex species are associated exclusively with bats, while a few associate with a more diverse range of hosts . cimex adjunctus is a widespread ectoparasite of bats in north america, occurring from the eastern seaboard to the rocky mountains, and from labrador and the northwest territories south to texas  <cit> . it parasitizes a number of bat species, including the big brown bat  and the little brown myotis , two species that often roost in buildings . the generation time of c. adjunctus is unknown, but is likely similar to that of the common bed bug c. lectularius, which can range from two to  <dig> generations a year depending on monthly temperatures  <cit> , and is certainly much shorter than that of its hosts.

usinger  <cit>  proposed that cimex species have a very low inherent capacity for dispersal over long distances, on the scale of kilometers. he thought it unlikely that adult cimex species disperse on their own. he therefore hypothesized that cimex species can disperse occasionally attached to a host’s body  <cit> . previous studies of genetic diversity of the big brown bat and little brown myotis in north america have reported high within-site genetic variation and generally low among-site differentiation, although there are differences between patterns at nuclear and mitochondrial markers . overall, these studies indicate that high levels of gene flow are maintained over long distances in both bat species, while genetic structuring of mitochondrial variation suggests a higher degree of female than male philopatry. for c. adjunctus, likely only a fraction of host dispersal events result in successful parasite dispersal so gene flow may be lower in c. adjunctus relative to these two host species. furthermore, c. adjunctus may experience frequent extirpation and recolonization events. bartonička and růžičková  <cit>  identified bat bug load as a possible cause of roost-switching in bats, with numbers of bats dropping as the population of c. pipistrelli reaches a high. they also found the appearance of c. pipistrelli  <dig> to 56 days after the first bat visit in any given roost. since c. adjunctus, like c. pipistrelli, does not stay on the host between blood meals, sudden host population decreases within roosts might drive local extirpation events.

although different ectoparasite races are often associated with different host species , high gene flow among populations associated with different host species has also been documented. in europe, cimex pipistrelli is morphologically, but not genetically, differentiated among bat host species  <cit> . this suggests possible morphological plasticity, but high gene flow, among individuals associated with different host species. in north america, we might also expect gene flow among c. adjunctus populations on different host species. many different north american bat species temporarily roost together for short intervals during the night, such as many myotis species, including m. lucifugus, and e. fuscus  <cit> , potentially facilitating host switching by c. adjunctus.

much of north america was unsuitable for many bat species during the last pleistocene glacial maximum, and both m. lucifugus and e. fuscus are hypothesized to have expanded their ranges from glacial refugia. dixon  <cit>  suggested that little brown myotis populations currently in minnesota have dispersed from a single large southeastern us glacial refugium, and neubaum et al.  <cit>  suggested that big brown bat populations have dispersed from several eastern and western us glacial refugia into what is now colorado. range and demographic expansion in little brown myotis has also been proposed on the east coast of canada  <cit> . we expect that the potential dependence of c. adjunctus on its host species for long-distance dispersal and colonization may have contributed to broadly congruent patterns of historical range expansion over large spatial scales.

we investigated the spatial genetic structure and phylogeography of c. adjunctus across its range in north america. because of its comparatively shorter generation time, the likelihood that only a fraction of bat dispersal events may result in ectoparasite gene flow, and the potential for local extirpations, we predicted stronger spatial genetic structure in c. adjunctus relative to its hosts. because of the potential for movement among host species, we also examined differentiation among populations found on different host species. finally, based on the hypothesis that post-pleistocene climate warming had similar effects on the demographic history of c. adjunctus as that of its hosts, we predicted genetic signatures of demographic and range expansion in c. adjunctus.

RESULTS
we collected  <dig> cimex adjunctus samples from throughout its range in north america , from  <dig> sites . we successfully amplified a fragment of the cytochrome c oxidase  <dig>  gene for  <dig> c. adjunctus, and identified  <dig> haplotypes with  <dig> polymorphic sites . we also genotyped  <dig> of the c. adjunctus at nine microsatellite loci . we successfully obtained both mitochondrial and microsatellite data for  <dig> c. adjunctus . for approximate bayesian computation , which uses both types of markers, we used the overlapping dataset . for analyses using only microsatellite loci , we used the whole microsatellite dataset  and for analyses using only mitochondrial dna , we used the complete co <dig> dataset . finally, we used only sites with data for at least two individuals, and for which we obtained both mitochondrial and microsatellite data, for the analysis of molecular variance  analysis, which resulted in a dataset of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> sites .fig.  <dig> sampling locations of cimex adjunctus in north america. created with arcgis v <dig>  . numbers on the map correspond to site numbers in additional file 1: table s <dig>  membership to each of ten genetic clusters, defined using microsatellite data in geneland, is shown with a unique colour and shape. cluster numbers are given in the legend and correspond to those in additional file 1: table s1




microsatellite diversity, and hardy-weinberg and linkage disequilibrium
among the nine microsatellite loci, we observed between two and  <dig> alleles. across different sites and genetic clusters , average number of alleles ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  expected heterozygosity ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , observed heterozygosity ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , and the inbreeding coefficient varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . variation in genetic diversity and inbreeding coefficients did not show any obvious spatial pattern. we found three significant cases of deviation from hardy-weinberg equilibrium . since these incidences of deviation from hardy-weinberg equilibrium were not systematic across loci or sites, we retained these two markers and two sites for our analyses. we did not find any evidence of significant linkage disequilibrium in any marker.table  <dig> genetic diversity estimates for c. adjunctus, averaged across nine microsatellite markers, for sites with five or more sampled individuals and for genetic clusters identified by geneland . site and cluster numbers correspond to those in fig.  <dig> and additional file 1: table s1




range-wide genetic structure
genetic clustering analyses using the geneland method revealed  <dig> genetic clusters , which were generally concordant with geographic location . one interesting exception was that individuals from the northwest territories and saskatchewan clustered with individuals from distant regions . there was no association between genetic clusters identified by geneland and any major geographic barriers that might knowingly impact dispersal. the sampling year and host species did not seem to strongly affect clustering, as individuals associated with different host species or sampled at different years were frequently assigned to the same cluster . using k-means clustering, we obtained the lowest bic value at k =  <dig>  and the second lowest bic value was at k =  <dig>  moreover, we observed significant ibd calculated on individual genetic relatedness values . conditioning for genetic structure slightly improved the fit of the ibd model .table  <dig> results of clustering and isolation-by-distance analyses of cimex adjunctus, estimated using microsatellite markers. most likely number of genetic clusters  estimated using the geneland method, isolation-by-distance  and ibd while correcting for population genetic structure  are shown

p
r2

r2
*statistically significant at α =  <dig> 




amova results were very different between the two types of markers. for microsatellites, considerably less of the total variation was explained by among  than within sites , but for mitochondrial data the variation among  and within sites  were similar. the proportion of genetic variation among host species was high for microsatellite data , but quite low for mitochondrial data .table  <dig> results of analysis of molecular variance  on cimex adjunctus, using mitochondrial and microsatellite data. percentage of total variation among host species, among sample sites , and within sample sites are shown




demographic history
considering those haplotypes represented by four or more individuals, there was some degree of spatial structuring in their distribution. specifically, distinct haplotypes were associated with the western and eastern ends of c. adjunctus’ range . one interesting observation was that individuals from northwest territories and saskatchewan had very similar haplotypes to individuals from the midwest of the united states. the msn did not show a well-defined starburst pattern . also, the md showed multiple peaks rather than a single peak that would have indicated potential demographic expansion in the past . evolution of neτ through time, estimated using ebsp, showed mostly constant population size with a possible gradual decrease from about  <dig>  to  <dig>  years ago to about half of the initial population size, followed by a small increase to the present . finally, abc analysis gave strongest support to a scenario mimicking a decrease in effective population size of at least an order of magnitude between  <dig> million years ago and  <dig>  years ago .fig.  <dig> frequencies of mitochondrial dna haplotypes of cimex adjunctus across its range. data for nearby sampling sites are combined in a single pie chart. rare haplotypes represented by fewer than four individuals in the entire data set are shown in grey. haplotypes represented by four or more individuals in the entire dataset are identified with unique colors as indicated in the legend, and corresponding to haplotype colors in fig.  <dig>  site numbers correspond to those in fig.  <dig> and in additional file 1: table s <dig>  sizes of circles indicate sample sizes


fig.  <dig> minimum-spanning network of mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase  <dig>  sequences of cimex adjunctus. haplotypes represented by fewer than four individuals are shown in grey. haplotypes represented by four or more individuals are identified with unique colors as indicated in the legend, and corresponding to those in fig.  <dig>  each circle represents a unique sequence, each line segment is a mutational step, numbers are sample sizes for each unique sequence, small circles without a sample size are intermediate, unsampled haplotypes, and the square represents the putative ancestral sequence


fig.  <dig> frequency of pairwise mismatches among cytochrome c oxidase  <dig>  sequences of cimex adjunctus in north america


fig.  <dig> extended bayesian skyline plot estimated using cytochrome c oxidase  <dig>  data of cimex adjunctus. shown are the mean and 95% highest posterior density interval of the product of effective population size  and generation time  through time 





discussion
range-wide genetic structure
analyses of mitochondrial and microsatellite genetic markers supported our prediction of high range-wide genetic structure, mediated by geographic distance, in c. adjunctus, an ectoparasite of bats. across the range of c. adjunctus, we found significant genetic structure, a large proportion of which was explained by geographic distance. whereas ibd has not been previously investigated in most bat parasites , it has been investigated in two of the key hosts of c. adjunctus, the big brown bat and the little brown myotis. a relationship between genetic and geographic distance has been observed in both the big brown bat  <cit>  and little brown myotis across a considerably smaller spatial scale  <cit>  than examined here. range-wide ibd has also been described for little brown myotis  <cit> , based on population-level analyses using f
st. thus, geographic distance explains a lot of the variation in genetic structure of c. adjunctus as it does in two of its hosts, which could potentially reflect the reliance of c. adjunctus on their hosts for dispersal.

however, the overall degree of genetic structuring appears to be higher in c. adjunctus than in its hosts. analysis of microsatellite genotypes has revealed only two genetic clusters in both big brown bat  <cit>  and little brown myotis  <cit> , both at continental spatial scales, whereas our results point to ten genetic clusters in c. adjunctus. likewise, very little genetic variation  occurs among spatially separate sites in big brown bat  <cit>  and in little brown myotis . in c. adjunctus, about one third of the microsatellite variation and about one half of mitochondrial variation occur among sites . these observations suggest that c. adjunctus is more subdivided within its range than at least two of its hosts, and that its genetic structure does not entirely reflect the dispersal patterns of its hosts. interestingly however, both genetic clustering and msn results also offer some evidence of possible continent-scale long-distance movement in c. adjunctus, as reflected in the relationships among individuals from the northwest territories, saskatchewan, maritime canada and the us midwest. relationships among c. adjunctus samples from these locations echo a pattern that was observed in m. lucifugus, where a set of sites in the central united states and central to north-western canada are connected by high gene flow  <cit> .

spatial structuring of genetic diversity can arise when gene flow is not sufficiently high to homogenize allele frequencies throughout the study area, and across a broad range of animal species dispersal ability is correlated with both gene flow and population genetic structure  <cit> . this has led to the prediction that genetic structure of many parasites will reflect host dispersal and genetic structure  <cit> . however, the association between host dispersal and parasite genetic structure has recently been shown to be generally weak  <cit> . furthermore, genetic structure in parasites is often found to be stronger than that of their host, as we have observed here for c. adjunctus. for example, a finer genetic structure was found in an endoparasitic nematode h. polygyrus than in its host, the field mouse a. sylvaticus  <cit> . one reason for stronger genetic structuring in parasites than their hosts could be that, for parasites using their host as a means of dispersal, not every host dispersal event will result in dispersal by the parasite. this is likely to be the case for c. adjunctus, which spends a considerable proportion of time living off of its hosts within cracks and crevices in roosting sites. first, only a small subset of dispersing bats are likely to be accompanied by c. adjunctus. second, dispersal mortality in the parasite may be very high due to grooming behaviour of bats that can cause the parasites to fall off  <cit> . additionally, parasites that have a generation time that is much shorter than that of their hosts, that are associated with more than one host species, or that are associated with highly mobile hosts typically show a much stronger genetic structure than their host, as highlighted by mazé-guilmo et al.  <cit> . all of these factors are true for c. adjunctus, and could explain the much stronger genetic structure we observed for relative to two of its key hosts.

in addition to gene flow and dispersal, genetic structure may also be influenced by genetic drift in small populations, which acts by increasing differentiation  <cit> . bat-associated cimex populations might be much smaller than populations of their hosts, although information on c. adjunctus population sizes is limited. in addition, it is possible that c. adjunctus experiences localized extirpations and recolonizations when roosts are abandoned by bats and subsequently re-occupied. the resulting founder events would further reduce effective population sizes and lead to higher genetic differentiation in c. adjunctus via genetic drift.

we also examined the proportion of genetic variance among samples of c. adjunctus associated with different host species. interestingly, we found a sharp difference between mitochondrial dna and microsatellite markers in this regard. mitochondrial data suggested considerably less variation among populations associated with different host species compared to microsatellite data. at the same time, microsatellite data showed less variation among populations than did the mitochondrial data, indicating that the difference we observed with respect to host species does not reflect a generally poorer ability of the mitochondrial data to detect differentiation in c. adjunctus.

our mitochondrial data are consistent with an earlier study on c. pipistrelli that found no genetic differentiation among individuals associated with different host species, using mitochondrial co <dig> and four nuclear loci  <cit> . our microsatellite results contradict these results from c. pipistrelli, although it is important to point that all nuclear loci in the study of balvin et al.  <cit>  showed almost no variation. mitochondrial dna is maternally inherited and therefore variation in it will reflect dispersal and history of the maternal lineage only. it is possible therefore that sex-biased behaviour in c. adjunctus could be the reason for our results. male-biased dispersal among roosts could lead to the higher proportion of genetic variation among sites in mitochondrial data than in microsatellite data. on the other hand, female-biased switching of hosts within roosts could be responsible for the lower proportion of genetic variation among host species observed in the mitochondrial versus microsatellite data. autonomous  female-biased movements over short distances, such as between neighbouring apartment units, have been described in the common bed bug, c. lectularius  <cit> . if female c. adjunctus also move more readily at short distances within roosts, that could explain both a higher rate of host-switching among females and a lower rate of transport among roosts by their hosts . however, there is currently no information available on sex-biased dispersal or host switching in c. adjunctus. our results not only suggest sex-biased dispersal or host switching in c. adjunctus, but also highlight the need to use more than one type of marker when investigating genetic diversity in an understudied species.

the most well studied member of the genus cimex is the human associated common bed bug, c. lectularius. several studies have examined genetic structure in c. lectularius across a range of spatial scales . however, most such studies focus on a considerably smaller scale than we do here, making direct comparisons of genetic structure difficult. for example, saenz et al.  <cit>  describe a weaker ibd pattern in c. lectularius than we observed for c. adjunctus, which could be due in part to the smaller spatial scale of their sampling . on the other hand, our genetic diversity estimates for c. adjunctus were strikingly similar to those found in one study on c. lectularius  <cit> , although we report slightly higher average numbers of alleles. in an interesting parallel, a study of c. lectularius populations associated with bats and humans found higher average numbers of alleles in the bat-associated populations than human-associated populations  <cit> . another study of c. lectularius in europe  <cit>  found higher mitochondrial dna variation among bat and human associated populations than we observed among populations of c. adjunctus associated with different bat species. one likely reason for this dissimilarity between c. adjunctus and c. lectularius is that the former is a weak generalist, associated with closely related species  <cit> , while the former is a strong generalist, associated with phylogenetically very different species. overall, sample sizes and the number of microsatellite markers used were lower in our study than in several studies of c. lectularius genetic structure  <cit> , but were nonetheless appropriate given the much broader spatial and temporal scale of resolution of our analyses  <cit> .

demographic history
we predicted signals of range and demographic expansion in c. adjunctus, based on the fact that there are widespread signatures of historic population expansion in many vertebrates, invertebrates and plant populations, including in the bat hosts of c. adjunctus. such patterns are most probably attributable to postglacial climate warming  <cit> . however, we found that the history of this ectoparasite is marked most strongly by demographic decline, with only a weak signal of recent demographic expansion, and no clear pattern of range expansion. for example, typical starburst patterns were previously observed in the haplotypic networks of e. fuscus and m. lucifugus , indicative of range expansion. however, we found no clear starburst pattern for c. adjunctus. this is unlikely to be a result of inadequate spatial sampling since our samples cover most of the known range of this species  <cit> .

we found evidence of population decline in the demographic history of c. adjunctus using a variety of approaches. according to ebsp results, a gradual decline might have started at around  <dig>  years ago, corresponding roughly to the illinoian glaciation, a time of likely very harsh climate for most species in north america  <cit> . a small demographic recovery may have started at around  <dig>  years ago. our abc results confirmed a population decline as the most likely historical scenario. two previous studies found signals of demographic expansion in m. lucifugus in eastern canada  <cit>  and minnesota, united states  <cit> . a small potential increase in c. adjunctus effective population size indicated in the ebsp starting  <dig>  years ago is in a similar timeframe as, but is of much smaller amplitude than, the demographic expansion found in both m. lucifugus studies. relative to those studies, our analysis was able to span a larger amount of time, probably due to the larger spatial scale of our sampling.

CONCLUSIONS
parasites that are mostly free-living, associate with multiple species of hosts, and have hosts that are highly mobile, such as some ectoparasites of bats, may be expected to show a genetic structure that contrasts with the dispersal patterns and genetic structure of their hosts  <cit> . these same factors may also lead to a difference in historic patterns of change in host and parasite ranges and population sizes. we have found exactly this pattern in c. adjunctus, an insect ectoparasite associated with a number of bat species in north america. this free-living parasite moves off the host between blood meals and could be actively removed by the host through anti-parasitism behaviour. our results highlight that the genetic structure and demographic history of a weak generalist ectoparasite, particularly one that has a loose relationship with its hosts, can be very different from that of its hosts.

