BACKGROUND
protein-dna interactions play a pivotal role in gene regulation. the ability to identify amino acid residues that are responsible for the specificity and affinity of the interactions can significantly improve our understanding of macromolecular functions and contribute to advances in drug discovery  <cit> . hence, the discovery of the principles of protein-dna interactions has been a topic of significant interest for many years  <cit> . current approaches to uncovering such principles rely on experimental analysis of the structures of protein-dna complexes in order to understand the molecular details of specific residue-residue contacts that mediate protein-dna recognition  <cit> . in addition to biophysical methods for structure determination, biochemical and molecular genetic approaches have been widely used to identify dna-binding sites on proteins and to investigate the interaction modes between proteins and dna. for example, alanine-scanning mutagenesis has been used to identify the amino acids important for target recognition by the m5c methyltransferase  <cit>  and to distinguish specific amino acids important for dna binding and transcription activation by soxs  <cit> . more recently, methods for precisely identifying protein-dna contacts by coupling photochemical crosslinking with mass spectrometry have also been developed  <cit> .

with increasing availability of protein sequence data, there is an urgent need for computational tools that can rapidly and reliably identify dna-binding sites. hence, there has been significant recent interest in developing computational methods for identification of amino acid residues that participate in protein-dna interactions based on combinations of sequence, structure, evolutionary information, and chemical or physical properties. for example, jones et al.  <cit>  analyzed residue patches on the surface of dna-binding proteins and used electrostatic potentials of residues to predict dna-binding sites. they recently applied this method to the identification of three specific classes of dna-binding proteins, based on the presence of solvent accessible dna-binding structural motifs  <cit> . in related work, tsuchiya et al.  <cit>  used a structure-based method to identify protein-dna binding sites based on electrostatic potentials and surface shape, and keil et al.  <cit>  trained a neural network classifier to identify patches likely to be dna-binding sites based on physical and chemical properties of the patches. neural network classifiers have also been used to identify protein-dna interface residues based on a combination of sequence neighbor and structure information  <cit> . more recently, ahmad and sarai have proposed a sequence-based method for predicting dna-binding residues that incorporates sequence alignment profiles into the input  <cit> .

against this background, this paper describes a machine-learning approach to developing a classifier for identifying amino acid residues that are likely to be involved in protein-dna interactions.

RESULTS
identification of interface residues based on local sequence information
a naïve bayes classifier was trained to predict whether or not a target residue in a protein sequence is an interface residue based on local protein sequence information. several input encodings based on local sequence information were tried, with input consisting of:  the identities of  <dig> amino acid residues, corresponding to a window containing the target residue and  <dig> neighboring residues on each side of the target residue; and  the identities of  <dig> amino acid residues and the sequence entropy of the target residue . in each case, naïve bayes classifiers were trained and evaluated using leave-one-out cross-validation on a set of  <dig> dna-binding proteins

inclusion of other features of the target residue, including relative solvent accessibility, secondary structure, electrostatic potential, and hydrophobicity as additional inputs to the classifier did not yield performance improvements  relative to the classifier trained using only the amino acid identities of the target residue and its sequence neighbors. classifiers trained using features other than the amino acid identities of target residue and its neighbors as input achieved performance that was lower than that of the classifier using amino acid identities of the corresponding residues as input .

evaluation of the predictions in the context of 3-dimensional structures of proteins
we examined in the context of the 3-dimensional structures of the protein-dna complexes, the dna-binding residue predictions generated by a naïve bayes classifier trained to identify such residues based on the amino acid identities of the target residue and its sequence neighbors. two representative examples are shown in figure  <dig>  figure 1a shows the predictions on the transcription factor c/ebpβ from pdb complex 1gu <dig>  the predictions of the classifier rank the 3rd best in terms of correlation efficient among the  <dig> proteins. we note that the classifier is able to recognize the dna-binding site on the protein on the basis of sequence information alone. figure 1b shows the predictions on the intron-associated endonuclease i-tevi from pdb complex 1i3j. the predictions of the classifier in this case rank the114th best among the  <dig> proteins in terms of correlation efficient. i-tevi wraps around the dna and has an unusually extended binding site. we note that the predicted dna-binding residues cover the long segment of the protein that binds to the dna.

receiver operating characteristic  curve
in some situations , it is desirable to predict interface residues with high precision at the cost of reduced coverage. in other situations, discovering more potential interface residues might be more useful. these different requirements can be met by modifying the threshold θ used by the naïve bayes classifier in this study. the naïve bayes classifier predicts a residue to be an interface residue if pp>θ
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaadawcaaqaaiabdcfaqjabcicaoiabdogajjabg2da9iabigdaxiabcyha8jabdifayjabg2da9iabdiha4naabaaaleaacqaixaqmaeqaaogaemieag3aasbaasqaaiabikdayaqabagccqgguaglcqgguaglcqgguaglcqwg4baedawgaawcbagaemoba4gabeaakiabcmcapaqaaiabdcfaqjabcicaoiabdogajjabg2da9iabicdawiabcyha8jabdifayjabg2da9iabdiha4naabaaaleaacqaixaqmaeqaaogaemieag3aasbaasqaaiabikdayaqabagccqgguaglcqgguaglcqgguaglcqwg4baedawgaawcbagaemoba4gabeaakiabcmcapaaacqgh+agpcqah4oqcaaa@5936@. figure  <dig> shows the receiver operating characteristic curve  of the dna-binding site predictor.

naïve bayes classifier using only local sequence identities as input can discover dna-binding motifs
the results summarized above show that a naïve bayes classifier trained on a set of dna-binding proteins can successfully identify protein-dna interface residues from amino acid sequence. this raises the question as to how the sequence features that are identified as predictive of dna-binding residues by naïve bayes classifier relate to known dna-binding motifs. to explore this question, we used the ps_scan program to search for prosite motifs in our data set of  <dig> dna-binding proteins. prosite motifs were found in  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins . of these  <dig> hits,  <dig> overlap with actual protein-dna binding sites. the dna-binding site predictions produced by the naïve bayes classifier  using the identities of a window of  <dig> residues and the sequence entropy of the target residue as input, substantially overlap with  <dig> of the  <dig> prosite dna-binding motifs . it is worth noting that  <dig> of the  <dig> dna-binding proteins in our data set contain no prosite motif whose annotation suggests a role in protein-dna interactions. prosite motifs cover more than 50% of interface residues in only 11%  of the proteins and cover at least 20% of interface residues in only 20%  of the proteins. in contrast, the naïve bayes classifier identifies at least 50% of the interface residues in 33%  of the proteins and at least 20% of the interface residues in 87%  of the dna-binding proteins used in this study. these results suggest the possibility of using a naïve bayes classifier trained to predict dna-binding residues to identify putative dna-binding motifs.

comparison with previously published methods
ahmad and sarai have developed a position specific scoring matrix  based neural network classifier for predicting dna-binding sites  <cit> . to the best of our knowledge, this is the only previously published study which reports the performance of a dna-binding site prediction using only sequence information on a "per residue" basis. ahmad and sarai have made available an online server that predicts dna-binding residues using a pssm-based neural network classifier  <cit> . the server makes predictions for protein sequences that are  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid residues in length. in our data set of  <dig> dna-binding proteins,  <dig> have length in this range. the predictions of the pssm-based classifier on these  <dig> proteins were obtained by submitting the sequences to the online server. the server returns, for each residue in the submitted sequence, the estimated probability that the residue is a dna-binding residue. these probabilities can be compared with a threshold to obtain a prediction as to whether a residue is a dna-binding residue. different choices of threshold yield different predictions. we varied the threshold from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in increments of  <dig>  to generate an roc curve for the pssm-based neural network classifier. for comparison, we trained and evaluated using leave-one-out cross-validation, a naïve bayes classifier using as input the identities of  <dig> amino acid residues on the subset of  <dig> proteins . figure  <dig> shows the comparison of the roc curves of the pssm-based neural network classifier with that of the naïve bayes classifier on the data set of  <dig> proteins. the results show that the naïve bayes classifier achieves higher hit rate, for any given choice of the false alarm rate, than the current implementation of the pssm-based neural network classifier in the online server.

identification of dna-binding residues in type i restriction-modification system
restriction-modification  systems play important role in the recognition and elimination of foreign dna. in type i r-m systems, s subunit determines the specificity of dna recognition. the interaction mode between s subunit and dna is still unknown. recently, kim et al.  <cit>  solved the crystal structure of the s subunit from m. jannaschii, the only crystal structure ever reported for the s subunit of type i  systems. to further evaluate the naïve bayes classifier, we used the classifier trained on our data set of  <dig> dna-binding proteins  to identify dna-binding residues on the s subunit of the type i r-m system from m. jannaschii. figure  <dig> shows the predicted dna-binding residues in red and spacefill. note that kim et al.  <cit>  reported, based on the solved crystal structure of the s subunit of m. jannaschii, that the structures of the two target recognition domains  of the s subunit are similar to the dna binding domain of taqi-mtase. by aligning the structures of trd <dig> and trd <dig> with the structure of taqi-mtase/dna complex, kim et al.  <cit>  proposed a model for the interaction between the s subunit and dna. in figure  <dig>  the dna molecules in kim's model are shown in blue. comparison of kim's model with the dna-binding site predictions produced by our naïve bayes classifier shows that the naive bayes classifier agrees with the locations of the two potential dna-binding sites on the s subunit in kim's interaction model.

predictions of the naïve bayes classifier on proteins for which there is no experimental evidence suggesting a dna-binding role
given that the naïve bayes classifier was trained to identify dna-binding residues in proteins that are known to bind to dna, it is interesting to examine their predictions on a set of proteins for which at present, there is no evidence suggesting a dna-binding role. we assembled a non-redundant data set of  <dig>  proteins which, based on our analysis of gene ontology annotations, appear to have no evidence suggesting a dna-binding role. a naïve bayes classifier trained on our data set of  <dig> dna-binding proteins to identify the dna-binding residues  was applied to the  <dig>  proteins with no known dna-binding role. the naïve bayes classifier predicted 11% of the  <dig>  residues from these  <dig>  proteins as potentially dna-binding residues. it would be inappropriate to conclude that 11% is a per residue basis false positive rate of our classifier because absence of dna-binding evidence in go annotation does not necessarily imply that the protein in question does not have a dna-binding role. it is quite possible that at least some of these  <dig>  proteins indeed bind to dna. it should be emphasized that our classifier was not trained to distinguish the class of dna-binding proteins from those that are not dna-binding . it is interesting to note that in  <dig> of the  <dig>  proteins, no residues were predicted to be dna-binding by our classifier;  <dig> had fewer than  <dig> predicted dna-binding residues;  <dig> had fewer than  <dig> predicted dna-binding residues, and  <dig> with fewer than  <dig> dna-binding residues. exploring the implications of these observations would require experimentally testing some of the proteins on which our naïve bayes classifier predicts putative dna-binding sites for dna-binding activity. another potentially interesting direction would be to train classifiers to distinguish proteins that are dna-binding  from those that are not.

discussion
effectiveness of local amino acid sequence based approach to prediction of putative dna-binding sites
in this paper, we have described a computationally efficient approach to identifying putative dna-binding residues of dna-binding proteins using naïve bayes classifiers trained to predict dna-binding residues using amino acid identities of the target residue and its sequence neighbors. the resulting classifier achieves 71% overall accuracy with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , 35% specificity and 53% sensitivity in identifying interface residues as evaluated by leave-one-out cross-validation. our results indicate the feasibility of identifying interface residues based on local sequence information alone.

we found that the performance of the classifier is improved by using sequence entropy of the target residue  as additional input. this observation is consistent with the suggestion that dna-binding residues are likely to be conserved . the resulting classifier achieves 78% overall accuracy with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , 44% specificity and 41% sensitivity in identifying interface residues.

incorporating additional structure-derived information such as solvent accessibility, electrostatic potential, hydrophobicity or secondary structure of the target residue as additional input, however, did not improve the performance in this study. this should not be taken to mean that these features are not useful predictors of a residue's functionality. in particular, electrostatic potential has been shown to be useful in identification of protein-dna interface residues  <cit> . the fact that this information does not improve performance of our naïve bayes classifiers might have to do with the properties of input encoding or the classification method. specifically, the additional features were simply added as additional input. the underlying assumption of the naïve bayes classifier that the inputs are independent given the class almost certainly does not hold in the case of protein sequences. hence, more systematic analysis is needed to identify features that are useful for identification of interface residues and develop methods of representing them in input to a broad range of classifiers. jones and thornton  <cit>  analyzed six features of surface patches in protein-protein interaction sites and developed an approach to identify protein-protein interfaces based on the scores combining the six features. sen et al.  <cit>  developed an ensemble method to identify protease-inhibitor binding sites based on sequence, structure and evolution information. it would be interesting to explore such methods for computational prediction of protein-dna interfaces.

comparison of naïve bayes classifier with a pssm-based neural network classifier
ahmad and sarai  <cit>  used a pssm-based neural network classifier to identify interface residues in protein-dna interactions. our comparison of the pssm-based classifier with the naïve bayes classifier shows that the naïve bayes classifier achieves higher hit rate than the pssm-based classifier for any given choice of the false alarm rate.

we note that the pssm-based classifier's roc originally reported by ahmad and sarai  <cit>  is better than the pssm-based classifier's roc achieved by their online server  <cit>  on the data set used in our comparison. a few factors may have contributed to this difference:  the data set used by ahmad and sarai in their original study is different from the data set of  <dig> proteins used here. it is possible that the current implementation of the pssm-based method is well optimized for their original data set, but not for the  <dig> proteins used here;  the roc reported by ahmad and sarai includes predictions on proteins of all lengths, whereas the online server only makes predictions for proteins with a length in the range of 40– <dig>  we chose to compare the naïve bayes classifier with the online server because the server is publicly available and it provides the raw probabilities of the predictions making it possible to compare the roc curves of the two classifiers on the same data set. however, it should be noted that in the case of naïve bayes classifier, our use of leave-one-out cross-validation ensures that the training and test data do not overlap. we have no control over the training data used by the pssm-based classifier. nevertheless, a comparison of the two roc curves suggests that the naïve bayes classifier achieves higher hit rate than the current implementation of the pssm-based neural network classifier for any given choice of the false alarm rate.

a thorough assessment of the performance of the naïve bayes classifier relative to the pssm-based classifier requires systematic comparisons using leave-one-out cross-validation on identical data sets – which is at present, not feasible without access to an implementation of the algorithm and the precise parameter settings used to train the pssm-based classifier. plans are underway to perform such a comparison using identical data sets and evaluation procedures, in collaboration with ahmad and sarai.

it should be noted that the naïve bayes classifier described in this paper offers several advantages over the pssm-based neural network classifier:  the naïve bayes classifier can be trained in a single pass through the training data whereas training a neural network classifier requires many, often hundreds of passes through the training data.  training the naïve bayes classifier, unlike the neural network classifier, requires no time-consuming and computationally expensive exploration of many possible choices of network architecture  and parameter settings .  the naïve bayes classifier, as well as predictions generated by it is amenable to a straightforward probabilistic interpretation whereas the neural network classifier is more of a "black box".

these advantages, together with the superior performance of the naïve bayes classifier relative to the current implementation of the pssm-based neural network classifier, make it an attractive alternative to the latter in identifying dna-binding residues from a protein sequence. however, the neural network classifier is not limited by the strong independence assumption of the naïve bayes classifier. hence, it would be interesting to explore whether a neural network classifier or a variant of it could be optimized to yield results that are better than that of the simple naïve bayes classifier.

use of naïve bayes classifiers to identify putative novel dna-binding motifs
protein sequence motifs  are often used to identify putative dna-binding domains. discovery of such motifs requires alignment of protein sequences that are known to have the same or similar functions. generating multiple sequence alignments that reveal useful sequence motifs requires significant human expertise to identify a suitable set of sequences to be aligned and to manually refine, through an iterative process of trial and error, the multiple sequence alignment. against this background, it is interesting to note that in  <dig> out of  <dig> dna-binding proteins used in this study, we found no prosite motifs whose annotations suggest a possible dna-binding role. in the remaining proteins,  <dig> prosite motifs were found to overlap with protein-dna binding sites. the dna-binding sites predicted by the naïve bayes classifier significantly overlapped with  <dig> of the  <dig> prosite motifs that overlapped with dna-binding sites. prosite motifs cover at least 20% of the dna-binding residues in only 20%  of the proteins. in contrast, the naïve bayes classifier identifies at least 20% of the interface residues in 87%  of the dna-binding proteins used in this study. this raises the possibility of identifying novel sequence motifs that correspond to protein-dna interfaces by using a naïve bayes classifier trained to identify protein-dna binding sites. more systematic comparison of this approach with alternative approaches to identification of putative dna-binding motifs using other motif libraries and different motif finding methods is needed to evaluate its efficacy relative to other approaches.

CONCLUSIONS
in previous work, we have used similar approaches to identify interface residues involved in protein-protein interactions  <cit>  and protein-rna interactions  <cit> . here we show that it is also feasible to identify interface residues involved in protein-dna interaction using sequence information. with the level of success achieved in this study, putative dna-binding sites predicted by the classifiers trained using a machine-learning approach should be useful for guiding experimental investigations into the role of specific residues of a protein in its interaction with dna, e.g., by localizing candidate residues for alanine-scanning mutagenesis  <cit> . moreover, analysis of the binding site "rules" generated by classifiers may provide valuable insight into the protein-dna recognition code responsible for the specificity and affinity of protein-dna interactions in living cells.

