BACKGROUND
protein kinases comprise a large family of membrane-bound and cytosolic enzymes, with  <dig> genes identified in the human genome  <cit> . all protein kinases catalyze the transfer of the γ-phosphate of adenosine triphosphate  to the hydroxyl group of tyrosine, serine, or threonine residues of protein substrates. together with the protein phosphotases, kinases act as regulatory switches for essentially all cellular processes, including metabolic pathways, cell growth, differentiation, survival, and apoptosis. abnormal function of protein kinases leads to development of many serious diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, inflammatory and autoimmune disorders, and diseases of the heart. in particular, many cancers  may be linked with increased activity of specific growth-factor-receptor tyrosine kinases due to overexpression, or mutations leading to constitutively active forms  <cit> .

great hopes were placed that inhibition of dysfunctional kinases will lead to new highly effective therapies. the first small-molecule kinase inhibitor, imatinib, was launched in  <dig> as an anticancer agent for the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia; its action being to inhibit the constitutively active form of abelson tyrosine  kinase. since then, eight compounds targeting the kinase catalytic domain were approved for treatment of various forms of cancer; over thirty kinase inhibitors are in the clinical phases of development, and many more are in preclinical pipelines.

a major problem in the development of kinase inhibitors is to achieve specificity. most of the kinase inhibitors in current development interact with the kinases' atp binding cleft, where they compete with atp  <cit> . however, the atp-binding site is highly conserved among all kinases and it is therefore difficult to design a drug selective for only one kinase at a time. other functional domains that have been exploited to target kinases are also conserved among numerous kinases making the design of selective inhibitors problematic also in these cases. in fact, a large-scale screening undertaken by fabian et al.  <cit>  revealed that the three first fda approved inhibitors actually interacted with about one sixth of the protein kinases included in the screen; each of them cross interacted with between  <dig> to  <dig> of  <dig> evaluated protein kinases. seventeen other kinase inhibitors in pre-clinical and clinical phases of development were also tested in this study and were shown to possess various degree of promiscuity; only one of the compounds interacted with less than five kinases.

many promising kinase inhibitors were abandoned early due to toxicity  <cit> . yet another common reason for failure was lack of clinical efficacy. the latter problem can be attributed to the multitude and complexity of cellular signaling cascades, with redundant pathways and complex feed back mechanisms. use of multi-targeted compounds that can selectively inhibit a specific group of kinases of such pathways might increase the chance to achieve clinical antitumor activity  <cit> . yet another reason for lack of clinical efficacy is resistance that arises due to mutations in the targeted oncogene. e.g., drug resistance in imatinib-treated leukemia patients appears due to mutations in the bcr-abl fusion protein. this prompts the need for new generations of drugs that can override the acquired resistance by inhibiting the mutated oncogene  <cit> .

a computational method widely applied in drug design is quantitative structure-activity relationship  modelling. qsar models are used to optimize lead compounds for target activity and other properties  and to perform virtual screening to find new hits. however, drawbacks of qsar are that its models consider only properties of ligands and that it analyzes interactions with only one drug target at a time. hence qsar models are unable to generalize between multiple targets.

a more general approach is proteochemometric modelling, which we introduced some time ago to study differences in mechanisms of molecular recognition for groups of related proteins  <cit> . proteochemometric models are based on experimentally determined interaction data for series of proteins interacting with series of ligands, like organic compounds, peptide inhibitors, substrates, etc. these data are correlated to descriptors of the two sets of interacting entities, which creates models that can be used to predict activities of yet untested ligand-protein combinations, as well as foresee activity profiles of novel unseen ligands and proteins.

proteochemometric models take advantage of the fact that  <dig> d structures of homologous proteins are more conserved than their primary sequences and functions. thus, proteins that have diverged functionally during evolution may still share the same structural organization and exploit similar molecular interaction mechanisms. the principle behind proteochemometrics is simple. it requires  consistent interaction data,  numerical descriptions of relevant physico-chemical and/or structural properties of both ligands and the protein macromolecules, and  a non-linear correlation method that jointly uses the two sets of descriptors to explain ligand-protein complementarities and interaction profiles. we have previously successfully applied proteochemometrics to create high-resolution models for ligand interactions with several classes of g-protein coupled receptors and for inhibition of multiple mutated variants of the hiv- <dig> protease. the aim of this study was to evaluate several types of kinase descriptors and compare the performance of different multivariate correlation methods in large-scale proteochemometric modelling of protein kinase-inhibitor interactions.

RESULTS
performance of different types of kinase descriptors in pca and pls-da models
in order to compare the performance of the alignment-based approach and the five alignment-independent approaches used herein for describing protein kinase sequences we applied principal component analysis  and partial least-squares discriminant analysis . pca was performed to visualize how different types of descriptors separate the seven groups of protein kinases confined in the data set of  <dig> sequences. pls-da was used to obtain a quantitative measure of the ability of the descriptors to discriminate these groups. the seven kinase groups were as defined in  <cit> , namely: agc, camk, ck <dig>  cmgc, ste, tk, and tkl. 

the first three principal components of the pca models for the six sets of descriptors are visualized in figure  <dig>  panels a to f. as seen from panels a and b, so-paa and ctd descriptors distribute the kinases in a more or less random fashion, albeit part of tyrosine kinases are separated from other groups, and the ste and ck <dig> groups are quite compact. clustering into groups is more evident when the aac-dc descriptors and maccs of z-scale descriptors are used . for these descriptors the location of the tk group, which is the largest group in the data set, shows almost no overlap with the other groups. finally, the accs of z-scale descriptors  and the z-scale descriptors of aligned sequences give good separation of most of the kinase groups . however, a notable difference between the two last is that accs separate subgroups of tks, while the first three pcs of descriptors of the aligned sequences do not reveal such sub-clustering. on the other hand, the alignment-based descriptors are the only ones that separate cmgc kinases as being substantially different from the other groups. as seen from panel f, for the alignment-based approach the cmgc kinases form a distinct cluster in the first two pcs.

pls-da finds the directions in pc space where maximum separation among the classes is obtained and where each class forms a maximally compact cluster. in an ideal situation a cross-validated correlation coefficient q <dig> =  <dig> indicates that all members of a class are predicted to have y =  <dig>  whereas all non-members are predicted to have y =  <dig>  in reality q <dig> is always lower than  <dig>  which is due to intra-class variations. nevertheless, a q <dig> within the range  <dig> - <dig>  still indicates a good separation of classes, with few or no mispredictions. should q <dig> drop down to  <dig> - <dig> , or even less, we have a warning that classes overlap and that the model will make multiple mispredictions. .

cross validation results for each type of kinase description for each kinase group are shown graphically in figure  <dig>  where panels a to f present pls-da results for the same descriptor types as in figure  <dig>  a-f. similarly as for the pca models, z-scale based descriptions perform the best, with the alignment based approach performing over all the best. as seen, extremely high predictive ability was obtained with the q <dig> values for the seven kinase groups ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> , the overall q <dig> being  <dig>  . comparisons of all six panels of figure  <dig> reveal that, irrespectively of the description type, the best separation is obtained for tks. the lowest q <dig> values were for all descriptions obtained for tkl kinases suggesting that this group is more diverse than the other groups; . however, cross-validation results showed that none of the tkl kinases was mispredicted as being non-member, and none of the other kinases was mispredicted as being member of tkl group in the models that used maccs or alignment based descriptions. however, the model that exploited accs mispredicted one tkl kinase .

selection of optimal lags for acc and macc transforms
an additional goal of the preliminary modelling was to identify the optimal complexity of the acc and macc descriptions. . as described in methods, covariances over long distances are less helpful in finding physico-chemical similarities in related protein sequences due to the differences in the length of segments that connect their functional units. use of very many acc or macc terms with large lags may then give rise to chance correlations, deteriorating the resolution of any mathematical models created from them. by comparing pls-da models exploiting acc and macc descriptors with different maximum lags  we showed that for both descriptor types the results were somewhat inferior for l = 10; the overall q <dig> being  <dig>  and  <dig>  for acc and macc based models, respectively. increasing l to  <dig> gave major improvements ; further increase to l =  <dig> produced yet slightly better models. finally, including very long distance covariances with l =  <dig> led to slightly reduced predictive ability, the q2s dropping to  <dig>  and  <dig>  for accs and maccs, respectively. an interesting finding was that the performance of the two descriptor types was quite similar when the maximum lag was set to l =  <dig> and larger. this was so both in terms of overall q <dig>  and with respect to q2's for the seven groups of kinases . based on all these results we elected to use acc and macc descriptors with maximum lag  <dig> in all further modelling of kinase-inhibitor interactions.

performance of different types of kinase descriptors and multivariate correlation methods in predicting kinase-inhibitor activity
we used several machine learning methods to correlate the descriptors of kinase inhibitors and kinases to the interaction activities. the methods used were as follows: decision trees , one nearest neighbour  and k-nearest neighbour  approach, support vector machines , and partial least-square projections to latent structures . the first four methods induce non-linear models, whereas pls is a linear method. when using pls we created both linear and non linear models; in the latter case the dataset included cross-terms derived from kinase and inhibitor descriptions.

the predictive abilities for new inhibitor-kinase combinations  and new kinases  as assessed by outer-loop cross-validation are presented in table  <dig>  the most predictive models were obtained using svm, where for all three z-scale based description methods the p <dig> values fell in the range  <dig> - <dig>  and the p2kin values in the range  <dig> - <dig> . the pls  and k-nn models performed almost as good.  models based on aac-dc descriptors performed clearly worse than the z-scale based descriptions, but also here the svm model was the most predictive; the p <dig> being  <dig>  and p2kin being  <dig> , whereas the values of these parameters for pls model were only  <dig>  and  <dig> .

shown are the performances of proteochemometric models based on decision trees , one nearest neighbour  and k-nearest neighbour  approaches, support vector machines , and partial least-square projections to latent structures, with  and without cross-terms . p <dig> and p2kin indicate the squared correlation coefficient from outer loop of cross-validation for, respectively, new kinase-inhibitor combinations and new kinases.

the inferior performance for the aac-dc descriptions is not surprising. in fact it seems quite unlikely that the fraction of any single dipeptide would show significant correlation with the functional properties of the kinases. such correlations, however, can become evident for larger sets of dipeptide combinations , giving an advantage to the svm model which by the use of its non-linear kernel can approximate high-complexity interaction effects between the descriptors. the difference between the performances of svm and pls models is even larger when proteins are described by ctd or by so-paa descriptors; the p2kin for pls models using these two sets of descriptors being, respectively,  <dig>  and  <dig> , compared to  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the svm models.

for any set of descriptors the k-nn method outperformed 1-nn . however, the optimal number of neighbours found to be used by the cross-validation inner-loop was quite low, and ranged in all cases  <dig> to  <dig>  the predictions of k-nn models are thus based on local subsets of the data set, and for this reason it would be problematic to use these models to draw any general conclusions on the molecular properties that determine kinase-inhibitor complementarity.

finally, as expected, pls modelling without use of kinase-inhibitor cross-terms explained only a minor part of the activity variation; the p2kin for all three z-scale-exploiting models being  <dig>  . this result shows that the non-linear part which describes kinase-inhibitor selectivity dominate over the linear part that describes the average activity of a ligand for the protein series and the average activity of all ligands for a particular protein. the high non-linearity in the dataset is also likely the reason for the moderate success of the decision tree algorithm, which for any of the six used kinase descriptions created a massive tree with over  <dig> leaves explaining 65-71% of the activity variation . however, all these trees suffered in ability to generalize to novel kinases; the p2kin for various descriptions ranging only  <dig> - <dig> .

distribution of prediction errors in svm, pls and k-nn models
the performance of the svm, pls, and k-nn models exploiting z-scale descriptors of aligned sequences  is further illustrated in figure  <dig>  the figure presents histograms for the prediction errors calculated in the outer-loop of cross-validation for 1/ <dig> of the kinases that had been entirely excluded from the modelling . the distributions of errors in the svm and pls models are very similar . the cumulative plot demonstrates that in the svm model the difference between predicted and observed pkd values range 0- <dig>  logarithmic units for 57% of the kinase-inhibitor combinations; for 75% of the combinations they fall below  <dig>  logarithmic units; for 89% they are less than one logarithmic units, and for 99% less than two logarithmic units. the corresponding fractions in the pls model are 49%, 70%, 88%, and 98%. to interpret these results one should keep in mind that the total span of kinase-inhibitor activities exceeded five logarithmic units, namely from pkd =  <dig> to  <dig> , and all non-interacting entities were assigned the numerical value pkd = 4; hence mispredictions by more than six units could be theoretically possible.

for the k-nn model the pattern of error distribution is quite different . here the prediction error was zero for more than one half of the non-interacting pairs . however, 14% of the prediction errors exceed one logarithmic unit and 4% exceed two logarithmic units, thus indicating that predictions of the k nn model are less accurate compared to those obtained by svm and pls. in other words, activities for inhibitors interacting with overall quite similar kinases may vary a lot and regression models can better explain this than the nearest neighbour approach.

dependence of modelling performance on the size of the dataset
although both svm, pls, and k-nn models showed good predictive ability they were based on more than  <dig>  data points. it would thus be of obvious interest to know the robustness of the proteochemometric approach when less data are available. we therefore assessed the relationship between the sparseness of the data matrix used and the performance of the model. to this end we created models using  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> percent of all data. for example, when 10% of the data was used to calculate the p2kin value, the set of  <dig> kinases was randomly split into ten partitions of about equal size. modelling was then performed using only one of these partitions at a time and the nine remaining partitions were used to evaluate the model obtained. the procedure of splitting the dataset was iterated ten times in order to assure reproducibility of the results. the p <dig> and p2kin measures for models exploiting z-scale descriptors of aligned kinase sequences are presented in table  <dig>  where the values for 80% the dataset size are in fact identical with the above-presented results of 5-fold outer-loop cross-validation . the performance of the models decreases only slightly when 40-60% of the whole dataset is used for the model building, and the models are still predictive when as few as 10% of all kinase-inhibitor combinations or when 10% of all kinases are present in the dataset . moreover, the small margins between the p <dig> and p2kin parameters indicate that the reliability of predictions for "new unassayed kinases" does not differ much from the reliability of predictions for the kinases for which some interaction data have been already assayed and used in the modelling. comparisons of the results for the three data analysis methods also indicate that their performance is more similar for larger datasets. for sparsely populated datasets the performance of k-nn method deteriorates faster than for the svm and pls methods.

for explanation of abbreviations see legend to table  <dig> 

predicting interacting versus non-interacting kinase-inhibitor pairs
although all models predict interaction activities on a continuous scale, they can also be used to predict whether new inhibitors and kinases interact or not. in the quantitative modelling we assigned the value pkd =  <dig> to all inhibitor-kinase combinations that had been found not to interact in the primary screen - the screen for which the detection limit was pkd =  <dig>  hence if the activity predicted for an inhibitor-kinase pair falls below a pre-specified threshold level, the pair could be classified as non-interacting, while if it falls above this threshold it could be classified as interacting. the selection of the threshold value will affect the sensitivity and specificity of the classification, which can be defined as:    

a common measure for the classification quality is the receiver operating characteristic  curve, which is plotted as sensitivity versus one minus specificity upon varying the discrimination threshold value. the area under the roc curve  is a measure of the discriminatory power of a classifier, which is insensitive to class distributions and the costs of misclassifications; auc =  <dig> indicates perfect classification, while auc =  <dig>  means that the classifier does not perform better then random guessing.

the good performance of the classification is further indicated from the roc areas, which for the models built on 80% of the kinases were  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for, respectively, the svm, pls, and k nn model. interestingly, the models built on only 10% of the kinases also show good classification performance, the roc areas being, respectively,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  for svm, pls, and k-nn models. this finding indicates that even in the cases when quantitative models do not possess very high predictive ability in terms of p <dig>  they may still be able to separate active and inactive kinase-inhibitor combinations. accordingly, our models should be useful for virtual large-scale screening to select the promising objects prior to their experimental testing, while sorting away objects with a less probability of having the properties sought for in a development project.

discussion
design of selective and multiselective medications requires understanding of the properties of the biological targets that distinguish the chosen target from numerous similar "anti-targets" encoded in the human genome. contemporary drug design has to a large extent been focused to structure-based methods where ligands are designed to fit into a binding pocket of the target. this requires knowledge of the exact  <dig> d structures of the targets and anti-targets, which is a problem for protein-kinases as x-ray structures have been solved for only  <dig> human protein kinase domains  <cit> .

proteochemometrics, on the other hand, has a distinct advantage when the studied proteins share the same structural organization since primary amino acid sequences can then be used without the need to have high-resolution  <dig> d structures of the targets. proteochemometrics has also the advantage that multiple targets and anti-targets can be encompassed in one single model. structural alignments of protein kinases have shown that they all contain universal conserved subdomains whereas their amino acid sequences still show quite notable variation. in fact, there is generally a much higher degree of conservation of the 3d-structures among protein families than of their primary sequences  <cit> . the average pair-wise sequence identity over the kinase domains falls below 30%, and only a small fraction of residues are markedly conserved across the entire superfamily  <cit> . use of sequence-derived descriptions can hence be considered to be a rational approach for kinase representation in multivariate modelling, stated that the sequence descriptions are made in such a way that they are relevant for the structural and functional organization of the kinases. descriptions can be derived based on prior sequence alignments or in alignment independent ways, the latter approaches are advantageous for less similar sequences, when unambiguous alignments are impossible to obtain.

in the first phase of this study we performed pca and pls-da, using one set of alignment based and five sets of alignment independent descriptors of protein kinase amino acid sequences. the purpose of this analysis was to evaluate the ability of the different descriptions to separate kinases into groups according to their functions. pls-da for the best model  afforded excellent separation of the seven groups of kinases; the cross-validated squared correlation coefficients fell between  <dig> - <dig>  for six of the groups, while for the more diverse tyrosine kinase-like kinase group it was  <dig> .

as explained in the methods section, pls-da models create regression equations for each of the modelled classes and thus identify properties that are more typical, or even unique, for a particular class compared to the other classes. thus, inspection of the alignment based pls-da regression equation exploiting z-scale descriptors reveals that in some cases the description of the physico-chemical properties of very short sequence stretches and even of single residues are sufficient to separate all members of one kinase group from all other kinases. in one such example, when we inspected the alignment based pls-da model we revealed that a conserved proline residue located surrounded by two hydrophobic amino acids in the activation loop of the tks sequences is the sufficient pattern for class separation. in the majority of the cases this triplet is embraced by two positively charged lysine or arginine residues . analysis of the alignment independent pls-da model exploiting aac-dc descriptors further identifies that groups of kinases are often distinguished by the model by small sets of dipeptides . such identified specific sequence residues or patterns, which may be identified by our models, could accordingly potentially be addressed in the design of targeted and multi-targeted drugs. in fact, a few such amino acids  have been previously exploited in drug design for kinases. this includes the so-called gatekeeper residue, which is a bulky amino acid present in most kinases, while 20% of the kinases have a threonine at this position. the property was used in design of selectivity for abl kinase inhibitors. . a study of cohen et al.  <cit>  designed inhibitors for rsk family kinases by targeting two selectivity filters in the atp binding site, namely the threonine gatekeeper and a cysteine residue, which is an uncommon amino acid in the kinases' active site. these two amino acids that distinguishes rsks from other protein kinases were sufficient to confer high activity of the designed inhibitor.

although we here limited pls-da modelling to separation of seven major groups of the kinase superfamily the analysis can be performed hierarchically at any resolution, e.g., to delineate particular families, subfamilies, and even single kinases.

in the subsequent studies we created quantitative models for kinase-inhibitor interaction activities using the six types of kinase descriptions and performing correlations using svm, pls, k-nn, and decision trees. the small molecule inhibitors were in all models represented by a unified set of 3d-structural and physicochemical property descriptors. models that exploited z-scale descriptions of the alignable parts of the protein kinase sequences performed the best. however, using acc or macc transformations gave only slightly inferior models when correlations to the activity data were done by svm or pls. acc transformed descriptors performed worse with the k-nn approach, while macc transformations resulted in a weaker model with use of decision trees. the advantages of acc and macc transforms are that they do not require prior alignment and that they are calculated from full-length sequences of kinase domains, which in the present data set varied from  <dig> to  <dig> residues . whereas accs reflect the covariances of amino acid properties over whole sequences, maccs pinpoint individual pairs of residues with specific property combinations. macc based models may thus identify patterns that are not confined to the same location in each and every protein and/or are situated in sequence stretches that can not be aligned unambiguously over the whole dataset. consequently, models exploiting maccs may complement the alignment-based models in analysis and prediction of kinase-inhibitor interactions. the three other descriptions for the protein sequences used  showed inferior performances compared to z-scale based descriptions and thus appear less useful in proteochemometric modelling.

svm outperformed the other data analysis methods, including pls, in both the prediction accuracy for the active kinase-inhibitor combinations as manifested by p <dig> and p2kin parameters  and in the ability to distinguish interacting versus non-interacting kinase-inhibitor pairs as revealed by the areas under the roc curves . accordingly, svm seems to be the optimal choice for predicting full kinome-wide selectivity profiles of the existing compounds, and for virtual screening to find new hits with desired selectivities. however, an important point is that svm is essentially a 'black box' technique, which makes interpretations of its models difficult. thus, even if the performance of svm in virtual screening is superior to pls, it is problematic to comprehend which of the molecular properties of kinases and inhibitors that are important in the model. pls contrasts to 'black box' methods like svm and to locally derived knn and dt models because it expresses the correlation results in a single straightforwardly interpretable regression equation. moreover, pls provides additional tools for model diagnostics, such as score and loading plots and 'distance to model' parameters that allow identification of outliers and assessment of reliability of extrapolations outside the modelled chemical and interaction spaces  <cit> . consequently, the parallel use of pls and svm modelling techniques may be advantageous when one aims at obtaining models for both predictions and interpretations, and cross-checking of model performances. .

the models built on small sub-parts of the dataset showed the robustness of the proteochemometric modelling approach. thus, even for the smallest dataset comprising only about  <dig> kinases the svm and pls models showed acceptable predictive ability. the performances of the models based on small data-sets were even more impressive in prediction of interacting versus non-interacting kinase-inhibitor pairs; the discriminatory power of svm and pls models being, respectively,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the models created on  <dig> kinases . these results may have a wide impact to the protein kinase field as they mean that a relatively limited amount of experimental work is needed to afford qualitative and quantitative interaction models that will generalize for the whole kinome.

success of any empirical modelling depends on the quality of data, which in proteochemometrics should comprise accurate activity measurements and descriptions of relevant physico-chemical and/or structural properties of proteins and their ligands. yet another prerequisite for proteochemometrics is an adequate composition of the dataset, which should be balanced and include both interacting and non-interacting protein-ligand combinations. unfortunately, 'negative' results are often omitted in study reports. moreover, interaction databases populated by data from multiple series, contain typically activities for a fairly low fraction of all possible ligand-protein combinations, which implies that a bulk of the non-interacting entity pairs are absent. modelling of sparse data matrices with overrepresented high activity data would inevitably give rise to false-positive predictions. hence, the success of any modelling study owes most to using a well-balanced dataset, such as the here used dataset comprising data for both active and inactive kinase-inhibitor combinations for more than one half of the human kinome.

although the modelled dataset covered more than  <dig>  interactions, the series of  <dig> kinase inhibitors can not be considered as large, even though it included seven of the eight presently approved anticancer agents as well as other compounds with mutually dissimilar inhibition profiles. one can thus expect to gain further improvements by analyzing data for many more chemical compounds providing wider and denser coverage of the chemical and interaction spaces. in the present study the dataset parts for modelling and validation were selected randomly to assure objective assessment of the modelling performances. however, it is possible to apply statistical experimental design  <cit>  to choose small representative panels of kinases to be used for assaying and interaction modelling. one technique is d-optimal design that could be used to select kinases that cover most of the diversity of the kinase sequence and activity space. designed molecular libraries have proven much more informative than random collections, and they have been shown in some cases to allow a 103- <dig> fold reduction of the experimental work required, while still retaining the full generalization ability of derived interaction models  <cit> . we can hence conclude that the values in table  <dig> are the lowest limits of the predictive abilities, which would be surpassed in any models for datasets of the same size if kinases were selected according to principles of statistical experimental design. hence, for any experimental work to be undertaken in the kinase field following this study we would strongly encourage the use of experimental design. the final outcome will be kinome wide models that can predict the interaction strength of a random chemical over all known protein kinases.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we developed kinome-wide proteochemometric models for the prediction of kinase-inhibitor interaction profiles. we compared several alignment-based and alignment-independent approaches for the description of protein kinases, evaluated the performances of linear and non-linear correlation methods, and investigated the relationship between the size of the dataset and the predictive ability of the models obtained. our best models are highly predictive on a quantitative scale, and can delineate interacting and non-interacting kinase-inhibitor combinations. one of the findings of this study is that models built on quite limited amount of kinase data are still capable to generalize over the whole human kinome. we thus foresee that the here shown routes to concomitant proteochemometric kinome wide modelling will markedly speed-up the discovery and optimization of protein kinase targeted and multi-targeted drugs.

