BACKGROUND
in natural populations, many species are host to one or more parasite species, where parasites are broadly defined to include viruses and bacteria. however, not all parasitic organisms elicit an immune response from individuals of a given host species  <cit> . additionally, immune responses and the degree of resistance often vary among hosts, even when the same species of parasite is monitored in observational studies or used in experimental challenges  <cit> . research has now focused on both the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that account for this variation in immune responses among hosts and the consequences of resistance to both host and parasite individuals and populations  <cit> .

evolutionary ecologists have adopted various approaches in attempting to explain within-population variation in immune responses and resistance expression. for example, researchers have examined the extent to which resistance is heritable and whether host responses are specific to the parasite strains used  <cit> . other researchers have viewed the fitness benefits of immune defence as being traded off against other traits; an approach used in testing predictions of life-history theory  <cit> . importantly, costs of resistance can include intrinsic costs of maintaining immune components in anticipation of parasitism and/or costs of induction i.e., initiating and activating an immune response. it is the latter costs that often are demonstrated for vertebrates and invertebrates in response to challenges from parasites or surrogates of parasitism   <cit> .

the costs of resistance are expected to be context dependent, a problem only recently identified  <cit> . one study to examine context dependent resistance found that starved and immune challenged bumblebee workers had lower survivorship than either fed and challenged workers or starved workers that were not challenged  <cit> . that study and more recent work  <cit>  has underscored the fact that success of parasites and their impact on their hosts, also should relate to environmentally relevant external factors.

under natural conditions, insects are subjected to hours or days when foraging is restricted as a result of variable or inclement weather conditions. hosts less able to acquire dietary resources may subsequently mount a less effective immune response  <cit> . temperature also can play a key role in host response to parasitism  <cit> . yet, little is known of the costs of resistance when temperatures, under which resistance is expressed, are not maintained. we expect when weather conditions are 'good'  insects resist parasites. however, what happens if those insects are subjected to 'poor' conditions after allocating resources to resistance? resistance costs may not be realised unless the host expressing resistance is subsequently challenged environmentally; further, these costs also may depend on the type of immunity induced and the magnitude of induction.

there have been several studies examining insect immunity; however, patterns of how insects respond to immune challenges are inconsistent and often relate to the immune traits assayed  <cit> . as a primary component of invertebrate immunity, circulating haemocytes are involved in recognition, phagocytosis and encapsulation of invading parasites and pathogens  <cit> . activation of the pro-phenoloxidase cascade to produce melanin is a key component of the invertebrate immune system . in addition, anti-microbial peptides can be produced in response to an immune insult  <cit> .

the main purpose of this study was to examine a direct fitness cost in relation to induction of an immune response for adults of the temperate and early-emerging damselfly, enallagma boreale selys. to ensure our experiment included environmentally relevant conditions , we first assessed the local variation in temperature and rainfall during the emergence and flight period of e. boreale for four previous emergence and flight periods . both low temperatures and periods of heavy rainfall prevent foraging attempts for damselflies under natural conditions and were therefore considered 'poor' weather conditions  <cit> . damselflies were immune challenged with a dose of immunogenic lipopolysaccharide  in saline solution and allowed to respond at an environmentally relevant 'good' temperature. lps or bacterial cell wall components are known to induce an immune response in several other insects without the pathogenic effect of the bacteria . to ensure lps induced an immune response in e. boreale, we assessed immune traits of a subsample of lps-injected and control  e. boreale. we assayed three key aspects of insect immunity: haemocyte concentration, phenoloxidase  activity and antibacterial activity. our expectation was that at least one of these immune responses would be induced to higher levels when e. boreale were immune challenged. the remaining challenged damselflies were subsequently subjected to an environmentally relevant 'poor' temperature and food deprivation. to examine if costs of immune induction were realised when a responding individual is subsequently subjected to 'poor' environmental conditions, survivorship was assessed at cooler temperatures. reduced adult longevity was expected at cooler temperatures and was expected to relate to the level of immune induction.

sex differences in immunity are present, and can be understood by reference to natural or sexual selection on the sexes  <cit> . however, there is currently no general pattern of sex differences in immune investment by insects, as has been suggested for mammals  <cit> . notwithstanding, host sex is an important factor to consider when assaying immune responses and the ultimate or evolutionary cost of resistance in anticipation of parasitism  <cit> . as with many insect species, male and female damselflies differ in life-history strategies: males appear to forage to obtain enough resources for mating activity whereas females forage to obtain greater resources for egg production and thereby gain weight during maturity  <cit> . of course, the more important question is whether fitness relations to longevity differ for males or females leading to the expectation of higher immunity and longevity in either sex.

costs of resistance and/or induction of immune defence also are expected to relate to the age of the host. damselflies have two distinct adult stages, newly emerged  and reproductively mature  <cit> . newly emerged damselflies must allocate resources to cuticular hardening as well as contend with parasites and pathogens. enzyme pathways used in the production of melanin for immune defence are similar to those used in cuticular hardening  <cit> . thus optimal investment in immunity may be limited by the maturation process. further, based on observations from four previous years, newly emerged damselflies are expected to experience frequent and longer bouts of inclement weather . in comparison, reproductively mature adults have to contend with costs of reproduction as well as costs of defence if responding to challenge by parasites and/or pathogens. however, mature adults are expected to be most active later in the season when weather conditions should be more favourable . for another damselfly lestes virdis, differences in immune parameters between newly emerged and mature damselflies were found and explained as age-related differences in life-history trade-offs  <cit> . the cost of immune induction also may be age-dependent reflecting the optimal patterns of energy allocation during maturation. for example, sex differences in immunity were evident for mature scathophaga stercaria flies; however, this sex difference was not found for newly emerged flies  <cit> . this inconsistency between mature and newly emerged flies was explained as a result of sex-specific physiological requirements that were age-dependent.

as part of our main objective, we specifically compared e. boreale males and females of newly emerged and reproductively mature adults as we suspected both age and the sex would influence the type and magnitude of immune expression and subsequent costs of immune induction. multiple measures of immunity ensured identification of differences in the specific immune trait expressed between males and females within each age category. survivorship, as a measure of cost of resistance mediated by immune induction, was assessed for control and experimental individuals, which were either newly emerged or reproductively mature males or females.

RESULTS
immune parameters
immune parameters were not correlated for newly emerged  or mature adults  therefore each dependent variable was analyzed separately.

haemocyte concentration  did not differ between treatments or between sexes of newly emerged e. boreale . however, both newly emerged males and females did have a higher melanisation index  when injected with lps versus saline . to assess antibacterial activity, several plates were seeded with bacteria . controlling for the variability in bacterial growth between plates, there was a sex-by-treatment interaction when comparing antibacterial activity of lps and saline injected newly emerged males and females . females and not males injected with lps had heightened antibacterial activity .

mature males and females injected with lps did have a greater haemocyte concentration than saline injected conspecifics . the mi for both saline and lps injected mature females was significantly greater than conspecific males, but there was no treatment effect . mature females had a stronger antibacterial activity than males when controlling for the variability between bacterial plates . no difference in antibacterial activity between the treatments was observed for mature damselflies .

survivorship
newly emerged adult e. boreale injected with lps did not have a significantly lower survivorship than conspecifics injected with saline . however, newly emerged females did survive longer than males in both treatments . survivorship of mature e. boreale was lower in the lps treatment compared to saline injected conspecifics . similar to the newly emerged e. boreale, mature females lived longer than conspecific males in both treatments; however, the result only approached significance .

discussion
a cost of immune induction in terms of adult longevity was evident for immune challenged mature e. boreale when subjected to low temperatures and food deprivation. there was approximately 25% reduction in adult survival  when immune challenged damselflies were compared to saline injected controls. two other studies have found similar results where upon activation of the immune system with lps in adult bumblebees  <cit>  and male field crickets  <cit> , survivorship was lowered. fellowes et al.  <cit>  also found that larval drosophila had a reduced competitive ability that likely leads to reduced survivorship when resistance was selected. costs are not limited to just this specific immune challenge  and immune expression; upon induction of cellular encapsulation of a foreign body, tenebrio molitor females had lowered survivorship compared to control females  <cit> . our results suggest that under natural conditions, mature damselflies would pay the cost of resistance when faced with subsequently poor weather conditions. for this particular e. boreale population, there are many occasions when bouts of poor weather follow good weather , but these were more restricted to emergence periods. importantly, resistance against parasitic mites , when initiated, occurs at damselfly emergence  <cit> . in comparison, mature e. boreale, similar to other damselflies, ingest parasitic gregarines when feeding  <cit> . although it is still unclear how or if damselflies respond to gregarines in the gut, our data suggest that future research should investigate whether mature damselflies responding to gregarines have lowered survivorship, when faced with inclement weather.

one question of interest is why survival of challenged newly emerged e. boreale was not significantly lower when compared to unchallenged controls. there is still some debate as to whether costs of resistance should occur, despite evidence in recent studies of trade-offs against other traits such as competitive ability or maturation rate . one explanation for our lack of finding a cost in newly-emerged adults is that newly emerged damselflies must contend with parasitic water mites in addition to repairing wounds inflicted by mites piercing the cuticle . secondary infection at the mite attachment points also may occur. for other insect hosts, risk of exposure as well as the type of challenge an individual is exposed to has explained how investment into immunity is optimised and subsequently how costs of resistance are minimised  <cit> . it is expected that newly emerged e. boreale with a high risk of parasitism have allocated more resources to potential immune responses than have mature reproductive e. boreale.

another explanation concerns the nature of the cost of resistance. at emergence, damselflies must invest in cuticular hardening, a process that uses the same enzyme pathways  as the production of melanin used in immune defence  <cit> . thus, a more likely cost of resistance or in repairing wounds for newly emerged damselflies is longer times for cuticular hardening after eclosion. it is also important that newly emerged e. boreale responded to the immune challenge by increasing levels of po activity and females responded with an increase in antibacterial activity; however, mature individuals responded to the lps challenge with a significant increase in haemocyte concentration . this difference in immune activation also may be partially responsible for our inability to find a cost of immune induction under environmentally relevant conditions for newly-emerged damselflies. newly emerged damselflies also are more likely to encounter poor weather conditions, in particular for long periods of time in this study population . responding to parasitism on good days does not appear to represent a cost for newly emerged e. boreale when inclement weather follows. in fact, under low temperature and reduced foraging conditions newly emerged e. boreale could live up to ten days at 15°c despite responding to an immune challenge .

both newly emerged and mature females did live longer than males in both treatment groups. a larger body size  could explain the greater female survivorship compared to male conspecifics for both newly emerged and mature e. boreale. for mature females, egg resorption also might occur to maintain longevity following resistance expression  <cit> . in comparison, immune challenged reproductive female tenebrio molitor beetles suffered reduced longevity while maintaining fecundity  <cit> . it is expected that clutch size is less important to reproductive success of female damselflies than is the number of clutches over her lifetime  <cit>  – this may not be the case for t. molitor females.

sex differences in immune measures were evident where mature females had significantly greater levels of po activity when challenged or not challenged compared to conspecific males. both haemocytes and po are involved in sclerotization or tanning of egg coverings  in invertebrates  <cit> . thus, heightened immune traits such as haemolymph po activity in females may not be indicative of greater immunity, but rather a side-effect of a greater need for melanin. differences in antibacterial activity were observed between the newly emerged sexes only in response to the immune challenge. however, no sex differences were observed between newly emerged e. boreale in our measures of po activity or haemocyte concentration. our results were similar to that found for the non-territorial damselfly, lestes viridis, where newly emerged and mature damselflies demonstrated no difference in haemocyte totals, but where only po activity was higher in mature females than conspecific males  <cit> .

we did not find any evidence to suggest the cost of immune induction differed between males and females. this is a surprising result as previous work has indicated female immune investment is often greater than male investment  <cit> . several hypotheses have been proposed to predict invertebrate sex differences in investment into immunity. females are expected to invest in egg production whereas males must compete to fertilize eggs. further, rolff  <cit>  suggested that assuming greater longevity will increase lifetime egg production; females will invest more into immunity compared to conspecific males. alternatively, males downregulate or suppress immunity as a result of costly secondary sex ornaments and behaviour  <cit> . recently, mckean & nunney  <cit>  have suggested that sex differences in investment in resistance arise from male and female differential response to the environment: a topic of considerable relevance to the present study. they suggest the cost of resistance will depend not only on the investment in reproduction but will also relate to variation in fitness-limiting resource availability. our data suggests that while allocation to immune parameters differed between mature males and females, there were no detectable differences in the costs of immune induction  despite being subjected to similarly poor conditions .

CONCLUSIONS
the results suggest that costs of immune induction do not depend just on the type and magnitude of investment in immunity. we found that costs of immune induction in terms of longevity were evident for mature damselflies but not for newly emerged damselflies. the variation in weather conditions normally experienced by different aged individuals in this temperate damselfly, the type of immune expression, and when resistance against parasitism is typically mounted, are likely explanations for the age related differences in relation to experimental challenges that we observed. it is important that the environmental relevance of laboratory conditions are well founded for future studies on costs of immune induction in the laboratory.

