BACKGROUND
the ferret is an important model for pulmonary research studies because of the long trachea, large lung capacity and bronchiolar branching. it is commonly used for studies of infectious diseases and is susceptible to infection with a large number of pathogens, such as influenza virus, severe acute respiratory syndrome  corona virus, and canine distemper virus  <cit> . the ferret is an essential model for influenza research as it develops a number of the clinical symptoms of influenza that are also seen in humans and, in contrast to mice, can be infected by human isolates of influenza virus  <cit> . with the recent two-animal ruling by the us food and drug administration  for the licensing of drugs or vaccines directed against diseases of low or no incidence, the ferret represents an inexpensive small, non-rodent animal model. despite the fact that ferrets have been used in biomedical research for decades, little is known about the genome of m. p. furo. currently, there are only a limited number of partial or full length cdnas present in the genbank. this not only impacts the number of molecular genetic assays available for analysis, but also hinders the development of antibody-based assays, such as flow cytometry. the lack of reagents for molecular analysis of the mechanisms involved in infection and immunogenic protection is restricted, limiting the usefulness of this animal model.

recent advances in dna sequencing have drastically increased the sequencing throughput relative to traditional sanger based approaches  <cit> . second-generation dna sequencing technology enables more cost-efficient genomic analysis and, due to their highly parallel nature, allows for applications in transcriptomics and epigenomics. sequencing of normalized cdna libraries from several tissues allows for full or partial determination of the transcriptome of a model organism. the transcript information can then be used to develop microarray platforms, taqman assays and antibodies, for example  <cit> .

analyses of gene expression patterns provide important information on the role of differential gene expression in normal biological processes and disease progression. global transcriptional changes detected using microarrays has improved our knowledge about virus-host interactions  <cit> . examination of the mrna levels in the host upon infection can help determine infection-specific transcriptional signatures and allow for distinction between different pathogens  <cit> . these functional genomic analyses may provide valuable knowledge about which components of the innate immune response the host activates to clear the pathogens, as well as the strategies that viruses or bacteria use to defeat these  <cit> . identification of immune signatures can be used to assess the strength of the adaptive immune response and to predict protective immunity after vaccination  <cit> . to date, this type of analysis in the ferret is only possible through heterologous species array hybridization, which may introduce false positives due to the evolutionary distance between the target species and the microarray platform chosen .

here we report the use of massive parallel sequencing using the roche gs-flx platform to produce an extensive est dataset for the ferret. to ensure sequence diversity, we pooled total rna extracted from blood, liver, lung, spleen and brain. this rna pool was reverse-transcribed to cdna that was normalized prior to sequencing to avoid sequencing of abundantly expressed genes. the sequence reads were then assembled and annotated using a newly-developed annotation pipeline. the annotated reads were combined with ferret sequences already available in the genbank, and used to create an oligonucleotide-based microarray. our results contribute sequence information necessary for the development of molecular and genomic assays and allow for a better understanding of the genome of the domestic ferret.

RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing, annotation and sequence verification
to obtain a diverse representation of expressed sequences we pooled total rna from blood, spleen, liver, lung and brain from one male and one female ferret. the rna was then reverse-transcribed into cdna. prior to sequencing the cdna was normalized to avoid the sequencing of only the most abundant transcripts.

we obtained approximately  <dig> million base pairs distributed in  <dig> reads with an average read length of  <dig> base pairs. the reads were assembled into  <dig> sequence contigs and annotated using nucleotide and/or protein sequence homologies.  <dig> contigs were annotated. initially,  <dig> contigs were selected based on the assembled nucleotide length being at least  <dig> base pairs and the annotation e-value of  <dig>  or lower . based on the annotations, these contigs represented a total of  <dig> ferret genes. all contigs in the ferret_seq <dig> group were used for microarray probe design. the remaining contigs were megablasted against the available genomic ferret sequence as well as the htgs and the nt databases available at the national center for biotechnology information . from these,  <dig> contigs with sequence length larger than  <dig> bp and an e-value smaller than 10- <dig> were selected to be included on the ferret-specific microarray . the ferret_seq <dig> cdnas represent  <dig> additional orthologous gene fragments not included in the ferret_seq <dig> data set as well as  <dig> hits to chromosomal regions.

in an attempt to estimate the number of genes with multiple contigs covering distinctly different regions, we performed a reassembly of the ferret_seq <dig> and ferret_seq <dig> reads. using less stringent cap <dig> assembly settings, we identified  <dig> contigs that were redundant and fully encompassed by other larger assemblies of sequences. these contigs were removed from further analysis. the remaining contigs were used to identify genes with multiple contig coverage.  <dig> individual genes from the ferret_seq <dig> and ferret_seq <dig> are represented by contigs from two or more non-overlapping regions. the majority of those transcripts are covered by two individual contigs . approximately  <dig> % of the transcripts from the ferret assemblies have three individual regions represented by sequence and approximately 3% are covered by four different regions .

the annotated transcripts were also classified according to the three major functional standard gene ontology categories: biological process; molecular function; and cellular component. as expected, a wide range of functionality was covered. the most frequent biological processes are shown in figure 1b, and involve nucleic acid metabolic processes, metabolic processes and regulation of biological processes. the main molecular functions were binding, transferase activity, catalytic activity and transporter activity. examining the cellular component annotations, more than 50% of the transcripts were classified as intracellular, approximately 30% were membrane proteins and only 6% were classified as extracellular transcripts .

reduction of interfering alpha- and beta-globin mrna in whole blood derived rna
phylogenetic analysis of the ferret globin genes indicated a closer relation to the human globins than to those of mouse. using clustalw alignment of the sequences for the hba gene for human, ferret and mouse resulted in higher alignment scores for m. p. furo versus human . we thus used the human globinclear ® kit from ambion to eliminate the globin interference and achieved an approximately 75% reduction of the globin mrna . we further decreased the globin transcripts by complementing the human globin oligomix of the kit with ferret specific antisense rna oligos directed towards the hba and hbb genes, accomplishing an 85% reduction . we also hybridized blood-derived rna with and without globin clear treatment on the ferret microarray. hybridization of globin clear treated rna increased the number of microarray probes with a normalized log2-transformed signal above  <dig> to  <dig> probes versus  <dig> for the non-treated rna .

design of the ferret microarray
we used the transcripts generated by the highly parallel sequencing described above, as well as the already publicly available sequences to create a microarray specific to m. p. furo. the array was designed utilizing the e-array portal hosted by agilent for array design https://earray.chem.agilent.com/earray/. using the quality scores assigned for each probe by the agilent's probe design algorithm , we excluded all probes with bc scores of three and above. we further eliminated near-identical probes by blasting all probes against themselves. for probe pairs sharing  <dig> of  <dig> base pairs, only one probe was included on the array. we also included  <dig> ferret entries in the est database and  <dig> mrnas were retrieved from the sequence repositories at ncbi. the ests were blasted against themselves to remove overlapping est entries leaving  <dig> entries. the mrna and the ests were then uploaded to the e-array portal, and again probes with bc scores of three and higher were excluded from the array. based on the annotation analysis, one or several different transcripts from  <dig> ferret genes were represented on the array. in addition, the function of  <dig> contigs remains to be elucidated as the blast hit used to annotate these points towards a genomic region rather than an expressed gene. the probe sequences, as well as the annotated source contigs or the gen bank accessions, are found in additional file  <dig> 

microarray analysis and taqman development
rna from brain, liver, lung, spleen and blood was analyzed on the array . biological replicates were analyzed as follows: five for liver and brain tissues, four for lung tissue, and three for blood and spleen tissues. in addition, technical replicates were analyzed for samples from the lung, the liver and the brain.  <dig> probes of  <dig> had a normalized, scaled and log <dig> transformed expression value above  <dig>  which was subjectively set as the low signal cutoff. the correlation coefficients between the biological replicates were 95% and higher. the technical replicates showed correlation coefficients of  <dig> ;  <dig>  and  <dig> % for lung, liver and brain respectively. unsupervised hierarchical cluster analysis and principal component analysis using the entire data set was used to examine the power of the data to classify the samples according to their origin. both methods showed a clear internal relationship between the biological and technical replicates from the individual samples . this is supported further by correct classification using k-nearest neighbor classification analysis, where two samples in each sample group were selected to train the algorithm to classify the remaining samples .

we then used parametric testing to isolate transcripts differentially expressed between the tissues. the one-way anova test  isolated  <dig> probes with significantly different expression profile between the five analyzed tissues. these probes were further analyzed using the pavlidis template matching  pattern recognition algorithm to isolate transcripts only expressed by one of the five tissue groups . a number of these transcripts were compared to the gene atlas expression sets though the biogps portal  <cit> . the expression profile of a selection of these genes was further verified by taqman analysis.

the array data were also used to identify housekeeping genes which had minimal variation across the tested tissues. we searched the array data set using the list of human housekeeping genes generated by eisenberg and levanon,  <dig>  <cit> . the  <dig> probes on the ferret array corresponding to these genes were analyzed by anova to filter out the genes that varied over the analyzed tissues despite being classified as housekeeping genes. more than  <dig> transcripts were significantly different . the remaining transcripts were clustered using k-means clustering to distinguish between the genes that varied within each group from those that were truly non-variable between the groups. the latter indicate suitable housekeeping genes. we identified  <dig> genes from the eisenberg and levanon list with even expression across the tested tissues .

to verify a portion of the findings from the microarray analysis, we examined the gene expression differences between analyses by quantitative real time pcr. we identified five housekeeping genes with even expression levels across the samples. we also selected three genes per tissue, with the exception of the spleen, that were highly expressed only in the specific tissue. primers and taqman probes were designed for each of the transcripts individually. we also designed primers and taqman probes enabling multiplex analysis, allowing for simultaneous analysis of tissue specific transcripts and housekeeping genes in a single reaction. based on the theoretical optimal pairs combinations, the genes encoding apolipoprotein h , albumin , pulmonary surfactant-associated protein c , claudin- <dig> , glycine receptor subunit beta , synaptotagmin- <dig> , ataxin 2-binding protein  <dig> , non-pou domain containing, octamer-binding protein  and lastly the activating transcription factor  <dig> gene  were selected for analysis. we started the analysis by confirming the suitability of the two housekeeping genes. both these genes showed even transcription profiles for the tested tissues. we then compared the relative expression differences between these genes. based on the log2-transformed microarray data, the average difference of the fold-changes between the nono and the atf <dig> transcripts was approximately  <dig> . confirmatory analysis using qrt-pcr estimates this to be  <dig> , which is in agreement with the microarray results . we also verified a number of the tissue-specific transcripts detected by the array analysis. the albumin and the pulmonary surfactant-associated protein c both showed low c values, as expected. however, the fold-change ratio comparisons between the array data and qrt-pcr were higher when analyzed by qrt-pcr. a possible explanation is that the signal intensity of alb and sftpc genes is higher than the upper limit of the dynamic range of the microarray scanner. we then examined the fox <dig> gene, exclusively expressed in the brain. this gene is expressed at lower levels than alb and sftpc, and the fold-change difference between fox <dig> and atf <dig> is approximately  <dig>  when measured by the array and  <dig>  when confirmed by qrt-pcr analysis . lastly, we tested several common housekeeping genes by real time pcr using sybr green. these genes were the 60s ribosomal proteins l <dig> and l <dig>  and the sin3a-associated protein,  <dig> kda . as with the array analysis, the c values across the tissues were more variable than the  <dig> selected by the anova/k-means clustering analysis .

discussion
lack of molecular and immunological tools
domestic ferrets commonly serve as a model in critical research areas. the generation of reagents is critical to probing further into the mechanisms of disease and infection using this model. the ferret animal model is highly adapted for studies of influenza virus infection because the animals develop a number of the symptoms of influenza that are also seen in humans  <cit> . a severe course of disease is seen when infecting the ferrets with highly pathogenic strains such as the h5n <dig> avian influenza strains  <cit> . ferrets can be infected by human isolates of influenza virus, while mice, for example, require adapted strains  <cit> . humans and ferrets share the same molecular structure of sialic acid residues, which serve as the receptor for influenza attachment to the host cell in the airway epithelium. this enables the influenza virus to use the same host cell entry mechanism. in addition to influenza virus, the ferret model has been shown useful for studies of sars cov infection  <cit> , canine distemper virus  <cit> , campylobacter sp. infection  <cit>  as well as in alzheimer's disease research  <cit> .

despite the broad use of this animal model, ferret research has been hindered by a lack of available molecular genetic reagents and immunological tools. current entrez records show that  <dig> mrnas,  <dig> ests and  <dig> protein sequences are available. the ferret genome is not, as of yet, fully sequenced, however, the genome sequencing project is ongoing and has recently made several thousand partially sequenced clones available in the htgs database. in addition, second generation sequencing technologies have increased the sequencing throughput significantly, and enable full or partial determination of the transcriptome of a model animal  <cit> . the goal for the present study was to utilize these advances to increase the available transcribed sequences for the ferret and to use this information to develop a ferret microarray platform as well as assays for quantitative real time pcr.

analysis of global transcriptional changes using microarrays has improved our knowledge about virus-host interactions as well as mechanisms by which vaccines induce protection. functional genomic analyses provide valuable knowledge about components of hosts' innate immune responses to pathogens, as well as the strategies the viruses or bacteria use to defeat these . systemic approaches like these can identify innate immune signatures; which may be used to assess the strength of the adaptive immune response and to predict protective immunity after vaccination  <cit> .

microarray analysis of rna derived from ferret studies are commonly performed through heterologous array hybridization using an array developed for another species  <cit> . the sequence divergence between two different species may lead to influences on hybridization kinetics and the differentiation between actual differential gene expression and those that may be due to sequence mismatches become indistinguishable. in addition, isoforms and variants of ancestral genes may cross hybridize and give false positives . the microarray presented in this work avoids these concerns.

transcriptome sequencing and ferret assay development
sequencing of the normalized cdna library resulted in more than five hundred thousand sequence reads. these reads were assembled, filtered and annotated using blast searches against the non-redundant protein and sequence databases. we identified more than  <dig> individual transcripts, of which approximately 25% are covered by two or more contigs. the correctness of the annotation process was tested in several ways. we blasted contigs annotated based on protein sequences against the nucleotide databases. the annotations were also indirectly confirmed by the tissue-specific expression profiles detected on the microarray. the tissue-specific gene expression profiles were compared to the gene expression of the same genes from mouse and human using the biogps web portal http://biogps.gnf.org. the vast majority of the analyzed genes showed similar transcription profiles for the ferret genes and the human or murine transcripts. common expression profiles suggest that the annotation of the ferret transcripts on the array is accurate. although the possibility of altered expression of genes in the ferret, the human or the mouse exist, it is likely that the majority of the well-conserved expression patterns are similar between these species.

the microarray data were used to identify genes evenly expressed throughout the analyzed tissues. we based this analysis on a set of previously-identified housekeeping genes and identified  <dig> genes through anova and k-means clustering analysis. the resulting genes had limited variation across the tissues. none of the most commonly used housekeeping genes, such as the beta-actin , glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase , or the 60s ribosomal protein l <dig>  were in this list. analysis of the coefficient of variation  among the data points across the tissue samples indicated several fold-higher cvs for these . careful analysis of housekeeping genes is essential for both semi-quantitative and quantitative analysis of gene expression  <cit> . the  <dig> genes we present here provide a good starting point for further investigations into the ferret animal model.

CONCLUSIONS
the ferret is an increasingly important animal model, especially since it is susceptible to infection of influenza strains that also infect humans. however, the number of reagents for molecular and immunological analyses is limited. in this study we have identified close to  <dig> partial ferret genes, created a microarray platform for global transcription analysis, developed quantitative real-time pcr assays and hemoglobin mrna reduction methods. the tools and sequences presented here can be used to aid in the development of ferret-specific antibodies, the discovery of molecular targets of pathogens in the ferret, infection-specific biomarker discovery and identification of correlates of protection for vaccine tests in this animal model.

