BACKGROUND
unbiased surveys of the transcriptomes of higher eukaryotes by multiple techniques
            ranging from tiling arrays and short-read sequencing to large-scale sequencing of
            full-length cdnas have dramatically changed our perception of genome organization: at
            least 90% of the mammalian genomes are transcribed, the vast majority of this
            transcription is non-protein-coding, and there is mounting evidence that a significant
            fraction of the non-coding transcripts are functional  <cit> . the investigation of non-coding rnas has thus developed into a focal topic
            in molecular biology and bioinformatics alike. most of the ancient house-keeping rnas
             and many of the newly discovered regulatory rnas,
            including microrna precursors, form evolutionarily well-conserved secondary structures,
            reviewed e.g. in  <cit> . these structures are tightly linked to the molecules' functions. it is
            therefore a core task in rna bioinformatics to compute in particular the consensus
            structures of evolutionarily conserved rnas.

it has long been known that the accuracy of thermodynamic structure predictions for
            individual sequences is rather limited. on the other hand, computing the consensus
               structure common to several related rna sequences can drastically improve the
            prediction  <cit> . the conceptually most elegant approach towards consensus structure
            prediction is to solve the alignment and the structure prediction problem
            simultaneously. the sankoff algorithm  <cit>  provides a solution that is practically applicable and has been implemented
            in various variants including dynalign  <cit> , stemloc  <cit> , foldalign  <cit> , locarna  <cit>  or consan  <cit> . still, these approaches are computationally too expensive for large-scale
            routine applications. one basic alternative is to first compute structures for the
            individual sequences and then to align these sequences taking into account the
            structural information. this can be achieved in different ways using sequence-based
            , tree-based  <cit> , or sankoff-style alignment algorithms  <cit> . alignment-free approaches include rnaspa  <cit>  and consensus shapes  <cit> .

a large group of methods pre-supposes a  alignment. most methods of this type
            use the alignment to super-impose predicted structures to global  <cit>  or local structures  <cit> . rnaalifold  <cit> , on the other hand, in essence averages the contributions of the standard
            turner energy model  <cit>  according to a given alignment a and then solves the thermodynamic folding problem w.r.t. these
            averaged energies. a special case is the construct package  <cit> , which besides acting as a front-end for several prediction tools provides an
            interface for changing rna alignments using expert knowledge.

methods
original rnaalifold
the original rnaalifold approach combines a thermodynamic energy minimization  <cit>  with a simple scoring model to assess evolutionary conservation. both an
               energy minimization and a partition function version are implemented in the vienna
               rna package  <cit> . energy minimization uses the following recursions:

 fi,j=min⁡ci,j=βγ++min⁡{∑α∈aℌmin⁡i<k<l<j+ck,l)min⁡i<k<jmi,j=min⁡{mi+ <dig> j+cmin⁡i<k<jci,k+mk+ <dig> j+bmi,j1mi,j1=min⁡ 

as in single-sequence folding, the arrays f
                  ij
               , c
                  ij
               , m
                  ij
               , and mij <dig> hold, for every sub-sequence from i to j, the
               energies of the optimal folds of unconstrained structures, of structures enclosed by
                   base pairs, of multi-loop components, and of multi-loop
               components with a single branch, respectively  <cit> . the turner energy parameters for hairpin loops delimited by alignment
               positions i and j in sequence α ∈ a are denoted by ℌ; similarly ℑ encodes the energies of interior loops including stacked base
               pairs. multi-loops are modeled by a linear model with a "closing" contribution a, and contribution b and c for each branch and unpaired position, respectively. note that
               these values are the tabulated single-sequence parameters multiplied by the number
                  n = |a| of aligned sequences, since the recursion above computes the sum
               of the folding energies. rnaalifold modifies the energy model by introducing a  conservation score γ that evaluates
               the corresponding alignment columns w.r.t. evidence for base pairing. in  <cit> , we used

  γ′=12∑α,β∈aα≠β{h+hif ∈ℬ∧∈ℬ0otherwise 

where the hamming distance h =  <dig> if a =
                  b and h =  <dig> if a ≠
                  b and ℬ = {au, ua, cg, gc, gu,
                  ug} is the set of possible base pairs. the full covariation score
                  γ also includes penalties for sequences in which the
                base pair cannot be realized:

  γ=γ′+δ∑α∈a{0 if ∈ℬ <dig>  if αi∧αj are gaps1 otherwise 

potentially paired columns, in which less than a user-defined number or fraction of
               sequences can form the pair, are considered to be forbidden. rnaalifold therefore
               predicts the structure common to most of the sequences in an alignment. a
               prediction for a single molecule that is consistent with the consensus structure can
               be obtained by using the result of rnaalifold as a constraint for single molecule
               folding. both mfold  <cit>  and rnafold  <cit>  can be used for this purpose.

the purpose of this contribution is to explore several avenues for improving the
               performance of rnaalifold. intuitively, there are two leverage points:  the
               details of the energy evaluations in the presence of gaps, and  the rather ad
                  hoc covariance bonuses and penalties.

improved energy evaluation
the  <dig> implementation of rnaalifold uses a very simplistic way of treating gaps in
               order to save computational resources: gaps within unpaired regions are simply
               ignored, because then only alignment positions appear as indices and loop sizes, for
               instance, do not need to be evaluated separately for every sequence. this can,
               however, distort the energetics in particular if there are many gaps, and in extreme
               cases can lead to the inclusion of unrealistically short hairpins, see figure  <dig>  a second source of error is that gaps do not contribute to the
               dangling end energies in this setting.
                     the alignment in the middle is predicted once with gaps treated as if they were
                     bases , and once by removing them before computing the energies . the
                     predicted structures  are shown to the left. as can be seen
                     in  <dig>  sequence  <dig> can form a perfect hairpin. in  <dig>  the sterically
                     impossible hairpin for the other two sequences is shown. two of the three
                     sequences cannot form the predicted structure. on the other hand, the new
                     version of rnaalifold predicts a stem that has a bulge , but only in
                     one sequence, the other two sequences can form the perfect stem shown in
                      <dig> 

the new implementation thus evaluates ℌ and ℑ by first mapping the alignment indices back to the positions in
                  α. then the correct energy parameters according to the turner
               model are retrieved. in the same way, the handling of dangling ends is fixed. in
               practice, this is achieved by introducing three arrays of dimension n
               × n, where n is the length of the alignment of n
               sequences. for each sequence α and each alignment position,
               these arrays hold the 5' neighboring base, the 3' neighboring base, and the position
               in the original sequence. since in typical applications we have n
               ≪ n, this does not significantly change memory consumption.
               still, the problem remains that in some sequences hairpin loops with less than three
               unpaired positions may arise. we penalize these sequences with a contribution of the
               same order of magnitude as that of non-canonical base pairs. from here on, we will
               refer to this "gap free" energy computation as the "new rnaalifold".

energy parameters
instead of the usual turner energy parameters, one may use other parametrizations.
                  andronescu et al.  <cit>  introduced energy parameters that increase the performance of single
                  stranded rna folding, with striking results in particular on ribosomal rnas. we
                  found, however, that they provide no significant over-all performance gain for
                  rnaalifold on the broad range of datasets we used to assess performance . the results obtained for
                  andronescu's energy parameters, together with those of other unsuccessful attempts
                  to increase performance, are tabulated in the additional file  <dig> 

sequence weighting
in practice, many input alignments have a very unbalanced distribution of
                  sequences. often most sequences are very closely related and outweigh one or a few
                  divergent ones. in this case it seems appropriate to down-weight the influence of
                  closely related sequences  <cit>  similar to the weighted sum of pairs score frequently used for multiple
                  alignment. the problem with this approach is that distant sequences receive the
                  highest weights, but are also more likely to be misaligned, and hence a rational
                  weighting scheme will also increase the impact of alignment errors.

one can try to minimize this effect by dividing the score of rnaalifold in two
                  parts, one which does not contain the outliers, thus scoring a smaller alignment,
                  and one which contains all sequences. if the smaller alignment scores
                  significantly better than the complete one, one can assume that the divergent
                  sequence is either misaligned or at least does not share the consensus structure.
                  at present, we have not been able to devise a fail-safe automatic procedure to
                  identify these cases. since sequence weighting leads to a significant increase in
                  cpu time because the weighting has to be introduced in the inner-most loop of the
                  energy evaluation, we have decided against including the weighting option into the
                  public version of rnaalifold.

improving the evaluation of sequence-covariation
ribosum matrices
the covariance term γ' of the old rnaalifold implementation is
                  based on qualitative arguments only. a more quantitatively sound approach is to
                  use scoring matrices akin to the ribosum scheme  <cit> . as a training set, we selected  <dig>  sequences in total from the
                  about  <dig>  sequences in the ssu alignment of the european ribosomal rna database  <cit> , which are available in the dcse file format. when reading in the dcse
                  format, one needs to correctly assign helix numbers to concrete helices of the
                  sequences. in some cases, this assignment could not be done in an automated way.
                  avoiding possible mis-assignments, such base pairs were ignored in the
                  computation. we also kept only sequences with less than 5% undetermined
                  nucleotides and at least 50% of the maximum possible number of base pairs. this
                  set was clustered using single linkage clustering to determine clusters where the
                  sequence identity between different clusters is ≤ p. for each
                  cutoff value p we determined the frequencies f of
                  nucleotides of type a and c being aligned and
                  f of base pairs of type ab and cd
                  being aligned in sequences that are within different clusters. besides being
                  more different than p, the sequences had to have at least a sequence
                  identity of q. for each pair q, p, we define the
                  modified ribosum scores as the log-odds scores

  r = log
                        /ff) 

in practice, we vary p and q in steps of 5% sequence identity
                  and obtain altogether  <dig> matrices. note that this procedure is somewhat different
                  from the approach reported in  <cit> . the frequencies can be determined either for all base pairs including
                  the non-canonical ones or restricted to the six types of canonical base pairs.
                  only the latter version has proved useful in our context, and will be referred to
                  as ribosum in the following.

the covariance term is computed as

  γ′=12∑α,β∈aα≠βxr, 

i.e., the ribosum matrices replace the hamming distances h + h, and are scaled by a factor x so that the entries are in the same
                  range as the entries of the hamming distance matrix. in order to determine which
                  matrix to use, we determine the minimum q and maximum p sequence
                  identity in the alignment and select the ribosum matrix with smallest p
                  and q so that p ≤ p and q
                  ≤ q.

rnaalifold uses two parameters to fine-tune the impact of the covariance score.
                  the first parameter, β, controls the influence of the covariance
                  score γ' relative to the total folding energy. the second one,
                     δ, weights the impact of non-standard pairs. the old default
                  value for both parameters is  <dig> 

simply leaving them as they are would lead to a large change in the balance
                  between the thermodynamic and the covariance score. in the old rnaalifold program,
                  less than 10% of the total score is derived from the covariance score. if
                     β and δ were kept at  <dig>  this fraction would
                  increase to more than 50%. this would presumably overemphasize covariance over
                  thermodynamics. to find appropriate values for β and
                     δ, we use k-fold cross validation, with k =
                   <dig> on the cmfinder-sarse benchmark dataset described below.

pfold-like scoring
inspired by the approach used in pfold, we also tested a covariance scoring based
                  on an explicit phylogenetic model. more precisely, we used the log-odds ratio of
                  the probabilities of a base pair given a tree and the alignment, and the product
                  of the corresponding probabilities of unpaired bases given the same tree and
                  alignment  <cit> . a neighbor joining tree computed from the distances measured within
                  the alignment was used. the probabilities were then computed from this tree using
                  the pfold rate matrices. this ansatz, however, did not result in more accurate
                  predictions. therefore, it was not included into rnaalifold.

additional features
in addition to increasing the performance, additional functionalities are included in
               the new rnaalifold software.

centroid structure
the partition function computation now includes the computation of the
                     centroid structure, which is defined as the structure with minimal
                  mean base pair distance to all the structures of the ensemble:

  d=∑i,j∈b{1−)ifi,j∈bpelse 

here, d is the distance of a structure to the ensemble, b
                  denotes the set of all possible base pairs in the ensemble,
                  b is the set of all base pairs of structure s, and
                     p is the probability of the base pair
                  i, j in the ensemble. it can easily be seen that the structure
                  with minimal d is the structure that contains all base pairs
                  with a probability greater than  <dig> . this centroid structure can be seen as the
                  single structure that best describes the ensemble  <cit> . the centroid structure usually contains less base pairs than the
                  minimum free energy structure, and is therefore less likely to contain false
                  positives.

stochastic backtracking
when trying to find out about statistical features of the structure ensemble other
                  than base pair probabilities, it is sometimes of interest to compute a sample of
                  suboptimal structures according to their boltzmann weights. this can be achieved
                  efficiently using so-called stochastic backtracking. in this variation of the
                  standard backtracking scheme, one uses the matrices of the partition function
                  computation to determine the probability of base pairs or unpaired bases that are
                  included in the structure instead of choosing the alternative with the minimum
                  free energy at each step. the principle of stochastic backtracking in rna folding
                  has been used already in  <cit>  for the generation of uniformly distributed random structures. later,
                  sfold  <cit>  and the vienna rna package  <cit>  also implemented energy-weighted variants. these implementations differ
                  from the original algorithm only by the inclusion of the boltzmann factors of the
                  loop energy contributions instead of treating all structural alternatives with
                  equal weight. the generalization of the stochastic backtracking algorithm to
                  consensus folds is straightforward. see additional file  <dig> for a detailed description. stochastic backtracking is now implemented
                  in the rnaalifold software.

performance evaluation
a trusted set of aligned sequences with corresponding structures is needed in order
               to evaluate the performance of consensus structure prediction tools. most papers on
               this topic use some subset of the rfam  <cit> . however, the structures and alignments contained in rfam pose several
               problems. the database consists of a large number of snornas  and micro rnas . furthermore, many of the rfam entries contain
               short sequences that can only form simple one stem structures. a serious problem is
               the fact that many of the rfam structures are predictions, some of which were created
               by the very programs that are to be tested. not even all of the structures flagged as
               published within the database have been experimentally derived. mostly because of
               this reasons, only  <dig> of the more than  <dig> rfam families are contained in rna strand  <cit> , a recently created, curated database of high quality single rna secondary
               structures.

we therefore chose several different datasets for performance evaluation. in addition
               to the complete rfam  seed alignments, we use here the cmfinder-sarse
               subset compiled from  <cit> , which contains  <dig> high quality seed alignments , the seeds of  <dig> rfam families contained in rna strand, and the dataset
               of knetfold  <cit> . a list of these rfam subsets can be found in the additional file  <dig> or including links in the online supplement.

the script refold.pl of the vienna rna package is used to remove gaps and
               non-standard base pairs from the rnaalifold predictions. the resulting structure is
               compared to the reference structure. for each alignment only the first sequence is
               used for performance evaluation to avoid a bias from the unequal sizes of the aligned
               sequence sets. as performance measure we use the mathews correlation coefficient
                as introduced in a previous benchmark  <cit> : base pairs that are not part of the reference structure are counted as
               false positives only if they are inconsistent with the reference structure, while
               they are ignored if they can be added to the reference structure. thus additional
               stems and elongated stems are not penalized. while this is a physically reasonable
               way to compute the mcc, the question of comparability might arise. to address this,
               we also used the more simple way of defining false positives as all base pairs
               predicted that were not part of the reference structure, and called it "other mcc".

for the comparison procedure, we used the web-servers of pfold  <cit>  and knetfold. in case the rfam seed alignment contained more than 40
               sequences, only the first  <dig> were used; all-gap columns were removed from such
               alignments. the mccaskill-mea software mcc_mea  <cit>  was installed locally. the predictions were also filtered with refold.pl
               before scoring.

in order to evaluate the dependence on the alignment quality, we also realigned the
               rfam alignments of the cmfinder-sarse dataset using clustal  <cit> , and then proceeded as described above. furthermore, we also computed the
               mcc for all rfam seed alignments for those programs that can be run locally .

the rnaalifold algorithm has been extensively used for the prediction of
               thermodynamically stable and/or evolutionary conserved rnas  <cit> . the alifoldz program  <cit>  evaluates stability and structural conservation at the same time simply by
               comparing the consensus free energy of an alignment to the consensus free energies of
               a large number of randomly shuffled alignments, relying entirely on rnaalifold. rnaz  <cit> , on the other hand calculates two separate scores for stability and
               conservation. structural conservation is assessed by means of the folding energy
               based structure conservation index . here, the consensus energy is set in
               relation to the mean free energies of the single sequences. the lower bound of the
               sci is zero, indicating that rnaalifold is not able to find a consensus structure,
               while a sci close to one corresponds to perfect structure conservation. here, we
               investigate whether the improved performance of rnaalifold in terms of correctness of
               the predicted structure can also improve the performance of ncrna gene finders.

in order to evaluate the performance of alifoldz and the sci, we re-consider a
               sub-set of the test-set used in a previous benchmark  <cit> . as usual, we compute roc curves to determine our ability to discriminate
               between truly conserved alignments and randomized controls. for simplicity, only the
               area under the roc curve  is reported below as a measure of the discrimination
               power.

RESULTS
predicting consensus structures
we first compared the new implementation of rnaalifold with the  <dig> version. as
               shown in figure  <dig>  the proper treatment of gaps in the new
               version leads to a consistently improved accuracy. the data also shows that the
               covariance contribution in the  <dig> version was too large. using ribosum matrices
               instead of the naïve hamming distance score substantially increases the
               beneficial effect of the covariance score. however, if the same parameters as in the
               original rnaalifold were used, the relative portion of the covariance term within the
               score would be greater than the thermodynamic score. we remark that for large values
               of β, where the covariance contributions dominate, the performance
               becomes much worse than for a purely thermodynamic energy computation . as a new default, we therefore use β =  <dig>  and
                  δ =  <dig> . still, the portion of the covariance term in the
               combined energy term is much higher  in the ribosum than in the other
               rnaalifold variants . we want to remark that with the exception of very low
                  β, the performance of the ribosum variant always exceeds the
               performance of the new variant without ribosum, which in turn always performs better
               than the  <dig> variant of rnaalifold .
                        and δ parameters. it can be seen that except for
                        β =  <dig> , using ribosum matrices improves the performance
                     of the new rnaalifold, which is in turn always better than the  <dig> 
                     variant. furthermore, for the ribosum variant, the size of the plateau, i.e.
                     the subset of parameters with a mcc ≥  <dig>  is quite big, containing
                      <dig> of  <dig> combinations of parameters . top: 3d-plot of the mcc against the
                     parameters β and δ. bottom: vertical
                     section along the diagonals β = δ and
                        δ + β =  <dig> .
                           δ.a: for all three rnaalifold variants, the
                     accuracy of the structure prediction, measured here as mcc for the
                     cmfinder-sarse dataset , depends on the weight β of
                     the covariance term . b: the auc value for
                     the sci computation also depends strongly on the values of β
                     and δ. the green square indicates the optimal parameters
                        , the red dot is the
                     default . as the default is close to the maximum, there is little room
                     for improvement.
               predictions for five alignment-based programs on the cmfinder-sarse dataset. the new
               rnaalifold with ribosum matrices often yields perfect predictions and appears to have
               a good worst case performance: the smallest observed mcc is  <dig> , and in this case
               the input alignment is clearly flawed, see additional file  <dig> 

performance comparisons on the cmfinder-sarse dataset. we list the mcc for
                     different alignments. best performance bold.

in table  <dig>  the performance of the same five programs on the
               rna strand-rfam dataset is shown. this curated dataset, in contrast to the other
               datasets we used, has many pseudo-knotted structures  and only  <dig> of the 19
               alignments have simple one-stem structures. in this regard, it is a good extension to
               our other datasets. while the total mccs of all programs are lower, again the ribosum
               variant of rnaalifold outperforms the other programs – however, on this
               dataset, the centroid structure computed using ribosum rnaalifold has the best
               performance, with an mcc of  <dig> . for this table, knetfold was run using the "check
               pseudoknots" option. still, it only correctly predicted a part of a single
               pseudo-knot.

performance comparisons on the rna strand-rfam dataset. we list the mcc for
                     different alignments. best performance indicated in bold, n.a. means
                     that data is not available due to length restrictions on the respective server,
                     pk denotes structures that contain a pseudo-knot. as there are many
                     pseudo-knotted structures in this dataset, knetfold was used in the "check
                     pseudoknot" mode. the mccs take into account the pseudo-knots.

we also used the rfam subset that was used to evaluate the performance of knetfold  <cit> . however, we did not use the same procedure to prune alignments down to a
               maximum of  <dig> sequences. therefore, the mccs reported here cannot directly be
               compared to the ones in  <cit> . the mcc we achieve with the ribosum variant of rnaalifold is  <dig> . this
               is again a significant improvement over the mcc of  <dig>  achieved by the 2002
               variant.

when considering an almost complete set of about  <dig> rfam alignments , the mean mcc of
               rnaalifold  <dig> is  <dig> , the new rnaalifold with ribosum matrices achieves a mean
               mcc of  <dig> , while mcc_mea achieves  <dig> .

in table  <dig>  the performance of the new rnaalifold variants
               using the "other mcc" variant and the results when using clustal realigned sequences
               are shown.

performance comparisons on the cmfinder-sarse dataset. we list the mean mcc for
                     different programs. best performance indicated in bold. other mcc is the
                     variant counting every wrongly predicted pair as false positive, clustal mcc is
                     the mcc as introduced by gardner et al.  <cit>  applied to alignments realigned using clustal  <cit> .

effects on predicted structures
over all, there are two main reasons why prediction using the ribosum variant of
                  rnaalifold will give better predictions than the  <dig> variant. by treating gaps as
                  if they were bases, the  <dig> implementation sometimes assigns much too unfavorable
                  energies to loops containing gaps in a small number of sequences. as a
                  consequence, these loops cannot be part of the consensus structure. examples for
                  this effect are gcvb, where an interrupting bulge loop in the consensus
                  structure actually exists in only one sequence, or the hammerhead ribozyme, where
                  a large insertion within a hairpin loop is present in about a third of the
                  sequences.

the beneficial effect of using the ribosum matrices is mostly due to the
                  possibility to assign covariance boni to certain base pairs even if not much  covariation actually occurred. this makes it possible to compensate for a
                  few contradicting base pairs, whether they are due to alignment errors or to a
                  slightly different structure for some sequences. predictions that benefit from
                  that effect are e.g. the enterovirus 5' cloverleaf, the snake h/aca box small
                  nucleolar rna or the unal <dig> line 3' element. a mixture of both effects is seen in
                  the r <dig> rna element as well as in the hammerhead ribozyme. the detailed results for
                  these molecules can be seen in the additional files  <dig> 
                      <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> or in
                  the online supplement.

detection of ncrnas
alifoldz detects structural non-coding rnas by comparing the energy of the native
               alignment to the energies of a population of randomized control alignments via a
                  z-score. here, the better predictive power of the new ribosum approach
               directly translates into increased ability to distinguish evolutionary conserved rnas
               from randomized controls. the ribosum approach achieves an auc of  <dig>  compared to
                <dig>  for both the  <dig> implementation and the new rnaalifold. the performance boost
               comes mainly from additional bonus energies derived from covariance scoring. in the
               ribosum approach these energies have a much higher contribution than in the
               conventional model thereby favoring true conservation patterns by giving a lower
               total free energy and hence a lower z-score. this beneficial effect is not
               observed in the case of the sci, where the ribosum covariance energies even result in
               a performance drop  compared to the other two implementations . the sci is a conservation measure that compares the consensus free
               energy to the mean free energy of the single sequences. the covariance energies are
               important for the high discrimination capability of the sci, but with the ribosum
               scoring model the over-emphasis of the covariance energy contributions blurs the
               signal for true conservation. if we neglect the covariance score for the computation
               of the sci, the effect is much smaller . we expect, however, that the
               ribosum approach will perform well on purely structure-based similarity or distance
               measures.

computational requirements
theoretically, the new and the old rnaalifold variants have the same space ) and time ) complexity, with n sequences in
               an alignment of length n. however, neglecting possible base pairs with a
               conservation score below a certain cutoff  dramatically reduces computation time without affecting the
               results. as an example, folding a subset of five randomly chosen sequences of a
               ribosomal ssu alignment  takes an average of about  <dig>  seconds,
               while using  <dig> sequences of the same alignment takes about  <dig>  seconds on an intel
               xeon  <dig>  ghz processor . the ribosum matrices make it
               much harder to exclude base pairs from the outset. thus, the ribosum variant is by
               far the slowest option on alignments with many rather diverse sequences.
                     folding different alignments with  <dig> sequences and different lengths. b:
                     folding a different number of random sequences from the same alignment .

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown here that the performance of rnaalifold can be improved to be competitive
            with all recently published alignment-based consensus structure prediction tools. this
            improvement is reached by a more accurate treatment of gaps and an elaborate model for
            the evaluation of sequence covariations that resembles the ribosum matrices. the gain in
            performance is achieved at negligible extra computational cost and without dramatic
            changes to the implementation. while a sequence weighting scheme apparently can yield
            further improvements on good alignments, this makes the procedure less resilient towards
            mis-alignments. it seems, therefore, that the approach is essentially limited by the
            quality of the input alignments.

authors' contributions
shb designed and implemented the new version of rnaalifold, ilh and pfs initiated the
            study and contributed to the theory, sw derived and calculated the ribosum-like scores,
            arg evaluated the performance for structured rna detection. all authors closely
            collaborated in writing the manuscript.

availability and requirements
rnaalifold is part of the viennarna software package, the new version can be downloaded
            for linux as a tar archive at: .

the electronic supplement of this paper can be found at
               

supplementary material
additional file 1
additional results. results of various unsuccessful approaches to
                        increase the accuracy of rnaalifold.

click here for file

 additional file 2
stochastic backtracking. detailed description of stochastic
                        backtracking algorithm for consensus structure prediction using
                     rnaalifold.

click here for file

 additional file 3
datasets. list of the datasets used for evaluating performance.

click here for file

 additional file 4
alignment and structure of snord <dig>  the rfam alignment and reference
                     structure of snord <dig> together with the energies of the structure on the single
                     molecules.

click here for file

 additional file 5
enterovirus 5' cloverleaf structure. analysis of the effects leading
                        to better prediction of the enterovirus 5' cloverleaf structure.

click here for file

 additional file 6
gcvb structure. analysis of the effects leading to better prediction
                        of the gcvb structure.

click here for file

 additional file 7
snake h/aca snorna structure. analysis of the effects leading to
                        better prediction of the snake h/aca snorna structure.

click here for file

 additional file 8
hammerhead rybozyme structure. analysis of the effects leading to
                        better prediction of the hammerhead rybozyme structure.

click here for file

 additional file 9
r <dig> rna element structure. analysis of the effects leading to better
                        prediction of the r <dig> rna element structure.

click here for file

 additional file 10
unal <dig> line 3' element structure. analysis of the effects leading to
                        better prediction of the unal <dig> line 3' element structure.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported in part by the european union as part of the fp- <dig> embio
               project as well as by the austrian gen-au project "bioinformatics integration
               network" and deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft as part of spp- <dig> "sensory and
               regulatory rnas in prokaryotes".
