BACKGROUND
gene insertions and deletions have been widely acknowledged to play an essential role in shaping bacterial genomes during evolution  <cit> . parsimony methods have been employed to understand the process of gene insertions and deletions  <cit> . however, parsimony methods fail to distinguish parallel deletions and insertions on multiple branches  <cit> . the problem of parallel deletions and insertions can be overcome using maximum likelihood methods by making use of transition probabilities  <cit> .

recently a maximum likelihood method was employed to study gene insertions and deletions assuming constant rates across genes in a given genome  <cit> . however, the assumption of constant insertion/deletion rates among genes is unrealistic. for example, it has been shown that informational genes, such as those involved in transcription and translation, are less likely to be laterally transferred than are operational genes responsible for metabolic processes  <cit> . this observation forms the basis of the "complexity hypothesis". unfortunately, causes of rate variation for insertions/deletions beyond the difference between informational genes and operational genes still remain unclear. a study of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions making use of the maximum likelihood method, therefore, becomes useful to address questions on rate variation for gene insertions/deletions.

here, a Γ-distribution has been incorporated into a maximum likelihood estimation of gene insertion/deletion rates . after incorporating rate variation for gene insertions/deletions among genes, the likelihood was improved significantly over a constant rate model using the same set of data from the bacillus group as in  <cit> . the method was applied to  <dig> complete bacterial genomes in  <dig> phylogenetic groups;  <dig> groups showed significantly better fits to the data with rate variation for gene insertions/deletions. the remaining five groups did not show significantly better fits to the data with rate variation. furthermore, the removal of informational genes from the likelihood estimation contributes little change in terms of the rate variation parameter α for gene insertions/deletions. this is the case despite informational genes having significantly lower rates of insertions/deletions than non-informational genes.

the results reveal that rate variation of gene insertions/deletions is much more complex than simply a difference between informational genes and operational genes; instead, a high degree of rate variation for insertions/deletions remains among both informational genes and among non-informational genes.

RESULTS
the same set of data from the bacillus group in  <cit>  was used to initially test the performance of the models incorporating rate variation. following the previous study, three rate-conditions  were assumed , each one was further extended by adding rate variation.

the likelihood of the models was improved significantly by incorporating a Γ-distribution in rate variation models compared with relevant constant rate models . of the three models, the likelihood of the single-constant rate model was improved the most by incorporating rate variation. in the single rate model with a Γ-distribution, the mle  rate of insertions/deletions is  <dig> , which is much greater than the rate  <dig>  of the constant rate model. there is a high degree of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions, since the rate variation parameter α is  <dig> ; indicating that there is a small subset of genes with rapid gene turn-over.

the two-rate and three-rate models both assumed different rates on certain parts of the phylogeny. after incorporating rate variation, they both showed significantly better fits to the data than did the single rate model , but the mle rates are similar to those estimated from the constant rate models. in the two-rate model, the rates with rate variation in a Γ-distribution are  <dig> ,  <dig>  versus  <dig> ,  <dig>  with constant rates. similarly, in the three-rate model, the rates with rate variation are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  versus  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  with constant rates. both models consistently support that recently transferred genes tend to have high rates of gene insertions/deletions as noted in  <cit> . both cases showed lower levels of rate variation  compared with the single-rate model , even though, incorporating rate variation also improved the likelihood significantly.

to gain a clearer picture of rate variation of lateral gene transfer in the domain of bacteria, the study was expanded to  <dig> complete bacterial genomes in  <dig> phylogenetic groups . for each phylogenetic group, two phylogenies were constructed. one  is based on a group of selected genes, the other  is based on genes present among the relevant taxa as described in the methods section. of the  <dig> phylogenetic groups,  <dig> groups showed a fairly high level of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions among genes, and the confidence interval falls into a small range for each α value . it is also striking that estimates using phylogenies on different set of genes or using different phylogenies are similar . five groups did not show a significant level of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions . the five groups are candidatus, ehrlichia, lactobacillus, mycoplasma, and synechococcus. the lower boundary of each infinite α value was also estimated. the ehrlichia group shows a very broad interval range for the "maximum" likelihood value and the lower boundary of α value is  <dig>  . the undistinguished difference between the rate variation model and the constant rate model in ehrlichia might be due to the limited size of data  and/or accelerated evolution at the sequence level in this intracellular group. the relationship between the rate variation parameter α in a Γ distribution and the average branch length of each group was examined. figure  <dig> shows that there is a positive correlation between the rate variation parameter α and the average branch length of each group. closely related groups tend to have a higher degree of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions among genes, while distantly related groups tend to have a lower level of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions. this suggests that the observation of rate variation is a strong local phenomenon and becomes blurry over evolutionary time.

*significant improvement

*significant improvement

*at 5% level, and the lower boundary of any ∞ α value is shown in integers except in the ehrlichia group, which has a lower boundary  <dig> .

mle estimates of gene insertions/deletions rates in informational genes and in non-informational genes were estimated separately in the absence of rate variation. the rates in informational genes are lower than those in non-informational genes in all groups, but none of them are zero . this is consistent with previous studies that have shown informational genes have slower rates of gene insertions/deletions than non-informational genes  <cit> , but they are not completely free of gene movement  <cit> . to evaluate whether the difference in informational genes contributes the most to rate variation of gene transfers, maximum likelihood estimation with rate variation for gene insertions/deletions was conducted by excluding all informational genes. the α values excluding informational genes are remarkably similar to those including informational genes , even though the α values are slightly increased when excluding informational genes. however this could be because informational genes tend to be more conserved. we therefore, excluded the same number of most conserved genes . in this case, a greater increase in α values was observed than that observed when informational genes were excluded . the ratio of the increase of α value after excluding informational genes over the increase in α value after excluding the same number of most conserved genes was calculated . if all informational genes are as rarely transferred as are the most conserved genes, one should expect that the ratio is close to  <dig>  however, the ratio in most groups  is smaller than  <dig> , suggesting that the effect of excluding informational genes is similar to that of excluding random genes rather than that of excluding the most conserved genes. rate variation for gene insertions/deletions in non-informational genes still remained high after the genes that do not have significant matches to any genes in cog classification were removed . furthermore, the level of rate variation in informational genes is significant in most groups . thus, rate variation for gene insertions/deletion is not mainly due to the difference between informational genes and non-informational genes, but instead, a substantial amount of variation for gene insertions/deletions is observed in both informational and non-informational genes. in other words, the "complexity hypothesis" only explains a small part of the variation in rate of gene insertions/deletions.

a the difference was calculated from αinformational−αrandomαconserved−αrandom

discussion
the accuracy of maximum likelihood estimation of gene indel rates is dependent on the presence of a robust phylogeny for the genomes under study. phylogenies obtained from single genes can sometimes be distorted due to rampant lgt  <cit>  and rrna sequences may not be useful due to the lack of informative characters differentiating closely related species and varying functional constraints over the molecule  <cit> . we used a concatenated dna sequence obtained by joining the gene sequences that are commonly present in many bacterial genomes. for the select-genes tree construction, a set of genes were chosen from those reported in previous studies  <cit> . if there is more than one phylogeny generated for a group, all phylogenies were used and weighted by their occurrence to overcome the uncertainty of using just one. to avoid the confounding effects of duplication during evolution  <cit> , duplicated genes were removed from phylogeny construction. due to the broad spectrum of species analyzed in this study, there are few genes free of both duplication and lateral gene transfer across all groups. consequently, the genes used for phylogeny reconstruction may be different between groups . to assess the robustness of each select-genes tree, the common-genes trees were reconstructed using genes present in all members of each phylogenetic group. when the common-genes tree and the select-genes tree are not topologically identical, a supertree was constructed. there are  <dig> groups that have an identical topology between the select-genes tree and the common-genes tree. the remaining  <dig> groups do not show an identical topology between the select-genes tree and the common-genes tree. please note that many differences are due to either the lack of phylogenetic signal at the tips of a phylogeny or the placement of the root .

one way to achieve a more accurate phylogeny is to make use of a large number of genes in comprehensive phylogenetic studies, such as supermatrics  and supertrees  <cit> . the more data included in a phylogenomic analysis, the more likely to overcome possible stochastic errors  <cit> . in this study, the common-genes tree was not always favored by the supertree over the select-genes trees. indeed, there are two groups that the select-genes tree is supported by the supertree . slow evolving genes are sometimes more informative for phylogeny construction, since fast evolving genes might cause problems such as long branch attraction  <cit> . the tree length of each gene was computed from each phylogeny and plotted in . it is clear that the selected genes for phylogeny construction have relatively slow evolutionary rates compared with all common genes. there are  <dig> groups whose supertree does not support the select-genes tree or the common-genes tree. the lack of congruence in these groups is likely due to insufficient taxon sampling.  <cit> . more accurate trees might be obtained as more complete genome sequences become available. importantly, the maximum likelihood estimates based on the common-genes trees are remarkably similar with the estimates based on the select-genes trees . for the  <dig> groups that do not have an identical topology between the select-genes tree and the common-genes tree, the results reported are based on the supertree topology . the results are again similar to those based on the select gene tree and those based on the common-genes tree .

to further explore how much, if at all, different phylogenies might alter the results, maximum likelihood estimation based on possible alternative topologies was investigated. one hundred bootstraps from the alignment of the common genes were generated for each group. for the select-genes, possible alternative topologies were obtained from the mrbayes output. if there are more than  <dig> distinct topologies, the top  <dig> ones according to their likelihood were chosen for further maximum likelihood estimation. the maximum likelihood estimates are shown in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  it is clear that the α values are similar among different phylogenies. the removal of informational genes results in little change on the rate variation parameter α, and this holds true for each phylogeny. furthermore, the likelihood estimations in the bacillus group based on a phylogeny constructed from different genes  are similar with those based on the phylogeny of the previous study . the slight difference is due to the removal of short sequences in this study and differences in the phylogenies constructed from different sequences. the results do not, therefore, seem to be an artifact of the genes included or the phylogeny reconstruction. informational genes are known to be less likely to undergo lateral gene transfer  <cit> , which is also the core of the "complexity hypothesis"  <cit> . in this study, informational genes were found to have lower rates of gene insertions/deletions compared with non-informational genes . however, no group has an insertion/deletion rate equal to  <dig>  suggesting that informational genes are not completely free of gene movement. in fact, several ribosomal protein coding genes are deleted from streptococcus mutans . the rate variation parameter, α, change after excluding informational genes is similar to the α change after randomly removing genes rather than the α change after excluding the most conserved genes . furthermore, different cutoffs used in identifying informational genes only resulted in variation of the number of informational genes but did not affect the degree of rate variation for insertions/deletions in non-informational genes . there is a great deal of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions in non-informational genes and also there is a significant level of rate variation in informational genes. in other words, the different rates between informational genes and non-informational genes as shown in the "complexity hypothesis" can only explain a small part of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions. similarly, our simulation study showed that the high level of rate variation can not be explained solely by the fast turn-over rates of recently transferred genes .

it has been suggested that different cutoff thresholds for identifying homologues might affect the identification of some gene gains  <cit> , but different thresholds result in little change on the number of gene families  <cit>  and the rates of gene insertions/deletions  <cit> . in this study, results using different thresholds were similar . it is important to note that gene duplication was not taken into consideration in this study, since our focus was on insertions/deletions of gene families rather than intraspecific gene family duplication. this avoids the difficulty of distinguishing some gene transfer from gene duplication  <cit> . recently, some studies have suggested that duplicated genes or genes that have a high duplicability propensity might be more likely to be involved in lateral gene transfer  <cit> . methods incorporating gene duplication information are desirable for future studies.

for the  <dig> groups that showed a significant improvement in likelihood by adding rate variation, there is a positive association between the rate variation parameter α and the average branch length. higher degrees of rate variation for gene insertions/deletion are expected to be observed in closely related groups. the seven closely related bacillus genomes in the bc group were analyzed separately and, as expected, a high degree of rate variation was observed . similarly, the five groups that have an infinite α value show fairly high levels of divergence within the group in terms of the average branch length. an acceleration of sequence evolution in the endosymbiont genomes has been acknowledged  <cit> . the accelerated rates of evolution might affect the branch lengths of the phylogeny used in the analyses and might also affect the identification of homologues within each phylogenetic group. four endosymbiont groups showed strong accelerated rates of evolution. they are candidatus, ehrichia, mycoplasma, and richettsia. analyses after the removal of these four groups also showed similar results .

there are two possible explanations for the correlation between the average branch length and the α value. first, it is possible that the observed correlation is due to the lack of power of maximum likelihood estimation in distantly related groups. previously, it has been shown that comparison among distantly related species tends to infer lower rates of insertions/deletions  <cit> . on the other hand, if maximum likelihood estimation in the study has enough power in distantly related groups, the results might suggest that rate variation for insertions/deletions has a strong local effect and becomes weaker as evolution in progress. this strong local effect might be, at least partially, due to a high variability in recently transferred genes. it is known that many of recently transferred genes are under faster rates of evolution and might be eliminated from the genome rapidly  <cit> , and while some transferred genes that play roles in long term adaptation might become fixed  <cit>  and integrated into the functional network  <cit> . maximum likelihood estimations from simulated data showed support for these explanations. when the number of insertions/deletions increased, a larger proportion of insertions/deletions became undetectable, at the same time, sister taxa shared less common genes and have more unique genes . if this correlation holds true, after a long enough time period, one should expect rate variation becomes undetectable. hence, over a long time period, genes would have roughly the same chance to be transferred. this has been shown in some recent studies. by examining the cyanobacteria group, zhaxybayeva et al. reported that genes from all functional categories are subject to gene transfer  <cit> . in addition, it was suggested that among all sequenced gene families, at least two-thirds and probably all, have been affected by lgt at some time in their evolutionary past  <cit> .

on the other hand, not many genes in a genome are shown to be affected by lateral gene transfer when comparing closely related species; this might be partially able to explain the contradictory views of lateral gene transfer at different phylogenetic scales. it has been reported that the genes from closely related species tend to have clearer tree-like relationship than the ones from distantly related species  <cit>  and the studies analyzing genomes in different degrees of divergence do not show congruent results  <cit> . there may be several sources of noise in the data in figure  <dig>  it is plausible that different phylogenetic groups might have slightly different mechanisms of preventing lateral gene transfer or selectively retaining certain foreign genes. in fact, it is known that bacteria are able to selectively retain foreign genes with certain sequence features, such as codon usage  <cit>  and gc content  <cit> . the possibility of lateral gene transfers into a genome could also be affected by other internal or external environmental factors, such as genome size, carbon utilization, isolated niches, and biochemical properties  <cit> . however, there is no evidence found in this study that the degree of rate variation for gene insertions/deletions across genes is associated with genome size .

CONCLUSIONS
maximum likelihood models incorporating rate variation allow us to evaluate the contribution to rate variation of gene insertions/deletions between informational genes and non-informational genes. consistent with the "complexity hypothesis", informational genes are less likely to be laterally transferred than non-informational genes. however, the difference between informational genes and non-informational genes is only a small fraction of the variation present; instead, a substantial amount of rate variation for insertions/deletions remains among both informational genes and among non-informational genes. furthermore, the observation of rate variation has a strong local effect and becomes blurry over evolutionary time.

