BACKGROUND
synaptic transmission is a highly regulated process that relies on calcium  to trigger the release of transmitters from membrane bound vesicles. to accomplish this fusion of vesicle and plasma membranes, the snare  complex of proteins is required as well as a ca2+ sensor that can bind ca2+  <cit> . synaptotagmin  i is well established as a main ca2+ sensor for rapid and regulated vesicle release from neurons and neurosecretory cells  <cit> . it binds ca2+, interacts with phospholipid membranes, and triggers the snare complex proteins to allow vesicle fusion and subsequent transmitter release  <cit> .

synaptotagmins are a conserved family of proteins comprised of at least  <dig> different isoforms . a distinguishing feature of the syt isoforms is the tandem cytoplasmic c <dig> domains  that, for some isoforms, confer the phospholipid and ca2+-binding ability to the specific isoforms  <cit> . although syt isoforms share similar c <dig> domain structures, they differ in their ability to bind ca2+ by the c <dig> domains. the ca2+-dependent syt isoforms bind to phospholipids as a function of ca2+-binding to the c <dig> domains and include syt i  <cit> . conversely, syt iv is a unique syt isoform that has similar c <dig> domain structure, but does not bind ca2+ in the c2a domain due to an amino acid substitution that prevents ca2+-binding and presumably prevents the ca2+-dependent functions attributed to the c2a domain  <cit> . unlike the c2a domain of syt iv, the c2b domain is thought to retain the ability to bind ca2+, and this binding of ca2+ to the c2b domains of other syt isoforms has been shown to be essential for transmitter release  <cit> . therefore, controversy remains as to whether syt iv can support ca2+-dependent vesicle fusion and subsequent transmitter release.

an intriguing feature of syt iv is that it is an immediate early gene whose expression is induced in vivo following treatment with kainic acid to induce seizures  <cit> . in contrast, gene expression of syt i is either unchanged or decreased with kainic acid treatment  <cit> . forskolin and depolarization with high k+ leads to increased syt iv expression in the neuroendocrine rat pheochromocytoma  cells, mimicking the effects of kainic acid  <cit> . in mice, lack of syt iv has been associated with memory and performance deficits  <cit> , as well as depression-like behaviors  <cit> . these behavioral effects in animals indicate that syt iv may play a role in synaptic transmission, transmitter and/or vesicle release processes.

studies performed in pc <dig> cells and drosophila have shown that overexpression of syt iv decreases transmitter release by the formation of hetero-oligomers with syt i  <cit> . more recently, forskolin-induced syt iv expression has been shown to decrease the fusion pore stability that leads to a more readily closed fusion pore, and thus, an increase in the frequency of 'kiss and run' events  <cit> . in syt iv knockout mice, vesicle release from the posterior pituitary nerve terminals  <cit>  and hippocampal neurons  <cit>  was enhanced compared to wild type mice. taken together, these results have contributed to the hypothesis that syt iv acts to prevent neurotransmitter release during periods of high stimulation. however, in a separate study performed in mouse hippocampal neurons, there were no measurable effects of syt iv upregulation on fast synaptic transmission, fusion modes or kinetics  <cit> .

in drosophila, syt iv has been shown to substitute for syt i to mediate transmitter release  <cit> , or in pituitary gonadotropes, to be necessary for large dense core vesicle  release when syt i was not effective  <cit> . furthermore, in glial cells, syt iv was shown to be essential for ca2+-dependent release of glutamate  <cit> . in most cases, experiments done to investigate the involvement of syt iv on transmitter release were performed in secretory cells that also expressed the primary ca2+-sensor, syt i. in fact, because syt iv has been shown to co-localize with syt i and reported to form hetero-oligomers  <cit> , it is possible that the function of syt iv in regulated release of vesicles is dependent upon whether syt i is also expressed.

we hypothesize that syt iv modulates ca2+-regulated transmitter release and that the function of syt iv is dependent upon the presence of syt i. to test this hypothesis, we used pc <dig> cell lines established previously in our laboratory. these cell lines have stable incorporation of plasmid-based rnai to specifically eliminate expression of syt i  <cit> . we have already shown that abolished syt i expression reduced catecholamine  release by ~50% from single cells  <cit> . furthermore, we showed that evoked release of neuropeptide y  from ldcvs was reduced in the absence of syt i, establishing a role for syt i in differentially regulating transmitter release from ldcvs compared to small vesicles in pc <dig> cells  <cit> . in the current study, we show that syt iv upregulation does not affect ca release or npy release when syt i is expressed. however, upregulation of syt iv in the absence of syt i expression reduces release of vesicles and their transmitter content compared to release from cells that have endogenous expression of syt iv with targeted knockdown of syt i. together, these data show that neither upregulation nor overexpression of syt iv substitutes for syt i.

RESULTS
expression of syt iv is upregulated by forskolin in syt i knockdown cells
in a previous study, we established a pc <dig> cell line that continuously expresses a short hairpin rna designed to silence expression of syt i, that we refer to as shrna-syt i   <cit> . in that study, we showed that expression of ca2+-dependent syt isoforms ii, iii, vii and ix, and the snare proteins were unaltered by the lack of syt i expression in the shrna-syt i cells. however, we did not characterize the expression levels of syt iv. previously, other researchers had shown that syt iv expression is rapidly increased in pc <dig> cells by treatment with forskolin  <cit>  which is thought to act on adenylyl cyclase, a potent activator of camp production that results in activation of multiple signal transduction pathways including creb-mediated transcription  <cit> . it is postulated that forskolin-induced syt iv expression is achieved by creb-mediated transcription  <cit> . therefore, we treated control pc <dig> and syt i knockdown cells with  <dig> μm forskolin, and used immunodetection methods to determine whether upregulation of syt iv expression was increased when cells have abolished syt i expression  <cit> .

representative immunoblots of lysates prepared from control pc <dig> and syt i knockdown cells show that syt iv expression was induced within  <dig> hours of continuous forskolin treatment. figure 1a shows an example immunoblot of syt iv upregulation in response to forskolin treatment measured from control pc <dig> cells normalized to β-actin. similar results were obtained in shrna-syt i cells. intracellular camp was measured with an immunoassay, and increased approximately  <dig> to 300-fold in each cell type as expected. the plots in figures 1b and c show the average fold increase in syt iv expression levels measured in forskolin-treated control and shrna-syt i knockdown cells compared to untreated cells. densitometry analysis shows that syt iv expression was significantly increased ~ <dig> -fold  and peaked after  <dig> hours of treatment with forskolin in control pc <dig> cells compared to untreated cells . likewise, syt iv expression in syt i knockdown cells increased ~ <dig> -fold  and peaked after  <dig> hours of forskolin treatment . these results are similar to previous reports that described an increase in syt iv mrna and protein expression within  <dig> hours of treatment with forskolin  <cit> . we found similar results in control transfected  cells that were stably transfected with an empty plasmid that lacks a targeting insert and does not express any shrnas. furthermore, to be certain that upregulating syt iv does not affect expression of syt i, we determined that syt i expression was unaffected by forskolin treatment and remained constant over time in forskolin-treated control cells.

upregulation of syt iv inhibits ca release in syt i knockdown cells
to test the hypothesis that syt i and syt iv are functionally co-dependent in regulating exocytosis of transmitter from vesicles, we used carbon-fiber amperometry to detect the release of individual vesicles and secretion of transmitter. we recorded amperometric release events from control cells, shrna-syt i knockdown cells, and control transfected cells, each of which were either untreated or treated with forskolin for 3- <dig> hours. baseline release was measured during the first 20- <dig> sec of each recording while cells were continuously bathed in a hank's basal salt solution to establish the resting conditions. the solution was then changed to a stimulating solution of high k+ , and continuously perfused for  <dig> min. figure  <dig> shows representative examples of the recordings obtained from control pc <dig> cells compared to cells treated with forskolin for 3- <dig> hours . figures 2c and 2d show examples of amperometric recordings from syt i knockdown cells compared to syt i knockdown cells treated with forskolin. the syt i knockdown cell treated with forskolin  exhibits reduced numbers of events compared to the control, forskolin-treated cell .

the plot in figure 2e shows the average number of events per cell measured during the  <dig> min stimulation period. there was no significant difference in the events measured in forskolin-treated control cells compared to untreated control cells. however, the average number of events measured in forskolin-treated shrna-syt i cells was reduced by 84% compared to the number of events measured in forskolin-treated control pc <dig> cells . furthermore, the average number of events in forskolin-treated syt i knockdown cells was significantly reduced compared to the untreated syt i knockdown cells. therefore, when syt iv is upregulated with forskolin, syt i functionally allows release of catecholamine-containing vesicles; whereas, when syt i is abolished by the shrna targeting syt i, upregulation of syt iv causes an even greater reduction in release events.

stimulated influx of intracellular ca2+ is not reduced after forskolin treatment in syt i knockdown cells
in addition to activating creb-mediated transcription, in some cells forskolin-induced camp production also leads to release of ca2+ from intracellular stores  <cit> . we were concerned that forskolin treatment could result in a secondary increase in intracellular ca2+ levels  and induce transmitter release. to determine whether forskolin treatment altered levels of intracellular i by release of ca2+ from intracellular stores or influx of extracellular ca2+, we used fura- <dig> to image ca2+ and measured relative levels of resting and stimulated i. resting ca2+ levels in untreated and forskolin-treated control, syt i knockdown and ct cells were unaffected by forskolin-treatment . with high k+ stimulation, each group of cells responded with an expected ~4-fold increase in i. treatment with forskolin did not enhance or prevent influx of extracellular ca2+ in response to depolarization in any of the cell groups . thus, forskolin does not alter extracellular ca2+ entering the cell, nor does it induce or alter intracellular release of ca2+ from stores. this is in agreement with previous results that show that some clonal lines of pc <dig> cells do not have major intracellular ca2+ stores  <cit> , or that some pc <dig> cells lack the receptors to activate release from stores  <cit> .

overexpression of syt iv confirms that syt iv inhibits ca release in syt i knockdown cells
to determine that the reduced transmitter release was specific to syt iv upregulation and not due to other effects caused by forskolin-mediated camp production, we transiently co-transfected the cells with two plasmids, one that expresses the human isoform of syt iv and one that expresses enhanced green fluorescent protein  in a 10: <dig> μg ratio, respectively. transfections were performed in control pc <dig> cells and two different, independent, stable syt i knockdown cell lines  that each had abolished expression of syt i. to determine that the exogenously expressed syt iv protein was expressed in egfp-expressing pc <dig> cells, we used immunocytochemistry with an anti-syt iv antibody that detects both human and rat syt iv, and an antibody that detects egfp. figure 3a shows untransfected  and co-transfected  pc <dig> cells stained for syt iv , egfp , and nuclei . in the top images, the syt iv antibody shows that syt iv is endogenously expressed at low levels in the control pc <dig> cells. from an image analysis using imagej software, the percentage of fluorescing pixels/cell was measured from the red channel depicting syt iv expression and from the blue channel depicting the nuclei stain. the ratio of the pixel percentages was compared between the red and blue channels. in the lower images, overexpressed syt iv is expressed at greater levels  than endogenously expressed syt iv. a merge of the red and green images shows that co-transfected cells stained for both syt iv and egfp. from three independent experiments, we determined that nearly 100% of the egfp-expressing cells also stained for overexpressed syt iv. therefore, we were confident that when we recorded from egfp-expressing cells that those chosen cells also overexpressed the plasmid expressing human syt iv.

we used amperometry to measure individual release events from the control and syt i knockdown cells that were co-transfected with syt iv and egfp plasmids. figure 3b shows an example amperometry recording from a control cell  and that has overexpressed syt iv. figure 3c shows an example recording of a syt i knockdown cell that has overexpressed syt iv. after ~ <dig> sec of baseline recording, the solution was changed to a high k+ stimulating solution for  <dig> min . the plot in figure 3d shows that the average number of events per cell was reduced  in the two independent stable syt i knockdown cell lines  compared to the non-transfected control cells, as expected for cells that lack syt i. there was also a reduction  in the number of events per cell between the control cells and syt i knockdown cells  when syt iv was overexpressed. although there was no difference in the average number of events in control cells that express endogenous levels of syt i when transfected with psyt iv compared to non-transfected cells , one of the two syt i knockdown cell lines  showed a significant decrease  in the average number of events when syt iv was overexpressed compared to non-transfected syt ib knockdown cells. the total number of events was reduced for the syt i knockdown cells compared to control cells. the total number of events was reduced further when syt iv was overexpressed compared to the non-transfected cells. these numbers of events follow a similar trend as seen in the syt i knockdown cells that had syt iv upregulated by forskolin.

to confirm that the reduced number of release events detected from individual cells was characteristic of the population of forskolin-treated syt i knockdown cells, high performance liquid chromatography-electrochemical detection  was used to measure norepinephrine  release from populations of cells. figure 3e shows the amount of ne release detected from each group of cells after  <dig> min of stimulation with high k+. there were no significant differences between control and ct cells with or without forskolin treatment. similar to the single vesicle release measurements detected with amperometry, stimulated ne release was significantly reduced  in untreated syt i knockdown cells compared to untreated control cells, as well as in forskolin-treated syt i knockdown cells compared to forskolin-treated control cells. stimulated release of ne was decreased by half in forskolin-treated syt i knockdown cells compared to untreated syt i knockdown cells .

syt iv does not alter amplitude or quantal content of vesicle release
individual amperometric spike events can be analyzed on expanded time scales to evaluate such parameters as spike amplitude and quantal content that are correlated to the amount of neurotransmitter molecules contained within the vesicles  <cit> . previously, others have determined that quantal content is correlated to the relative diameter of the vesicle, with small events corresponding to small vesicles, and larger events corresponding to ldcvs  <cit> . furthermore, analysis of the spike kinetics describe the fusion pore expansion by the rate of rise, and the half-width of the spike corresponds to the diffusion of transmitter from the vesicle as the vesicle fuses with the plasma membrane  <cit> . quantitative analysis of the amperometric spike shows that the mean peak amplitude was similar in untreated and forskolin-treated control cells, syt i knockdown cells and ct cells . the integrated area under the spike events is calculated as the charge or quantal content per vesicle shown in figure 4b. there were no significant differences regardless of forskolin-treatment in control and syt i knockdown cells in the quantal content per vesicle released. this indicates that the amount of transmitter released per event was not different between the cells that had syt iv upregulated or abolished syt i expression.

a gaussian distribution of measured quantal content will depict the range of vesicle diameters released from cells. integrated charge over time  is proportional to vesicle volume assuming that transmitter concentration is the same for all vesicles and that release of vesicle content results in complete emptying. under these assumptions, the cubed root of the quantal charge  is directly proportional to vesicle diameter  <cit> . to determine whether a specific population of vesicles had failed to be released from cells that had increased syt iv expression, a cumulative distribution histogram of the cubed root of quantal content  was plotted versus the number of events for all of the control and syt i knockdown cells . in each histogram , the data for the untreated control and forskolin-treated control cells are best described by a single gaussian. the means of the histograms are shown on each plot, and are similar to one another, ranging from  <dig>  pc1/ <dig> to  <dig>  pc1/ <dig>  each of the syt i knockdown cell groups, either with or without forskolin treatment to upregulate syt iv, were similar to control cells in their distribution of vesicle population. however, the total number of events was largely reduced in the syt i knockdown cells which affects the amplitude of the distribution histogram. because the means and distributions exhibit similar cubed roots of quantal content , there was no apparent loss of one population of vesicles, only an apparent reduction in total number of vesicles released from syt i knockdown cells.

analysis of the amperometry events measured from each type of cell with overexpressed syt iv had similar peak amplitudes and quantal contents as the cells with upregulated syt iv using forskolin. additionally, the cubed root of the quantal content and gaussian histograms gave similar ranges of means, and no apparent loss of vesicle population. therefore, in pc <dig> cells that express endogenous syt i or cells stably transfected with shrna to target syt i knockdown, there is no difference between averaged amplitudes or quantal content of packaged transmitter when syt iv is upregulated or overexpressed, nor is there any specific loss of one population of vesicles for release compared to another, such as small clear vesicles compared to ldcvs.

overexpression of syt iv alters the fusion kinetics
we analyzed each of the release events measured from the various groups of cells to determine whether the properties of the fusion pore expansion and transmitter diffusion were affected when syt iv expression was upregulated by forskolin treatment, or overexpressed by transfection, compared to control cells. there were no differences in the half-width of the spikes for either the upregulated syt iv or overexpressed syt iv. figure 4c shows the rate of rise  was significantly slowed in both the control cells and the syt i knockdown cells when syt iv was overexpressed, but not when syt iv was upregulated with forskolin treatment. the rising phase exhibited the same slowed kinetics. therefore, overexpression of syt iv slowed the rate of fusion pore expansion, but did not affect the rate of transmitter diffusion from the vesicle .

syt iv reduced the number of transmitter molecules released from syt i knockdown cells
the faraday equation, n = qtot/ne, calculates the number of oxidized ca molecules per cell  released, where qtot is total charge per cell, n is two electrons per oxidized molecule of ca, and e is the elemental charge . for each cell, we calculated the total charge per cell  by multiplying the average charge measured per vesicle  by the total number of events per cell. tables  <dig> and  <dig> show the summary of the averaged released number of ca molecules/cell for each group. in table  <dig>  the number of molecules released from untreated syt i knockdown cells were reduced compared to the untreated control cells , as were the number of molecules released from forskolin-treated syt i knockdown cells compared to forskolin-treated control cells . similar results are shown in table  <dig> that compares the effects of overexpression of syt iv in the syt i knockdown cells to control cells. to be certain that the reduction in number of molecules in the syt i knockdown cells were not due to a failure of the cells to synthesize ldcvs, we confirmed that each of the groups of cells contained ldcvs with electron microscopy . however, without three-dimensional reconstructions of cells, it is not clear if there is a reduction in the number of synthesized vesicles, or if ldcvs have a smaller volume reflecting a possible reduced content of stored ca. even so, these data together indicate that syt iv does not substitute for syt i to support evoked release, but instead, upregulation of syt iv expression further inhibits release of vesicle contents.

the faraday equation was used to calculate the average number of ca molecules per cell from the total charge per cell  <cit> .

the faraday equation was used to calculate the average number of ca molecules per cell from the total charge per cell  <cit>  .

stimulated npy release is not rescued by syt iv
the results described above summarize the effect of forskolin-induced syt iv expression on regulated ca release in the presence and absence of syt i. cas are reported to be localized to both small vesicles and ldcvs  <cit> . previous reports show that syt iv is localized to ldcvs and regulates the fusion mechanism for ldcvs in syt i-expressing pc <dig> cells  <cit> . the "core" of ldcvs is composed of many secretory peptides including npy  <cit> . therefore, we tested whether syt iv mediates the release of npy from ldcvs, and whether this is dependent upon the presence of syt i.

we used an immunoassay to measure stimulated npy release from control and syt i knockdown cells treated with forskolin and compared to untreated cells. figure 6b shows that npy release was greatly reduced in two independent syt i knockdown cell lines compared to control cells. both shrna-syt ia and ic stable cell lines exhibit reduced npy release normalized to total protein compared to control cells . similarly, in the same cells that had upregulated syt iv expression following forskolin treatment, release of npy remained significantly reduced compared to control cells treated with forskolin . reduced release of npy was not rescued by forskolin-upregulated syt iv expression. thus, syt iv does not act redundantly for syt i to restore npy release in syt i knockdown cells.

discussion
in the current experiments, we have studied the role that syt iv plays in regulating release of cas and npy from vesicles without interference from the primary syt isoform, syt i. previously, we showed that syt i plays a differential role in regulating release of these two transmitters  <cit> . in this study, we show that in cells that express syt i, neither upregulated syt iv nor overexpressed syt iv affects the number of ca release events measured from single cells , nor does syt iv affect ca release measured from populations of cells by hplc . similarly, in cells that expressed syt i, there were no effects of syt iv upregulation on npy release .

conversely, in cells that had syt i expression abolished, the number of ca release events was reduced compared to control cells that endogenously expressed both syt i and iv . in the syt i knockdown cells, increased syt iv expression resulted in reduced ca release events. in a recent study by arthur et al. , they speculated that syt iv knockout mice have vesicles that are more fusogenic, which would support our finding that increased syt iv expression results in less fusogenic vesicles. npy release was also reduced in these cells, but not reduced any more than what was observed in cells that lacked syt i with endogenous syt iv levels . previously, there was speculation that syt iv mediates neuropeptide secretion from ldcvs  <cit> , however, we did not observe any rescue of npy release in cells that lacked syt i and expressed syt iv . recently, in a study measuring exocytosis of oxytocin and vasopressin, peptides secreted from ldcvs from the posterior pituitary, syt iv was shown to affect the ca2+ dependency for exocytosis  <cit> . in that study, syt iv knockout mice responded to low levels of ca2+ entry with greater exocytosis of vesicles, and to higher levels of ca2+ with less exocytosis of vesicles  <cit> . therefore, in pc <dig> cells, syt iv plays an inhibitory role in vesicle release that is revealed when syt i is not expressed. together, these data indicate that syt iv does not substitute for syt i to support ca2+-dependent release of transmitter from vesicles.

the average distribution of quantal content was measured for each of the upregulated syt iv and syt i knockdown cells, and compared to control cells. from the cubed root analysis of the average charge measured per vesicle  there was no apparent loss of one population of vesicles over another based on means of the distribution histograms in figure  <dig>  only an apparent reduction in total number of vesicles released from syt i knockdown cells. average amplitude and charge per vesicle are unaffected . the number of ca molecules released was not significantly different when syt iv was upregulated or overexpressed in syt i expressing cells . however, there was a reduction in number of ca molecules released when control cells were compared to syt i knockdown cells with endogenous expression of syt iv . a similar reduction of ca molecules released was observed for the control syt i knockdown cells when syt iv expression was either upregulated or overexpressed . our results agree with two previous studies that each used overexpression of syt iv in pc <dig> cells in the presence of syt i: a decreased number of transmitter molecules was released  <cit> , and many fewer vesicles were released than from control cells without increasing extracellular stimulation conditions  <cit> .

many possibilities could explain the reduced number of ca molecules released from cells that have syt i expression abolished and syt iv expression increased. the first possibility is that forskolin treatment causes a reduction of intracellular ca2+ influx; however, we report here that forskolin does not alter the influx of intracellular ca2+ in any of the cell groups . a second possibility is that release of fewer ca molecules is due to a reduction in the number of vesicles synthesized. in fact, in a recent study from syt iv knockout mice, synaptic vesicles were reduced in numbers synthesized, and in their targeting to proper release sites  <cit> . we compared electron micrographs from control and syt i knockdown cells that had endogenous syt iv levels expressed or syt iv levels upregulated by forskolin, and each cell group had ldcvs readily apparent. therefore, ldcvs were synthesized in each of the cells; however, without serial reconstruction of the cells, we cannot quantify or properly localize the vesicles to address a possible reduction in total number of vesicles synthesized. furthermore, syt iv may be inhibiting ca2+-triggered vesicle fusion mediated via the snare/phospholipids, an effect that becomes more pronounced when syt i is not expressed, thus revealing a role for syt iv that is masked when syt i is expressed. interestingly, in a study using drosophila neuromuscular junction, evoked release could be inhibited by increasing the ratio of syt iv to syt i expression  <cit> .

we show that kinetic analysis of amperometric spikes measured from both control and syt i knockdown cells that had overexpressed syt iv exhibited a reduced rate of rise of the spike, indicating that expansion of the fusion pore required a longer time to open to release the transmitter contents compared to control cells . fusion kinetics were unaffected in either syt i knockdown cells or control cells that had upregulated syt iv expression. no other kinetic changes were observed in any of the cell types with or without syt i targeted or in cells with increased syt iv expression. one possible explanation is that endogenous levels of syt iv expression are relatively low until increased by either forskolin treatment or overexpression. by overexpressing syt iv, we have bypassed the regulatory machinery of syt iv expression and syt iv is constantly expressed. overexpression likely leads to unregulated and possibly greater expression of syt iv than by forskolin treatment, although because pc <dig> cells have low transfection efficiency, it is difficult to quantify the levels of overexpression of syt iv protein compared to upregulation by forskolin using immunoblot analysis. in a study in syt i-expressing hippocampal neurons that had overexpressed syt iv, no changes in fusion kinetics were observed  <cit> , and in syt i-expressing pc <dig> cells that had syt iv overexpressed, decreased fusion pore stability was observed  <cit> . in our study, we have used the human syt iv rather than rat syt iv for the overexpression studies. even though the sequence is mostly conserved, the human isoform may have somewhat different ca2+ binding properties than the rat isoform, which to our knowledge, has not been directly measured. however, differences in ca2+ binding affinities have been reported in drosophila, whose syt iv isoform has been shown to have a higher affinity for ca2+ than rat syt iv  <cit> . unlike drosophila syt iv, rat syt iv does not participate in ca2+-dependent binding of phospholipids  <cit> . both homologues can form hetero-oligomers with other syt isoforms  <cit> . additionally, syt iv has been shown to establish linear ca2+ dependence of vesicle release from mouse auditory ribbon synapses  <cit> . these results implicate syt iv as having a modulatory effect on vesicle release, that may be dependent upon an expressed ratio of syt i and syt iv in different vesicles, and at different synapses, an idea that was confirmed in a drosophila study  <cit> .

because pc <dig> cells normally express low levels of endogenous syt iv, syt i may dominate the phenotype and therefore the function of syt iv by having a higher affinity for ca2+ and therefore outcompeting endogenous levels of syt iv for ca2+. alternatively, because it has been shown that syt i and iv colocalize at the same vesicles  <cit> , by knocking down expression of syt i, another mechanism may become activated that compensates for syt i in the release machinery which is the target for syt iv. this observation would then become more apparent with an increase of syt iv expression in the absence of syt i.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that syt iv inhibits release of transmitters from pc <dig> cells that lack the primary ca2+ sensor, syt i. we show that in syt i knockdown cells, ca and npy release is reduced compared to control cells, and that regardless of how syt iv expression is increased, syt iv does not substitute to rescue the release. with the development of the syt iv knockout mouse, others have begun to determine how syt iv may function as a modulator of transmitter release. however, more studies are needed to determine the exact mechanism of action of a syt isoform that is ca2+-independent, but that in some cases displays ca2+-dependent activities and promotes release, while in other cases, acts to inhibit ca2+-dependent transmitter release.

