BACKGROUND
archeological findings have indicated that the 'mother of all poultry' is the southeast  asian red jungle fowl  . since domestication of chicken has been observed at the indus valley as early as  <dig>  bc, it is believed to be the epicenter of chicken domestication  <cit> . however, later day excavations in peiligan neolithic sites of china have raised questions about the exclusive domestication at indus valley, suggesting alternate and possibly earlier domestication centers  <cit> . it is proposed that g. gallus, the wild rjf found in the forests of se asia and india, spread to other parts of the world when people domesticated the chicken, resulting in many chicken breeds  <cit> . subsequent to domestication, the extensive breeding programmes have resulted in sixty or so breeds of chicken representing four distinct lineages: egg-type, game, meat-type and bantam  <cit> . while some authors suggest monophyletic origin of domestic chicken  <cit> , others provide evidence for multiple and independent domestication events  <cit> . such inconsistent observations are attributable to the fact that the initial studies were done with relatively small set of samples. in all these reported studies the native rjfs of indian sub-continent, g. g. murghi were not represented in the analyses due to lack of sequence or molecular marker information on this group of birds.

taxonomically, genus gallus is composed of four species, g. gallus , g. lafayettei , g. varius  and g. sonneratii . presently there are  <dig> sub-species of rjf, g. g. gallus , and g. g. spadiceus, g. g. bankiva, g. g. murghi  and g. g. jabouillei  <cit> . these classifications are mainly based on phenotypic traits and geographic distribution of the populations. in literature, wild and domesticated birds are often referred to as 'fowls' and 'chicken', respectively. the domestic chicken is considered either as a sub-species of rjf  or as a separate species, g. domesticus. however, tight clustering of the different sub-species discounts this existing taxonomical hierarchy  <cit>  rendering sub-species status within rjf redundant.

besides the taxonomical intricacies, the researchers are also concerned about the genetic integrity and conservation status of the rjf in the wild and those held in avicultural collections. it is suspected that the domestic chicken is hybridizing with the wild rjf resulting in erosion of genetic purity of the wild birds  <cit> . most of these earlier studies are based on either phenotypic characters or dna analyses confined to small samples. phylogenetic analyses of mitochondrial d-loop sequence and nuclear genes have indicated possible hybridization between gjf-rjf/domestic birds  <cit> . in the light of these reports it is important to assess the genetic uniqueness of indian rjfs not only from conservation point of view, but also for using them in population studies.

it is well known that the patterns of genetic differences can reveal the demographic history of the population under study. since changes in population size leave characteristic molecular signatures, by measuring such changes one can reconstruct the population history. mismatch distributions, also known as 'pairwise differences' give information on genetic differences between pairs of subjects and can be used to understand the population history  <cit> . mitochondrial dna  is inherited maternally  <cit>  and is often employed in population genetic analyses due to its high copy number, haploid nature and absence of/rare recombination events  <cit> . a recent study involving the analysis of chicken mitochondrial dna sequence from pre-historical samples pointed pre-columbian polynesian origin of american breeds  <cit> , thus suggesting the importance of mitochondrial d-loop sequence in determining the history of chicken domestication. microsatellite markers, on the other hand, are nuclear markers and are used extensively in population genetic analyses because they are highly polymorphic, ubiquitously distributed throughout the genome, are having high mutation rates, co-dominant in nature, selectively neutral and are amenable to pcr-based high through-put analysis  <cit> . hilel et al.  <cit>  characterized  <dig> chicken breeds using  <dig> microsatellite markers and concluded that the origin of domestic chicken to be from rjfs, as supported by mt dna analyses  <cit> .

in all the earlier studies these two marker systems have been used independently to study chicken populations  <cit> . in the present study we have combined the results emanating from these two informative marker systems to address the questions relating to  evolutionary status of indian rjf and chicken and  extent of gene flow between indian rjf and chicken, rjf-gjf in comparison to the world population.

RESULTS
genetic identity of indian fowls
in the present study, phylogenetic and demographic profiling analyses were carried out using  <dig> indian birds that belong to seven populations. we employed  <dig> microsatellite markers and also sequenced  <dig> bp of hyper variable region  of mitochondrial genomes of two species of fowls namely g. sonneratii  and g. gallus, which includes two subspecies g. g. murghi,  and g. g. domesticus .

totally there were  <dig> alleles from  <dig> microsatellite loci, of which,  <dig> were from g. g. murghi, and  <dig> were from g. g. domesticus chicken. the locus mcw <dig> gave the maximum number of alleles in g. g. murghi and in g. sonneratii, while vitiig <dig> locus revealed the maximum number of alleles in g. g. domesticus . the total number of private alleles was maximum in g. g. murghi followed by g. g. domesticus and g. sonneratii, respectively. population-wise mean number of alleles per locus ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  , with a mean heterozygosity ranging from  <dig>   to  <dig>  .

*no. of alleles obtained in the present study.

when the  <dig> birds were subdivided into seven groups  and analyzed for hardy-weinberg equilibrium , of the  <dig> combinations   <dig> deviated from hwe, with  <dig> deviations occurring in g. g. murghi alone and  <dig> in g. g. domesticus group . we speculate that g. g. murghi is probably not in hwe because of inbreeding within the fragmented populations. the low fst values among g. g. murghi as compared to g. g. domesticus birds also suggested possible inbreeding within g. g. murghi populations. the average fst was  <dig>  within g. g. murghi, while it was  <dig>  within g. g. domesticus . the amova estimation based on  <dig> permutations using genalex showed a significant  within population variation . upon grouping the  <dig> indian birds as domestic and rjf, the microsatellite markers showed a significant variation 'among the groups'  than 'within the group' .

note: rjf – g. g. murghi populations. m – morni hill, b – birshi kargah, k – kalesar. c, j and m represent g. g. domesticus from chicken, jodhpur and mirpur bakshiwala populations. gjf – g. sonneratii .

population-wise nei's genetic distance calculated using genalex program showed a higher average distance between g. sonneratii and g. g. domesticus  than between g. sonneratii – g. g. murghi  and g. g. murghi – g. g. domesticus  combinations . intra-population average distances were lower for both domestic and rjf groups than across the population distances, which is consistent with the observation that among population variation was more than within population variation. the results suggest very rare genetic exchange between the rjf and domestic chicken populations, at least in recent history.

a maximum likelihood  tree obtained from the microsatellite data showed a clear separation of g. g. domesticus from the g. g. murghi, with g. sonneratii as an outgroup  suggesting the genetic distinctness of g. g. murghi. however, rare instances of hybridization between indian rjf and domestic birds cannot be excluded in nature as seen in one case .

we also constructed a genetic distance based neighbor-joining  tree to obtain the genetic relationship among indian birds. the result clearly points to the fact that hybridization between indian chicken and indian rjf g. g. murghi in the wild is extremely rare .

to understand the clustering pattern of birds, we also carried out genetic distance based principal component analysis   of domestic and rjf birds, using genalex. the results showed clear segregation of all domestic birds into a single quadrate of the pca , which did not include any rjf. however, the population of rjfs did not segregate according to the location/population, suggesting the possibility of inbreeding within the rjf populations. this result further supports the absence of hybridization between rjf and domestic birds in india, at least in recent times.

we also sequenced and analyzed  <dig> bp of the d-loop region of  <dig> indian birds to derive the matrilineal population history by using coalescent-based models.

the pairwise fst values calculated using arlequin were very low within g. g. murghi when compared to g. g. domesticus . the average fst values were more for g. sonneratii – g. g. domesticus combination than for g. sonneratii-g. g. murghi or g. g. murghi – g. g. domesticus combinations. contrary to microsatellite based analysis, mitochondrial analysis showed a lower mean pairwise fst value for g. sonneratii – g. g. domesticus combination. these results again point out that there is hardly any genetic exchange across the three categories of birds, namely gjf, rjf and domestic birds.

to understand the demographic history of the two populations, we obtained pairwise mismatch distribution estimates. in an expanding population, mismatch distribution is expected to be a bell shaped smooth curve, whereas population at constant growth shows raggedness. in the present study, observed mismatch distribution was bell-shaped for  <dig> indian birds of g. g. murghi . however, appearance of multiple peaks suggested a population subdivision, which was more prominent in g. g. domesticus than in g. g. murghi. this also suggests homogenous population of g. g. murghi, again supporting our notion that inbreeding is more common in rjf than in domestic birds. harpending's raggedness index was lower in g. g. murghi  than in g. g. domesticus , but was significant  in both the populations reiterating population expansion.

phylogeny and median-joining network profiles of indian birds in comparison to global populations
in the present study we also compared the d-loop sequence of  <dig> birds with the corresponding sequences  of  <dig> birds from ncbi genbank to get insight into phylodemographic status of g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus . of the  <dig> sequences,  <dig> were from rjfs,  <dig> were from domestic chicken and the rest belonged to other species of gallus. these  <dig> birds were classified into  <dig> groups based on geographical location and species/sub-species status as shown in table  <dig>  we included japanese quail, coturnix japonica as an outgroup whenever necessary.

* misc. represents birds from iran, uk and vietnam. nc – not calculated.

all the  <dig> sequences resulted in  <dig> segregating sites and  <dig> haplotypes with a haplotype diversity of  <dig>  and an average nucleotide diversity of  <dig> . the nj tree generated from the haplotype data revealed two distinct g. gallus clusters, one consisting of the g. g. bankiva group, and the remaining cluster containing all the other groups namely, g. g. spadiceus, g. g. gallus, g. g. murghi, g. g. jabouillei and g. g. domesticus. irrespective of the geographic distribution and sub-species status, more than 95% of the birds clustered within this single largest group . this result is consistent with the neighbor-joining tree of all  <dig> birds , where we observed a single clade for all domestic and rjf birds. however, in contrast to fumihito et al.'s work  <cit> , we observed a clear segregation of a clade containing g. varius, g. lafayettei and g. sonneratii from all rjf/domestic bird combination, which reassures us about the absence of the hybridization. such a topology was also evident from the haplotype-based tree 

to obtain further insight into the haplotype relationships, we constructed a median-joining network using  <dig> haplotypes. in the haplotype network, most of the g. g. gallus formed individual nodes  and clustered independently, while many g. g. murghi haplotypes  grouped around a major cluster  having  <dig> birds, giving rise to a star like phylogeny . the largest haplotype h_ <dig>  confined mostly to chinese g. g. domesticus birds without any representation of jungle fowls. thirty nine birds of g. g. spadiceus belonging to  <dig> haplotypes did not have any representation from g. g. murghi birds. the second largest haplotype  shared only a single individual of g. g. gallus and many g. g. domesticus from china, india, japan and indonesia. forty-three g. g. domesticus of india  were distributed throughout the network. these haplotypes were connected with g. g. gallus, g. g. murghi and g. g. spadiceus. the haplotype h_ <dig> contained g. g. domesticus  birds reported in the present study as well as from an earlier study  <cit> . interestingly, majority of the indian g. g. domesticus haplotypes shared the birds from the three major g. gallus groups belonging to g. g. spadiceus , g. g. gallus , and also g. g. murghi . it is very likely that g. g. spadiceus has also contributed to the domestic chicken. apart from indian rjf, g. g. murghi haplotype h_ <dig> also contained  <dig> chinese,  <dig> iranian and  <dig> japanese domestic chicken. the distribution of indian domestic chicken into different haplotypes could imply multiple origins of indian domestic chicken breeds.

the sequenced regions of d-loop were well conserved in most of the birds. the  <dig> bp insertion element found in g. sonneratii was the only indel of considerable size present in the whole sequence. the salient mutation observed in g. g. murghi was the presence of 't' in most of the birds   that was present in only  <dig> % of g. g. gallus,  <dig> % of g. g. spadiceus and  <dig> % of all the g. g. domesticus birds. only three indian g. g. domesticus  had 't' at this position. this position corresponds to the nucleotide number  <dig>  in the complete mitochondrial genome sequence of g. gallus  available in genbank. across the portion of the sequenced mitochondrial genome we observed that transition to transversion ratio was lower in case of g. g. murghi  than in g. g. gallus  or g. g. spadiceus .

mismatch distribution analyses carried out under sudden expansion model showed that mean pairwise differences were highest in g. g. murghi among g. gallus sub-species. however, another species of gallus, g. sonneratii had the highest mean pairwise differences . both tajima's d and fu's fs were significantly  negative in g. g. murghi, suggesting the departure from neutrality . tajima's d was significant only in g. g. spadiceus and g. g. murghi. fu's fs, a better indicator for estimating the departures from neutral theory, showed a significant negative value  for g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus . nucleotide diversity was also high  in case of g. g. murghi  amongst all the groups studied .

the fst values showed a very high differentiation between the out group c. japonica and the other  <dig> populations, with a value above  <dig> . most of the pairwise fst values were significant with a p value <  <dig> . fst value  <cit>  based nj tree showed the divergence of g. g. murghi from g. g. gallus, g. g. spadiceus and g. g. domesticus . amova calculations showed that the majority of variation found within g. gallus subspecies was between the domestic and jungle fowl populations , while 'among the group' variation was 7% with an overall fst value of  <dig>  .

discussion
in the present study we attempted to understand the contribution of indian red jungle fowl, g. g. murghi to the domestication event. as of now, no sequence information is available from this group of birds which, in all likelihood, was contributor of one of the earliest known chicken domestication event, i.e. in mohanjo-daro. we studied indian birds belonging to two species of gallus and compared them with the worldwide bird populations. since microsatellite markers and the d-loop sequence of mitochondrial dna have a high mutation rates, they provide information about recent evolutionary history as compared to slow mutating genes that provide data about ancient history  <cit> . to reconstruct the recent past, we used both these marker systems and also addressed the issue of genetic purity of wild birds.

from the mtdna analysis, we observed that a group of g. g. domesticus birds had the g. g. murghi haplotype , while a few others shared haplotypes with g. g. gallus  and with g. g. spadiceus . this is also true for indian chicken that have originated by independent domestication from g. g. murghi as well as possibly from other g. g. subspecies. interestingly, sharing of different haplotypes by indian domestic chicken clarify that the present day asiatic chicken might have originated from different progenitors by multiple domestication events and such multi-origin breeds could still be observed in a single geographical location. this is consistent with the observation of oka et al.  <cit> , who showed that the present day native japanese chicken are having multiple origin.

a model explaining the origin of indian domestic bird by multiple domestications is depicted schematically in fig.  <dig>  sharing of haplotypes, as indicated in this model, suggests multiple origins to indian domestic chicken. independent domestications have also been reported for cattle  <cit> , pig  <cit>  suggesting that such events are not rare. however, all the birds except g. g. bankiva form a single cluster suggesting a common ancestor long back in history for these birds including jungle fowls and domestic birds. the separation of g. g. bankiva from the main cluster of birds indicates the possibility of a speciation event.

the multilocus microsatellite data as well as the d-loop sequence of indian chicken showed departure from neutrality as indicated by significant negative value of tajima's d and fu's fs for g. g. murghi suggesting the possible population expansion of indian birds. these results are also consistent with mismatch distribution analyses and significant value for harpending's raggedness index . taken together with the genetic diversity analyses, we surmise that g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus  must have undergone population expansion. it is believed that population expansion follows a domestication event. this fact holds true even in case of chicken, where we did observe population expansion, as did previous studies.

our analyses revealed that the sampled indian birds are relatively pure with very rare hybridization between g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus . nishibori et al.  <cit>  suggested the hybridization of rjf with domestic and grey jungle fowl. in the present study of indian birds, we did not come across noticeable hybridization at least in the recent past, as indicated by very low fst values for mtdna  and microsatellite markers and also a clear separation of rjf clades from domestic chicken in microsatellite based phylogeny. all these results indicate the genetic integrity of the g. g. murghi.

in the present study, we observed predominant occurrence of a characteristic 't' nucleotide in  <dig> % of g. g. murghi birds that is absent in most of the indian domestic chicken further supporting the occurrence of negligible hybridization between g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus . all the sampled g. sonneratii had 'a' nucleotide in this position. if the frequent hybridization is occurring then it is expected that at least a few of g. g. murghi to have 'a' at this position. since we found only one rjf with 'a' at this site, and also due to clear separation of the clades, it is unlikely that g. g. murghi and g. sonneratii hybridize in the wild contrary to the observations made by nishibori et al.  <cit>  who suggested the possible hybridization between the rjf and gjf. such contrasting observations may be due to the limited number of samples  used by nisibori et al.  <cit> . taken together with the fumihito et. al.'s  <cit>  and liu et al.'s  <cit>  observations our results prompted us to question the sub-species status for g. g. gallus, g. g. spadiceus, g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus. in the light of these findings, we recommend that g. gallus should be classified as g. g. gallus that should include all rjfs and g. g. domesticus birds. at the same time, after confirmation of reproductive isolation, g. g. bankiva could be placed into a separate species, gallus bankiva.

CONCLUSIONS
for the first time by analyzing hitherto unreported samples of g. g. murghi and also including the g. g. domesticus , we confirm that the domestication of chicken has occurred independently from g. g. murghi. we also provide evidence that there is little genetic exchange between g. g. murghi and g. g. domesticus  and minimal hybridization between g. sonneratii and g. g. murghi. comparison of indian rjf and domestic bird to that of world population also supports the previous studies of obsoleteness of the sub-species status given to rjfs and domestic chicken.

