BACKGROUND

pseudomonas syringae is a widely-studied plant-pathogenic bacterium of interest as a model for analysis of the molecular bases of host-pathogen interactions and of epiphytic growth on plant leaf surfaces. this species can be subdivided into over  <dig> pathological variants or pathovars that are mainly distinguished by host range  <cit> . phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the p. syringae species have demonstrated that the species is grouped into four clades with some former pathovars such as p. cannabina and p. savastanoi re-elevated into separate species with their own subsets of pathovars  <cit> . genetic and genomic analyses of host range differentiation among p. syringae pathovars typically focus on differences in the repertoire of specific type iii effector proteins  <cit> . the type iii secretion system  is required for p. syringae pathogenesis and encodes a specialized delivery system functioning in the translocation of effector proteins directly into the cytoplasm of plant cells. type iii effectors function collectively to suppress plant defenses and to establish infections that result in plant cell death and release of nutrients to invading pathogen cells . genome sequence evidence indicates that many type iii effector genes were acquired via horizontal gene transfer; in addition, the location of many of these genes adjacent to mobile genetic elements facilitates their transfer to and relocation within genomes .

plasmids are critical sources for evolution due to their capacity to acquire foreign dna sequences and to their ability to affect their transfer among bacteria via self-encoded mechanisms such as conjugation and mobilization  <cit> . plasmids are viewed as major contributors to genome innovation and in many cases represent the first acquisition point for foreign dna sequences into a cell. plasmid sequences comprise a significant portion of the variable genome , that portion of the genome that does not encode basic survival functions but instead contributes to ecological fitness in specific habitats, lifestyles, or environmental conditions . bacterial plasmids tend to encode more mobile genetic elements than chromosomes, and undergo recombination at higher frequencies than chromosomes  <cit> . these facets of plasmid biology, along with the dispensability of plasmids to organism survival, empower plasmids as breeding grounds for the evolution of novel genetic determinants and for the distribution of these genes within a communal gene pool  <cit> .

the ppt23a plasmid family comprises a group of plasmids that appear to be indigenous to p. syringae and related organisms. ppt23a-family plasmids  typically range from  <dig> to 100 kb and share a conserved major replication gene repa and origin of replication  <cit> . the gene content of pfps encompasses genes encoding plasmid-specific functions, including two distinct gene sets encoding type iv secretion systems  specifying conjugation functions, and a variety of other genes either experimentally shown to or postulated to confer virulence or ecological fitness traits  <cit> . sequence and hybridization analyses have shown that individual pfps can encode genes that are distributed at population, pathovar, or species-specific levels . horizontal gene transfer has played a significant role in the evolution of pfps; for example, a phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that pfps were widely transferred among p. syringae pathovar hosts and that individual genes had been transferred among distinct pfps  <cit> . pfps have also acted as a repository for the acquisition of bactericide-resistance genes including copper resistance determinants and the streptomycin-resistance transposon tn <dig> .

to date, closed genomic sequences of twelve pfps are available from p. syringae pathovars phaseolicola, maculicola, syringae, tomato and actinidiae, p. cannabina pathovar  alisalensis, and p. savastanoi pv. savastanoi . however, acquisition of closed plasmid sequences has been difficult due to the presence of multiple repeated insertion sequence elements on some of these plasmids and due to the presence of multiple pfps in many p. syringae strains  <cit> . draft sequences of various p. syringae genomes are becoming available at a faster and faster rate . unfortunately, the presence of plasmids and especially of pfps in these genomes and an examination of their gene content is lacking. for example, in a comparative genomics study of p. syringae pathovars, it was noted that it was “difficult to truly identify presence of plasmids using short-read assembly information alone”  <cit> . in fact, we only found one p. syringae genomics study with significant information on plasmid genome content; results from this study indicated that most of the strain-specific genes identified in p. savastanoi pv. glycinea strains were located within plasmid dna sequences  <cit> .

we hypothesized that further understanding of the evolution of the ppt23a plasmid family and the role of these plasmids in p. syringae biology and pathogenesis required the determination and analysis of additional complete, closed plasmid genome sequences. thus, in this work we sequenced eight pfps and performed comprehensive bioinformatic analyses of these plasmids.

RESULTS
complete closed native plasmid sequences analysis
it is well known that the majority of strains belonging to the p. syringae group can harbor at least one indigenous plasmid  <cit> , although the number of harbored pfp plasmids can vary  <cit> . in addition, pfps have been shown to share a large amount of repeated sequences including insertion sequence elements  <cit> . these two facts can constitute a relevant bottleneck during plasmid isolation and sequencing  <cit> .

in light of the above mentioned potential problems, we selected eight different p. syringae strains for this study that were previously identified as harboring only one plasmid, in order to facilitate plasmid isolation and the subsequent sequencing process. thus, the complete closed sequences of eight different plasmids isolated from eight different p. syringae bacterial strains belonging to three pathovars were obtained . six of the eight plasmids were obtained from strains of the pathovar syringae isolated from diseased mango trees , sweet cherry , and ornamental pear . one plasmid was obtained from the pathovar garcae isolated from coffee, and the remaining plasmid was obtained from the pathovar tabaci isolated from tobacco. all of the plasmids analyzed in this study were previously identified to be pfps because they share the essential replication protein repa  <cit> . after plasmid isolation and purification using cscl-ethidium bromide gradients, sequencing was carried out using the roche  <dig> gs  platform with paired-end reads. pass filter reads  ranged from  <dig>  of ppg <dig> to  <dig>  of pps <dig>  and the mean read length ranged from  <dig> of pps6- <dig> to  <dig> of pps <dig>  contigs generated for the majority of plasmids were  <dig> with the exception of ppg <dig> plasmid that were  <dig>  in order to verify if the sequencing and subsequent assembly process were reliable, two different test methods were carried out. firstly, a pcr analysis using specific primers  designed on the plasmid initial and final raw sequences revealed that the  <dig> sequencing platform properly provided the closed circular plasmid sequences. second, the complete sequence of the plasmid pps <dig> obtained by two different sequencing platforms was compared using the blast  <dig> sequences tool from ncbi . this nucleotide comparison showed that the plasmid sequences were identical , and thus, validated the sequencing method used in this study.table  <dig> 
pseudomonas syringae strains used in this study


p. syringae

a ncppb, national collection of plant pathogenic bacteria 




the main characteristics of the different plasmids sequenced in this study and their genetic maps are summarized in table  <dig> and fig.  <dig> respectively. the full length closed circular dna sequences ranged from  <dig>  bp of pps <dig> and pps6- <dig> plasmids, to  <dig>  bp of the ppt0893- <dig> plasmid and the %gc content varied from  <dig> % of the plasmid ppg <dig>  to  <dig> % of the ppt0893- <dig> plasmid. annotation methods revealed that the number of orfs presented in the different plasmids ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and the percentage of hypothetical proteins present in each plasmid ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> %. to assign putative functions to the orfs predicted in each different plasmid, the sequence of each one was compared with the genbank database using blastx searches showing the homology to previously known gene sequences . the putative function of the different orfs and their representations in genetic maps  indicated the presence of common and different genes between all the plasmids. using the multiple genome alignment software mauve, we determined that the synteny of six  of the eight plasmids was very high . the ppg <dig> plasmid had some differences showing some rearrangement events, although this plasmid did share the type iva secretion system  and some genes related with maintenance and conjugation functions with the other six plasmids analyzed. the highest difference was shown by the ppt0893- <dig> plasmid; apart from some rearrangement events in comparison with the other plasmids, this plasmid carried the type ivb secretion system . interestingly, the physical co-localization of both different type iv systems was almost identical in all the plasmid sequences. schematic representation of the type iv mpft and type iv mpfi secretion systems from the sequenced plasmids, showed that they were practically identical to the type iv mpft system from the plasmid ppsr <dig> from p. syringae pv. syringae a <dig> and with the type iv mpfi system from the plasmid dc3000a from p. syringae pv. tomato dc <dig>  respectively . small differences could be identified only based on the presence or absence of some hypothetical proteins among the complete set of type iv genes.table  <dig> main characteristics of native plasmids sequenced in this study


copabcd
rulab

a hp, number and percentage of hypothetical protein  present in each plasmid


b the rula and rulb genes are located in different positions in the plasmid sequence and in different orientations


c phenotypic analyses performed previously of highlighted plasmids have demonstrated copper resistance , uv radiation tolerance , and conjugation transfer   <cit> 


fig.  <dig> circular genetic maps of pps <dig>  pps <dig>  pps <dig>  pps <dig>  pps6- <dig>  pps7b <dig>  ppg <dig> and ppt0893- <dig> plasmids. repa is defined as the orf <dig> in all plasmids analysis in this study. orfs are color-coded according to their putative functions. orfs involved in replication, stability and conjugation functions are colored in red. orfs involved in epiphytic fitness and p. syringae host-interactions are colored in green. orfs involved in copper detoxification are colored in blue. orfs involved in arsenic detoxification are colored in purple. the rulab operon is colored in orange. orfs predicted as hypothetical proteins are colored in yellow. putative directions of transcription of each orf, are indicated by an arrow. the identity of each orf is given inside the plasmid circular map, with the exception of the hypothetical proteins. plasmids maps are not drawn at scale




nucleotide comparisons of the eight native plasmids revealed that pps <dig> and pps6- <dig> were identical, although both were isolated from different plant hosts and from different continents. in addition, pps <dig> and pps <dig> showed few nucleotide sequence differences, being considered virtually identical plasmids. when the sequences from pps <dig> and pps7b <dig> were compared , both plasmids contained a portion of the genomic island gi <dig> from p. syringae pv. syringae b728a , with the difference that pps7b <dig> also harbored an operon involved in arsenic resistance , that is present in the gi <dig> genomic island but missing from pps <dig> 

comparative analysis of pfp gene content
many pfps from p. syringae strains have been described previously to improve the epiphytic fitness of their hosts. for example, the rulab operon that functions in dna repair, confers uv radiation tolerance and contributes to p. syringae survival on leaf surfaces . the characteristic rulab operon was identified in seven of the eight plasmids sequenced in this study. in the ppg <dig> plasmid, the rula gene is present in the same location and orientation compared to the other plasmids, but the rulb gene appeared nicked and the two different fragments  were located in different positions and in different orientations into the plasmid. among these two rulb fragments, we have found an insertion of dna of approximately  <dig>  kbp that harbors  <dig> different effectors of the t3ss .fig.  <dig> 
rulab dna region analysis of ppg <dig>  a plasmid map of ppg <dig> with the location of rula and rulb nicked genes, marked in light orange. integron-like element  of  <dig>  kbp among the rulb nicked gene marked with dotted red line. four putative type iii effectors are marked in green color. b representation of the non-coding region of the rula and the big part of rulb genes which contains the putative promoter sequences. the nucleotide sequences of both putative promoters  showing the proposed − <dig> box, − <dig> box and the tf binding sites; the nucleotide position is also indicated. the putative shine-dalgarno sequence was only found for the rula gene, and is shown in bold type





furthermore, in order to decipher if these genes could be putatively functional, the presence of the promoter and shine-dalgarno sequences were bioinfomatically sought for rula and for the largest fragment of rulb . promoter regions were determined for both rula and rulb, but a shine-dalgarno sequence was only found for the rula gene.

other important features commonly associated with pfps that improve the epiphytic fitness of p. syringae in agricultural ecosystems are the copper resistance genes  <cit> . although normally copper resistance genes appear forming the copabcd operon in p. syringae, different genetic structures have also been observed and characterized for their role in improving copper resistance  <cit> . two of the eight plasmids sequenced in this study  encoded the common copabcdrs operon, and a small metal binding protein that is slightly different in sizes between these two plasmids and that has not been previously described associated with this operon in plasmids. two other plasmids  contained a novel genetic structure with the cuscba operon, a copg gene, a copper chaperone, and a copper transcriptional regulator inserted into the copabcdrs operon; these determinants are related with the detoxification of monovalent cations .

plasmid conjugation has been described to be encoded by the type iv secretion system, and is the main mechanism for gene transfer among phytopathogenic bacteria  <cit> . it was noteworthy that some specific genes not observed previously in other plasmids forming a characteristic structure have been identified in seven of the eight plasmid sequences . these genes were located upstream of the type iv mpft secretion system genes and were delimited by a phage integrase. the arrangement of these genes was the following: 1) a luxr transcriptional regulator 2) an abc transporter substrate-binding protein, factor, 3) a xre/pbsx transcriptional regulator, 4) a nusg transcriptional regulator-termination protein, and then, the type iv mpft secretion system .

finally, pfp sequences have also been related with virulence function, mainly through encoding t3ss effectors and toxin genes  <cit> . in this study, type iii effectors were identified bioinfomatically in two plasmids . the ppt0893- <dig> plasmid harbored the effector hopbd <dig> that was also shared with the ppg <dig> plasmid. blast  <dig> sequence comparison revealed query coverage of 100%, with an identity of 97% . the effector hopbd <dig> and five others present in ppg <dig> were characterized further in order to predict in silico their functionality . bioinformatic predictions based on the presence of signal peptide, transmembrane domain, and the detection of hrp-boxes  within promoter sequences showed that five of the six putative type iii effectors predicted originally in ppg <dig>  could be functional and thus, play an important role in virulence. in addition, the vast amount of hypothetical proteins present on the different plasmids were analyzed to determine their putative role as effectors of the t3ss . bioinformatic predictions based on the presence of signal peptide, transmembrane domain, and amino acid sequences using the effective t <dig> tool, suggested that at least  <dig> hypothetical proteins could potentially function as type iii effectors. one hypothetical protein was found in pps <dig>  one in pps7b <dig>  and three in both ppg <dig> and ppt0893- <dig> .table  <dig> bioinformatic predictions of main characteristics of putative type iii effector proteins found in ppg <dig> plasmid


a transmembrane domains


b hrp-box is a cis promoter element recognized by the alternate sigma factor hrpl and is associated mainly with genes encoded in the type iii secretion system of plant pathogenic bacteria


c non-detected


h. proteinsa

a hypothetical proteins that meet the three requirements, in all the plasmids analyzed


b standard classification module: comprises effectors of escherichia coli, salmonella, chlamydia, yersinia, and pseudomonas



c plant classification module: comprises effector sequences from pseudomonas syringae



d
nd non-detected


e
np non-predicted





pseudomonas syringae pfps have been also demonstrated to encode other hrp-independent virulence factors such as enzymes for phytohormone biosynthesis, which are also encoded in plasmids from other plant pathogens  <cit> . ppt0893- <dig> is the unique plasmid from this study that encoded other potential virulence genes such as anthranilate synthase i and ii, involved in tryptophan synthesis, levansucrase c related with the synthesis of levan, and finally a diguanylate cyclase  potentially involved in cyclic di-gmp synthesis, a second messenger compound that is involved in virulence of plant and opportunistic human pseudomonas spp. pathogens and other plant pathogens .

phylogenetic analysis redefined the evolutionary history of ppt23a family plasmids
in order to unravel the evolutionary history of the p. syringae pfps, a phylogenetic analysis using  <dig> repa gene sequences from different p. syringae plasmids present in the ncbi database and the repa sequences from the eight plasmids sequenced in this study was performed. this phylogenetic analysis was conducted using two different methods: 1) using as the outgroup the repa sequences of two plasmids from xanthomonas citri pv. citri a <dig> , and 2) not using an outgroup . phylogenetic analysis using the repa outgroup sequences revealed the presence of four evolutionary groups as previously described , and the presence of a new group of plasmids designated as group “e” that was phylogenetically closely related with group a . this new group e, was comprised of plasmids previously characterized in group a; ppt0893- <dig> sequenced in this study was also included in this new group . the remaining seven plasmids sequenced in this study were grouped together, forming part of the already known group b . phylogenetic analysis carried out without the use of the outgroup sequences, showed the presence of two new groups “e” and “f”, that were basically composed of the plasmids belonging to the new group e described above , although the bootstrap value for the new group e was lower than  <dig>  in addition, these two new groups were more distantly related with group a of plasmids, in comparison with the previous phylogeny obtained using the outgroup sequences.fig.  <dig> evolutionary history of ppt23a family plasmid and their pseudomonas syringae and related pseudomonas hosts. a phylogenetic analysis of the complete repa sequences of ppt23a family plasmids from pseudomonas syringae and related strains, using as the outgroup the repa sequences of two plasmids  from xanthomonas citri pv. citri a <dig>  b phylogenetic analysis using the repa sequences from pseudomonas syringae plasmids, not including in this tree the outgroup plasmids. c phylogeny of pseudomonas syringae and related strains harboring plasmids from the ppt23a family was constructed based on the analysis of two concatenated housekeeping genes , using as the outgroup the gyrb-rpod sequences from xanthomonas citri pv. citri a <dig>  d phylogenetic analysis using the concatenated housekeeping genes  from pseudomonas syringae and related strains, not including in this tree the outgroup strain. the neighbor-joining tree was constructed by mega  <dig> using the jukes-cantor model. percent bootstrap values of more than 50%  are shown at the nodes. the topology of the different trees, was identical by using the minimum evolution and maximum parsimony methods. gray boxes: the outgroup plasmids and strain. black boxes: plasmids sequenced in this study. yellow boxes: corresponding with p. syringae strains that harbor two ppt23a plasmids, with each plasmid belonging to a different evolutionary cluster




the trees generated with the repa sequences were then compared to those derived from a multilocus sequence analysis using partial sequences of gyrb and rpod genes obtained from the database for some of the p. syringae strains included in the repa phylogeny, in order to evaluate the association of specific plasmids with specific host chromosomal genotypes. the phylogenetic groups generated were practically identical irrespective of using or not using outgroup sequences . following the color scale, we could observe how the evolutionary history of pfps and their bacterial hosts was incongruent. the p. syringae pv. syringae strains isolated from mango  along with the strain isolated from sweet cherry, formed a unique cluster. p. syringae pv. garcae  <dig>  grouped together with the other pv. garcae strain included in this study, and p. syringae pv. tabaci 0893– <dig> was grouped together with different pathovars of p. syringae .

in order to gain a greater understanding with respect to the evolutionary history of the ppt23a family, and how these plasmids could play a major role in p. syringae biology, the phylogenetic distribution based on the repa sequences  and its relationship with the host of isolation, and with other important genetic features of plasmids of this family  was analyzed . a total of  <dig> repa sequences were used for this purpose. from this analysis, we observed the presence of the original four groups, and the presence of one new group formed by pptdc3000a from p. syringae pv. tomato, and by the ppt0893- <dig> plasmid from the pv. tabaci, that was sequenced in this study. the rest of the plasmids sequenced in this study were placed in group b, and all of them harbored the rulab operon and the type iv mpft secretion system. to decipher if there were more genes shared by seven plasmids sequenced in this study that belonged to group b, an analysis of the core genome was carried out by using a venn diagram analysis . this analysis revealed that this sub-group of plasmids share  <dig> core genes related mainly with maintenance and mobilization functions.fig.  <dig> phylogenetic relationships predict a new sub cluster into the plasmid group b. a phylogenetic analysis using the repa sequences only from plasmids, whose their complete sequences are available in the database. the neighbor-joining tree was constructed by mega  <dig> using the jukes-cantor model. bootstrap values  are shown at the nodes. the plant host of isolation and the presence of some characteristic genes of the ppt23a family plasmids  are represented in the right columns beside each plasmid name. sht: sequence shorter than expected; imcomp: incomplete; *: rula and rulb genes located at different positions and orientations. b genomic diversity of the sub cluster of plasmids. each plasmid is represented by an oval. the number of orthologous protein-coding genes shared by all plasmids  is in the centre. overlapping regions show the number of coding sequences  conserved only within the specified plasmids. numbers in the non-overlapping portions of each oval show the number of cds unique to each plasmid. hypothetical proteins were not taking into account to this analysis




possibly the most interesting genes regarding plasmid-specific functions revealed by the core genome analysis could be related with the induction or repression of the conjugation system, and were present in seven of eight plasmids sequenced in this study. these genes included a luxr transcriptional regulator, an abc transporter, a xre/pbsx transcriptional regulator and a nusg transcriptional regulator-termination protein; all of them located upstream of the type iv mpft secretion system. interestingly, the xre/pbsx transcriptional regulator and the nusg transcriptional regulator-termination protein are also present upstream of the type iv mpfi secretion system of ppt0893- <dig>  a phylogenetic analysis was conducted for these genes independently , concatenated , and also using  <dig> concatenated core genes  and the complete plasmid sequences , from the seven plasmids that harbored the type iv mpft secretion system. the distribution showed for the different phylogenetic analysis was similar, and grouped together the plasmids that harbored copper resistance genes ; the plasmids that did not encode copper resistance were contained in two separate groups . these analyses held for each gene analyzed except nusg . also, this phylogenetic distribution was altered, when the repa phylogeny of the seven plasmids was used . three different groups were observed, plasmids encoding copper resistance genes , plasmids not harboring copper resistance genes , and another group with both copper resistance and copper sensitive plasmids . this altered phylogenetic distribution was not observed when the analysis was conducted using the  <dig> core genes and the complete plasmid sequences .fig.  <dig> phylogenetic distribution of putative signalling-like genes related with the conjugation system. the luxr transcriptional regulator, abc transporter, xre/pbsx transcriptional regulator and nusg transcriptional regulator-termination nucleotide sequences from the  <dig> plasmids of this study that harbor the type iv mpft secretion system, were used independently  and concatenated  to carry out a phylogenetic analysis. in addition, the phylogeny of these plasmids was carried out using the core genes obtained for these plasmids in this study  , using the repa sequences  and analyzing a concatenated dataset containing  <dig> core plasmid sequences . the neighbor-joining tree using the jukes-cantor model was generated by mega  <dig>  bootstrap values  are show on the branches. blue box: copper resistance plasmids. red box: non-copper resistance plasmids. purple box: copper resistance and non-resistance plasmids




discussion
we report the complete closed sequence and comparative genomics analysis of eight pfps from the plant pathogen p. syringae. as previously reported, pfps share the major replication gene repa  <cit> ; this major replication gene is the only gene currently known to be distributed among all plasmids of the ppt23a family. the ppt23a plasmid family is ubiquitous but not universal within the species p. syringae, as there have been strains isolated that do not contain any plasmids. however, most p. syringae strains studied contain one or multiple pfps; a unique feature of the ppt23a family is the coexistence of two to several pfps within individual p. syringae strains. the origin of multiple pfps within individuals may be through incremental acquisition of plasmids or through plasmid duplication events  <cit> . the compatibility of multiple pfps within the same host cell was originally hypothesized to be due to alterations in amino acid sequence at the c-terminus of repa  <cit> . however, more recent evidence has suggested that a putative control region sequence consisting of stem-loop structures upstream of repa enables compatibility of pfps if the sequence differs by only a few nucleotides  <cit> .

a previous phylogenetic analysis of pfps indicated incongruence between pfp phylogeny and host p. syringae pathovar phylogeny  <cit> . those results suggested that horizontal transfer had played a role in the current observed distribution of pfps within p. syringae, and that specific plasmid:pathovar relationships did not exist. experiments performed in vitro have demonstrated conjugative transfer for pfps, including some instances of interpathovar transfer  <cit> . our current results including the eight plasmids sequenced in this study and additional recent sequences from other studies confirmed this finding of incongruence of pfps and p. syringae host pathovars. furthermore, a phylogenetic analysis using a concatenated set of  <dig> conserved core ppfp sequences also supported the incongruence of pfps and individual p. syringae pathovars.

the major contribution of pfps to the ecological fitness and pathogenesis of p. syringae is through carriage of accessory genes. for example, pfps may encode any of the following genes including the rulab genes that confer resistance to ultraviolet radiation, type iii effector genes, toxin biosynthesis genes, indole acetic acid biosynthesis genes, levansucrase, and agriculturally-important resistance genes to copper or streptomycin . the carriage of specific accessory genes on pfps can be influenced by selection acting at the p. syringae species level, with carriage of genes such as rulab  <cit> . other genes such as type iii effector genes are likely selected at the pathovar level , and still others at the population level . for example, the plasmids pps6- <dig> and pps7b <dig>  were isolated from p. syringae pv. syringae strains under selection from copper bactericide use on different woody hosts from different regions of the united states. both of the plasmids encode highly similar backbones with the only major difference being the type of copper resistance determinant acquired which likely reflects the availability of genes within the respective communities.

the pfps that have been sequenced from p. syringae pv. syringae strains in this and other studies have encoded few or no genes encoding type iii effectors with potential direct linkages to p. syringae-host interactions  <cit> . this is in contrast to other pfps, such as ppg <dig> and ppt0893- <dig> in this study, and others that encode multiple type iii effectors and additional putative virulence genes  <cit> . we hypothesize that this is a reflection of the number of effectors required to cause disease and suppress host resistance responses in particular pathosystems; for example, genome sequence analysis of different p. syringae pv. syringae strains has shown a relatively small number of type iii effectors encoded by these strains  <cit>  compared to other pathovars. continued acquisition of type iii effectors by pfps may be important in the pathogen-host “arms race” positively affecting virulence in other pathovars encoding large effector repertoires. the plasmid ppg <dig> from this study presents the rulb gene nicked, and an insertion of  <dig>  kbp of dna was found, and, carrying among others,  <dig> type iii effectors. the role of rulb gene as a hotspot for site specific insertion of integron-like elements  and other putative mobile elements that harbor t3ss effectors among other genes has been previously described  <cit> .

we detected large regions from the chromosomally-located gi <dig> genomic island of p. syringae pv. syringae b728a on two of the pfps  sequenced in this study. this provides further retrospective evidence of the movement of genomic island regions between plasmid and chromosome in p. syringae. the gi <dig> genomic island shares extensive similarity to the pphgi- <dig> genomic island of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola 1302a, a 106-kb genomic island that can excise from the chromosome when strain 1302a is inoculated onto a resistant bean cultivar  <cit> ; however, the copper and arsenic-resistance determinants found on the plasmids sequenced in this study are not present in the pphgi- <dig> island. the integration of plasmids into and excision of plasmids from the p. syringae chromosome was first demonstrated 35 years ago  <cit> . later, the pfp pfkn was shown to integrate into the chromosome of p. syringae pv. maculicola via recombination between alleles of the t3ss effector avrpphe  <cit> , and the pfp pav <dig> of p. syringae pv. phaseolicola 1302a and two other native plasmids were presumably integrated into the chromosome of the host strain after passage through a resistant bean cultivar  <cit> . in many cases, these intragenome plasmid recombination or excision events appear to occur as a consequence of host recognition/avoidance scenarios  <cit> . however, the recombination and relocation of genomic island sequences such as the copper and arsenic-resistance determinants to pps <dig> and pps7b <dig> also suggests that other ecological stress selection can play a role in gene movement between plasmids and chromosomes.

the carriage of large plasmids imposes a fitness cost on the host cell that must be ameliorated to enable plasmid maintenance. this coevolutionary process can be mediated through any of several mechanisms including deletion of nonessential sequences from the plasmid, alterations  in plasmid gene expression, and alterations in chromosomal gene expression . the importance of positive selection for plasmid-encoded genes, such as antibiotic-resistance genes, in conjunction with other coevolutionary mechanisms also plays a critical role in plasmid persistence  <cit> . conjugative plasmids exhibit a modular structure consisting of discrete gene regions that are clustered into functional groups  <cit> . these functional groups or modules include replication, stability, propagation, and adaptation with the propagation module including genes functioning in conjugative transfer and the adaptation module including ecologically-important genes  <cit> . coordination and co-regulation of genes within these functional modules is also important and contribute to an overall “plasmid survival kit”  <cit> .

our sequence analysis of pfp genomes in this study illustrated a modular structure of these plasmids  with replication, stability, propagation, and adaptation modules all present. the ubiquitous nature of pfps within p. syringae suggests that this plasmid family has successfully coevolved with the p. syringae species, however, few studies have assessed the effect of pfps on the corresponding fitness of the p. syringae host  <cit> . co-regulation of the plasmid-selfish genes  likely contributes to a reduction of deleterious effects of pfps on their p. syringae hosts. similarities in gene content and synteny of these modules in the plasmids examined in this study and in previous analyses of pfps genomes  <cit> , suggest that the modules that contribute to the plasmid backbone are strongly conserved.

there is one curious distinction in gene content among the plasmid backbone genes present on pfps and that involves the composition of the propagation module specifically with regards to conjugative transfer related genes encoding a type iv secretion system . there are two known suites of conjugative transfer genes on pfps, the type iv mpft-t4ss  and the type iv mpfi-t4ss   <cit> . in a previous macroarray study of  <dig> pfps from  <dig> p. syringae pathovars, we identified  <dig> pfps that hybridized to most or all of the type iv mpft-t4ss genes and  <dig> pfps that hybridized to all  <dig> genes of the type iv mpfi-t4ss genes  <cit> . the pfps that encoded a type iv mpft-t4ss were distributed among p. syringae pathovars in genomospecies i, ii, iii, and iv, and pfps that encoded a type iv mpfi-t4ss were distributed among p. syringae pathovars in genomospecies ii, iii, and iv  <cit> . only a few other pfps were shown to either lack a t4ss or to only hybridize to a few t4ss genes  <cit> . as shown in the plasmids maps in fig.  <dig>  the genetic location of either of the type iv mpft or type iv mpfi t4sss is very similar, and upstream of the gntr transcriptional regulator, repa, and the rulab genes, suggesting that both of these t4ss gene sets have been acquired into an existing pfp backbone. in addition, it is not yet clear if carriage of either of the type iv mpft or type iv mpfi-t4sss is associated with carriage of specific accessory genes including type iii effector genes.

finally, analysis of accessory gene carriage among sequenced plasmids common to gram-negative plant pathogens such as p. syringae, erwinia amylovora, and xanthomonas campestris  shows a predominance of known and putative virulence determinants and less numbers of genes that may generally enhance fitness in the plant environment. this is in spite of the observation that these plant pathogens do spend parts of their life cycles growing on plant surfaces either on leaves or flowers. analysis of accessory gene carriage on plasmids isolated from non-pathogenic plant-associated bacteria has shown differing suites of genes compared to those found on plasmids from plant pathogens. for example, pa <dig>  a recently-sequenced plasmid from the plant epiphyte p. fluorescens a <dig>  is very similar to pfps except it does not encode a repa gene or other replication initiation protein  <cit> . however, although pa <dig> encodes similar genes in the propagation and stability modules to pfps and does encode rulab, there are few other similarities in the accessory gene module  <cit> . likewise the pqbr plasmid family which is distributed among bacterial strains isolated from the sugar beet phyllosphere, does not appear to share accessory genes with any other pfps  <cit> . thus, plant pathogens such as p. syringae harbor plasmids that encode accessory genes with a plant pathogen “signature” that is important for host-pathogen interactions and/or is selected in response to bactericide usage in agriculture. this suggests in turn that other genes, such as specific epiphytic fitness determinants critical for in planta growth in these pathogens, are maintained as indispensible in chromosomal locations freeing the plasmids to carry genes that, though still dispensible overall to the host bacterium, provide a selective advantage that is strong enough both to maintain the plasmid within the bacterial pathogen population and to maintain the bacterial pathogen populations on their respective plant hosts.

CONCLUSIONS
our sequence analysis revealed that pfps from p. syringae encode suites of accessory genes that are selected at species , pathovar , and population levels , and contribute to ecological and pathogenic fitness. results from phylogenetic analyses supported the incongruence of pfps and individual p. syringae pathovars, suggesting the importance of horizontal transfer in affecting the current distribution of pfps in the p. syringae species. the conservation of type iv secretion systems encoding conjugation functions also presumably contributes to the distribution of these plasmids within p. syringae populations.

