BACKGROUND
technology used for purifying a recombinant protein has a significant impact on its biochemical function, structural properties, and other aspects, such as generating an antibody against the protein. currently available, established purification methods generally attach an affinity tag to the n-terminus or c-terminus end of the target protein, and then recover the target protein by affinity chromatography  <cit> . purification tags used today are classified into peptide-tags and protein-tags based on their nature and form. his-tag, a typical and globally the most used peptide-tag, is highly effective in purifying the tagged protein by using immobilized metal affinity chromatography, such as nickel sepharose  <cit> . the glutathione-s-transferase  tag, a typical protein-tag, has a high specific binding capacity for glutathione, and is, generally, known to have little or no effect on the activity of the fused recombinant protein  <cit> . in both cases, however, production of tag-free recombinant protein requires treatment with a protease, such as prescission or tev protease. therefore, in order to purify a tag-free recombinant protein multiple chromatography steps are necessary.

currently, there are only a few recombinant protein purification methods that combine affinity purification, cleavage, and separation of the fusion partner in one-step. one such one-step purification method was reported by mao  <cit> , in which the catalytic core of the transpeptidase sortase a , found in the cell envelope of staphylococcus aureus  <cit> , was used for fusion with the target protein. the srta enzyme is known to catalytically cleave the thr-gly bond of its recognition motif lpxtg  in the presence of calcium and triglycine  <cit> . thus, the purified target protein eluted off the affinity column has only an extra gly residue on the n-terminus end. this excellent approach was designed for the purification of recombinant proteins expressed in escherichia coli cells. however, as discussed in that report  <cit> , the fusion protein was partially self-cleaved during the expression, probably because of the difficulty in controlling the concentration of calcium in the living cells. inability to suppress the srta activity during the expression of the fused recombinant protein in e. coli was, therefore, a major limiting factor for using this otherwise excellent approach as a general tool for the production and purification of recombinant proteins.

at present, several types of cell-free protein production systems have been reported as alternative methods for obtaining recombinant proteins . in this regard, it is noteworthy that we are also developing wheat embryo based cell-free system for in vitro protein production  <cit> . cell-free protein production is very flexible because it utilizes only the translational machinery of the cell without other factors, such as dna replication and metabolic pathways, of the living system. the cell-free system, thus, could simply be modified by the addition or subtraction of reagents. in this study, we have adopted the self-cleavage activity of srta in the wheat cell-free system for the production of tag-free recombinant proteins, and demonstrated an improved self-cleavage purification method by incorporating biotinylation reagents and calcium chelates in the cell-free synthesis system.

RESULTS
self-cleavage activity of srta during the cell-free protein synthesis
first, based on the previous report, we constructed the expression vector peu-his-srta-gw by inserting the dna fragment required for the gateway  recombination technology into the previously described wheat germ cell-free expression vector peu-e <dig>  <cit> . the gateway system allows easy recombination of the targeted genes. the srta cleavage site, lpetg, was introduced in the forward pcr primer according to the instructions provided with the gateway system . to test the self-cleavage purification system, we selected the human protein kinases and malaria vaccine candidate pfs <dig>  as candidate proteins because they are very important proteins for practical use. pcr products of the coding regions of pfs <dig> and six protein kinases were amplified, and each pcr amplified fragment was individually inserted into the pdonr <dig> vector by bp recombination reaction. subsequently, the inserted lpetg-gene fragment was cloned into the peu-his-srta-gw vector by lr recombination reaction, resulting in a peu-his-srta-lpetg-gene plasmid. these peu-his-srta-lpetg-gene plasmids were then used for 14c-leu-labeled protein synthesis using the wheat cell-free system. unfortunately, in all cases,  <dig> to 40% of the synthesized proteins were cleaved during the cell-free synthesis . the cleavage rate was dependent on the type of the gene used in creating the plasmid construct. for example, cleavage of pfs <dig>  and gfp  during the protein synthesis process were very low, whereas almost 40% of the synthesized sgk <dig> protein was cleaved during the cell-free synthesis. since calcium supplementation is known to induce the srta activity  <cit> , the cell-free system was treated with the calcium chelator, bapta . treatment with more than  <dig> mm bapta dramatically blocked the inexpedient cleavage of sgk <dig>  however, protein synthesis was inhibited as the bapta concentration was increased . for example, levels of sgk <dig> and gfp proteins produced in the presence of  <dig> mm bapta were approximately 20% and 30%, respectively, of their respective levels in the absence of bapta. in other proteins, the synthesis conditions in the presence of  <dig> and  <dig> mm bapta were investigated . by comparing the results of the bapta-concentration dependent blocking of the srta activity and inhibition of the protein synthesis, we concluded that  <dig> mm bapta is optimal for the cell-free synthesis of srta-fusion proteins, because at this concentration of bapta the recovery of all full-length srta fusion proteins improved by approximately 10-20% without any major inhibition of the protein synthesis.

self-cleavage purification of his-srta-fusion proteins
a total of eight plasmid constructs, each containing a different gene , were used for the cell-free protein production and self-cleavage purification studies, and the results are shown in figure 1g. out of eight proteins, three proteins, gfp, p38g and pfs <dig>  clearly eluted from a nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid  sepharose column, whereas other five proteins could not be recovered in the eluted fraction . to confirm protein synthesis and self-cleavage, column resins of all samples were analyzed by sds-page after boiling with sds-sample buffer . surprisingly, even though ampka <dig>  csk, sgk and sgk <dig> were synthesized and self-cleaved on the column resin, their cleaved forms were not eluted off the resin. we could not find the ripk <dig> protein in the eluted or in the resin-bound fraction, suggesting that this protein was expressed at a very low level. in addition, purity of the protein in the eluted fraction was not high, as there were several similar protein contaminants in every lane. furthermore, many proteins bound to the ni-nta resin . these results suggested that further technical improvements were necessary to achieve high quality purified proteins with high-efficiency from the cell-free based his-srta system.

biotinylated sortase self-cleavage purification 
recently we successfully adapted the biotin-labeling system of e. coli biotin ligase and biotin to the wheat cell-free protein synthesis system  <cit> . the biotinylation reaction modifies a specific lysine residue at the biotin ligation site . the biotinylated proteins could be directly used for an assay without further purification because of very low biotin concentration. since the his-tag based approach showed many contaminated proteins in the eluted fraction of the ni-nta column, we next used the biotin-labeled tag for protein purification. for this purpose, we constructed the peu-bisop-lpetg-gfp plasmid based on the peu-his-srta-lpetg-gfp vector as shown in figure 1a and 2a. next, we compared whether the his-tagged or the biotin-tagged protein could be better purified by the sortase self-cleavage method, processed either manually or using automated robots to eliminate any human error. clearly, on the cbb-stained sds-page, a single major protein band  was found in the eluted fraction following the sortase self-cleavage of the biotin-tagged srta fusion protein; in contrast, contaminating proteins were found along with the major protein band in the eluted fraction of the self-cleaved his-tagged srta fusion protein . reaction performance of robot for his-srta-lpetg-gfp or bisop-lpetg-gfp was  <dig> or 58% of recovery,  <dig> or 88% of purity, and  <dig> or  <dig> μg of yield respectively. these results suggest that the bisop method is better suited for producing tag-free purified proteins by the cell-free system.

next, to examine whether the number of bls has any effect on the purification, two vectors, one having a single bls and the other having double bls, were constructed . coding regions of gfp, pfs <dig> and csk were individually cloned into each one of these two vectors, and then the resultant recombinant plasmids were used for the protein synthesis using the cell-free system. staining with alexa488-labeled streptavidin revealed slight mobility shifts for proteins containing double bls, as compared to those containing single bls . we did not observe any difference between the single and double bls containing proteins with respect to biotinylation, elution and resin binding characteristics. similar to the self-cleavage purification of gfp , all three eluted proteins were highly purified . the higher purity of proteins obtained using the bisop method might be due to the presence of very few contaminating proteins on the streptavidin-conjugated resin . interestingly, the csk protein, prepared by the bisop method was eluted of the resin, whereas with the his-tag based method it was not found in the eluted fraction . total amounts of purified gfp, s <dig> and csk by the bisop method were  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> μg per reaction respectively. also full-length gfp, s <dig> and csk proteins remaining on the column were approximately  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> μg respectively, and cleaved s <dig> and csk proteins on the column were  <dig> and  <dig> μg respectively. these data means that rate of target proteins remaining on the column was approximately 15%. next, the bisop method was used for purifying several other proteins. for this purpose, four protein kinase genes were individually inserted into the gateway system vector peu-bisop-gw following the procedures described above, and the results are shown in figure 2e. both sgk <dig> and ampka <dig>  which were not recovered earlier from the resin when the his-tag based method was used , were also purified by the bisop method .

total amounts of purified csk, sgk <dig>  ampka <dig> and p38g by the bisop method were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> μg per reaction respectively. in addition, analysis of the n-terminal sequence of the gfp protein purified by the bisop revealed the expected cleavage of the thr-gly bond of the inserted lpetg sortase-recognition site . these results suggested that the bisop method would be suitable for the purification of the cell-free produced proteins with high efficiency and purity.

purification of e <dig> heterocomplex by bisop
analysis of protein complex is one of important targets for their structural and biochemical analysis. thus, next we examined whether a protein heterocomplex, co-expressed using the wheat cell-free system, could be purified by the bisop method. to test this notion, we next co-expressed ube2n and ube2v <dig>  two proteins forming the heterodimer complex of the ubiquitin-conjugate  enzyme  <cit> , using the bisop method. specific complex formation between these two proteins produced by the cell-free system has already been reported  <cit> . at first, we confirmed co-expression of the biotinylated srta-lpetg-ube2n and ube2v <dig>  by incorporating 14c-leu during the cell-free synthesis . notably, we recovered the e <dig> heterocomplex consisting of ube2n and ube2v <dig> when both ube2v <dig> and srta-lpetg-ube2n were co-expressed using the cell-free system and then purified by the bisop method . the protein band corresponding to ube2v <dig> was however not found when the biotinylated srta-lpetg-ube2n was expressed alone. therefore, this result suggests that the bisop method would be useful for purification of protein complexes produced by the cell-free system.

activity of csk purified by the bisop method
it is very important that the purification method provide functionally active protein. we, therefore, investigated whether the csk protein purified using the bisop method could specifically phosphorylate the tyr- <dig> residue of human src protein   <cit> . for this purpose, biotinylated src was synthesized by the cell-free system and the synthesized protein was partially purified using the magnetic streptavidin-conjugated beads. the bead-bound src was then treated with -labeled or unlabeled atp and the csk protein that was purified by the bisop method. both autoradiogram of the sds-page separated proteins from the reaction mix containing -labeled atp and immunoblot analysis of the sds-page separated proteins from the reaction mix containing the unlabeled atp using the specific anti-phospho-src antibody showed specific phosphorylation of the y <dig> residue of src by csk . these results suggest that bisop would be suitable for the in vitro synthesis of active proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
the cell-free system is an easy to use method for synthesizing recombinant proteins. in this study, we have developed a new biotinylated-sortase self-cleavage purification  method to achieve high quality purification of several proteins, including a protein heterocomplex, without any affinity tag. in addition, we showed that this method could be automated using robots. results of this study indicate that the combination of the cell-free protein synthesis system and bisop could provide a simple and easy method for the preparation of high quality recombinant proteins without any affinity tag. since the cell-free system is suitable for high-throughput protein production, this combined method could also be utilized at the genome-wide level.

