BACKGROUND
co-conservation, a measure of the degree to which proteins are gained and lost together through evolution , has demonstrated utility as a protein function prediction method  <cit> , particularly in bacteria. pairwise co-conservation scores can be aggregated into networks  <cit> , and assessments of connectivity within the resulting graph can further improve the quality of function prediction. function prediction methods based on biological networks is an active area of research  <cit> .

topological analysis of other types of biological networks, including protein-protein interactions, regulatory interactions, and metabolic networks, has demonstrated that structural features of network subgraphs can provide quantitative insight into biological function  <cit> . for example, maslov and sneppen analyzed the stability of interaction networks by comparing patterns in average connectivity of interaction and regulatory networks  <cit> . characterizations of the structural features of metabolite networks  <cit>  demonstrate a correlation between topologically defined subnetworks and biochemical function. topological characterizations also illuminate evolutionary issues. for example, fraser et al. observed that the effect of an individual protein on cell fitness correlates with the number of its interaction partners  <cit> . jeong et al. showed that most highly connected proteins in protein-protein interaction networks are crucial to cell viability  <cit> .

due to the availability of genome-wide data, nearly all previous investigations of network topology have been in yeast, and the majority has been based on high-throughput assays of protein-protein interactions . in contrast, this paper examines co-conservation networks in bacteria using different reference genomes, the first in-depth study to our knowledge, of the topological characteristics of such networks. this characterization can be used for current and future comparison to like studies in other organism and network types. co-conservation networks are distinct from physical interaction networks as they capture putative functional relationships which are not necessarily dependent on direct protein binding. we find that bacterial co-conservation networks show both biologically important similarities and differences with yeast ppi networks. for example, similar to reports of significance in yeast ppi networks  <cit> , node degree  in bacterial co-conservation networks is predictive of broad functional categories, such as essentiality. unlike yeast ppi networks  <cit> , the bacterial co-conservation network using all bacteria as the reference set does not demonstrate high connectivity among proteins that form complexes.

such differences call into question the broad applicability of the yeast methods for predicting function based on network topology. here, the topological properties of bacterial co-conservation networks and their relationship to function are examined. based on this assessment, we demonstrate the use of co-conservation network topological properties to predict the function of uncharacterized proteins.

RESULTS
the bacterial co-conservation network constructed from e. coli k <dig> and  <dig> other completely sequenced bacteria  is shown in figure 1a. this network captures, for each e. coli k <dig> protein, which other proteins it is co-conserved with in a large reference group. we have previously described how such interaction networks can vary with the selection of reference group  <cit>  and that networks conserved across multiple species can provide insight into the function of proteins that act in coherent biological processes  <cit> . here, we assessed the topological characteristics of bacterial co-conservation networks for the purpose of using such characteristics to improve protein function prediction. though most results are reported using the all genomes reference set, we also provide comparison to using motile, proteobacteria and aerobic reference sets.

topological features of e. coli k <dig> networks
the e. coli k <dig> co-conservation network using all genomes as reference  contained  <dig>  interactions, among  <dig>  proteins, forming  <dig> disconnected subgraphs, called clusters . the remaining  <dig>  e. coli k <dig> proteins were not co-conserved with any others, and would be singletons if they had been included in the graph. three large clusters were apparent, containing  <dig> proteins ,  <dig> proteins  and  <dig> proteins . surprisingly, networks constructed from the other reference sets  contained roughly the same number of proteins as the all network, yet the number of interactions varied widely .

the clustering coefficient was defined as the edge density in the neighbors of a protein. the average clustering coefficient of the all network was high , indicating that proteins tend to be co-conserved in highly connected groups. the average shortest path  indicated that there was a short path between any two proteins in a cluster. the average clustering coefficient remained high for motile, proteobacteria, and aerobic networks. though the connectivity average increased as the number of interactions increased, the average shortest path appeared to be large in the motile network, relative to the others. moreover, the diameter of the motile network was disproportionately large. this occurred because the motile network consisted of two large densely connected clusters bridged by only a few edges and there existed many smaller clusters extending by long paths from the two dense cores .

the connectivity distribution p, the probability that a protein interacts with k other proteins, shown in figure 1b for the all network, had a heterogeneous, skewed shape, and indicated that most proteins were linked to only a few proteins, but a few proteins had a large number of connections. p in this graph was consistent with a power law distribution p ~ k-γ, with γ =  <dig>  , indicating a scale free network. in the log-log plot of figure 1c, there was a high correlation  between connectivity  and connectivity distribution ) for a large range of k. however the correlation broke down for highly connected nodes. topological analysis is summarized in table  <dig> using different reference sets. like many other biological networks  <cit> , the bacterial co-conservation networks using difference reference sets were all scale-free .

hubs in scale free networks distinguish essentiality and complexes
scale-free networks share a number of properties, including sensitivity to disruptions of highly connected "hub" nodes and robustness to interference with non-hub nodes, among others. therefore, this result suggests that the collection of hub nodes in bacterial co-conservation networks should include a higher proportion of essential proteins than the collection of non-hub nodes. indeed, essential proteins in our bacterial co-conservation network had significantly more interactions than non-essential proteins , validating earlier findings in yeast using other types of interactions  <cit> . for example, the average degree of essential proteins in the all network was  <dig>  , while that of non-essential proteins was  <dig>   . note that the disparity of mean connectivity between essential and non-essential proteins suggests that connectivity alone can be used as a proxy for essentiality. in the proteobacteria network, the essentiality is not predictable . in that essentiality is not evenly distributed among functional categories, these results suggest that connectivity, and possibly other measures of network topology, might also be useful for improving function prediction.

unlike yeast ppi networks  <cit> , high connectivity in bacteria co-conservation networks does not allow identification of protein complexes. we noted that when the reference genome was all, there was no significant difference between the connectivity of complex proteins vs. non-complex proteins . the small difference between mean connectivity in the aerobic network is statistically significant due to low overall standard deviation of connectivity . interestingly, high connectivity in the motile and proteobacteria networks corresponds to non-complex proteins. this is in contrast to yeast ppi networks where high connectivity corresponds to protein complexes.

relationship between protein-protein interaction and co-conservation networks
the co-conservation network was compared to the e. coli k <dig> protein-protein interaction  network, obtained from the database of interacting proteins   <cit> , which contained  <dig>  interactions over  <dig>  proteins. the ppi network had no interactions for  <dig>  proteins that had at least one interaction in the co-conservation network . of these  <dig>  proteins in the co-conservation network,  <dig> were unclassified using kegg ,  <dig> were unclassified using cog  and  <dig> were unclassified using tigr . these proteins represent examples where the co-conservation network allowed the assignment of function to proteins which could not be annotated using the ppi network.

relationships among topological characteristics and protein function
function annotation homogeneity within clusters
the co-conservation protein clusters in the all network ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> proteins. considering clusters with at least two annotated proteins, the proteins in all but the largest clusters tended to have identical function annotations, regardless of the source of annotation . for clusters of size less than  <dig>  the majority are homogeneous for all different sources. though some medium and large clusters contained proteins with different function annotations, these proteins are often involved in inter-dependent processes that contribute to a common phenomenon  <cit> . for example, many clusters contain proteins annotated to some specific function and also to "regulation," where the regulation activity turns out to be regulating the process in which the other proteins participate. the proteins that underlie a function and its regulation were co-conserved. this was not an indication of functional heterogeneity, but was an artifact of the annotation scheme.

function and connectivity
different functional classes displayed different average connectivity . since the definition of a functional class varied among different annotation databases, figure  <dig> shows the connectivity of each protein versus kegg  <cit> , cog  <cit> , and tigr  <cit>  functional categories. for kegg and cog, regardless of the reference set, proteins with high connectivity were generally involved in cellular processes , which was interesting given that there were few cellular process proteins in each network. in contrast, metabolism proteins  were abundant and generally had the lowest average connectivity.

using cog, cell division and chromosome partitioning  in figure  <dig> had high average connectivity using all reference sets except aerobic. in the proteobacteria network, the most highly connected protein were intracellular trafficking and secretion  while the most highly connected proteins in the aerobic network were motility proteins . tigr classification showed proteins involved in motility had high average connectivity, while central intermediary metabolism and cofactors were the least connected .

translation is one of the most ancient processes in the cell and previous studies have shown that these proteins have a high average connectivity  <cit> . the average connectivity of these nodes in our networks was low ; this was because most of these proteins appeared in more than 90% of organisms and were removed in the preprocessing step as described in the methods section. additional file  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> show the presence of high connectivity among these proteins in networks when proteins that appear in more than 90% or less than 10% of the genomes in a reference set were not removed. interestingly, przulj et al. have earlier observed that in the yeast protein-protein interaction network, stress and defense and transport proteins are less connected than transcription and translation proteins  <cit> . though the annotation sources for e. coli are completely different, the average connectivity in tigr for transporter and transcription were similar . it is interesting that dna metabolism is most connected in all, followed by dna/protein/amino acid in motile, followed by protein in proetobacteria, and finally amino acid in aerobic.

function and hub proteins
power law networks have a few nodes with many connections while the majority of nodes have few links. the nodes with many connections  are shown to be particularly interesting in a biological context as they can have important roles for drug targets and are crucial in cell viability, among other traits  <cit> . intriguingly, in the all network, many of the hubs  had no functional classification in any annotation source . maslov and sneppen argue that hub proteins tend not to interact with other hub proteins in yeast, but rather prefer to interact with sparsely connected proteins  <cit> . this assertion was not true in the bacterial co-conservation networks. in bacterial co-conservation networks, hubs tended to interact with other hubs. for example in the all network, of  <dig>  interactions  where at least one partner was a hub, only 24%  were between a hub and a non-hub while 76%  were between two hubs. hubs were defined as the top 10% of highly connected proteins; the same pattern holds when the hubs were defined to be the top 20% of highly connected proteins . for hubs defined as the top 10%, hub-hub connectivity was high in the motile , proteobacteria  and aerobic  networks. although beyond the scope of this work, it would be interesting to better understand why bacterial hub nodes are highly interconnected and what effect on network properties such interconnectedness confers. our interest is how connectivity information improves function prediction.

using topological features to assign function to uncharacterized proteins
based on the above observations, we hypothesized that specific aspects  of network topology could be used to improve function prediction of uncharacterized proteins. a popular approach to function prediction is to use the most frequently occurring function among the neighbors of an uncharacterized protein  <cit> . one problem with this approach is that many neighbors of unclassified proteins tend to also be unclassified. for example, combining functional information from kegg  <cit> , cog  <cit>  and tigr  <cit> , 41% of the total number of interactions  contained at least one unclassified protein  in the all network. in 67% of the  <dig>  interactions, one partner was unclassified , while in the remaining 33% both proteins in the pair were unclassified .

importantly, the majority  of neighbors of the unclassified proteins were also unclassified using kegg. based on our observations regarding the topology of the co-conservation network described above, we hypothesized that extending the function prediction strategy to include the majority function assignment of a cluster, rather than just the neighbors of a protein, would improve prediction.

the accuracy of this prediction strategy was validated by determining the average percentage of proteins which were assigned the majority function within their cluster. the percentage value that defines the majority was calculated for each cluster and averaged over all clusters that had at least three proteins and at least two were classified. on average, 93% of classified proteins in a cluster were assigned the kegg function which was the majority assignment in the cluster. this means taking the majority vote of the cluster had an average prediction error of 7%. figure  <dig> further indicates how the prediction accuracy is influenced by cluster size. although 16% of the clusters have no characterized proteins at all, using the entire cluster to predict function of unclassified proteins is a large improvement over using immediate neighbors since 60% of those were unclassified using kegg.

the distribution of functional assignment of neighbors of an unclassified protein also varied based on the connectivity of the protein . there was a higher probability that an unknown protein connected to an environmental or metabolism protein if the connectivity was low  whereas it was improbable to connect to an environmental protein for connectivities of 22– <dig>  in fact, the distributions suggested the unknown proteins of degree  <dig> and  <dig> might be metabolism proteins, as only that category appeared among their notated neighbors. for connectivity  <dig>  there were  <dig> classified proteins;  <dig> are metabolism proteins and  <dig> was involved in genetic information processing. for the  <dig> classified proteins of connectivity  <dig>  all of them were metabolism proteins.

predicting function based on the majority assignment of immediate neighbors or entire cluster both rely on the assumption that like interacts with like. however, it is interesting to note that this may not be valid, as suggested by the distributions of functional assignments of neighbors of characterized proteins . though the accuracy of the distributions was confounded by the strong presence of unclassified proteins, they suggested cellular process proteins preferentially interacted with genetic information processing proteins. moreover, genetic proteins slightly preferred to partner with metabolism proteins, with a small bias against interacting with environmental proteins. for environmental information processing and metabolism proteins, we see the expected behavior of interactions between proteins of the same function. this suggests that function prediction based on majority function will be more accurate for proteins whose true function is either of the latter and less accurate for the two former categories. this claim is investigated below.

evaluating predictions based on topological properties
of the  <dig> unclassified proteins  in the all co-conservation network,  <dig> proteins had no annotated neighbors, while  <dig> proteins were contained in a cluster containing no annotated neighbors. this means that in the former case, a function prediction algorithm based on immediate neighbors would fail, while in the latter case, a prediction algorithm which uses the entire cluster would fail. for cases such as these in which nearby annotations are not available, the distributions of figure  <dig> suggest ways in which topological information might instead be exploited in function prediction algorithms.

based on the observations detailed above, new predictions strategies were created to incorporate the connectivity of the protein and the differential preference of interaction based on the functions assigned to a protein pair. the contribution of each type and the combination of topological information was evaluated using a cross validation scheme where 10% of the  <dig>  classified proteins in the all network with at least one classified neighbor were taken at random as the test set, their functions hidden and predicted from quantities computed on the remaining 90% of classified proteins . from this training set, distributions of node connectivity, function within a cluster, and function among immediate neighbors in a cluster were calculated.

results in figure  <dig> show that the two baseline prediction methods, 1-sampleunif and 2-sampleglobal, which do not incorporate topological information had the poorest performances regardless of the annotation source used. a significant improvement  over these baseline algorithms was seen using connectivity information alone . using kegg, nearly 44% of the proteins were classified correctly using just connectivity information. these results on classified proteins argue that despite being a simple topological characterization, connectivity could be particularly useful for unclassified proteins residing in clusters with no functional information, since majority-based methods can not be applied.

methods which can incorporate functional information of the cluster in any form  show substantial improvement over the baselines. though the 3-majorityneigh method outperformed the 4-majorityclust method, the prediction task was made easier in the evaluation than would be the case for true unclassified proteins; the requirement that each test protein be connected to at least one other  classified protein ensured that there were likely labeled proteins in the immediate neighborhood from which to predict .

the combination  of connectivity information  and preference bias for non-like pairs  showed a significant improvement over preference bias alone for cog  and kegg . moreover, 7-neighconnect showed no statistically significant difference in performance from 4-majorityclust for kegg and cog .

these results indicated that choosing the majority function of the cluster or immediate neighborhood were better methods on average. however, when the set of proteins was divided into those whose function was predicted correctly or incorrectly using 4-majorityclust, most incorrect predictions were for proteins from clusters with a heterogeneous, almost uniform, distribution of function within the cluster. of the proteins whose function was predicted correctly by 4- majorityclust, only 30% resided in clusters with more than one function, compared to 100% for the set of incorrectly predicted proteins.

methods 8– <dig> show the value of using connectivity information or preference bias of interaction when the function of the protein is not the majority function of the cluster. the results show the benefit of using connectivity and preference bias information, allowing up to 44% correct prediction  for the set of proteins completely missed by one of the best methods, 4-majorityclust. though the average value was similar for 2-sampleglobal and 5-sampleconnect on all proteins, sampleglobal performed much worse than sampleconnect on this set of proteins . interestingly, the average connectivity of this set of incorrectly predicted proteins was high , suggesting that using topological information in predictions might be most useful for hub proteins.

methods 11– <dig> test the prediction accuracy on the hub proteins, showing dramatic drops in performance for majorityneigh  and majorityclust . in contrast, using connectivity information within sampleconnect  showed a sharp increase in performance for the set of hubs. the sampleneigh method , based on neighbor information, suffered from noise introduced from the high connectivity, yet when combined with connectivity information  allowed further improvement over connectivity information alone, even for the hubs. moreover, for the highly connected proteins, the topological based methods sampleconnect and neighconnect outperformed the majority based methods, majorityneigh and majorityclust.

together these results suggest an improved function prediction algorithm for truly unclassified proteins, based on the topological properties examined here. when there is a single function assigned to the classified proteins in the cluster, use the majority function of the cluster  for the uncharacterized protein. homogeneous neighbors and clusters are generally found for low connectivity proteins. when there is more than one function represented by classified proteins in the cluster, use a combination of connectivity and preference bias information  for prediction. this situation generally occurs for highly connected proteins.

overall, our results show connectivity is particularly useful for characterization of unclassified proteins residing in clusters where majority based methods either cannot be applied  or would likely fail .

function predictions
in the artificial situation represented by our cross validation study, results showed that the majority based methods were effective for proteins whose immediate neighbors or cluster members were generally assigned a single function. for the true unclassified proteins, additional file  <dig> shows the majority cluster method applied to the smaller clusters containing at least one unclassified protein and at least one classified protein using any annotation source. of the  <dig> proteins in these  <dig> clusters,  <dig> proteins were unclassified by any annotation source. comparing our predictions to a later release of the cog database which provided new annotations for  <dig> of the  <dig> proteins, we predicted  <dig> out of the  <dig> correctly using the majority cluster method.

CONCLUSIONS
bacterial co-conservation networks share some topological properties with yeast protein-protein interaction and other biological networks, but differ in important aspects. like in yeast ppi networks, highly connected nodes are related to essential functions, and the co-conserved protein-protein interaction network appears to be scale free.

it is unclear if the lack of variation observed in the remaining classes represents a true biological phenomenon or a limitation of resolution. there is no difference between the connectivity distributions of complexed and non-complexed proteins in our data to justify the use of connectivity for complex prediction. in this respect, co-conservation networks appear to be distinct from physical interaction networks. however connectivity in our networks does appear to be a reliable predictor for essentiality, in congruence with previous findings  <cit> .

we took advantage of several properties of the network to infer function for several of the uncharacterized proteins in e. coli k <dig> . the analysis of functional assignment for individual proteins and all protein pairs  showed that the frequency of interaction between proteins depended on the function of each partner and on connectivity. an interesting future direction would be to incorporate these global observations within a function prediction algorithm and test the accuracy of using connectivity and neighbor function assignment information together to refine the likelihood of assigning a given function to an unknown protein.

