BACKGROUND
the formation and placement of primordial germ cells  in animal embryos is of interest in developmental biology, evolutionary biology and biotechnology. in diptera, including the well studied drosophila melanogaster, pgcs form as morphologically and molecularly distinct pole cells, in the posterior of the embryo, early in development  <cit> . in insects outside the diptera pgcs can develop in regions of pole or germ plasm, a distinct form of cytoplasm in early eggs  <cit> , or are associated with the oosome  <cit>  a specialised subcellular structure that appears to define pgc fate early in embryogenesis. these specialised structures and/or cytoplasm are widely distributed amongst insects but are not found in all insect embryos  <cit> .

in the honeybee , little is known about the formation of pgcs in the embryo. in late embryonic and larval stages pgcs have been identified in the genital ridge situated near the dorsal surface of the abdomen where the gonads develop  <cit> . previous authors have stated that there is no evidence for pgcs arising early in development  <cit>  as is seen in other insects.

in other insects pgc placement and development has been studied using molecular markers of germ cell fate  <cit> . two genes, vasa and nanos, have proved useful markers for pgcs in a broad range of species.

the vasa gene encodes a dead box rna helicase that is expressed in the pgcs of all major groups of animals examined  <cit> . in mice, vasa related genes are expressed in pgcs and are required for pgc development  <cit> . in drosophila vasa is required for multiple processes in the development and maintenance of pgcs  including the localisation of nanos rna  <cit> .

nanos genes encode zinc finger transcription factors that have been shown to be expressed in the pgcs of diptera  <cit> , caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> , cnidarians  <cit> , leech  <cit> , mice  <cit>  and humans  <cit> . in drosophila nanos is required for pgc migration and fate  <cit>  and acts to repress somatic cell fate in pgcs by repressing differentiation  <cit> . in zebrafish, nanos is required for pgc migration and survival  <cit> . mice have three nanos-like genes, two of which are expressed in pgcs and required for their maintenance  <cit> .

vasa expression, assayed with in-situ hybridisation or antibodies, has been used most generally as a pgcs marker in arthropod embryos. using both techniques, pgc specification has been studied in the orthopteran schistocerca gregaria. in this species pgcs form at the dorsal boundaries of the germband in the abdomen and migrate dorsally to the gonads  <cit> . vasa expression has also been examined in the lepidopteran bombyx mori  <cit> . in this species, vasa rna is first expressed in the presumptive embryo and then comes to be located in cells at the posterior of the germ band. in later stages these vasa positive cells populate the abdomen in regions consistent with the forming gonads. in non insect arthropods, vasa expression has also been examined in the two-spotted spider mite   <cit> , and the crustaceans daphnia  <cit>  and parhayle  <cit> . in tetranychus, vasa rna marks a population of cells underlying the cellular blastoderm that migrate into the posterior of the embryo and are incorporated into the gonad. in daphnia, vasa protein is localised in a subcellular compartment in  <dig> cell stage embryos and is partitioned into a single blastomere at the 16-cell stage. this vasa positive cell is the progenitor for the germ line in this species  <cit> . in parhayle, vasa protein expression becomes apparent at the 8-cell stage in the g-micromere. manipulation of the embryo, however, indicates that localised determinants for pgc development exist at the  <dig> cell stage  <cit> .

in hymenoptera, the insect order containing the honeybee, vasa expression has been examined only in the polyembryonic parasitic wasp copidosoma floridanum. in this species, an organelle, the oosome, stains for vasa rna and is segregated into cells that then express vasa rna and protein and form pgcs. inheritance of pgcs appears to regulate both larval caste and axis formation  <cit> . oosomes that specify germ-cell fate are found in many hymenopteran species  <cit>  but are not present in honeybee ovaries or embryos  <cit> .

nanos genes have a role in specifying posterior regions of insect embryos  <cit> . in drosophila, nanos rna is localised to posterior regions of the embryo, and nanos translation is repressed in the rest of the embryo by the binding of smaug protein to a rna secondary structure in the 3'utr of the nanos mrna  <cit> . nanos protein then regulates hunchback  translation by recruiting a cofactor, pumilio, that binds a 'nanos response element' in the 3'utr of the hunchback mrna, thus restricting hb protein expression to the anterior of the embryo  <cit> . this translation repression activity in the posterior of insect embryos appears to be conserved in the orthopteran schistocerca americana  <cit>  where nanos rna is also posteriorly localised. posteriorly localised nanos expression is also found in mosquito embryos  <cit> .

in this paper i have cloned cdna fragments of honeybee vasa and nanos and used in-situ hybridisation on embryos and ovaries to determine if honeybee pgcs are specified early in development, like many holometabolous insect embryos, or if they form late in development from an inductive event.

RESULTS
identification of homologues of nanos and vasa in honeybees
reciprocal blast searches  <cit>  of the honeybee and drosophila melanogaster genomes with drosophila vasa and nanos sequences identified a single region of the honeybee genome with homology to vasa, and a single region with homology to nanos. gene predictions corresponding to each of these regions were collected and analysed.

a predicted transcript  located on group  <dig>  has high homology to drosophila vasa. i term this transcript amvasa. the transcript is predicted to encode a protein containing all of the  <dig> domains conserved in dead box helicases. the givgxa motif, conserved in insect vasas, is also conserved but the exrkf domain conserved among vasa and pl <dig> proteins is not present. the function of this motif is not known. the full length of this transcript was cloned from cdna.

phylogenetic analysis of the amvasa predicted protein sequence indicates that it clusters with drosophila, bombyx and schistocerca vasa proteins as well as a predicted vasa-like dead box helicase from anopheles  . related non-vasa dead-box helicases form a separate clade in this analysis, indicating that the amvasa is a homologue of drosophila vasa and not a related dead-box helicase. the lack of the vasa specific exrkf motif is unusual for an insect vasa protein. to ensure that the gene identified is the orthologue of vasa from the honeybee, the honeybee genome was searched for regions encoding dead box helicase proteins. all of the dead-box encoding regions have been identified in the glean <dig> official gene prediction set. neighbour joining phylogenetic analysis of a multiple alignment of the predicted proteins encoded by these sequences and other insect and vertebrate dead-box helicase proteins indicates that the amvasa gene is the closest homologue of vasa in the honeybee genome 

the sequence with highest homology to drosophila nanos in the honeybee genome is included in a predicted transcript  that is annotated as similar to venom protein vn <dig> . analysis of this transcript indicates that homology to nanos is restricted to two upstream exons almost  <dig> kb from the exons of the predicted transcript with homology to venom protein vn <dig> . just downstream of the second exon corresponding to nanos is a gap in the genome sequence that may have caused an error with the gene prediction software. i have sequenced across this gap and identified an in-frame stop codon downstream of the second exon. primers designed to amplify full-length nanos from cdna indicate that the gene prediction is correct in this area. i designate the gene from which this sequence derives amnos. this sequence is deposited in genbank as dq <dig> 

multiple alignments of predicted proteins from nanos relatives indicate that the highest similarity between these sequences lies in the c-terminal zinc-finger dna binding domain . this region contains the two cchc motifs for coordinating the zinc atoms that are completely conserved in amnos. outside of this region, sequence similarity is limited to short sequences. phylogenetic analysis of a multiple alignment of this conserved dna binding domain  clusters the predicted amnos protein sequence with a predicted nanos gene from nasonia, and drosophila nanos. other insect nanos sequences  i) map of the genomic region that contains the highest similarity to nanos sequences in the bee genome. the map indicates the regions of similarity to nanos genes, the cdna region cloned and the position of putative bearded boxes associated with nanos translation regulation in drosophila. ii and iii) rna structures of the first  <dig> bases of the drosophila nanos  and amnos  3'utrs predicted by mfold  <cit> . b) bayesian phylogeny of nanos protein sequences derived from the alignment shown in d. the predicted apis mellifera nanos protein sequence  clusters with drosophila and nasonia nanos sequences with high posterior probability. c) alignment of the most conserved regions of nanos protein sequences from metazoa.

in drosophila the 3'utr of nanos contains a structural rna motif required for translational repression  <cit> , no sequence homology to this region can be seen in the amnos 3'utr. an rna structure prediction program  predicts the first  <dig> bases of the amnos 3'utr produces a similar rna fold to that of the drosophila 3'utr . the drosophila motif contains sequences similar to bearded boxes that are also associated with translation repression  <cit> . predicted bearded boxes are present downstream of the amnos gene but not in the predicted secondary structure.

expression of amvasa in honeybee embryos
in-situ hybridisation using a fragment of the amvasa cdna sequence was used to determine the placement and development of pgcs in female honeybee embryo . the probe was made from a  <dig> bp fragment of amvasa from the second exon, a relatively non-conserved region of the gene. the c terminal part of the protein encoded by this fragment is boxed in figure  <dig>  amvasa rna is present at early stages of apis embryogenesis, with a uniform distribution at stage  <dig>  . this initial expression rapidly disappears by late stage  <dig>  amvasa in not expressed in any cells until stage  <dig>  when amvasa rna appears in a line of cells starting in the 3rd abdominal segment  and stretching to the 6th abdominal segment  . this line of cells lies just ventral to the boundary between the germband and the extra-embryonic membranes and lies just underneath the epidermis of the embryo. these cells continue to express amvasa through the rest of embryogenesis , and, in larval honeybees, come to be placed in regions consistent with the placement of the genital ridge .

amvasa rna is also detected in a small group of cells in the mandibular segment in stage  <dig> embryos . it is unclear what this structure is.

the expression of amvasa rna seems to indicate that pgcs in apis form late in embryogenesis. it is possible, however, that the distribution of the amvasa rna does not reflect the distribution of amvasa protein, as in drosophila  <cit> . to determine if amvasa protein is present in embryos stages 2– <dig>  embryos were stained using an antibody raised against schistocerca gregaria vasa that has been shown to cross react in a number of species  <cit> . no staining above background in apis embryos or ovaries was detected using the antibody in conditions in which drosophila melanogaster embryos did stain in the canonical vasa pattern, implying this antibody does not cross-react with amvasa .

to confirm the timing of amvasa rna expression, rt-pcr was carried out on rna from honeybee embryos of various stages . a pcr product of the target length, consistent with amvasa rna, was found only in rna from just laid eggs and embryos over stage  <dig>  no amvasa rna could be detected in embryos of stages 3– <dig>  consistent with our in-situ hybridisation results.

expression of amnos in honeybee embryos
as amvasa rna expression indicated the late formation of pgcs and i was unable to confirm this using the anti-vasa antibody, the expression of amnos was used as a second pgc marker in female embryos. amnos rna is first detected in stage  <dig> embryos where it is present in a gradient with highest expression in posterior regions of the embryo . this expression fades rapidly through embryogenesis such that it is faint in stage  <dig> embryos  and absent from stage  <dig> embryos. no further expression of amnos is seen in embryos until stage  <dig> , when expression appears in a line of cells, starting in the 3rd abdominal segment and stretching to the 6th abdominal segment. like the cells marked with amvasa, amnos expressing cells lie under the epidermis and just ventral to the boundary between the embryonic and extraembryonic membranes. the distribution of amnos and amvasa in these embryos is identical except for the anterior patch of cells expressing amvasa; these cells do not express amnos.

to confirm the timing of amnos rna expression, rt-pcr was carried out on rna from honeybee embryos of various stages . a pcr product of the target length , consistent with amnos rna, was found only in rna from just-laid eggs and embryos over stage  <dig>  these data are consistent with our in-situ hybridisation results in that amnos rna is not expressed between stages 3– <dig> 

expression of amvasa in queen and worker bee ovaries
apis mellifera have polytrophic meroistic ovaries, similar to those of drosophila melanogaster. despite this similarity, a number of differences in morphology and biology exist. one particularly important difference is that worker bee ovaries have many less ovarioles than those of queens . workers in a queenright colony have small ovaries that are chemically repressed by the presence of the queen and her eggs  <cit> . removal of the queen from a colony can cause the reactivation of the worker bee ovaries and the workers may lay eggs  <cit> . to see if germ cell placement or organisation is significantly different in workers compared to queen ovaries i used in-situ hybridisation for amvasa rna to examine the placement of germ cells in both types of ovary .

in the queen ovary, both nurse and germ cells express amvasa. amvasa rna is not localised to any particular area in either cell type. amvasa rna is present in oocytes in the vitellarium, but expression is absent, or very weak in the germarium and terminal filament. in the nurse cells, rna is present in all cells in the vitellarium, but in the germarium, the expression of amvasa rna is reduced in the nurse cells closest to the oocytes . expression of amvasa rna does not extend beyond the germarium in nurse cells. no expression of amvasa is seen in follicle cells.

in worker ovaries a similar expression pattern can be seen . amvasa rna is present in all oocytes, but, in contrast to queen ovaries, this expression extends into the terminal filament . expression of amvasa rna in the nurse cells is reduced in worker ovaries. expression can be seen in nurse cells in the vitellarium, and, faintly, in the nurse cells associated with the last oocyte in the germarium . in the terminal filament  amvasa rna expression marks germ cells in the entire structure. comparison of the expression of amvasa rna and the location of nuclei stained with dapi indicates that the germ cells in the start of the terminal filament are surrounded by disc shaped 'terminal filament cells'  <cit>  that do not stain for amvasa. however within these compartments, cells that do not express amvasa are also present . it is not clear if these are nurse cells or follicle cells. in the last sections of the terminal filament, cells positive for amvasa rna are interspersed with cells that are not . the expression of amvasa in the worker, but not queen terminal filament is a clear difference between castes.

expression of amnos in queen and worker bee ovaries
the expression if amnos rna in queen and worker bee ovaries was also examined using in-situ hybridisation . in the early vitellarium and germarium, amnos rna is present only in a discrete domain in the anterior region of each oocyte, anterior to the oocyte nucleus . in later vitellaria, amnos rna staining is found faintly in the nurse cells, and in the localised domain in each oocyte. in later vitellaria, however, this domain lies on one side of the oocyte and appears as a patch in posterior regions of the egg with a more diffuse 'tail' stretching back to the more posterior regions. neither the patch nor the tail are associated with the oocyte nucleus  and in all cases lies posterior to it. in the oldest oocytes  amnos rna is found in an anterior patch that is fainter that that in younger oocytes. i believe this faint staining is an artefact caused by differential permeability of old and young oocytes. the 'comet-like' form of the patch of localised amnos rna in later vitellaria is consistent with movement of a discrete focus of amnos rna from anterior of the oocyte nucleus to posterior regions of the oocyte.

in worker bee ovaries, by contrast, amnos rna is weakly and uniformly distributed in oocytes in the vitellarium and germarium  and, at higher levels, in the nurse cells of the oldest oocyte. amnos rna is not expressed in nurse cells, follicle cells or cells in the terminal filament.

discussion
identification of apis homologues of nos and vasa
blast searches and phylogenetic reconstruction indicate that i have identified honeybee homologues of the evolutionarily conserved germ-cell markers nanos and vasa.

the amvasa gene, also identified by  <cit> , has all of the conserved sequences indicative of a vasa protein, and clusters with other insect vasa sequences to the exclusion of non vasa dead box helicases. the sequence does, however, have significant variation in the exrkf motif, that is conserved in pl <dig> and vasa helicases. the function of this motif is unknown, thus the significance of its absence from amvasa is not known.

the amnos gene identified in this study is similar in c-terminal regions to nanos proteins from other species. this region contains the zinc coordination residues of the zinc fingers. these residues are completely conserved in amnos. drosophila nanos contains a sequence that forms a specific secondary structure in the 3'utr that is required for translational repression  <cit> . this secondary structure is bound by the smaug protein in early embryos  <cit> . a similar secondary structure is predicted to form in the amnos 3'utr though its function, if any, is unknown.

the conservation and phylogenetic placement of these sequences is consistent with them encoding the conserved germ-cell markers vasa and nos.

germ cell development in apis mellifera
expression of amnos and amvasa rna occurs in two phases of honeybee embryonic development. both genes are expressed early in development, amvasa in the entire embryo, and amnos in a gradient pattern with highest concentrations in the posterior of the embryo, both probably due to maternal rna contribution. these expression patterns disappear by stage  <dig>  in later development, at and after stage  <dig>  both genes are expressed in a subset of cells that lie close to the dorsal boundary of the embryo proper and the extraembryonic membranes. these cells eventually come to be located in the dorsal-most regions of the embryo consistent with the genital ridges and forming gonads. that both genes are not expressed in embryos between stage  <dig> and stage  <dig> implies that during these stages there are no pgcs in the honeybee embryo, and that these cells form via an inductive event at, or just before, stage  <dig> 

neither morphological studies, nor the use of molecular markers has found any evidence for pole-cells, pole plasm or early segregating pgcs  <cit> . this is unlike the formation of pgcs in drosophila, which has a similar long-germ form of embryo to that of apis.

the expression of these two pgc markers implies that germ-cells form very close to the boundary of the embryo proper and the extra-embryonic membranes. the cells form in a3-a <dig> and no sign of migration of the pgcs can be seen. as dorsal closure occurs, the cells appear to be moved, passively, to the dorsal surface of the larva, close to the dorsal midline.

these findings indicate two possible scenarios for the origin of pgcs in the honeybee embryo. it is possible that the appearance of pgc markers at a late stage of embryogenesis, similar to the situation in mice  <cit>  implies that an inductive event at stage  <dig> specifies pgcs. the organisation of the cells, in a single line, is what might be expected if the cells are being induced by a signal released from an almost linear source. just dorsal of the pgcs are the extra-embryonic membranes that cover the dorsal opening. it is possible that the putative inducing signal leading to the formation of pgc fate emanates from the extra-embryonic membranes.

it is also possible that the amvasa and amnos rna are not expressed in germ-cells that do form early in development, and only come to be expressed when these cells reach the abdomen. drosophila vasa rna expression is indeed absent from pgcs until stage  <dig>  <cit>  and nanos expression is down-regulated in drosophila after stage  <dig>  <cit> . in the crustacean parhayle pgcs are specified very early in development, without the expression of vasa  <cit> 

this study is unable to determine which of these two possible mechanisms underlies germ-cell formation in honeybees.

localisation of nos rna and posterior development in apis mellifera
in drosophila and other insects nanos acts to regulate posterior development  <cit> . nos expression has been studied in both drosophila  <cit> , other dipterans  <cit>  and schistocerca  <cit> . in each studied species nos rna is localised in posterior regions in early development. in drosophila most nos rna is localised very tightly to the posterior, and its translation is repressed in anterior regions  <cit> . in drosophila nos acts as a key regulator of posterior development, translationally repressing, in concert with pumilio, the anterior gene hunchback in the posterior  <cit> . in schistocerca, the expression of nos is coincident with a clearance of hunchback expression from the very posterior regions of the embryo  <cit> . hunchback mrna from schistocerca is predicted to contain a nanos response element, similar to that which is bound by drosophila nanos to repress hunchback translation.

in honeybees amnos rna is present in the posterior of the early embryo  this domain is broader that that in drosophila where the highest levels of nos rna form, and appears to represent a concentration gradient, with highest rna expression in the very posterior of the embryo. the amnos 3'utr does not contain an element with sequence similarity to the stem-loop structure in the 3'utr of drosophila nos, but a similar rna structure is predicted to be formed by it.

in the ovary of queen bees, amnos rna expression is found in a localised patch in oocytes, that appears to move, during oocyte maturation, from anterior to posterior. in schistocerca  <cit> , and mosquitoes  <cit> nanos rna is also localised tightly to posterior regions of the oocyte. the localisation of amnos rna in the oocyte is consistent with a role in posterior patterning.

CONCLUSIONS
i have used amvasa and amnos as molecular markers of pgc fate in the honeybee apis mellifera. the timing of placement of their expression provides no evidence for early specification of germ-cells but implies that honeybee pgcs form from an inductive event late in embryonic development. it is also possible that germ-cells form early in the honeybee embryo but do so in the absence of vasa or nanos expression. both these possibilities differ from pgc specification in drosophila, where morphologically distinct pgcs appear early in development and are marked by the expression of vasa and nanos, or the more closely related copidosoma, where a cellular organelle determines pgc fate and contains vasa protein  <cit> .

any putative induction process implied by these results appears similar to the segregation of pgcs in schistocerca, where early segregation is also not seen. the placement of pgcs, forming close to the border between extra-embryonic and embryonic tissue and inside the epidermal layer, seems similar in both species.

this mode of pgc formation indicates that the evolutionary history of pgc segregation in insects is not simple, with different mechanisms acting in different species. it is unclear, at this point, what the ancestral mechanism is, and how the different mechanism of pgc specification in extant insects may have arisen.

