BACKGROUND
breathing in humans fulfils both metabolic and behavioral functions. the automatic activity of brainstem central pattern generators continuously adapts ventilation to the production of carbon dioxide by the tissues. suprapontine descending pathways convey voluntary and emotional respiratory commands that are independent of bodily requirements. spinal respiratory motoneurons integrate the corresponding bulbospinal and corticospinal inputs  <cit> , hence a reciprocal modulation of the two types of command. in one direction, direct corticospinal projections  <cit>  account for voluntary disruptions of the respiratory rhythm during voluntary respiratory maneuvers or non-respiratory uses of the respiratory system . in the other direction, increases in the automatic drive to breathe facilitate the diaphragm response to transcranial magnetic stimulation . this is true during quiet tidal breathing  <cit> , where such inspiration-related facilitation has been described during wake and sleep. this is also true during co2-stimulated breathing  <cit> , that accelerates the diaphragm response to tms applied during both inspiration and expiration.

the ventilatory responses to chemical stimuli such as hypoxia or hypercapnia are automatic and brainstem-generated. in contrast, the ventilatory adaptations to inspiratory mechanical loading in humans are believed to involve suprapontine mechanisms . this postulate is generally called on to explain why awake humans faced with mechanical loads tend not to hypoventilate, whereas hypoventilation does develop in animals and anesthetized humans under similar conditions. the precise neural origin and pathway of inspiratory load compensation are not known. it could involve reflex mechanisms increasing the automatic drive to breathe, but there are arguments against this hypothesis in the literature  <cit> . it could also involve either or both of the known corticospinal pathways to the diaphragm . in the latter case, resistive loading is not expected to increase the automatic drive to breathe but the response of the diaphragm to transcranial magnetic stimulation should be facilitated, because of spinal integration of the suprapontine command activated for load compensation. we designed the present study to test this hypothesis.

RESULTS
breathing through a  <dig> cmh2o/l/s inspiratory resistance  significantly reduced respiratory frequency as compared with unloaded breathing . a  <dig> cmh2o/l/s inspiratory resistance  did not significantly affect respiratory frequency. there were slight increases in tidal volume that did not reach statistical significance; thus minute ventilation remained grossly unchanged. the end-tidal partial pressure in carbon dioxide in the expired gas  was unaffected by inspiratory resistances. this was also the case for the tidal volume to inspiratory time ratio , the inspiratory duty cycle or inspiratory to total time ratio , and one millisecond mouth occlusion pressure .

inspiratory resistive loading did not influence the esophageal pressure , gastric pressure  and transdiaphragmatic pressure  to phenic nerve stimulation  during expiration or inspiration , nor did it influence the corresponding latencies and amplitudes .

mean values  of esophageal , gastric  and transdiaphragmatic  pressure  in response to cervical magnetic stimulation while the subjects were breathing room air  or against a resistance of either  <dig>  or  <dig>  cmh2o/l/s. stimulations were applied either during early inspiration or late expiration.

the pes, pga and pdi responses to transcranial magnetic stimulation  were also unaffected by inspiratory resistive loading, both during inspiration and expiration . there was no effect of inspiratory resistive loading on the amplitudes of the diaphragmatic motor evoked potentials  . conversely, the latencies of the diaphragm meps obtained in response to inspiratory tms were significantly shorter in the r <dig> condition than in the r <dig> condition  . this shortening was not observed in response to expiratory tms.

mean values  of esophageal , gastric  and transdiaphragmatic  pressure  in response to transcranial magnetic stimulation while the subjects were breathing room air  or against a resistance of either  <dig>  or  <dig>  cmh2o/l/s. stimulations were applied either during early inspiration or late expiration.

the emg responses of the abductor pollicis brevis to cervical and transcranial magnetic stimulations were not altered by inspiratory resistive breathing, both in terms of latency and amplitude .

discussion
in our subjects, and in line with previous observations  <cit> , inspiratory resistive breathing did not increase the automatic ventilatory drive . in contrast, inspiratory loading facilitated the response of the diaphragm to transcranial magnetic stimulation. this indicates that sources other than the brainstem respiratory generators were activated by resistive breathing and increased the inputs received by the phrenic motoneurons. for reasons that will be discussed below, increased afferent traffic is unlikely and therefore our observations point to the involvement of suprapontine structures. we believe that these results provide a neurophysiological substratum to the behavioral nature of inspiratory load compensation in awake humans, and could open new perspectives regarding the functional role of the premotor representation of the diaphragm  <cit> . this is summarized in figure  <dig> 

mechanisms of inspiratory resistive induced facilitation of the diaphragm response to transcranial magnetic stimulation
the facilitation of the response of a muscle to single pulse tms can occur at the cortical or at the spinal level. cortical facilitation typically increases the size of the motor evoked potentials without latency changes  <cit> . spinal facilitation, in contrast, tends to shorten latency. this can occur through the recruitment of additional motoneurons  that, in line with the size principle of motoneuron recruitment, have increasingly fast conduction properties. in this case, there is a simultaneous decrease in latency and increase in amplitude . this is typically what happens when tms is superimposed on a voluntary contraction  <cit> , and it has been repeatedly verified for the diaphragm  <cit> . spinal facilitation can also occur in the absence of motoneuron recruitment. indeed, single pulse tms produces successive descending volleys, early ones through the direct excitation of pyramidal tract neurons , and later ones through the activation of cortical interneurons . normally, spinal cells require the temporal summation of d- and i-waves to fire  <cit> . if pre-conditioned they can respond to early i-waves or d-waves, as evidenced by studies of single motor unit potentials  <cit>  . for the diaphragm, spinal facilitation of the temporal type has been invoked to explain the effects of changes in the bulbospinal drive to breathe on the response to tms  <cit> . mehiri et al.  <cit>  have indeed observed that superimposing tms upon inspiration rather than expiration shortened the latency of the diaphragm response by about  <dig> ms without modifying the amplitude of the diaphragm meps. this effect was magnified when afferent and cortical traffics were minimized by sleep. straus et al  <cit>  showed that similar changes were provoked by breathing 7% co <dig> 

in the present study, an inspiratory resistance of  <dig> cmh2o/l/s significantly shortened the latency of the diaphragmatic response to inspiratory tms. this shortening was  <dig>  ms on average , which corresponds to similar changes observed with other experimental designs  <cit> . we did not observe a significant change in amplitude, but we acknowledge that this could be due to insufficient statistical power . however, even if this was the case, the effect of resistive breathing on meps amplitudes would still be much less marked than the effect on latencies. according to the above described mechanisms and observations, we postulate that the facilitation of the diaphragm response to transcranial magnetic stimulation that we observed occurred at the spinal level. of note, the lack of influence of resistive breathing on the response of the abductor pollicis brevis to transcranial magnetic stimulation indicates that the observed phenomenon was specific to the diaphragm rather than concerning the corticospinal tract globally. whatever the source of the facilitation of the diaphragm response to tms that inspiratory resistive breathing provoked , this interpretation of our findings is coherent with the integration of afferent, segmental and supraspinal inputs that is characteristic of phrenic motoneurons  <cit> .

putative source of facilitation during resistive breathing 
conceivably, reflex mechanisms increasing the automatic drive to breathe could explain the compensation of inspiratory loading in humans, but data in the literature goes against this hypothesis  <cit> . our subjects did not exhibit signs of increased ventilatory drive when confronted with resistive loading . on the contrary, they exhibited a decreased breathing frequency. the discrepancy between frequency and vt/ti or pm <dig>  probably illustrates the differences in the control of the intensity of ventilatory drive and that of its timing. as a result, it seems safe to rule out facilitation through increased bulbospinal inputs as the explanation of our observations. we acknowledge that, because stimulations were triggered at a fixed pes level and because resistive breathing slowed respiration down, tms was delivered later in inspiration during resistive breathing than during unloaded breathing. the corresponding interval was however sufficiently narrow  not to influence the diaphragm meps latencies .

tms was delivered at a fixed level of inspiratory pressure, and sufficiently early during inspiration for the peak activity of inspiratory muscles to have not yet occurred  <cit> . therefore, the afferent traffic from the diaphragm was probably not very different during free breathing and during loaded breathing. this makes facilitation from afferent stimulation all the more unlikely as the costal diaphragm is poor in spindles  <cit> . in addition, afferent stimulation is associated with larger meps  <cit> , which we did not observe.

the remaining explanation for the inspiratory resistive breathing related facilitation of the diaphragm response to tms would be the activation of suprapontine regions. indeed, fighting an inspiratory resistance can activate multiple such regions  <cit> . the primary motor representation of the diaphragm is not a good candidate because our subjects were not instructed to fight the load, and had to breathe against it in a sustained manner. voluntary load compensation is thus not likely. it would have been expected to induce "spatial" facilitation with an increase in amplitude of diaphragm meps  <cit> , which we failed to observe. finally, inspiratory loading does not seem to activate the sensorimotor cortex  <cit> . inspiratory muscles obey premotor commands  <cit>  likely to originate in the medial premotor cortex  <cit> . there is a cortico-diaphragmatic pathway originating in the supplementary motor area  <cit> . however, the exact "respiratory role" of premotor regions is unknown. these regions are involved in the preparation of movement. their activation could hypothetically be called upon to explain the progressive change in breathing pattern that follows the imposition of an inspiratory load, with a shift from an initially highly variable respiration to a much more steady one  <cit> . as there are direct projections of premotor areas to the phrenic spinal motoneurons, it is reasonable to postulate that the activation of the premotor control of the diaphragm would depolarize them and thus increase their "receptiveness" to a concurrent input , which would explain our findings. this hypothesis is supported by the demonstration that a premotor negativity has a facilitating effect on the response of the target muscle to tms  <cit> . it must be emphasized that the facilitation of the diaphragm response that we observed is most certainly independent of any direct activation of the premotor diaphragm pathway that is best stimulated with a  <dig> mm double cone coil orientated antero-posteriorly and has a higher motor threshold than the primary motor diaphragm pathway  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we submit that inspiratory load compensation in awake humans may involve the activation of a premotor cortical area. confirmatory studies are necessary, but this information could be relevant to a better understanding of the respiratory sensations elicited by inspiratory loading, and possibly to the pathophysiology of diseases where inspiratory load compensation is mandatory to sustain ventilation. in this view, it has been shown that patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease  tend to exhibit facilitated diaphragm response to tms  <cit> . understanding whether, and in what proportion, this is due to an increased ventilatory drive, inspiratory loading, or both would probably be worthwhile.

