BACKGROUND
the french neuroanatomist and anthropologist paul broca was the first to present evidence that the circuits involved in speech production could be localized in a relatively distinct area  <cit> . broca's findings also pointed towards a link between speech impairment and damage to the left side of the brain, and in the meantime, the observation of left hemispheric dominance in both production and perception of the semantic and syntactical aspects, and a right hemisphere dominance for the processing of prosodic and emotional aspects of speech, has attained the status of a firmly supported scientific finding  <cit> . more recently, comparative research has shown that lateralized processing of acoustic stimuli is not restricted to humans  <cit> . most important for the current topic, a number of studies involving neuroanatomical, physiological and behavioural methods revealed hemispheric lateralization in the processing of species-specific sounds in non-human primates analogous to the processing of speech stimuli in humans . japanese macaques, macaca fuscata, for instance, revealed a right ear advantage – corresponding to a left hemispheric dominance – when they were trained to discriminate communicatively important features in their species-specific sounds  <cit> . after lesioning of the left superior temporal gyrus , members of the same species showed a stronger postoperative decrement in the discrimination of species-specific calls than after an equivalent lesioning of the right stg. finally, measuring local cerebral metabolic activity to directly detect auditory processing asymmetries in rhesus monkeys , poremba and colleagues  <cit>  found a greater amount of activity in the left temporal pole in response to species-specific calls as opposed to any other sounds .

however, many of these methodological approaches are either invasive or require extensive training of the subjects. therefore, a simple assay introduced by hauser and andersson  <cit>  has gained considerable attention and led to a series of follow-up studies in other species. this assay was first used on a population of free-ranging rhesus monkeys living on the island of cayo santiago. in this paradigm, a speaker was hidden directly behind subjects that were sitting in front of a food dispenser. when the animals were aligned with the speaker, either a species-specific vocalization or a bird alarm call was played and the direction of the head-turn response  was recorded. in the following, we will refer to this experimental design as the 'head turning paradigm'. these experiments and a number of follow-up studies revealed that the monkeys preferentially turned with their right ear leading when exposed to species-specific calls, and with their left ear leading in response to hetero-specific or manipulated species-specific calls  <cit> . this finding was interpreted as a demonstration of a left-hemispheric processing bias for species-specific vocalisations and a right-hemispheric bias for hetero-specific calls. while a left-hemispheric dominance for processing of species-specific calls is in line with the majority of neurophysiological and neuroanatomical research, none of these studies showed a right-hemispheric dominance for hetero-specific sounds .

more importantly, a number of recent studies employing the head turning paradigm in other species suggested a more complex pattern . vervet monkeys, chlorocebus aethiops, for example, were reported to have a left-turning  bias for processing species-specifics' calls  <cit>  and no bias for hetero-specific sounds, while neither barbary macaques, m. sylvanus,  <cit>  nor mouse lemurs, microcebus murinus,  <cit>  turned preferentially with either their right or left ear leading in response to playback of species-specific or hetero-specific sounds. interestingly though, the mouse lemurs showed sex differences in orienting behaviour, but only in response to specific calls  <cit> . finally, analogous to rhesus monkeys, california sea lions, zalophus californianus, turned preferentially with their right ear leading in response to species-specific calls but by contrast to rhesus monkeys showed no bias in response to hetero-specific calls  <cit> , while dogs turned with their right ear leading to conspecifics' vocalizations and with their left ear leading when presented with thunder  <cit>  in an experimental setting where these sounds were played from both sides simultaneously.

the inconsistent pattern of findings using the orienting paradigm in different species might be a result of an unexpectedly complex pattern of the phylogenetic distribution of hemispheric lateralization in closely related species. alternatively, these findings might point towards methodological problems of the orienting paradigm, a possibility that appears to be supported by within-species inconsistencies between the orienting paradigm and more established measures of lateralized acoustic processing . it thus seems vital to substantiate the connection between turning bias and lateralised processing before the orienting paradigm can be used to explore brain lateralization.

the purpose of the present study was to examine the link between orienting asymmetries and hemispheric lateralization in the processing of sounds in adult humans. humans constitute an ideal test case as the lateralized processing of speech is firmly established . to our knowledge, this is the first study that systematically scrutinises whether such lateralized processing indeed leads to reliable orienting asymmetries, as postulated by previous studies in nonhuman primates and other animals. to examine this link, we combined naturalistic behavioural experiments with neuroimaging techniques. the behavioural experiments were conducted in a fashion that approximated the test conditions used in the animal studies. that is, each subject was tested only once in a 'real life' situation where the subject was unaware of the purpose and the occurrence of the experiment. speech stimuli and artificial sounds were played directly behind subjects shopping in a supermarket. the first set of these experiments was conducted in germany. in light of the results , we ran a second set of experiments in the uk to explore the possible influence of experience in a left vs. a right driving country. functional magnetic resonance imaging  was used on a separate population in germany to validate the lateralized processing of the speech stimuli employed in the naturalistic experiment in a german population.

based on previous research, we expected a left hemispheric dominance for the processing of the speech stimuli and bilateral activation for the artificial sounds in the fmri experiments. in accordance with the underlying assumptions of the orienting paradigm, and the left-hemisphere dominance for speech processing, we predicted that  subjects would preferentially turn with the right ear leading when presented with human speech sounds, while they should reveal no bias in response to the presentation of artificial sounds.

although the fmri data confirmed the assumption of stronger left hemisphere activation for the speech sounds and bilateral activation for artificial sounds, the naturalistic behavioural experiments revealed no difference in orienting behaviour in relation to the stimulus category . overall, subjects turned left more frequently, and this tendency was slightly, but not significantly stronger in german subjects.

RESULTS
behavioural data
for the german sample, significantly more people turned left than right after playback of the speech sounds . upon presentation of the artificial sounds, the tendency to turn left did not reach significance . there was no significant difference between the two conditions in the propensity to turn left . to examine a possible influence of experience on orienting behaviour in a left vs. a right-driving country, we initiated a second set of experiments in the uk. we used the same artificial sounds, but english speech stimuli. subjects revealed no significant orienting bias in either of the conditions . a multinomial logistic regression with the factors stimulus category, country and gender revealed a slight but not significant influence of the country where the experiment was conducted, no other significant effects and no significant interactions .

results are based on a multinomial regression. since there were no significant interactions, these were removed from the final model. - <dig> ll = - <dig> log-likelihood

these results stand in stark contrast to our prediction of a right turning bias in response to speech that was based on the assumption of a specific coupling of lateralized processing of stimuli and a turning bias. to corroborate the lateralized processing of the sound stimuli used in the experiments, we therefore used functional magnetic resonance imaging to assess the processing of the sounds. for logistic reasons, we restricted this analysis to a comparison of the german speech sounds vs. the artificial sounds in a german study population.

fmri experiment
behavioural performance
we presented different sounds in a  sound localization task in which participants were asked to judge whether the sound was presented "from the left or right" by manipulating inter-aural time differences . our analysis was restricted to those trials where sounds revealed no itd . subjects were naïve to the fact that such trials also occurred.

responses to auditory stimuli presented from the 0° position were slightly biased towards the right in both conditions , but these biases were not significantly different from chance: for speech,  <dig> subjects showed a right  bias, seven a left  bias, and one subject no bias ; in the artificial condition,  <dig> subjects showed a r bias, five a l bias, and three no bias . a repeated-measured anova with the within-subject factor stimulus and the between-subjects factor gender showed no main effect of the stimulus category  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ), no influence of gender  and no significant interaction between stimulus × gender .

contrasted with the visual control condition, each auditory location task elicited overlapping activations in a network comprising superior temporal regions and the parietal operculum, with maximal activation in the left and right gyrus of heschl. direct contrasts revealed activations in the left brodmann area   <dig>   and in the superior temporal gyrus bilaterally  for speech in contrast to artificial sounds . when contrasting speech stimuli virtually presented 0° from behind with those virtually presented 10° or 20° from behind, activation was found in broca's area . this effect was exclusively found for speech sounds.

discussion
contrary to our predictions, we found no significant difference of the orienting behaviour in relation to the stimulus category despite the fact that we did observe differential lateralized brain activation as a response to the different stimuli. specifically, the left ba  <dig>  and frontal operculum showed a higher activation for speech in contrast to artificial sounds. in combination with the naturalistic behavioural experiments, these results indicate that in humans, hemispheric lateralization in the processing of sounds is not necessarily linked to a preferential contra-lateral orienting response.

across the categories, subjects in the naturalistic behavioural experiment revealed a left turning bias. this bias was more pronounced in the german population, and attained significance in response to speech stimuli. the source of this strong tendency to turn left after presentation of the speech sounds and the tendency of the english sample to show a weaker left turning bias is presently unclear. one possibility is that the orienting behaviour is governed by a tendency to shift attention to the left side in spatial tasks – in line with the assumption of a right hemisphere dominance in this domain  <cit> . on the other hand, when participants were instructed to attend to the sound source, they revealed a bias to attribute sounds coming from the 0° position as coming from the right, suggesting that spatial orientation is modulated by context  <cit> . further behavioural experiments  suggest that this tendency is not restricted to the experimental situation but related to the instruction to localize the sound source. thus, the results suggest that orienting responses can also be affected by the specific demands of the task employed. for practical reasons, we had to rely on self-report data regarding handedness. obviously, this may introduce a certain degree of error, since different assessments of handedness may come to different conclusions  <cit> . if lateralized processing of speech, however, would lead to an asymmetry in orienting behavior equivalent to that found in some of the animal studies , we should still have seen an effect. this was not the case.

the fmri data clearly demonstrated a lateralized processing of the speech stimuli used in the experiments. as an exclusive finding for speech sounds, activity in broca's area was further boosted when speech sounds were presented directly from behind. we take this to reflect a differential processing of the stimulus material in the different conditions and a further evidence for lateralized brain responses to speech. obviously, the experimental conditions in the naturalistic setting differed from the situation during image acquisition in the scanner, where subjects were instructed to pay attention to a particular feature  and where they were exposed to repeated presentations. both experimental modifications were deemed necessary to allow for the acquisition of imaging data without running the danger that brain activation simply reflects the default state of brain activity  <cit> . irrespective of these modifications, the imaging data clearly show that the speech stimuli used in the experiments evoked lateralized processing while the artificial stimuli did not. we are thus able to rule out the possibility that the lack of stimulus-dependent orienting behaviour was due to a lack of lateralized processing of the speech stimuli.

taken together, our results suggest that lateralized processing of sounds does not inevitably lead to orienting biases under experimental conditions like in this study or the other studies that employed this paradigm on  free ranging animals. the comparison of the results in the naturalistic setting and under experimental conditions suggests that the task demands may affect the orienting behaviour, and it might be possible that further factors influence orienting responses. we are also aware that our experimental situation in the supermarket was not identical to the one employed for the animals where sounds were typically presented from a hidden speaker, and not from a conspecifics carrying one. possibly, under different experimental conditions, a weak link between lateralized processing and orienting behaviour might be detected, as is the case for the dichotomous listening paradigm. regarding the application of the head-turning paradigm, however, the contribution of other factors may mask orienting biases related to the stimulus material renders the use of the orienting assay for determining lateralized processing of sounds questionable at best. the further use of this paradigm to uncover lateralized processing of sounds is therefore discouraged.

CONCLUSIONS
we found no contingency between lateralized processing of sounds and orienting biases. overall, the participants revealed a tendency to turn left in the naturalistic behavioural experiments; this tendency was slightly stronger in german subjects. a comparison with the response bias in the fmri experiments, where subjects revealed a slight bias to the right in a sound localization task, indicates that various factors such as task instructions and the experimental setting may have an effect on orienting biases. our results – as well as the inconsistent orienting biases found in different animal species – suggest that the orienting assay applied in naturalistic settings should be used with caution. in particular, it does not seem to be possible to infer lateralized processing from orienting biases alone  <cit> . unfortunately, therefore, the further use of this paradigm to uncover hemispheric lateralization cannot be recommended.

