BACKGROUND
most eukaryotic genes are composed by exons and introns, requiring pre-mrna splicing. although splicing occurs with incredible fidelity, a high rate of alternative joining of exons has been observed. alternative splicing can be mainly of three types: exon skipping, whereby an exon may be included or not in the mature mrna, alternative use of splice sites, resulting in longer or shorter exons and intron retention , whereby an intron sequence is maintained in the mature transcript or spliced out of it .

intron retention is unexpected since it affects mrna transport to the cytoplasm  <cit>  and can insert premature stop codons in the mature transcript that would then be degraded by non-sense mediated decay  <cit> . in fact, decreasing the levels of mrnas of a given gene can be a function of alternative splicing  <cit> . this, however, is not the fate of all mrnas with a retained intron. for example, an isoform of the mouse tgif <dig> gene that retains an intron in the coding region was shown to have biological activity  <cit> . furthermore, we have previously shown that introns retained in the human transcriptome bear signals of being biologically functional as gc content and codon usage similar to those of coding exons and the capacity of encoding protein domains  <cit> .

in respect to the mechanistic nature of ir, the most intuitive explanation is that these introns are flanked by weak splice sites that occasionally are not properly recognized. stamm and coworkers  <cit>  observed weaker conservation of splice sites flanking retained introns. studies with human genes have shown that strengthening sub-optimal splice sites flanking retained introns caused an increase in their removal levels  <cit>  or completely abolished retention  <cit> . on the other hand, other studies showed that weakening optimal splice sites leads to intron retention .

interestingly, all the introns involved in these studies were short . this may have a mechanistic reason according to current models of splice site recognition. in the exon definition model  <cit> , splice sites are recognized throughout the exons, which in vertebrates are usually shorter than introns. in this case, the non-recognition of a pair of weak splice sites would lead to the skipping of an exon, rather than to ir. however, in organisms whose exons are normally longer than introns , splice site pairs seem to be recognized throughout introns, the intron definition model  <cit> . the prevalence of one mechanism over the other seems to be based on the recognition of the shortest unit, either an intron or an exon over which a protein "bridge" connects two exon borders  <cit> . therefore, even in vertebrates, short introns could be the recognition unit for splicing and in this case ir is expected if splice sites are not properly recognized  <cit> .

in addition to splice site variation, some studies showed that the expression of the intron retaining and intron spliced isoforms varies along tissues  <cit>  indicating that cellular factors are also involved in the control of intron retention. in fact, splice site recognition depends on several factors as for example regulatory elements located in the mrna sequence and on the concentration of protein factors . it has been shown that the presence of specific cis-regulatory elements can indeed counterbalance retention of individual introns  <cit> .

although the studies mentioned above provide an experimental basis for ir on specific genes, a generalized model based on a large quantity of data is still missing. this model could reveal how different factors contribute to the frequency of ir. we sought to identify potential sequence features that may be associated with this type of alternative splicing by examining the contrasting features of two sets of retained introns found in human cdnas. one set corresponded to those cases in which the intron retaining isoform was the minor splice form and the other in which it was the major form. we found that a higher relative frequency of ir is associated with weaker splice sites, genes with overall short intron lengths, higher expression levels and particular densities of regulatory elements.

RESULTS
ir events were identified on human cdna sequences aligned to the genome. an event was considered to be any occurrence of at least one cdna defining an intron through the existence of its flanking exons plus at least one other spliced cdna containing at least parts  of the flanking exons and the intron .

in order to understand how splice site strength controls ir, we analyzed retained introns partitioned into two categories, according to their relative isoform frequencies . the low-rif group contained ir events where the intron retaining cdna was the minor form  and the high-rif group contained those events where it was the major form . as we wanted to contrast features of the groups of ir events with different relative frequencies of ir, events with an equal number of intron retaining and intron defining evidences  were not considered.

the initial set of events  was filtered to produce a higher quality data set. only those events where both the intron retaining and intron defining forms were confirmed by at least two cdnas each, presenting no alternative borders  and retaining introns longer than  <dig> nt were accepted. the filtered data set was composed by  <dig> low and  <dig> high-rif ir events.

a few retained introns flanked by non-canonical splice sites were found in the filtered data set . as they were not g..ag introns and in several cases different non-canonical splice sites could be obtained by adjustments in the alignment, they were excluded from the filtered data set . information about the final data sets is presented in table  <dig> 

*  <dig> clusters presented both low and high-rif events 

** ≥  <dig> distinct retained introns in the same gene, see discussion

splice site strength as a cause of intron retention
for each rif group, 5' and 3' splice sites had their information contents calculated . the sequence logos show that splice sites of the low-rif group  resemble those that flank constitutive exons  but the polypyrimidine tract is weaker when compared to constitutive exons. in the high-rif group, splice sites are less conserved and present an even weaker polypyrimidine tract, indicating that the high frequency of ir is due to weaker splice sites . stamm and coworkers  <cit>  also observed that retained introns present a higher deviation of the polypyrimidine tract in comparison to other types of alternative splicing. also, it is interesting to note that short drosophila introns do not present a strong polypyrimidine tract  <cit>  and that its absence favors the intron definition model  <cit> .

reinforcing the idea that weak splice sites are a cause of ir, there is a weak negative correlation between splice site strength and the frequency of retention as measured using the shapiro and senapathy scoring scheme  and the rif within each group . the low correlation coefficients found suggest that the rif is influenced by several other factors besides the splice site strength. also, the rif as calculated here is only a rough estimation since it does not take into account tissue variability, library normalization and possible cloning bias.

another way to view the dependence of rif on splice site strength is to compare the frequencies of splice sites with different s&s scores in the two rif groups . as expected, there is a higher percentage of low-rif introns with high s&s scores . however, about half of the retained introns in both rif groups presented s&s scores in the range of 140– <dig> , yielding equal odds of being retained in low or high relative frequencies. this observation further indicates that other important factors play a role in determining the frequency of intron retention.

the influence of flanking exon and intron lengths in intron retention
based on the study of retention of a  <dig> nt intron flanked by  <dig> and  <dig> nt exons  <cit>  and observations in drosophila introns, talerico and berget  <cit>  proposed that in vertebrates, retention would happen when introns and flanking exons are small. in the data sets analyzed here, the two exons flanking the retained intron have approximately the average length of human internal exons , with very few cases of very short exons . also, individual examples of ir from the literature involve exons with regular lengths . therefore, intron retention does not seem to be related to micro-exons.

in organisms like drosophila  <cit>  and s. pombe  <cit> , introns shorter than exons are recognized instead of the exons and weakening of splice sites frequently leads to intron retention. in vertebrates, ir frequently involves short introns . therefore, the length of introns is probably an important feature in the mechanism of ir, in agreement with the intron definition model. indeed, figure 3c shows a bias for short retained introns in both rif groups. however, it is difficult to assess whether this trend is real using cdna data, since ests bias the data for short introns. although in  <cit>  the authors found a difference in the length of introns retained in different frequencies, the lack of such difference in our data may be due to the fact that by requiring each event to be represented by at least  <dig> cdnas, the events identified by us were those with short introns in both rif groups that had a higher chance of being sequenced multiple times. one study that did not use ests to identify intron retention events, employed instead only the extent of genomic sequence conserved in human and mouse as a predictor  <cit> . the mean length of the  <dig> retained introns identified was also small .

although this bias for retention of short introns may also be a result of selection for inclusion of short sequences, another indirect evidence that supports a possible mechanistic relation of short introns and retention is the higher frequency of shorter non-retained introns in intron retaining genes. the average length of introns in our data set is  <dig> nt , close to previous findings . genes presenting a low rif have shorter introns , close to the length of introns of housekeeping genes , according to  <cit> . non-retained introns of the high-rif group are also shorter . in agreement with this observation, the mean length of non-retaining introns of the genes with intron retention identified by  <cit>  without est data is  <dig> nt ±  <dig>  of the 21). it is possible that this overall shorter length of introns increases the chance of a gene to undergo intron retention.

the last feature related to short introns analyzed was the size of "exon + retained intron + exon" units. whereas the mean length of retained introns + flanking exons units is around  <dig> nt , the mean lengths of "exon + non-retained intron + exon" units are considerably greater , following the lengths of non-retained introns alone. the means are not greater than those of the corresponding non-retained introns alone, as it would be expected, because the lengths of "exon + intron + exon" units were calculated only for internal exons, excluding first introns in the 5' utr, which are typically longer . figure 3d shows the distribution of lengths of "exon + retained intron + exon" units . independently of a length bias for retention, the fact that many of the ir units are shorter than  <dig> nt, only slightly above the length limit for exon definition of  <dig> nt  <cit> , suggests that this observation may have a mechanistic reason for at least part of the events as we discuss later.

genes presenting intron retention are more highly and broadly expressed than other genes
housekeeping genes are defined as those genes that are highly expressed in most, if not all tissues and present a compact structure . figure  <dig> shows that there is a bias for intron retaining genes to be expressed in many tissues in both rif groups, indicating a slight enrichment of housekeeping genes or genes broadly expressed. in addition, housekeeping genes from  <cit>  used here as a positive control, presented a higher expression than all genes considered together  in all tissues available . genes with ir presented expression levels per tissue lower than housekeeping genes, but higher than all genes in 25/ <dig>  and 14/ <dig>  tissues .

we also observed that there is a correlation between rif and expression levels of genes . note that the correlation is negative for the low-rif and positive for the high-rif group. one explanation is that higher expression levels increase the amount of all transcripts, both of the minor and the major forms, but under these circumstances, very rare forms also appear. rare splice forms in the low-rif group will be those with strong splice sites that very rarely retain an intron, resulting in the appearance of events with low retention/non-retention ratios only with higher expression . the reverse would be true for the high-rif group, in which rare forms will be those with very weak splice sites that only rarely remove the intron, and only with higher expression .

such association of higher expression and rif may be either because higher expression increases the error rate of the splicing machinery, specially because it seems that splicing occurs co-transcriptionally  <cit> , or simply allows ir  to be detected since more transcripts are produced. this latter explanation is attractive because we verified that clusters that presented intron retention have more cdnas than all other genes .

distribution and density of splicing cis-regulators
cis-regulatory elements , intronic splicing enhancers and silencers ), play an important role in constitutive and alternative splicing by acting as binding sites for trans-factors that promote  or inhibit  splicing . for example, a gaa ese was shown to be crucial to counterbalance retention of intron d of the bovine growth hormone gene  <cit>  and of intron  <dig> of the 9g <dig> splicing factor gene  <cit> .

as not all motifs corresponding to cis-regulatory elements found in exons or introns are functional, one hypothesis is that they are present in higher densities  in the sequences they act  <cit> . recently, wang et al  <cit>  showed that a particular set of esss that enhance splicing of retained introns is enriched in these sequences.

to evaluate whether the different rifs are associated with different densities of cis-regulatory elements, we scanned retained and non-retained introns, as well as exons of the same genes, for known regulatory motifs . the average densities of selex-eses  in exons and of fas-hex <dig> esss in retained and non-retained introns shown in table  <dig> were in the range found previously .

mean densities in italics are lower than in exons , mean densities in boldface are higher than in exons . the sign +i indicates that the density of the motif in retained introns is significantly higher  than in non-retained introns, -i indicates it is lower.

in comparison to exons, non-retained introns were found to be poor in eses, in accordance to a previous study  <cit> , and enriched with esss and the ise ggg .

retained introns were also different from exons, but with slightly higher densities of selex-eses, intermediary to exons and non-retained introns . this trend was not observed for rescue-eses and gaa, probably because these motifs are purine-rich . it seems that the peculiar nucleotide composition of retained introns can harbor less purine-rich motifs, but selex-eses are not affected in the same way, since they have a different nucleotide composition .

major differences between the low and high-rif groups are those related to the densities of ggg and esss. low-rif retained introns presented a slightly higher density of ggg than non-retained introns, whereas high-rif retained introns presented the opposite trend . in regard to fas-hex <dig> esss, wang et al  <cit>  showed that class  <dig> esss are actually under-represented in retained introns in relation to non-retained introns, which was also observed in our data for both rif groups. class  <dig> fas-esss, however, followed the same trend of ggg, showing higher densities in the low-rif than in non-retained introns and lower densities in the high-rif group . this difference between class  <dig> and class  <dig> esss is probably related to the fact that the latter are g-rich .

as ir will result in one long exon, being the commonest isoform of the high-rif group, we evaluated the possibility that such differential motif distribution between flanking exons and retained introns could be actually typical of an architecture of long exons , and not to retained introns themselves. analysis of exons of length between 300– <dig> nt and >  <dig> nt showed that these sequences do not present the pattern observed for "exon + retained intron + exon" units . rather, the flanking segments and pseudo-retained introns presented motif densities similar to exons in general and therefore higher than those of retained and non-retained introns, indicating that the observed differences in table  <dig> are specific to introns that are retained.

the ess/ggg densities observed could suggest that cis-regulatory elements play a role in differentially regulating ir in the two rif groups. a higher ess/ggg density in low-rif retained introns could increase the efficiency of intron splicing  whereas for high-rif introns, the inverse would be true. the basis for this argument is that knocking out different ggg triplets in the second intron of α-globin  <dig> leads to different levels of intron retention  <cit>  and that inserting esss in the frequently retained intron  <dig> of the nkiras <dig> gene increased the levels of the spliced form  <cit> . this would explain why introns with s&s score in the range of 140– <dig> can be retained in both low and high rifs .

the interpretation of the slightly higher sf2/asf and sc <dig> densities observed in retained introns is not straightforward. although it might be only due to a biased nucleotide composition, another possibility is that these eses could help defining short "exon + retained intron + exon" units as a single exon , increasing retention. the other possibility is an action in the recognition of splice sites. although eses are exonic by definition, sr proteins binding to introns was shown to both increase and decrease splicing in different studies . if these eses increase intron splicing in the events analyzed here, they would counterbalance intron retention. both cases could be happening in different intron retention events, but the fact that low-rif densities for sf2/asf and sc <dig> are higher than in high-rif could indicate that their role is in counterbalancing intron retention. however, the signals are too subtle to allow definite conclusions to be made.

one could argue that both the higher density of selex-eses and lower ess/ggg density in the high-rif set of retained introns could be due to selection on sequences that occasionally are exonic, but this possibility is challenged by rescue-ese and class  <dig> fas-ess, whose densities are similar to bona fide non-retained introns.

conservation of the frequency of intron retention in mouse
evolutionary conservation of given features is often taken as a signal of biological function, under the assumption that negative selection is acting on them. studying conserved ir events could support the observations made with human data and therefore help understanding the mechanism of intron retention. as the criteria we used to select high-confidence human ir events may have filtered out true events, in this analysis we searched the mouse genome and transcriptome for all the ir events initially detected. with the exception of the number of conserved events, all other data  were the same when searching only filtered human events.

 <dig> only introns with similar lengths and borders in human and mouse were considered

 <dig> conserved in the mouse if the event presented ≥  <dig> cdna with the retained intron and ≥  <dig> without. non-conserved: only the major form was found in mouse cdnas

 <dig> the total number of events  corresponds only to those events from row  <dig> with a least one mouse cdna aligned to the genomic region corresponding to the event

 <dig> with the exception of the high information content of the 3'ss of the low-rif group, values were very similar to those observed for human

most ir events presented only the major form in mouse , being considered non-conserved. those events that presented both minor and major forms in both human and mouse were deemed conserved . among these events, 22/ <dig> in the low-rif and 7/ <dig> in the high-rif group presented conserved rifs. according to our supposition, 8/ <dig> and 2/ <dig> of the human low and high-rif events, respectively, had been filtered out. this indicates that our filter was stringent, removing possible true events, and considering all the events in the mouse analysis was adequate. the small percentage of events found to be conserved is probably due to the lack of cdna data covering the homologous region, rather than lack of conservation.

interestingly, conserved retained introns presented a high percent identity, irrespective of the rif group , close to that of exons in general, whereas those human ir events of the low-rif group which presented only the major form in mouse presented the same percent identity of non-retained introns .

as observed for human there was a difference in the information content of splice sites, those of the low-rif group showing higher conservation . irrespective of the frequency of retention, retained introns in the mouse were considerably shorter than the average non-retained introns. data for the distribution and density of cis-regulatory elements are not provided for mouse conserved events due to the extremely reduced size of the data set. it is worth noting, however, that the trend of ggg/ess density in conserved events was consistent with that of human, i.e. notably higher in low-rif retained introns.

discussion
the main problem in analyzing ir is to guarantee that the events are authentic alternative splicing occurrences and not part of partially processed messages. however, the fact that we found a mechanistically coherent association of splice site strength and differential densities of cis-regulatory motifs with the two rif groups  indicates that our data set contains a large fraction of authentic ir events.

in agreement with previous experimental observations on individual vertebrate retained introns  <cit>  and with bioinformatic analyses  <cit> , we found that ir is associated with weaker splice sites. we extended this general observation showing that a decrease in splice site strength leads to higher relative frequencies of retention. however, a non-negligible fraction of events bear strong splice sites. extending a previous observation that a specific set of esss was able to inhibit intron retention  <cit> , we showed that there is an inverse association of the density of these regulatory elements  with the frequency of ir. the fact that a considerable fraction of low-rif retained introns presented strong splice sites and high ggg/ess density indicates that other factors more complex than those studied here are also involved in the regulation of this type of alternative splicing as for example the relative concentration of trans-factors, the formation of secondary structures in the rna molecule or the dependence of splicing of upstream introns for retention of a specific intron, as observed for the thrombopoietin gene  <cit> .

although cdna data sets like ours are possibly biased for short retained introns, other observations, not directly based on cdna data, support the notion that such introns are short . together with our observation that genes with ir present overall shorter introns these data suggest that this may have mechanistic reasons for at least part of the events. one attractive possibility is that these short retained introns are part of longer units  that are at times recognized as single long exons and at times as split "exon + intron + exon" structures. in support to this view, flanking exons seem to have the length of exons in general. in addition, the retained introns  contain intronic features necessary to be occasionally spliced out, such as  cryptic splice sites and splicing enhancers as ggg triplets that enhance intron removal through intron definition  <cit>  and esss. according to our data, in this model the relative frequency of retention would be regulated by the strength of splice sites and ggg/ess density.

based on this scenario, we propose a mechanism  as part of a bipartite model to explain how introns are retained and spliced out. model a was also proposed by sterner and berget  <cit>  when analyzing in vivo intron retention of an "exon + intron + exon" sequence shorter than  <dig> nt from chicken troponin i with the intron 5'ss mutated. later, talerico and berget  <cit>  suggested that this would be the general mechanism for intron retention in vertebrates.

the mechanism in model a could be related to the fact that handling long exons is complicated for vertebrate spliceosomes  <cit>  and it is tempting to speculate that the model could be extended to "exon + retained intron + exon" units longer than 300– <dig> nt. it was observed that an expanded exon of  <dig> nt could not be correctly spliced, but suffered internal splicing, creating three new small exons of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> nt and two introns shorter than  <dig> nt each. when expanding to  <dig> nt, two exons of  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides and one intron were created  <cit> . these observations support the idea proposed in model a that retained introns would use weak internal cryptic splice sites that are recognized during exon definition of a long exon.

however, we also verified that there are cases where retained introns are much longer than those known to be defined and would not fit in the relatively short "exon + intron + exon" units above. for these cases, we propose an alternative, and speculative, model  that does not involve intron definition. this mechanism implies that the introns flanking the retained one should be removed first, i.e., intron removal order may dictate the outcome of the splicing pattern, which has already been observed to influence exon skipping  <cit> . occasionally, the transition from e to a or even from a to b complex , which are possible points of alternative splicing regulation  <cit> , could suffer some kind of interruption due to the weakness of splice sites, halting later steps and retaining the intron.

gene expression level would not be an intrinsic part of the model proposed above, but may contribute by even abolishing intron retention in tissues where expression is lower. the occurrence of more than one event per gene specially in the low-rif group may be related to the fact that these genes present overall shorter introns, increasing the probability of an intron being retained through model a. with higher gene expression, retention of introns with moderately strong splice sites would be facilitated, though in low frequency. for introns to be retained in high frequency, splice sites would have to be considerably weaker, which due to selection are found in a minority of the introns, and therefore the chance of multiple events happening in the same gene is probably smaller.

CONCLUSIONS
although splice site strength is associated with a large fraction of ir events and in these cases is likely to determine whether an intron will be retained, and also in which frequency, other factors seem to be crucial in driving the regulation of this type of alternative splicing. the presence of specific regulatory motifs, by counterbalancing splice site strength, mainly for those introns that have moderately high splice sites scores seem to be very important in driving the frequency of ir. other features as intron length and even gene expression, together with still unknown factors, also seem to play important roles in the regulation of this phenomenon.

