BACKGROUND
glomerular visceral epithelial cells or podocytes comprise the outermost layer of the glomerular filtration apparatus. the podocytic slit diaphragm  is a specialized cell junction that keeps adjacent foot processes inter-connected  <cit> . the loss of podocyte-specific proteins is reminiscent of dedifferentiation, which has also been described as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition   <cit> . tubular epithelial cells also undergo dedifferentiation in vitro after incubation with fibrogenic tgf-β  <cit> . injurious stimuli trigger different responses, ranging from podocytic hypertrophy and detachment to apoptosis  <cit> . under these pathological conditions podocytes lose their specialized features and phenotype and may acquire mesenchymal markers  <cit> . this has been shown to be the case in hiv-induced nephropathy and collapsing glomerulopathy  <cit>  as well as tgf-β-induced podocyte injury  <cit> .

pivotal podocytic markers include the antiadhesive protein podocalyxin , which regulates podocyte morphology, as well as foot process formation and maintenance  <cit>  and the sd-specific transmembrane protein nephrin, which is also implicated in the pathophysiology of proteinuria  <cit> . glucose induces pc suppression in vivo, in glomeruli of streptozotocin-diabetic rats  <cit>  and in vitro in human glomerular epithelial cells   <cit> . nephrin reduction in hgec can be induced by glucose  <cit>  and may be related to side-effects of glycated albumin/ages  <cit> . the intracellular domain of nephrin associates with cd2ap  <cit> , an adaptor molecule which plays a major role in the maintenance of podocyte phenotype due to its cytoskeleton stabilizing properties  <cit> . a cell surface marker that has long been considered a differentiation marker of renal epithelium is common acute lymphoblastic leukemia antigen   <cit> . another protein used as a differentiation marker is vimentin, an intermediate filament protein characteristic of cells of mesenchymal origin. upregulation of its expression is considered a major criterion for emt  <cit>  and of podocyte injury as reported in pan nephrosis in rats  <cit> .

hgec exhibit a regular cobblestone appearance in culture and their phenotype agrees with that of parental podocytes  <cit> . glucose-induced pc supression in hgec cannot be restored by reverting glucose concentration to normal levels for either short or longer time intervals  <cit> . therefore, we investigated whether hgec exposure to high glucose resulted in loss of the differentiated podocytic characteristics and determined the time points when this phenotypic modulation takes place. our results indicated that loss of pc surface expression coincided with reduced cd10/calla surface levels, while cd2ap expression was not altered. moreover, loss of nephrin expression accompanied the glucose-induced downregulation of pc and cd10/calla, establishing that suppression of pc surface expression occurred earlier, when other pivotal podocytic markers were still unaffected. these observations indicated that pc downregulation occurs in podocytes still possessing some of their characteristics.

RESULTS
transient culture of hgec in high glucose resulted in reversible upregulation of vimentin protein expression
vimentin is a well-known mesenchymal marker and its upregulation is considered a significant marker of dedifferentiation  <cit>  and podocyte injury  <cit> . since hgec permanently grown in 25 mm glucose  display almost totally suppressed pc levels, compared to hgec exposed to 5 mm glucose   <cit> , we examined whether this change could be attributed to dysregulation of the podocytic phenotype, earmarked by enhanced vimentin expression. western blot analysis demonstrated that vimentin expression was upregulated in hgec:25 mm . elevated vimentin expression levels were established following 6 weeks of culture in 25 mm glucose  . vimentin expression reached maximal levels following 18 weeks of culture  in 25 mm glucose  , suggesting that modulation of the podocytic characteristics occurred progressively with time. in order to determine the time points at which alterations in expression levels of vimentin, as well as other important proteins expressed in podocytes occurred, hgec were exposed to 25 mm glucose for  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  18 weeks. from this time course an early time point  and a late time point  were selected in order to investigate whether glucose effects were reversible. the early time point was chosen because it signifies upregulation of the mesenchymal marker vimentin and the late time point was chosen because alterations were maximal. accordingly, we then examined whether the observed change in vimentin expression could be restored to normal levels, at the early  time point  and the late  time point . hgec exposed to 25 mm glucose for 6 weeks were reverted to normal glucose levels  for another 4 weeks . additionally hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/18w were cultured in 5 mm glucose for  <dig> more weeks . in both time intervals, early and late, vimentin reverted to lower, normal levels of expression.

in vitro culturing of hgec in the presence of high glucose levels resulted in permanent downregulation of cd10/calla protein expression
we examined the expression of cd10/calla in a similar manner to vimentin. facs analysis showed that hgec:5 mm expressed cd10/calla . on the contrary, hgec:25 mm demonstrated significantly reduced cell surface-associated levels . significantly reduced cd10/calla surface levels were established following 2 weeks of culture in 25 mm glucose   and remained downregulated following  <dig>  and 18 weeks of culture in 25 mm glucose  . cd10/calla surface levels remained significantly reduced after reverting glucose concentration to 5 mm for 18 weeks  . we next examined whether the observed downregulation of cd10/calla could be reversed at early  and late  time intervals, in hgec sequentially grown in 5 mm glucose . in both instances cd10/calla remained reduced suggesting permanent glucose-induced downregulation of its expression.

reversible phenotypic changes of expression in cultured podocytes are accompanied by normal levels of cell surface-associated nephrin
hgec:25 mm displayed severely reduced nephrin expression compared to hgec:5 mm  <cit> . nephrin expression remained suppressed even 12 weeks after reverting glucose concentration to 5 mm glucose levels  <cit> .

since nephrin associated with cell surface was demonstrated to play a major role in the development of proteinuric diseases  <cit> , we next examined cell surface-associated nephrin by immunocytochemical and facs approaches. in hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/4w, surface nephrin levels were downregulated  and remained reduced in hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/6w and hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/18w as well as in hgec 25 mm-to-5 mm/18w . however, in hgec:25 mm/6w-to-5 mm/4w, and hgec:25 mm/18w-to-5 mm/4w, cell surface-associated nephrin was restored to normal levels, similar to those observed in hgec:5 mm . in order to verify whether these findings were not only associated with cell surface nephrin expression but may also correspond to total protein levels, immunoblotting experiments were performed that confirmed our immunocytochemical and facs analyses .

in vitro culturing of hgec in high glucose transiently reduced cd2ap expression
western blot analysis and immunofluorescence studies indicated that cell surface expression of cd2ap was not affected by high glucose at 2 weeks  . hgec:5 mm and hgec:25 mm displayed a punctuate pattern of cd2ap expression . significantly reduced cd2ap expression was observed following 18 weeks of exposure to 25 mm glucose  . however, cd2ap levels were not reduced in hgec permanently grown in 25 mm glucose  . although cd2ap expression was not affected, actin staining appeared reduced in hgec:25 mm and actin fibers were dysregulated . however, f-actin distribution could be readily restored after exposure of hgec:25 mm to normal glucose levels for 96 hours .

glucose-induced downregulation of pc expression is partly reversible
since hgec:25 mm exhibit permanent pc expression downregulation  <cit> , we performed a time-course using western blot analysis to unravel when this phenotypic modulation occurs. immunoblotting experiments showed that glucose-induced reduction of pc expression started at 2 weeks of culture in 25 mm glucose  and maximal downregulation was observed after 18 weeks of culture in 25 mm glucose  . the extent of pc downregulation in hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/2w and hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/6w was statistically significant, but pc expression levels remained higher than those observed in hgec:25 mm . in hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/18w, pc expression became maximally suppressed . similar findings were obtained for cell-surface pc levels, as assessed by immunocytochemical and facs analyses . in hgec exposed to 25 mm glucose for 6 weeks  and then reverted to 5 mm glucose for four more weeks , pc expression was totally restored . on the contrary, hgec cultured in 25 mm glucose for 18 weeks  and reverted to normal glucose  for four more weeks  did not upregulate pc expression . these observations were confirmed by facs and immunofluorescence analyses . the observed effects were specifically due to d-glucose and not to any osmotic effect, because immunoblotting analysis of cells grown in 25 mm l-glucose revealed no changes in protein levels. the induced suppression was specific to pc, since other inter-related proteins such as α3β1-integrins were also decreased by high glucose, but their levels were immediately restored when glucose levels were reverted to 5 mm .

high glucose impaired binding of wt <dig> to the pc promoter
wt <dig> binding elements have been identified on the promoter of pc gene   <cit> . chip followed by quantitative pcr showed that wt <dig> binding to podxl promoter region in hgec:25 mm was decreased by >50% compared to hgec:5 mm . in agreement with the observed permanent reduction of pc expression, binding of wt <dig> to the podxl promoter was also reduced when hgec:25 mm which do not express pc were reverted to normal glucose for as long as 18 weeks  . although in hgec:25 mm-to-5 mm/18w the binding of wt <dig> to the podxl promoter appeared relatively increased compared to that observed in hgec:25 mm, the increase was not statistically significant. additionally in hgec:25 mm-to-5 mm/18w binding of rna polymerase to the relative promoter region remained reduced. hgec exposed to 25 mm glucose for 6 weeks  displayed a 2-fold reduction of binding of wt <dig> to podxl promoter , to an extent similar to that observed in hgec:5 mm-to-25 mm/18w and to that observed in 25 mm glucose . we then examined whether reduced wt <dig> binding to podxl promoter could be reversed at early  and late  time points. even though pc expression at the early time point was restored, the binding of wt <dig> to podxl promoter remained decreased . at the late time point, a partial but non-significant increase of wt <dig> binding to podxl promoter was observed that was not however associated with restoration of pc expression .

wt <dig> binding to the nphs <dig> promoter is not affected by high glucose
in addition to the pc promoter, wt <dig> binds to the nephrin gene  promoter and activates nephrin expression in podocytes  <cit> . chip followed by quantitative real-time pcr showed that binding of wt <dig> to the nphs <dig> promoter was significantly reduced when hgec:25 mm which do not express pc were reverted to normal glucose for as long as 18 weeks  . however, there were no significant differences in wt <dig> binding to the nphs <dig> promoter in hgec:5 mm  or hgec permanently exposed to high glucose . these results indicate that downregulation and restoration of cell surface-associated nephrin was not accompanied by altered binding of wt <dig> to the relevant gene promoter .

discussion
the glomerular podocyte is believed to play a role in the development and progression of albuminuria and glomerulosclerosis associated with diabetes, among other  <cit> . podocytes, and more particularly dysregulation of their differentiation, amongst other injurious stimuli, are at the centre of the pathogenesis of nephropathy. in this study, we describe the gradual modulation of pivotal characteristics of immortalized human podocytes in response to chronic exposure to high glucose. this conversion could be considered as a dedifferentiation process, since it was accompanied by increased expression of mesenchymal vimentin and reduced expression of specialized epithelial components which are podocytic markers. our data indicated that glucose-mediated pc downregulation which occurred progressively, preceded downregulation of nephrin, the expression of which was substantially suppressed as early as 4 weeks of culture in high glucose.

changes of podocyte structure and function have been previously described as epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition   <cit>  since pro-fibrotic components appeared, concomitant with loss of markers characteristic of epithelial differentiation. however, phenotypic changes of podocytes observed in vitro or in vivo may not necessarily represent emt-like changes  <cit> . podocytes are cells embryonically derived from the metanephric mesenchyme and express epithelial markers . following exposure to tgf-β <dig>  epithelial markers of podocytes were reported to be increased, concomitant with increased tight junction formation  <cit> . in contrast, in emt tight junctions are reduced. the phenotypic changes observed in our in vitro model more closely resemble a process of partial dedifferentiation. vimentin, a component of intermediate filaments is expressed in differentiated podocytes but its expression becomes upregulated in podocytes lacking their specific markers, for example in nephrotic glomeruli, in the puromycin aminonucleoside model in rat  <cit> . hence enhanced vimentin expression in podocytes following chronic exposure to high glucose could represent a marker of dedifferentiation. partial podocyte dedifferentiation induced by high glucose could be further supported by the observed loss of pc, nephrin and calla, concomitant with upregulation of mesenchymal vimentin.

our findings are consistent with the reported effects of tgf-β <dig> and ang-ii resulting in podocyte dedifferentiation and apoptosis under normal and high glucose conditions  <cit> . additionally, our study demonstrates for the first time that dysregulation of the normal podocytic characteristics is an event differentially affecting the expression of function-specific podocytic markers: downregulation of the epithelial marker cd10/calla and pc first occurred progressively, and were followed by stably downregulated nephrin at later time intervals.

nephrin and cd2ap are pivotal for slit diaphragm permselective properties  <cit> , and their loss has been linked to podocytic dysregulation and loss of the differentiated podocytic phenotype  <cit> . the punctate pattern of expression of nephrin and cd2ap which was observed in our in vitro system of podocytes  could represent the in vitro equivalent of foot-like process formation  <cit> . accordingly, glucose-induced, decreased punctate staining in these cells  <cit>  possibly indicated the existence of fewer foot-like processes, resembling foot effacement in vivo. downregulation of the podocyte marker nephrin concomitant with upregulation of the mesenchymal marker vimentin occurred following 4 weeks of exposure to high glucose. glucose-mediated downregulation of pc expression started as early as two weeks following exposure to high glucose, and gradually reached maximal suppression within 18 weeks. hence, glucose-induced loss of the differentiated characteristics was complete by 18 weeks. in other studies, in human lung adenocarcinoma, pc downregulation appeared to be intimately associated with upregulation of vimentin and e-cadherin, both involved in mesenchymal transition  <cit> . we herein report for the first time that in in vitro cultured podocytes, pc downregulation was reversible only when the cells still expressed this component in substantial, albeit decreased amounts. at later time intervals, the observed maximal loss of pc became permanent. in agreement with our observations, in an in vivo mouse model of podocyte injury, the decrease in nephrin and synaptopodin reflected early downregulation of these proteins in injured but still functioning podocytes, but pc expression was substantially downregulated only in severely injured or sclerotic podocytes  <cit> .

a novel finding of the present study was the observation that restoration of pc expression was not wt1-mediated, since this process was not accompanied by restoration of wt <dig> binding to the pc gene promoter region. earlier in vivo and in vitro studies reported that increased levels of expression and activity of wt <dig> were associated with increased levels of pc expression in podocytes  <cit> . however, it has been proposed that wt <dig> alone does not suffice to upregulate pc expression  <cit> . our observations suggest that wt <dig> is implicated in establishing basal pc levels and maintaining pc expression in differentiating and differentiated podocytes  <cit> ; nevertheless according to our data wt <dig> was not directly involved with upregulation of previously reduced pc expression. moreover, at the late time interval, when pc downregulation had become permanent, a minor  increase of wt <dig> binding at the relative response element was observed which was not adequate for transcriptional activation. additional transcription factors could be apparently involved in re-starting the partially or permanently suppressed expression of pc in the presence of high glucose. in this instance, wt <dig> may function in a manner similar to that used for regulation of the expression of the nephrin gene, since downregulation and re-expression of cell surface-associated nephrin were not accompamied by altered binding of wt <dig> to the nephrin gene promoter. interestingly, it has been suggested that the sp <dig> zinc finger protein can support transcriptional regulation of either nephrin or pc independently of wt <dig>  <cit> . another transcription factor implicated in upregulation of nephrin  <cit>  and pc expression  is the vitamin d receptor , strongly indicating that enhancement of nephrin and pc expression may be wt <dig> independent.

CONCLUSIONS
chronic exposure to high glucose induced a phenotypic conversion of cultured podocytes resembling dedifferentiation. this dedifferentiation process was gradual and progressive, first started with loss of the differentiation markers cd10/calla and pc, and was followed by enhanced vimentin and markedly reduced nephrin expression. reversible upregulation of vimentin expression was associated with restoration of normal nephrin expression. however, pc downregulation was irreversible when maximal loss of pc had been established. these observations indicate that attenuation of pc expression was mainly glucose dependent and persisted in hgec possessing podocytic characteristics. dumpening of pc expression could be thus considered a reliable marker of podocytic injury and partial dedifferentiation. therefore, rescuing pc expression may be pivotal in hyperglycemic conditions such as diabetic nephropathy. however this needs to be verified by in vivo studies. finally, our data suggested that maintenance of the previously established, differentiated podocytic phenotype does not necessarily involve wt <dig>  which however is crucial for the process of differentiation of podocytic presursors to podocytes. hence, investigating the role of other transcription factors in preserving and restoring structural and functional integrity of the podocytes is of paramount importance.

