BACKGROUND
damasio et al. proposed the somatic marker hypothesis  to interpret the function of the medial prefrontal cortex   <cit> . earlier neurological studies by damasio et al. indicated that the mpfc plays an important role in integrating the bodily signals , which provide emotional representation of different external events. in another words, normal decision makers with intact mpfc can integrate the bodily signals implicitly and automatically make advantageous real-life decisions, particularly regarding uncertain events which cannot be logically inferred. this is supported by clinical observations that the mpfc patients who retain normal iq score may still encounter problems in making real-life decisions.

notably, a growing body of behavioral and theoretical studies of the igt had pinpointed some possible confounds that may result in misinterpretation of the smh  <cit> . some igt studies suggested that decision-makers may actually preferred bad final-outcome deck b to good final-outcome deck c. lin and chiu et al.  <cit>  termed this phenomenon as "prominent deck b". wilder et al.  <cit> , macpherson et al.  <cit> , maia and mcclelland  <cit>  and rodríguez-sa'nchez et al.  <cit>  also mentioned that normal decision-makers may be guided by gain-loss frequency rather than final outcome.

according to neurological studies by iowa group, bechara and damasio  <cit>  defined additional brain regions for the neuronal network of smh. two loops have been postulated: the "body loop" and the "as-if body loop". the neural substrates of both loops include the mpfc, amygdala, insular cortex , somatosensory cortex , and brainstem nuclei  <cit> . they suggested that these brain regions constitute the central representation of the somatic signal processing in generating the advantageous decisions. recently, the iowa group had enlisted the striatum, anterior cingulate cortex  and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  to extend the neuronal loops of smh  <cit> .

however, some neuroscientists  <cit>  pointed out the theoretical flaws of these loops for smh, e.g., there being little neurological  evidence of s <dig> involvement for the smh  <cit> . an increasing number of studies demonstrated that deficits of proposed somatic loops do not necessarily affect igt performance  <cit> . many igt related studies  <cit>  provided data incongruent with the proposed neuronal correlates for smh. dunn, et al.  <cit> , after thoroughly reviewing the smh and igt-related behavioral, physiological, lesion, and brain imaging studies, reported the diversity of the results  <cit>  . the imaging studies revealed that except the mpfc, regions as the anterior cingulate cortex and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  were highly involved in decision-making processing during igt, but were not included from the proposed main loops by the iowa group  <cit> . the s <dig> was not activated except in two studies  <cit> . one major limitation is that these igt brain imaging studies only investigated the central representations for the risk vs. safe or good vs. bad decks. furthermore, most igt brain imaging studies focused only on the mpfc or orbitofrontal cortex  but did not discuss other regions associated with probability learning  <cit>  for decision making under uncertainty.

of smh








the table shows divergent results across the brain-imaging studies related to smh and igt.

it is noteworthy that the aforementioned studies did not investigate the critical dimensions of "anticipation" and "experience" of the decision making, respectively, to elucidate the complexity of the igt-brain processing. knutson et al.  <cit>  observed that anticipation of reward and the actual fulfillment of outcome may involve different brain circuitries. during reward anticipation the nuclear accumbens was involved while during outcome experience the mpfc was activated. moreover, breiter et al.  <cit> , using a gambling task comprising both monetary reward and punishment, demonstrated that anticipation and experience of monetary gains and losses may have different central representations.

in this study, the event-related fmri  was exploited to monitor brain activity associated with gain-loss frequency and final outcome, respectively. brain activity during anticipation  and experience  were deciphered to elucidate the neuronal architectures for the two dimensions in the decision making processing. detailed analyses of anticipation and experience of gain, loss and draw were conducted. four choices  and the hierarchical changes of value in igt were detailed to track the reactive brain responses. according to the findings obtained by wilder et al.  <cit> , normal decision makers should prefer decks b and d  over decks a and c . the lentiform nucleus  should be targeted to deal with probability information processing  <cit> . if the smh holds, then the mpfc is expected to be activated for the integration of somatic markers for decision making under uncertainty.

RESULTS
behavior data and leaning curve
behavioral results were similar to those obtained by wilder et al.  <cit> . gain-loss frequency rather than final outcome dominated subjects' behavior. behavioral data confirmed the observations obtained by lin and chiu et al.  <cit>  in which subjects preferred bad final outcome deck b of higher-frequency gain to the other three decks . moreover, the learning curve indicated that the deck b was relatively more attractive than the other three decks throughout the game .

brain activation during anticipation and experience
this experiment result demonstrated that in and ln rather than mpfc was correlated with decision processing, particularly during the anticipation period. this observation supported the hypothesis based on gain-loss frequency. in the original igt , brain activation during anticipation differed markedly from that during experience . bilateral in, ln, right superior temporal gyrus , left inferior parietal lobule , and acc were activated during the phase of anticipatory feeling and guide decisions . conversely, the other brain loops related to the experience of monetary outcome encompassed the right ipl  <cit> , superior frontal gyrus  and left middle frontal gyrus   <cit>  . brain areas for experience phase varied more than those for anticipation.


the random effect model was applied with stringent family-wise error correction  and voxel-extent of  <dig> for presentation brevity and discussion purpose.


the random effect model was applied with stringent family-wise error correction  and voxel-extent of  <dig> for presentation brevity and discussion purpose.

brain activation of gain, draw and loss
the respective activation during anticipation and experience of conditions of gain, draw and loss events was analyzed further. the data showed that the brain activations of gain, draw and loss during anticipation and decision processing overlapped considerably, including middle temporal gyrus , in, ln .

brain activation of decks 
during the anticipatory phase, activation was mostly found in mtg, caudate nucleus , in, and thalamus across, although not in all, the four desks. the respective brain activation map for each deck overlapped substantially during the anticipatory phase. in engagement was the only structure identified to be consistent with the originally proposed main loops of smh .

during the experience phase, diverse patterns for the four decks were revealed. the mfg and ipl showed common activation to the outcomes of all decks. the left precuneus and the right ipl were activated only during the experience phases of deck a and b . the cn tail was activated by the deck a, c, and d, but not by b . the left precuneus was engaged only by deck b.

time courses of regional activity for  <dig> monetary values 
the time courses of brain activity for each monetary value as extracted from significantly activated regions  were depicted using a peri-stimulus time histogram  . the activities of most involved regions didn't follow the monetary amount, except for differential responses observed in the right ln and left stg during the anticipation period . mpfc activation was only discovered during the outcome period of $ - <dig>  which is the largest loss in igt .

discussion
the "prominent deck b phenomenon"
the perseverated behavior of "prominent deck b phenomenon" was confirmed as previously reported  <cit>  albeit that the effect was sub-significant in our current study . this result corroborated many igt-related studies that reported that subjects actually preferred bad final-outcome deck b of high-frequency gain over good final-outcome decks c or d  <cit> . even sevy et al., johnson et al. and bechara  <cit>  also demonstrated the same "prominent deck b phenomenon" which was at odds with their first report  <cit> . this phenomenon astonishingly contradicts the basic assumption of igt which posits that normal decision makers are prone to avoid the bad deck. in fact, increasing number of studies consistently showed that participants preferred decks b and d to decks a and c  <cit> . the reason that the earlier studies failed to demonstrate such phenomenon is that most studies summed the chosen numbers of deck a and b or c and d ad hoc, respectively, for inference on the bad vs. good decks. notwithstanding, most igt brain-imaging studies did not report in details the subjects' behavioral data in regards to the preference to four-decks neither.

a few studies out of over one hundred using the similar four-deck format and addressing the chosen frequency had consistently demonstrated that the high-frequency gain decks b and d were preferentially selected than decks a and c in the control group  <cit> . the "prominent deck b phenomenon" indicated that subjects were overwhelmed by the high-frequency gain of decks b, d, and also c  and prohibited by the high-frequency loss of deck a. nevertheless, it still stands that subjects prefer the good final outcome decks  to the bad final outcome decks  albeit the fact that the subjects may actually be implicitly guided by gain-loss frequency instead of long-term outcome  <cit> . such interpretation may contradict the smh reasoning, however, the gain-loss preponderated choice behavior is not uncommon in the literature on decision making, suggesting that decision makers are often myopic to long-term outcomes  <cit> , even under situations of relative certainty  <cit> .

brain activation for anticipation and experience
in the current study, the in and ln were strongly associated with events of uncertain situation. the observation does not completely support the basic assumption of the igt or smh neural loops  <cit>  which did not posits that ln participates in the anticipation of uncertainty . the conjoined activation of these two structures might reflect that positive and negative emotions were simultaneously invoked  <cit>  by this uncertain monetary game, which led to a higher arousal state  <cit> . the arousal might catalyze the subject into a self-sustained situation where better psychosomatic condition can be tuned to augment the explorative intent when confronted with a challenge of uncertainty, which in turn can be indispensable for the survival of an organism. numerous studies have demonstrated that activation of ln is correlated with the "expectation" of reward  <cit>  and habit learning  <cit>  while in have been reported to be engaged in most studies on visceral and aversive disposition  <cit> . ln can be critical in attributing the positive emotion of anticipation  <cit>  and motivation, i.e., driving force  <cit> . on the other hand, in is not only frequently associated with generation of aversive sensation, e.g., disgust as induced by the repugnant stimuli  <cit> , but also related to the fear  <cit>  and addition behavior preservation  <cit> . the engagement of ln, a neural substrate important for probability learning  <cit>  echoes the behavioral results as compelled by the gain-loss frequency.

following the appearance of outcomes, the activity of ln and in , subsided and the overall activation pattern eminently changed. the circuitries involve only neocortical areas, mainly encompassing the frontal-parietal network  for processing value representation and logic inspection. the differential segregation of brain representation in respect to driving force and experience sentiments during anticipation and experience  <cit>   might attest to two systems, e.g., wanting and liking systems  <cit>  to further the elucidation of neural correlates of decision making and the accompanied interoceptive feeling.

brain activation for gain, loss and draw conditions
echoing the behavioral result where the subjects' choices were implicitly biased by high-frequency gain and not hunched by the long-term outcome, the almost common activation pattern in general  during the anticipation phase could not decipher or predict the eventual outcome of gain, loss, or draw conditions. ln, in, thalamus and mtg were commonly involved in the anticipation phase of three conditions  <cit> . however, the overlapped activation patterns diverged into differential expressions during experience period. the patterns collectively engaged primary visual cortex , bilateral ipc, sfg, posterior in and cn  <cit>  where different combinations of neural substrates were noted for respective condition. the result implies that the organism may entail subcortical/limbic system rather than logic system  to deal with the uncertain situation. on the other hand, after the gain, loss and draws were clearly presented to subjects, the logic system  was recruited to process these consequences. our results were inconsistent with cardinal propositions of smh that posits the mpfc crucial in generating the "guts" feeling and biasing the decision during anticipation .

brain activation for decks
anticipation commonly activated bilateral cn and anterior in despite some subtle differences in the activated foci. this was consistent with the previous findings according to gain, loss and draw condition  preconceived with reward-punishment expectation. the basal forebrain activation  was engaged commonly across the four decks and suggested a cognitive component of probability processing or habit establishment during the task performance. mtg activation may be related to eye scanning among the four decks while the activation of postcentral gyrus  and precentral gyrus  could be attributed to joystick operation. our findings disagreed with the prediction of smh that the mpfc, amygdala, in and s <dig> subserve primarily the processing of somatic signal for decision.

v <dig>  ipl and sfg were commonly activated during the experience period in addition to other discrete regions under different deck categories. the neo-cortices  were targeted for information processing related to outcome. the igt is extremely complex and is designed to prevent a subject using the logic reasoning to find out the long-term benefit. the igt suggests that uncertainty can foster the somatic marker  system to harbor decision makers in reaching the foresighted  status based on long-term processing. this view is contentious and may be inconsistent with the numerous studies of "emotion", a phenomenon considered irrational, uncontrollable, and immediate  <cit> . the transition from more limbic  to more cortical  structures did not warrant a better rational behavioral performance in our current study. furthermore, the behavioral results and the brain activation maps of current study did not demonstrated substantial differences within and between the good decks  and bad decks . the "instability" or inconsistent data of igt across different studies at behavioral or physiological levels  <cit>  may pinpoint a possible need for a reconsideration of neuro-physiological and neuropsychological assumptions of smh.

the role of medial prefrontal cortex in igt
damasio  <cit>  stated that "... the brains of the normal subjects were gradually learning to predict a bad outcome, and were signaling the relative badness of the particular deck before the actual card-turning." . damasio et al.  <cit>  suggested that the medial prefrontal cortex  plays an important role in integrating bodily signals , which provide emotional representation of different external events. normal decision makers with intact mpfc should be able to integrate the bodily signals implicitly and automatically make advantageous real-life decisions. this is of particular importance under the circumstance in face of uncertain events that cannot be logically inferred. based on the findings of galvanic skin conductance studies of smh, it is conceivable that the medial prefrontal cortex  should be more activated before selecting the bad decks a or b, namely the anticipation period.

however, the current study did not observe any significant activation under these conditions. only in the experience period of the largest loss  of desk b that the mpfc was expressed . the mpfc function may contribute to the immediate and shortsighted view as related to error detection  <cit> . the results of this study imply that mpfc may play a critical role in error monitoring or conflict detection  <cit> , but might not solicitly play a role in the integration of somatic markers  and guiding decisions rationally in the long-run. further studies are needed to exam this speculation since the results cannot discern the different statistical power calculated from different numbers of trials for each monetary value. for example, the "$  <dig> and $ 50" comprised over 70% of trials, but "$ -1150" comprised only 1–3% for each  run. this problem is inherent with the igt design.

notably, the right in manifested the greatest bold signal response during the standoff condition. we speculated that the in may be related to the calibration of mental account or emotion state. on the other hand, right ln corresponded to the hierarchical change of gain, and not to loss in igt  in face of uncertainty. this observation similar to many studies on risk of relative certainty  <cit>  and is congruent with the view that basal ganglion is related to biological reward system.

general discussion
this study aimed to disclose neural correlates involved in decision-making processing during anticipation and experience period of the igt. there are several points that mandate more comprehensive studies for clarification in the future. for example, testing of final-outcome, gain-loss frequency, and prominent deck b phenomenon at the behavioral level reveal only sub-significance. the limited findings of behavioral data may result from the internal variation of igt and emotions interfering with the performance of the mr-scanning procedure. whether there exits gender difference of brain activation patterns is of pertinent interest. for instance, bolla et al. reported a gender difference in the activity of ofc and dlpfc during igt using a gender-balanced approach  <cit> . nevertheless, regions such as the basal ganglia  <cit>  and parietal cortex  <cit> , suggested to be involved in reward-based probability learning  <cit>  under uncertainty, was not emphasized by bolla et al. study. on the other hand, the negative finding of the ventro-orbital mpfc in this study could possibly be attributed to the susceptibility signal loss of fmri acquisition.

our behavioral and imaging findings differed from previous igt-fmri studies. caroselli et al.  <cit>  investigated a large population  demonstrated also the "prominent deck b phenomenon" and absence of learning curve. a careful review of igt-fmri studies disclosed that only northoff et al.  <cit>  presented detailed behavioral data for a four-deck format and demonstrated the "prominent deck b phenomenon". albeit the discrepancy in the behavioral data with original igt, the mpfc was found to be activated. the igt-fmri study by fukui et al. presented behavioral data for the igt with a two-deck format  <cit>  and perfectly replicated the original findings as reported by the iowa group's study in  <dig>  <cit> . however, fukui et al. behavioral data contradicted with a recent study by sevy et al., and johnson et al., and bechara on the "prominent deck b phenomenon"  <cit> . tanabe et al. utilized a modified igt, not original igt  <cit> , and focused on the functional discrepancies of the ventral mpfc between substance users and a control group. these studies mainly focused on brain activity changes of the mpfc and ofc in either good-bad or risky-safe conditions  without discussion on the basal ganglia and parietal cortex in decision-making processing. notwithstanding, no information was tailored to the "prominent deck b phenomenon". recently, chiu et al.  <cit>  used a modified igt, namely the soochow gambling task  which possess a relative simple and balanced gain-loss structure than igt, but keeps all uncertain characteristics of igt. the experiment result of sgt clearly demonstrated that decision makers' choice was dominated by the gain-loss frequency rather than final-outcome. the heterogeneity of the experimental paradigms and discrepancies of the resulting behavioral data as well as the different approaches for fmri data analysis command a need to further profound and comprehensive studies for an empirical account for the smh theory and mpfc function. all the existing behavioral and brain imaging literature actually pinpointed that igt can be not that optimal to validate the smh. therefore, the vmpfc engagements by the igt remain elusive and mandate a further clarification.

CONCLUSIONS
our data indicated that both ln  <cit>  and in  <cit>  can be targeted for decision-making during anticipation of decision-making under uncertainty. ipl and sfg could be involved in the appreciation of the consequences of choices. common brain processing might occur during the anticipation periods of gain, loss and draw conditions, but the varied outcomes may predispose different neural substrates for the various experiential dimensions. a similar transition also occurred in the four-deck conditions. the mpfc was founded to be activated only during the experience period of the largest loss of deck b, but not during anticipation period. the original proposition of smh that mpfc should be implicitly engaged under ambivalence to monitor and inhibit the selection of the bad final-outcome deck by the decision makers is not supported by the current study. this study suggests that under the confrontation of uncertainty the normal decision makers can become myopic. ln and in might play more vital role in generating the "feeling" accompanying anticipation which in turn can drive for final decision while mpfc may serves more the function of online monitoring and error detection. consequently, the involvement of consciousness in guiding the decision will be very important in understanding the mechanism of covert  – overt  coupling  <cit> .

