BACKGROUND
polyploidy is a prevalent biological phenomenon in the chromosomal evolution of extant species and genera  <cit> , including the major crop plants such as rice, maize, wheat, soybean, and cotton. most plant species have polyploid ancestries  <cit> , and polyploidy may have played a critical role in flowering plant diversification  <cit> . polyploid genotypes may lead to the differences in morphology, physiology and molecular characteristics, etc. physiological traits, such as cell size, plant height , growth rate, flowering time and fertility, can be altered by polyploidization  <cit> . miller and coworkers’ research suggests that ploidy can affect flower size, stomatal size and seed weight  <cit> . compared with the corresponding diploids , autopolyploids tend to have larger cells, resulting in the enlargement of some organs, such as leaves, flowers and seeds  <cit> . chao and coworker discover that polyploid arabidopsis exhibit resistance to salinity and higher potassium uptake  <cit> . some other changed traits, such as pest resistance, apomixes, drought tolerance, flowering time and organ size, can also contribute to the success of polyploids in agriculture  <cit> .

besides offering evolutionary flexibility and phenotypic diversity for newly formed polyploids, polyploidy has considerable impacts on chromosomal rearrangement, nuclear enlargement and epigenetic changes, leading to the restructuring of the transcriptome, metabolome and proteome  <cit> . the epigenetic and developmental alterations allow polyploids to establish new species and promote their niches in local environments through restructuring genome and regulatory networks  <cit> . polyploidy plays a key role in duplicating gene expression, and many of these expression alterations are organ-specific  <cit> . blanc and wolfe propose that the functional diversification of duplicated genes is a major characteristic of long-term polyploidy events in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . polyploidy also has important impacts on genome structure and gene expression  <cit> . dna methylation changes are observed in allopolyploids and their progenitors in many plants . however, little is known about the complex nature of polyploidy  <cit> .

interestingly, large differences in morphology and physiology, including ph, leaf size and color, and chlorophyll content, are shown among rice with different ploidies, such as haploid , dp and triploid  rice. besides, these differences are obviously amplified by the increase of ploidy level. the gene expression differences between hp and dp rice have been well documented  <cit> , and the proteomic alterations during rice hull development are demonstrated by our recent research  <cit> . however, the proteomic changes between dp and tp in rice are poorly understood.

thus, to test the impacts of polyploidy on rice development and chloroplast protein expression, we used tandem mass tags -based proteomic methods to quantitatively screen the differentially expressed proteins among dp and tp. meanwhile, chloroplast proteins were further analyzed to evaluate the influences of photosynthesis on dp and tp rice plants. in addition, quantitative real-time pcr  was used to verify the reliability of the chloroplast-related proteins with differential expressions. through these approaches, our results may provide a global insight into the associated proteomic alterations in chloroplast and the impacts of ploidy on rice traits.

RESULTS
phenotypes of dp and tp
to identify the phenotypes of rice plants between dp and tp, nuclear dna ploidy analysis was firstly performed by flow cytometry to identify dp and tp . the increases of ph, ll and lw were positively correlated with ploidy levels . the values of ph, ll and lw in tp were significantly larger than those in dp . similarly, the contents of chlorophyll and carotenoid were higher in tp than in dp .fig.  <dig> phenotypes and growth indexes of diploid and triploid rice plants. a dp showed smaller plant and lighter leaf color compared to tp; b the flow cytometry of dp and tp rice plants; c the ph of dp and tp rice plants; d the lls of dp and tp rice plants; e the lws of dp and tp rice plants. 

fig.  <dig> the chlorophyll and carotenoid contents of diploid and triploid rice plants. a the chlorophyll contents of dp and tp rice plants; b the carotenoid contents of dp and tp rice plants. dp: diploid; tp: triploid



comparative proteomic analysis of biological process in dp and tp
of the  <dig> identified proteins,  <dig> differentially expressed proteins  showed the global false discovery rate < <dig>  with ≥95 % confidence. compared with their expressions in dp,  <dig> proteins were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated in the tp. to uncover the different biological mechanisms between dp and tp, we annotated the differentially expressed proteins with go terms and conducted a go biological process. multiple significant biological process were found to be involved in the differentially expressed proteins between dp and tp , including generation of precursor metabolites and energy , photosynthesis , metabolic process , response to abiotic stimulus , response to stress , carbohydrate metabolic process , and catabolic process .fig.  <dig> biological process enrichment analysis based on the differentially expressed proteins of diploid and triploid rice plants . dp: diploid; tp: triploid



pathway analysis
to identify potential protein targets, we performed pathway analysis on differentially expressed proteins using kegg databases in rice plants with dp and tp . our results demonstrated that  <dig> significant pathways were enriched at the 5 % significant level. among these significant pathways, photosynthesis, metabolic pathways, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms were highly significant  associated with the differentially expressed proteins between dp and tp. both photosynthesis and metabolic pathways were found to be related to alterations of protein expression in the development between dp and tp according to go biological process and pathway enrichment analysis.fig.  <dig> kegg pathway enrichment analysis based on the differentially expressed proteins of diploid and triploid rice plants . dp: diploid; tp: triploid



analysis of differentially expressed chloroplast proteins and qrt-pcr validation
chloroplast plays a crucial role in conducting photosynthesis and regulating and regulating metabolic biological process. to demonstrate the roles of chloroplast in rice ploidy, we studied the protein expression alterations in the chloroplasts of dp and tp. chloroplast proteins cyb <dig>  ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase large chain , apocytochrome f ,  <dig> atp synthase subunits atpa, atpb and atpf,  <dig> photosystem ii reaction center proteins psbb, psbc, psbd and psbh, as well as  <dig> photosystem i related proteins psaa, psab and psac were shown to have differentially up regulated in tp compared with dp . none of these chloroplast proteins was differentially down-regulated in tp. among these chloroplast proteins,  <dig> and  <dig> proteins were involved in photosynthesis and metabolic pathways, respectively; while three, one and one proteins were associated with oxidative phosphorylation, glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism, and carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms, respectively.table  <dig> the pathways participated by the differentially expressed chloroplast proteins between diploid and triploid rice plants

osa01100b
osa01100b
osa01100b
osa01100b

aosa <dig> represents photosynthesis; bosa <dig> represents metabolic pathways; cosa <dig> represents oxidative phosphorylation; dosa <dig> represents glyoxylate and dicarboxylate metabolism; eosa <dig> represents carbon fixation in photosynthetic organisms; ffc fold change



qrt-pcr was performed to validate the transcriptional levels for differentially expressed proteins among dp and tp . qrt-pcr results showed that five of the  <dig> chloroplast genes were differentially transcripted between tp and dp, including atpf, psaa, psab, psbb and rbl . all five genes were associated with metabolic pathways, and atpf, psaa, psab and psbb were related to photosynthesis.fig.  <dig> independent validation of the differentially expressed chloroplast proteins by qrt-pcr between diploid and triploid rice plants 



discussion
ploidy is a common feature and major factor of plant speciation. it drives the evolution of novel phenotypes and ecological tolerances  <cit> . although the identification of candidate genes and developmental regulations in plant polyploids have been extensively pursued  <cit> , a clear picture of proteins and pathways involved in regulatory and developmental differentiations has not been drawn for ploidy rice plants. in this study, our results suggests that proteomic alterations may account for the diversifications caused by ploidy in rice, and the significantly differentially expressed proteins and enriched pathways may help to unravel the complex underlying mechanisms in rice ploidy. multiple pathways, especially photosynthesis and metabolic pathways, were found to be greatly significantly associated with proteomic alterations between dp and tp, indicating that photosynthesis and metabolic pathways account for major contribution to the proteomic differentiation.

accumulating evidence demonstrates that chloroplasts participate in a variety of complex signaling pathways to regulate plant development, photosynthesis and metabolism with a exquisite way  <cit> . in arabidopsis, chloroplast potassium efflux antiporters influence photosynthesis and growth of fully developed rosettes  <cit> . the critical role of chloroplasts is beyond dispute and has been reported in plant immunity recently  <cit> . recently, a chloroplast-localized protein llb was found to affect the growth in rice  <cit> . although it is well known that chloroplast affects the growth of rice, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not yet understood clearly. consistent with the higher chlorophyll content in tp,  <dig> significantly differentially expressed chloroplast proteins were found to be up-regulated in tp, and  <dig> proteins were validated by qrt-pcr. cytochrome bc complexes play key roles in respiration and photosynthesis  <cit> . the differential expression of cyb <dig> between the rice with different ploidies indicates that it may participate in energy transduction in respiratory membranes and photosynthesis. among these validated proteins, atpf belongs to a plant-specific protein family and is characterized by crm domain, a recognized rna binding domain  <cit> . rbl is a rubisco large subunit, and the most abundant protein that serving as the major engine for carbon assimilation  <cit> . it underlines that tp may improve the efficiency of photosynthesis via coupling with the reaction of rbl. psaa, psab, and psbb are components of the photosystem ii core complex which is a critical element of photosynthesis  <cit> . currently, little is known about the functions of psaa, psab and psbb.

to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to analyze the proteomic alterations of rice plants with different ploidies using tmt ms/ms technology. our analysis suggested that tp tended to maintain their needs via more photosynthesis and metabolic activities than dp. among the  <dig> candidate chloroplast proteins,  <dig> were validated. through the combination of morphology, physiology and proteomic profiling, our results characterize the function of atpf, psaa, psab, psbb and rbl in tp, and provide new insights for further understanding the molecular characteristics of rice ploidy.

CONCLUSIONS
both photosynthesis and metabolic pathways were highly significantly associated with proteomic alteration between dp and tp based on biological process and pathway enrichment analysis, and  <dig> up-regulated chloroplast proteins involving in these two pathways were identified in tp. this study integrates morphology, physiology and proteomic profiling alteration of dp and tp to address their underlying different molecular mechanisms. our findings show that atpf, psaa, psab, psbb and rbl can induce considerable expression changes in tp and may affect the development and growth of rice through photosynthesis and metabolic pathways.

