BACKGROUND
animals protect themselves from xenobiotic or endogenous harmful chemicals by biotransformation and disposition of the compounds. chemical defense mechanisms are well characterized in vertebrates. recent comparisons of genomes from distantly related metazoans suggest conservation of the chemical defensome  <cit> . oikopleura dioica belongs to larvacean tunicates that have considerable importance in the marine ecosystem and for the vertical flux of carbon in the form of discarded food-filtering house  <cit> . oikopleura is surrounded by a complex mucopolysacharide house used to filter food particles from a large volume of water  <cit> , and the therefore it can potentially be affected by marine pollution. o. dioica can be kept in culture for many generations and has a very short generation time   <cit> . although tunicates are the closest living relatives of vertebrates  <cit> , a recent study revealed profound divergence of genome architecture features in oikopleura  <cit> . its gene complement may have also markedly changed with multiple examples of ancestral genes failing detection, including genes involved in immunity  <cit> . in such a context of rapid genome evolution and peculiar life history, we decided to explore the genome for selected defensome genes and initiate investigations of oikopleura responses to chemical stressors, for comparisons with invertebrate and vertebrate model systems.

the major components of chemical defensome of animals are phase i oxidative metabolic enzymes, phase ii conjugating enzymes, phase iii transporters, and transcription factors regulating the genes encoding biotransformation enzymes  <cit> . xenobiotic inducible cyp families 1- <dig> and the transcription factors regulating them are among the most important and best studied defensome genes in vertebrates. vertebrate cyp <dig> family enzymes play central roles in the metabolism of environmental toxicants such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons   <cit> . transcription factors of two classes, the aryl hydrocarbon receptor  and some nuclear receptor  family members , regulate the expression of mammalian cyp families 1- <dig>  <cit> . ahr regulates cyp <dig> family genes , the steroid and xenobiotic  receptor  and constitutive androstane receptor  regulate cyp3a and cyp2b, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha  regulates cyp4a  <cit> . sxr and car are closely related nuclear receptors  that are activated by a wide range of compounds including several clinically used drugs  <cit> . ahr is a major xenobiotic-sensing receptor that is activated by environmental pollutants such as dioxin and pahs including benzopyrene   <cit> .

ahr and its dimerization partner ahr nuclear translocator  are members of the family of basic-helix-loop-helix -per-arnt-sim  domain transcription factors  <cit> . upon ligand binding, ahr dimerizes with arnt and activates the transcription of target genes that include cyp <dig> family genes  and genes encoding phase ii conjugating enzymes  <cit> . hence the ahr signaling plays central roles in sensing and metabolic biotransformation of lipophilic toxicants in vertebrates  <cit> .

ahr homologs are present in invertebrate genomes  <cit> . invertebrate ahr plays developmental roles, and the xenobiotic receptor functions of ahr were suggested to have arisen in vertebrates  <cit> . ahr signaling pathway genes are interesting to examine in the tunicates since they were the last group diverging from vertebrates.

other transcription factors involved in oxidative stress response include nuclear factor -like  <dig>  and heat shock factors . oxidative biotransformation enzymes such as cyps are often considered as double-edged swords because they may not only detoxify harmful chemicals but also create more toxic electrophilic metabolites that can damage cellular macromolecules such as dna  <cit> . generation of reactive oxygen species  intermediate metabolites leads to activation of nrf <dig> which induces antioxidant enzyme genes including glutathione-s-transferases and glutamate-cysteine ligase subunits  <cit> .

the first objective of our study was to search the oikopleura genome for key candidate genes of chemical defense pathways; these include genes of relevant pathways, mainly cyps, the transcription factors ahr, nr1i  and nrf <dig> homologs. the second objective of the study was to examine the genome wide transcriptional responses to xenobiotic compounds using whole genome tiling arrays recently made available in oikopleura. oikopleura was exposed to two model xenobiotic compounds benzopyrene  and clofibrate  that are common environmental pollutants. bap is a carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon  that is a well characterized activator of ahr  <cit> . pahs are ubiquitous environmental pollutants formed by incomplete combustion of organic matter  <cit> . clo is a pparα activator lipid-lowering pharmaceutical compound, which is also found as an environmental contaminant in surface waters  <cit> .

RESULTS
small cyp complement and no detectable cyp1-like gene
blast searches using cyp <dig> family protein sequences from various vertebrates and the invertebrates did not result in cyp- like sequences in o. dioica geneome. we then searched the genome for all cyp sequences and unambiguously identified  <dig> unique genes . thus, oikopleura seems to have the smallest cyp gene complement of animal genomes sequenced thus far  <cit> , http://drnelson.uthsc.edu/cytochromep <dig> html. phylogenetic analysis shows that none of the oikopleura cyps cluster with cyp <dig> family proteins from other organisms . a larger set of proteins and species including all the  <dig> oikopleura cyps and many cyp <dig> protein sequences from various organisms  <cit>  were also used to construct a phylogenetic tree of similar topology to the one shown in figure  <dig>  but none of the oikopleura cyps cluster with cyp <dig> sequences . thus, cyp <dig> genes are either lost or have diverged beyond recognition in oikopleura. in contrast, cyp1-like genes are present in the genomes of ciona and sea urchin  <cit> . oikopleura has cyp3-like and cyp4-like genes but the  <dig> cyp2-like sequences do not cluster well with cyp <dig> family genes from other organisms . the absence of cyp1-like genes appears consistent with the parallel absence of ahr signaling pathway . interestingly, our expression analysis showed that bap and clo induced cyp3-like- <dig>  and cyp2-like- <dig>  genes, respectively .

lack of detection of ahr signaling pathway genes
in mammals, bhlh-pas domain proteins sense xenobiotics , oxygen  and light   <cit> . blast search in the oikopleura genome and est collections did not reveal a candidate ortholog for ahr. hmm searches for pas domain proteins in predicted oikopleura protein database and blast searches using various bhlh-pas domain protein sequences of vertebrates and invertebrates identified three bhlh-pas domain proteins in oikopleura. one pas domain protein identified  is a potassium voltage-gated channel family like protein  and was not analyzed further. phylogenetic comparison of the three oikopleura bhlh-pas domain proteins with representative homologs from mouse, ciona and sea urchin showed none of them cluster with ahr . the failure to detect ahr and its repressor ahrr genes, as well as the downstream cyp <dig> family genes  suggests the absence of an ahr mediated xenobiotic biotransformation signaling pathway in oikopleura. in contrast, ahr orthologs are present in other invertebrates including the tunicate c. intestinalis  <cit> .

a clusters with both nrf <dig> and bach proteins .

nd = not detected. data from  <cit>  and ncbi database.

oikopleura nr1i-like and nr1h-like nuclear receptors
the absence of detected ahr sequence prompted us to inspect the oikopleura genome for candidate xenobiotic sensing nuclear receptors. there are about  <dig> candidate nuclear receptors in oikopleura , suggesting significant lineage-specific expansion of the superfamily. sxr, car and vdr  belong to nr1i subfamily of nuclear receptor genes. sxr and car serve as xenobiotic sensors that activate the transcription of some cyp genes in vertebrates  <cit> . in vertebrates, the nr1h subfamily of nuclear receptors liver-x-receptor  and farnesoid-x-receptor  are activated by sterols and bile acids, respectively  <cit> . lxr and fxr, also found in invertebrates  <cit> , are potential targets of xenobiotic compounds. genes encoding nr1i-like and nr1h-like nuclear receptors appear to be multiplied in the oikopleura genome, even though the precise orthology relationships could not be clarified  <cit> . there are  <dig> nr1i and  <dig> nr1h  genes in the genome   <cit> , and among these, there could be candidate xenobiotic receptors. no strong candidate for ppar  was found in oikopleura .

nrf <dig> mediated oxidative stress response pathway genes in oikopleura
we further explored the oikopleura genome for transcription factors involved in oxidative stress response, particularly the nrf2-complex and found homologs of nrf <dig>  kelch-like ech-associated protein  <dig> , and small maf proteins . phylogenetic comparison of the o. dioica proteins with representative proteins from other organisms suggested a candidate nrf2-homolog gene for oikopleura  although it clusters with both nrf <dig> and bach proteins . nrf <dig> is a member of cap 'n' collar-basic leucine-zipper  proteins that heterodimerize with small maf family proteins and activate transcription from anti-oxidant response elements  in promoters of anti-oxidant defense genes  <cit> . nrf <dig> is normally bound to its suppressor keap- <dig> and is inactive in the cytosol, but it dissociates under oxidative stress from keap- <dig> and activates the transcription of target genes  <cit> . mammalian bach  <dig> and bach  <dig> proteins are nrf2-related factors that also heterodimerize with maf proteins and mediate oxidative stress signaling  <cit> . thus, although uncertainties remain due to the divergence of oikopleura sequences, components of nrf <dig> signaling appear to be present.

other groups of transcription factors involved in the oxidative stress response include the heat shock factors   <cit> . in oikopleura, there are two or three hsf5-like genes  and one gene very similar to both hsf <dig> and hsf <dig>  . the hsf1/ <dig> and many hsp genes were strongly induced by bap treatment , and hsf binding sites could be identified in the promoter regions of many of the bap induced hsp genes .

genes differentially regulated by bap
bap significantly changed the expression level of  <dig> annotated genes  in o. dioica . the list of affected genes includes several genes that are involved in drug metabolism and disposition. xenobiotic phase i and ii biotransformation enzyme genes induced by bap include genes encoding a cytochrome p <dig> family  <dig> , carboxylesterase, glutathione s-transferase alpha , thiosulfate sulfurtransferase and thioredoxin. genes encoding phase iii transport proteins, abc transporters and solute carrier proteins were also modulated. in bap-treated animals, a co-regulation of genes in oxidative stress pathways was demonstrated by up-regulation of gstα and the two subunits of glutamate-cysteine ligase , a rate limiting enzyme in glutathione synthesis . another example of co- regulation is the simultaneous up-regulation of many heat-shock protein  genes and their transcription factor hsf1/ <dig> gene  <cit>  . hsp genes were among the most strongly induced genes . some putative hsp proteins of oikopleura showed only low sequence similarity to mouse proteins  and therefore were not included in the list of genes used for pathway analysis .

pathways affected by bap
in order to take advantage of the rich annotations of mammalian model organisms such as mouse, all predicted proteins of genes differentially regulated were annotated using blast searches against m. musculus proteome . the best mouse hit for each oikopeleura gene was then used in functional analyses using david  <cit>  and various tools in metacore   <cit> . it is therefore important to interpret the pathway analyses data with caution since some pathways present in mammalian models may not be conserved or relevant in oikopleura. for example, enriched disease pathways are not relevant in oikopleura, although they may give insights into mechanisms of the underlying expression changes of the homolog genes in oikopleura.

kegg analyses using the mouse genes  revealed significantly enriched top kegg pathways such as focal adhesion, ecm-receptor interaction, pathways in cancer, small cell lung cancer and nitrogen metabolism . pathways related to cancer reflect the mouse annotations, but some of the genes in the pathways appear to be involved in conserved cellular processes such as dna damage and oxidative stress responses.

metacore enrichment analyses showed most enriched bap affected pathways are involved in apoptosis, oxidative stress response, immune response, protein folding and cell adhesion . the top scored pathway map  is shown in figure  <dig> with the bap affected genes indicated. in metacore interactome analysis option, networks can be built to see interconnectedness within a data set. genes in the input list can have physical and functional interactions  that are used by the algorithm to build sub-networks ranked by relative enrichment with the uploaded genes and relative saturation of networks with canonical pathways  <cit> . a detailed legend for metacore pathway maps and network objects is shown in additional file  <dig>  the network building tool in metacore was used to create networks using the transcription regulation algorithm, and resulted in a list of ranked transcription factor centered networks . one of the bap-induced key transcription factors, jund is a functional component of the ap- <dig> transcription factor complex. ap- <dig> is one of the top ranked transcription factors  and many oxidative stress response genes including gclm, gclc and thioredoxin that are up-regulated by bap are in the ap- <dig> network .

to explore interactions within the set of bap modulated genes, networks were generated in metacore using analyze algorithm with default settings. in the top ranking networks appear genes that are also part of the enriched pathways and processes . for example many stress response genes including those involved in the go biological process "endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response" are represented in the third ranking network .

comparison of bap induced responses between oikopleura and human cells
in order to assess conservation of responses to bap in mammals and oikopleura, we compared pathways significantly affected by bap in this experiment and in a gene set from a microarray experiment using human macrophages  <cit> . many oxidative stress and apoptosis related pathways were affected in both oikopleura and human cells  suggesting conservation of responses to genotoxic carcinogenic compounds. however, consistent with our genome survey results that showed absence of ahr signaling genes , the ahr signaling pathway was not enriched in oikopleura, but among the top enriched pathways in human cells . other major differences in the top  <dig> pathways enriched are related to cell-cycle regulation, which were among the top over-represented in human cells but not in oikopleura . this could be because of species specific differences in cell-cycle control mechanisms, which in oikopleura involves endocycling, and not necessarily mitosis  <cit> . generation of transcription factors centred over-connected hubs in metacore  resulted in a largely similar list of transcription factors for oikopleura and human bap-regulated gene sets . not surprisingly, ahr was in the human list of transcription factor networks , but not in the oikopleura list, suggesting lack of modulated ahr target genes in the latter. another notable difference is that bap appears to provoke stronger endoplasmic reticulum  stress response in oikopleura as suggested by significant over-representation of apoptosis and survival_endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway in oikopleura but not human cells . it is not clear why endoplasmic reticulum stress response pathway is responding more in oikopleura. this pathway can be adaptive, promoting survival or it can lead to induction of apoptosis  <cit> . however, apoptosis genes respond equally in both oikopleura and the human macrophage cells . er stress response can also explain the significant enrichment of cystic fibrosis disease as one of the processes affected by bap in oikopleura but not human cells . some pathways and processes such as human diseases are enriched here because the pathway analyses were done on mouse homologs of differentially regulated oikopleura genes, but the underlying changes in gene expression or cellular processes can be relevant also in oikopleura. for example, inspection of the modulated genes that led to the enrichment of cystic fibrosis disease reveals that they are involved in er stress response . er stress response is thought to contribute to mechanisms leading to the development of lung fibrosis in mice  <cit> .

genes and pathways affected by clo
treatment of o. dioica with clo resulted in differential regulation of  <dig> genes, with  <dig> genes up-regulated and  <dig> genes down-regulated . genes involved in the xenobiotic defense system in vertebrates were part of the list, including biotransformation enzyme genes such as cyp2-like- <dig> gene , conjugating enzyme genes such as gstα, and some abc transporters and solute carrier proteins . superoxide dismutase and many abc transporters were also down-regulated by clo.

the list of genes differentially regulated by clo was used in various functional analyses using kegg and metacore  as described above for bap gene set. clo affected mainly muscle contraction and energy metabolism pathways . among the significantly enriched pathways, ecm-receptor interaction and focal adhesion are also affected by bap . clo had orchestrated effects on main energy pathways such as glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, oxidative phosphorylation and citrate cycle  . while most pathways affected by clo are presumably conserved between oikopleura and mouse, some such as the disease pathways  may be less relevant for oikopleura. remarkably, nearly all the genes affected by clo in the enriched muscle component and energy pathways were down-regulated , suggesting functional suppression of energy metabolism and motility. this appears consistent with the reduced motility of the animals observed for the highest concentration of clo .

to see interaction among genes differentially regulated by clo, the network building tool in metacore was used . this resulted in a list of ranked interaction networks . consistent with the functional ontology top list , the first five networks were enriched in genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation and muscle contraction .

comparison of bap and clo affected genes and pathways
the major pathways and processes specifically affected by bap are related to its known genotoxic oxidative stress effects such as apoptosis, dna-damage response, mitogenic signaling and response to un-folded proteins . pathways and processes specifically affected by clo are energy metabolism and its regulation, muscle contraction, actin filaments, skeletal muscle development and regulation of cytoskeleton rearrangement . enriched pathways and processes significantly affected by both bap and clo are tissue remodelling and wound repair, inflammatory response, cell differentiation and cell adhesion .

comparison of go cellular component  in metacore generated different top lists of localizations for bap and clo-regulated gene products, reflecting differences in enriched pathways . the only localization that is significantly enriched by bap alone is golgi apparatus . several localization go terms were significantly enriched by clo but not bap. these include muscle components  and organelles parts , consistent with top enriched muscle contraction and energy metabolism pathways, respectively . the two compounds also share top list of go localizations, mainly extracellular region , because both affected many extracellular proteins, possibly including yet un-characterized structural proteins of the house which is composed of more than  <dig> glycoproteins proteins  <cit> . although not included in pathway and go analyses, the extracellular house component proteins  of oikopleura are among the genes down-regulated by both compounds . go analysis also allocated 35% of  <dig> genes down-regulated by both compounds  to the go-cc term extracellular region and 59% of them are annotated as glycoproteins. only  <dig> genes were up-regulated by both chemicals . thirteen genes were oppositely regulated by bap and clo .

validation of tiling array results by qpcr
fourteen genes differentially regulated in tiling arrays were selected for validation using qpcr . the results showed good agreement between the two expression assays  . the directions of changes in log transformed fold-changes in expression  using the two methods were consistent for all genes with the exception of pa2gd in clo-treated samples and cyp2r <dig> in bap-treated samples . good correlation between the two methods was achieved because in the tiling array design, each gene in the genome was represented by several overlapping probes along its entire length  resulting in a robust statistical quantification of expression levels as described in methods section.

discussion
we searched the oikopleura genome for homologs of key genes involved in xenobiotic response pathways. using whole genome tiling arrays, we have recorded transcriptional responses of oikopleura to two model xenobiotic compounds . oikopleura appears to have the smallest cyp complement of sequenced animal genomes and has no detectable cyp <dig> family genes. ahr, which is the transcriptional regulator of cyp <dig> family genes in vertebrates, is also undetectable in oikopleura. thus, the ahr signaling pathway may not exist in oikopleura. it is important to stress that although ahr is present in other invertebrates including ciona and sea urchin  <cit> , its involvement in xenobiotic defense has not been shown. ahr homologs in invertebrates examined thus far do not bind the prototypical ligand dioxin  <cit> . however, ahr has also developmental functions that are considered to be more ancestral  <cit> . hence, the xenobiotic receptor function of ahr could be a vertebrate innovation as suggested before  <cit> . the absence of ahr signaling in oikopleura re-enforces this conclusion and further suggests it might be disposable also in developmental mechanisms, at least in oikopleura.

both bap and clo exposures affected the expression level of genes that participate in xenobiotic biotransformation and stress responses in vertebrates. bap markedly changed the expression of many oxidative stress responsive genes. phase i oxidative biotransformation reactions generate reactive electrophilic metabolites of bap that result in oxidative stress in vertebrates  <cit> . the up-regulation of many biotransformation and anti-oxidant enzyme genes reveals similarities in oxidative stress responses in oikopleura and vertebrates   <cit> . furthermore, analysis using bap-modulated genes in oikopleura and human macrophage cells  <cit>  showed an enrichment of shared pathways such as dna-damage response and apoptosis , suggesting a conservation of response to genotoxic stress. a notable exception is the ahr signaling pathway, which was activated by bap treatment in human cells but not in oikopleura .

the similarities in bap-modulated genes and pathways in both vertebrates and oikopleura are surprising in the absence of ahr and cyp <dig> family genes in the latter. bap is converted to more toxic intermediate metabolites by cyp <dig> enzymes in vertebrates and thus, cyp <dig> inducing ahr is required for carcinogenicity of bap  <cit> . although cyp1-like genes could not be detected in oikopleura, it is possible that other cyp genes such as the cyp3-like  enzyme induced here are involved in generation of reactive metabolites of bap.

in contrast to bap, responses to clo treatment do not seem consistent with its effects in mammals, possibly because ppars or nr1c-like genes are absent in the oikopleura genome. in vertebrates, pparα ligands such as clo induce many fatty acid beta oxidation and oxidative phosphorylation enzymes  <cit> . in contrast to vertebrates, clo down-regulated several genes in energy metabolism pathways in oikopleura. our results in oikopleura thus far do not support conserved pparα-dependent pathways but suggest general stress effects of clo.

some genes and pathways affected in this study appear to be compound specific and others are likely to be general toxic stress responses. for example some top pathways affected by bap are shared by both oikoplera and the human macrophage cells  suggesting that they are bap specific responses. different cyp genes induced by the two compounds , are examples of compound specific biotransformation enzymes. pathways affected by both compounds in oikopleura such as cell adhesion, tissue remodelling and wound repair  appear to be general stress responses. both bap and clo also resulted in down-regulation of oikosins that are components of the house  <cit> . oikopleura invests a significant portion of energy in the synthesis of its food-filtering house, composed of more than  <dig> proteins  <cit> . it is possible that stress and reduced food intake  triggers energy saving adaptive responses such as reduced muscle contraction and lower energy metabolism in clo-treated animals. these findings suggest that bap and clo pollution could be detrimental to growth and survival of oikopleura in its environment.

the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of xenobiotic defense and biotransformation enzyme genes in oikopleura will have to be clarified further in future studies. based on comparison with mechanisms in vertebrates and other invertebrates, and bap-modulated gene expression analysis and genome survey, we propose a schematic model for possible mechanisms involved . in vertebrate systems, induction of biotransformation enzymes in response to xenobiotic stress involves both xenobiotic receptor-mediated  and non-receptor mediated mitogen-activated protein kinase  pathways  <cit> . no ahr was detected in oikopleura, but it is possible that some of the expanded nr1i and nr1h related members of nuclear receptors serve as xenobiotic receptors and regulate the transcription of some of the biotransformation genes such as cyps. in vertebrates, many anti-oxidant and phase ii biotransformation enzyme genes are targets of the transcription factors such as nrf <dig>  activated by signaling mechanisms involving mapk pathways  <cit> . components of the nrf <dig> signaling pathway appear to be conserved in oikopleura . indeed, nrf <dig> signaling is one of the top pathways significantly affected by bap , suggesting its involvement in the regulation of anti-oxidant protein genes including gstα, gclc and gclm up-regulated by bap . both nrf <dig> and ap- <dig> factors are involved in oxidant induced transcriptional regulation of gclc and gclm genes  <cit> . the mapk pathway is also involved in the regulation of the transcription factor hsf <dig> in response to cellular stress  <cit> . bap induction of many genes in the component pathways indicated in figure  <dig> suggests that this model likely applies also in oikopleura. for example, the transcription factors hsf1/ <dig> and jund , cyp3-like- <dig> gene, antioxidant genes and abc transporters were up-regulated here by bap .

CONCLUSIONS
oikopleura appears to have basic defensome toolkit or genes for biotransformation enzymes for responding to xenobiotic stressors, although it may lack some key genes playing roles in vertebrate responses. ahr, not detected in oikopleura, may have no important toxicological role outside vertebrates. xenobiotic induced biotransformation and anti-oxidant enzyme gene expression responses to bap treatment in oikopleura show similarities to those observed in vertebrates, with the important exception of an ahr signaling mediated responses. the pattern of responses to clo treatment appears different between oikopleura and vertebrates.

