BACKGROUND
fatty acid composition of cell membrane is an important determinant of cell function  <cit> . manipulation of cellular fatty acid composition has been a widely used approach to modulating the biological responsiveness of different cell types. recently, fatty acid profile, particularly the ratio of omega- <dig>  to omega- <dig>  polyunsaturated fatty acids, of cells or tissues has become a biomarker for monitoring the outcome of dietary interventions  and for identifying the risk factors for lipid related diseases   <cit> . measurement of the n-6/n- <dig> fatty acid ratio can be also used to identify animal phenotypes, such as the fat- <dig> transgenic mice that we created recently  <cit> . thus, analysis of fatty acid composition is a commonly used technique in lipid research.

analysis of fatty acid composition is usually carried out by gas chromatography . conventionally, preparation of samples for gc involves two separate procedures: extraction and methylation. lipids are usually extracted from cells or tissue homogenates by using organic solvents such as chroloform/methanol  <cit> . this procedure is time and material consuming, potentially causes sample loss and contamination, and generates organic wastes. these problems become more apparent when the number of samples to be extracted and analyzed is large and/or the specimen size is small.

this study validated a method that combines the extraction and methylation into a single step. our results showed that this simplified method without the need of prior extraction yielded desirable outcome.

RESULTS
the samples tested, including cultured cells, tissue homogenates, and red blood cells, were divided into two aliquots. one was analyzed by the conventional method and the other analyzed by the simplified method, under the same chromatographic conditions. the results obtained using the conventional and simplified methods were compared. figure  <dig> shows a representative set of the fatty acid profiles of mouse heart tissue derived from the two methods. generally, the results obtained using the simplified method without prior extraction are as good as or even better than those obtained using the standard method, particularly when the sample size is small. as shown in table  <dig>  the recovery of long chain fatty acids from tissue samples by the simplified method is significantly higher than that by the traditional method, but there is no difference in relative fatty acid composition between the two methods. however, it was noted that some short and medium chain fatty acids  could be lost, but none of those fatty acids with a chain length of  <dig> or more carbons was affected . similar outcomes were found in the tests using cultured cells, red blood cells and mouse-tails. these results indicate that the extraction of lipid prior to methylation is not necessary for the analysis of total long chain fatty acid composition by gc. we also found that the water in liquid samples, if its content is not more than 5% of the volume of bf <dig> solution added, did not affect significantly the analytic outcome. therefore, the simplified method is suitable for both dried and liquid samples. however, the result obtained using the simplified method is limited to fatty acid profile of total lipids in the analyzed specimens. for studies requiring fatty acid composition of individual lipid class , prior extraction and separation of lipids are still necessary for their analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study has demonstrated that the lipid extraction procedure prior to methylation employed conventionally in lipid analysis of long chain  polyunsaturated fatty acids in biological samples can be omitted, without affecting the recovery of long chain fatty acids and their composition. this simplified method is suitable for analysis of long chain fatty acid composition in a variety of biological specimens, but not appropriate for quantification of medium and short chain  fatty acids. because the modified method is relatively simple and sensitive, it has a number of advantages including saving time and easy-to-use, reducing the potentials of sample loss and contamination, and requiring only small quantities of specimens and solvents. these advantages become more obvious in the case where the number of samples to be analyzed is large and/or the specimen size is small. for example, use of the simplified method would make the task of lipid analysis much easier in the large clinical trials that need to monitor polyunsaturated fatty acid composition  of red blood cells or other specimens from a large number of subjects. this new method is particularly useful for phenotype analysis of the transgenic animals that exhibit a unique fatty acid profile, such as the fat- <dig> transgenic mice that we generated recently  <cit> .

