BACKGROUND
human swallowing is a complex neuromuscular procedure modulated by sensory feedback  <cit> . impairments of sensation have been implicated in aspiration after stroke  <cit>  and are known to result in short-term dysphagia even in healthy subjects when induced by oropharyngeal anaesthesia  <cit> . while many patients experience recovery of swallowing within the first few weeks after stroke, 40% of dysphagic stroke patients develop aspiration pneumonia which in turn increases the use of artificial feeding, length of hospital stay, and mortality  <cit> . despite the high incidence of aspiration pneumonia after stroke, treatment options for accelerating the recovery of swallowing by improving physiology and reducing aspiration remain limited. current strategies of swallowing therapy involve on the one hand modification of either eating behaviour or swallowing technique and on the other hand facilitation of swallowing with the use of ttos.

the anterior faucial pillars  are bilaterally located on the oral side of the velum and form part of the soft palate. they are innervated by the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve and the glossopharyngeal nerve. about  <dig> years ago sensory stimulation was first advocated as a method for facilitating swallowing  <cit> . since then stimulation of the afp and other parts of the oropharynx became a common treatment for dysphagia  <cit> . clinical studies showed that tactile stimulation of the afp increases swallowing speed and facilitates deglutition for several minutes. different groups using electrical stimulation even found a better outcome in stroke patients showing reduced aspiration  <cit>  and a decrease of gastrostomies  <cit>  while others found no changes in laryngeal closure, pharyngeal transit time or aspiration severity  <cit> . until now, the underlying basic physiological consequences induced by oropharyngeal stimulation are still unknown  <cit> . first results in this field of research revealed an increased cortical excitability evoked by pharyngeal stimulation  <cit> .

magnetoencephalography  can monitor cortical activity with a high temporal and spatial resolution  <cit> . motor tasks have been shown to result in event-related desynchronisations  of the cortical beta rhythm in cortical motor areas  <cit> . in the last few years synthetic aperture magnetometry  based on whole-head meg has been demonstrated to be a reliable method to examine the complex function of swallowing in humans  <cit> . while the artifacts caused by oropharyngeal muscle activation during the act of swallowing make it difficult to study activation in subcortical and bulbar structures, the cortical areas especially the sensorimotor areas can be examined in detail.

in the present study we employed whole-head meg and sam analyses to study cortical activity during self-paced volitional swallowing with and without preceding ttos. this simple stimulation paradigm was chosen due to its non invasivness and its easy bedside application. we hypothesized an increased swallowing related activation of the somatosensory cortex after oropharyngeal stimulation compared to the baseline condition without prior stimulation.

RESULTS
behavioral data
all participants tolerated the study without any difficulty. no coughing and, in particular, no signs of aspiration occurred during stimulation or measurements. the two conditions, after and without ttos, did not differ in swallowing behaviour. the amount of water swallowed during the two compared measurements was identical for each subject. number of swallows  as well as duration per swallow  did not differ between the two tasks. rms of emg amplitude across the swallow interval  showed no difference in emg power by comparison swallowing after and without oropharyngeal stimulation .

time-frequency plots
wavelet group analysis of meg sensor recordings revealed distinct activation in the higher alpha and lower beta frequency band in the parietal sensors with a reduction of activation at about m <dig> and a re-increase after about  <dig> –  <dig> ms. this effect was observable in both hemispheres and conditions . a difference plot of both conditions demonstrates stronger desynchronization in the stimulation condition compared to the reference measurement . according to these results meg data were then filtered in the alpha and beta band.

sam analysis
group analysis of sam results revealed significant event related desynchronizations  in the beta frequency band located in the primary sensorimotor cortex  in both conditions  . the peak of the erd was located bilaterally in the same area around the central gyrus in both conditions. in the alpha frequency band and other cortical areas no significant activation was observed in either of the two conditions. comparison of both conditions revealed a significantly stronger activation after ttos compared to the normal swallowing task . the maximum pseudo-t value increased in the ttos condition .

to analyze the chronological changes during swallowing separate calculation of sam images for each  <dig> ms interval was calculated. here the early intervals represent the oral phase of deglutition while the later intervals are part of the pharyngeal swallowing phase. a clear distinction between the two phases based on the submental emg recordings is not possible. this revealed erd of rhythmic brain activity within sensorimotor cortex in each individual subject and interval. group analysis of the normal swallowing paradigm showed no significant activation during the first  <dig> ms. only small left sided activation appeared in the third time interval. between  <dig> ms and  <dig> s right hemispheric lateralization of activation could be observed. in contrast, after ttos significant left lateralized activation was seen in all  <dig> time intervals. right hemispheric activation increases over time with a slight decrease in the last time frame .

discussion
the present study revealed an increment of cortical swallowing activation after ttos in healthy subjects. by this physiological changes on the cortical level induced by this widely used tool of dysphagia rehabilitation are shown.

behavioural changes after oropharyngeal stimulation
different behavioural studies examined the effect of oropharyngeal stimulation before. either thermal or taste stimuli are supposed to heighten the sensitivity for swallowing in the oral cavity thereby leading to a more rapid triggering of the swallowing reflex  <cit> . today this technique is often used in the treatment of patients with neurogenic dysphagia to facilitate a delayed or absent swallowing response. there is little data reporting the effectiveness of this therapy.

cold stimulation of the afp before swallowing hastened the onset of the pharyngeal swallowing phase and reduced the swallowing latency  <cit> . lazzara and co-workers could show that ttos on  <dig> patients with different neurologic diseases resulted in an improved triggering of the swallowing reflex in  <dig> of these patients  <cit> . other studies supported a short-term effect  of thermal application but could not find a long-term effect  for this therapy  <cit> .

also taste stimuli have been shown effects on swallowing. they reduced the delay in swallowing initiation, hastened triggering of pharyngeal swallowing in patients with neurogenic dysphagia and even led to a reduced frequency of radiographically observed aspiration. this suggests that afferents from the oral-pharyngeal chemoreceptors can facilitate deglutition  <cit> .

cortical changes after oropharyngeal stimulation
additionally to the observed and well known behavioural changes following oropharyngeal stimulation few studies focussed on its effects regarding the cortical level. the first study focusing on this topic in  <dig> demonstrated a facilitation of the cortical pathways by cranial nerve stimulation  <cit> . apart from that, electrical pharyngeal stimulation showed an increase of cortical excitability in different tms studies  <cit> . to our knowledge the cortical reaction to ttos has not been examined yet. in the present study a significant increase of cortical swallowing activation was observed after ttos compared to a swallowing paradigm without stimulation. these findings demonstrate cortical changes following simple oral stimulation. analysis of the chronological changes during the swallowing execution might provide further insights into the underlying physiological mechanisms. in healthy subjects a time-dependent shift from the left to the right hemisphere was found in an meg swallowing paradigm  <cit> . though from the submental emg data no clear cut between oral and pharyngeal phase can be defined, it is likely that the beginning of submental muscle activation represents at least part of the oral phase, while about  <dig> ms later and in the end of the recorded submental muscle activation the pharyngeal phase is taking place.

although in the present experiment sam analysis of the first two  <dig> ms intervals did not reveal significant activation in either hemisphere, an increase of right hemispheric activation was seen in the following time intervals. therefore the results of the normal swallowing condition found in the present study are mainly concordant with the previous investigation. in contrast to this, ttos revealed increased bihemispheric activation with predominant activation of the left somatosensory cortical areas during the whole swallowing interval. this finding underlines the hypothesis of hemispheric specialization in swallowing processing. in lesion studies left hemispheric infarction was associated with oral stage dysfunction, while dysfunction of the pharyngeal stage was related to right hemispheric lesions  <cit> . based on their findings, daniels and co-workers suggested a left hemisphere control for volitional aspects of swallowing and a right hemisphere control for reflexive swallowing behaviour. this is also supported by the meg study of our group mentioned above  <cit> . finally, patients with a chronic pharyngeal stage dysfunction revealed stronger right hemispheric activation, both in size and time, indicating cortical compensation of their pharyngeal dysphagia  <cit> .

along this reasoning, ttos, according to the present findings, may lead to a facilitation of both the oral and the pharyngeal phase of deglutition. on the other hand it remains unclear whether the observed effects are related to functional cortical reorganization or are more unspecific reactions to differences in attention due to the afferent input. the enhanced swallowing ability seen in dysphagic patients observed after application of ttos  <cit>  supports the hypothesis of cortical reorganization. however, based on the present study we cannot distinguish whether the observed effects are caused by the stimulation of the afp or only by the swallowing of a chilled bolus.

our results and their interpretation are also supported by behavioural studies employing ttos showing both changes of oral phase tasks, like a heightened sensitivity of the oral cavity  <cit>  and a reduced delay in swallowing initiation, and modification of the pharyngeal phase, like an improved triggering of the swallowing reflex  <cit> . though long term changes in swallowing behavior after ttos could not be shown yet, our findings may point to therapeutical approaches in swallowing rehabilitation. further studies have to show if stimulation intensity, frequency or treatment duration lead to different results in swallowing behavior and in the consecutive cortical activations. additionally cortical and behavioral changes of ttos have to be examined in dysphagic patients.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present study we could demonstrate an increase of cortical activation after thermal tactile oral stimulation. this is to our knowledge the first study showing cortical changes elicited by this simple swallowing therapy technique. our results provide an insight into the physiological mechanisms by which ttos might lead to the previously observed facilitation of swallowing. further examinations employing ttos in dysphagic patients have to show that increased cortical activation is paralleled by an improved swallowing performance.

