BACKGROUND
in order to better understand the vast complexity of the molecular events in biology, good measurement techniques and methodologies are required to investigate the biological processes as they unfold. the presented approach was developed to identify protein targets in alzheimer's disease as part of the first steps in the drug discovery pipeline. the activated cellular signal transduction pathways were studied in a neuronal disease model immediately upon amyloid-β stimulation <cit> . protein phosphorylation is a well known and extensively used signaling mechanism, so measuring specific changes in protein phosphorylation was used to inspect these pathways. to this end it is required to assess the degree of phosphorylation at a specific protein residue, which differs from the overall degree of phosphorylation of a given protein e.g. observed as a shift in isoelectric point on a gel.

the experimental setup uses stable isotope labeling by normal or heavy oxygen  to differentiate between mixed treated and control peptides <cit> . this peptide mixture is analyzed by mass spectrometry in a single run. the proteins were extracted and the samples were analyzed in two steps. first the proteins were trypsinized and peptides identified in an ms/ms mode experiment from an unlabeled mixture of the treated and control samples. secondly the proteins were extracted from the treated and untreated cells, an aliquot split was performed followed by 18o/16o c-terminal labeling by trypsination in two independent experiments . this produced a 'direct' experiment, where the peptides from the treated cells were labeled with heavy oxygen  and mixed with peptides from the untreated control cells labeled with light oxygen , and an 'inverted' experiment where the labeling was swapped. the samples were subsequently analyzed by mass spectrometry and the acquired spectra were initially processed through a series of analysis steps , which are not part of the method presented and therefore not detailed here.

the problem setting addressed here starts from a set of label swapped pairs, each with up to  <dig> spectral intensities  extracted from a large range of ms spectra summing ion counts from multiple charge states and an extended retention time. the choice of using up to  <dig> peaks  in the quantitative ms analysis was a pragmatic one, since in most spectra the 9th peak is already within the noise range. a set of inherent problems to the 18o labeling technique are treated here: one is the overlap of three isotopic contours from the labeled and unlabeled peptides; another is the non-perfect labeling efficiency, which along with experimental noise needs to be taken into account in order to get as robust and reliable quantitation as possible .

                           d
                           d
                           d
                           i
                           i
                           i
the theoretical quantities used to derive the ratio between treated and control samples are listed. the desired intensities for treated and control samples were calculated from the estimated intensities  resulting from the multivariate linear regression fit after normalization . the total intensity of a spectra i = a + b + c, where in the table subscripts d and i are added referring to the direct and inverted experiments, respectively, and the superscripts t and c are added referring to treated and control samples, respectively.

we have chosen to report the primary end result as the fold change between treated and control. choosing the fold change also means that the absolute intensities of treated and control are no longer needed, thus allowing the assumptions used to be reduced to one i.e. equal labeling efficiency between the two label swapped samples .

the theoretical probability distribution between double, single and no incorporation of 18o upon labeling can also be derived <cit> . here we have chosen not to make any such assumptions, but rather use additional experimental data in the form of label swapping and the limited assumption of equal labeling efficiency of a given peptide upon label swapping.

the basic analysis methodology starts with the fitting of theoretical isotopic contours for the heavy, mixed and light isotopes to the observed signal . the fitting was carried out using multivariate linear regression where the squared error was minimized <cit>  to yield the three intensities of labeled and unlabeled isotopes with their respective confidence intervals . to reflect the quality of fit of the multivariate regression onto the resulting fold change, confidence intervals were calculated by a parametric bootstrap using the estimated covariance matrix of the three regression coefficients.

some previous methods have relied on just a few peaks  to estimate the ratio between treated and control <cit>  and in most cases the peptide sequence was assumed unknown. more relevant information is present in the remaining peaks which can be utilized to improve the peptide abundance estimate. the abundance estimate can be improved further if the peptide sequence and post-translational modifications are known, since the theoretical isotopic contour is improved, as presented here. the presented method can also use estimated isotopic contours directly if the peptides have not been identified prior to ms quantitation <cit> . this is the case for a method recently published by eckel-passow et al. which uses averagine  and all of the ms-peaks presently discernible from background noise <cit> . they used the linear regression described by mirgorodskaya et al. <cit>  which is analogous to the one presented here to calculate the isotopic intensities. the sample used for their analysis was a simple mixture of two proteins in a 1: <dig> ratio, in contrast to proteins originating from a complete cell lysate as investigated here and by others <cit> .

to assess a new peptide quantitation methodology ideally you would need to have a large and varied set of spectra with already known abundances. in short of such a data set we propose to use simulated spectra for a thorough model assessment and the limited experimental data for validation.

RESULTS
to perform an in depth assessment of the methodology we first present a characterization of some important parameters on the experimentally observed spectra. this characterization was used to generate similar spectra in-silico where desired parameters could be imposed and compared to the ones estimated by the model after adding noise. the simulated spectra were generated in order to reflect, as much as possible, the experimentally observed spectra by using the same peptides and by mirroring the distributions observed for a set of important observable parameters. one important parameter is the proportion of total spectral intensity which cannot be explained by the model's three overlapping isotopic contours and remains as residuals or errors, here termed the ε/s-ratio (). the error term contains experimental noise as well as any mismatch between theory  and practice. the data agreed very well with the model as shown in figure 2a with less than 10% error for 85% of the spectra and less than 5% error for 50% of the spectra.

noise was added to the simulated data with a distribution similar to the one found for the experimental spectra, thereby reflecting the experimental data from this perspective, resulting in less than 10% error for 85% of the spectra and less than 5% for 45% of the spectra. another important parameter is the labeling efficiency which is defined as the ratio between the labeled isotope intensity  and the total intensity of the sample undergoing labeling . in most of the spectra a reasonably good labeling efficiency is observed , while there are three spectra pairs with low or absent labeling. we found that it was unrealistic to rescue these spectra with label efficiencies close to zero  so for the simulated spectra the tail of the imposed label efficiency distribution was cut off at  <dig> . the labeling efficiency shown for the simulated spectra is the one estimated by the model in the same manner as it is done for the experimentally observed spectra, which naturally differs from the one imposed when constructing the spectra. finally in supplementary figure  the estimated fold change distribution is shown for the experimental and simulated spectra. the average fold change was close to one, as one would expect from a biological perspective since only a small part of the phosphorylated proteins were expected to be involved in the cellular response. the experimental spectra had a trend towards positive fold changes, which we chose not to impose on the simulated data. furthermore we also chose a larger spread of the fold change to provide enough data points for a statistical analysis of larger fold changes, which actually increase the average fold change error as shown below. having inspected the experimentally observed spectra and ensured that the simulated spectra reflect their overall measurable characteristics, we can perform an in-depth assessment of the presented model's behavior using simulated spectra followed by an investigation of the experimentally observed spectra.

fold change assessment
the fold change parameter reports the change in abundance between the treated and control samples in a symmetrical and straightforward manner by a simple ratio . we used the simulated data presented above to assess the model estimates of fold change and its dependencies on noise, label efficiency and the absolute value of the fold change itself. we have chosen to display primarily the relationships with respect to the estimated parameters as they can be calculated from the experimentally observed spectra and thus relate the fold change to them.

as the noise level goes up the difference between true fold change and estimated fold change increases, but since the noise is distributed over  <dig> observable peaks, which are fitted in unison by the model, it is not directly clear how the estimated fold change would behave. to measure the quality of the estimated fold change we introduce the fold change error defined below as the difference between true  fold change and the fold change estimated from the model based on the spectra:

   

in figure  <dig> the fold change error is plotted as a function of the imposed noise level and the ε/s-ratio originating from the model residuals after fitting the three overlapping contours to the spectra. the imposed noise level and ε/s-ratio are correlated with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , which shows that the ε/s-ratio is a reasonably good indicator of the level of noise in a spectrum.

the fold change estimate was found to depend on the labeling efficiency , but even at low labeling efficiencies  the method yielded reasonably good fold change estimates at moderate noise levels . the imposed labeling efficiency and the one estimated after added noise were highly correlated with a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , showing that the model estimate is quite reliable . similarly the fold change error increased with increasing fold change as shown in figure 4a, but in a very noise dependent manner where a small linear response was found for low degrees of noise , while higher noise ranges result in drastic increases in average fold change error. this is an argument in favor of suggesting a spectral quality threshold around ε/s-ratio <  <dig> . the estimated fold change had a high correlation coefficient of  <dig>  with the imposed fold change validating the presented methodology over a wide and representative range of labeling efficiencies and noise levels. the interconnected influence of labeling efficiency and noise on the fold change error is not straightforward , but is relevant in the experimental setting. for example it should be noted that at low noise ranges  a reasonably low fold change error, can be obtained even down to mediocre labeling efficiencies , as illustrated in figure  <dig>  to provide adequate sampling the contour plot is made using a separate data set with flat distributions for all parameters.

fold change confidence interval assessment
in a high throughput setting it is not possible to assess the quality of each individual spectra pair and of the model fit manually, so if only a fold change is reported the spectral quality aspect is missing. to this end we have computed the confidence interval for each reported fold change using a bootstrap based on the regression . the relevance of the confidence interval lies in its ability to reflect the quality of the spectra pair. this means that for good spectra the confidence interval should be narrow, while for poor spectra it should widen up. a subset of fold change values and noise levels were extracted to illustrate how the fold change confidence interval tightens around the estimated fold change when the noise level decreases . the quality of the spectra depends primarily on the level of imposed noise and imposed label efficiency, which was found to correlate well with the fold change confidence interval window size . the estimated 95% confidence interval around the fold change actually contained the imposed fold change 96% of the cases showing that estimate is highly reliable.

consistency check
based on the obvious assumption that a contributing intensity cannot be negative we were able to derive a set of constraints in order to assess whether a label swapped spectra pair was mutually consistent . they specify that ad ≥ bi + ci and ai ≥ bd + cd, which basically means that a sample may not change intensity upon label swapping. they are important in order to identify problematic spectra pairs and were used as an initial filter on the experimental and simulated spectra pairs, thus flagging 8% and 5%, respectively.

examples from experimental spectra
to illustrate the reported results on experimentally observed spectra pairs, a peptide with low labeling efficiency  is shown in figure  <dig>  nevertheless a tight fold change interval could be estimated where fc =  <dig>  with a 95% confidence interval of . another medium intensity peptide was observed as two separate species, sharing a phosphorylation site . using the presented methodology the phosphorylation site specific fold change was estimated for the shared thr phosphorylation to  <dig>  with a 95% confidence interval of  . this peptide originates from the microtubule-associated protein  <dig> , the phosphorylation state of which has been found to influence cytoskeleton structure <cit> . in alzheimer's, the disease studied, cytoskeleton integrity is known to be of great importance <cit> .

robustness assessment
to assess the quality of the presented method directly on the experimentally observed spectra we performed a robustness test. in figure  <dig> one spectra peak was removed at the time and the spectra pair re-analyzed to show the resulting fold change. this is also based on the recognition that occasionally some peaks cannot be measured or are contaminated with interfering species and was feasible by utilizing the inherent redundancy contained within the spectra. the fold change estimates were found to be very robust towards the removal of single peaks and outliers could in this manner be identified to support the removal of interfering isotope species, thereby improving the final fold change estimate.

discussion
the presented method can estimate residue specific protein phosphorylation fold changes with associated confidence intervals from an 18o/16o label swapped spectra pair independently of the label efficiency, if minimal labeling occurs. the only prerequisite for the presented methodology is equal peptide specific label efficiency between label swapped experiments. the fold change for each peptide had a very low average and median error of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, where the error was estimated from simulated spectra with similar noise and labeling efficiency distributions as the experimentally observed spectra. the labeling efficiency and spectrum noise were along with the absolute value of the fold change itself found to be the main determinants of fold change error, but are being continuously improved <cit> . using the simulated data we were able to map this relationship in a contour plot, where the average fold change error is reported, given the estimated labeling efficiency and ε/s-ratio. the contour plot displays the non-linear relationship between labeling efficiency and ε/s-ratio and allows an additional estimate of the fold change error directly applicable to experimental observed spectra. a qualitative decrease in fold change estimation was found for a few poor spectra with an ε/s-ratio above  <dig>  or estimated labeling efficiency below  <dig> , which had an average fold change error of  <dig> . if these spectra are excluded the average and median fold change drops to  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. two major drawbacks where highlighted by miyagi and rao <cit>  of the 18o/16o-labeling technique: variability in labeling and computational tools, both are addressed by the presented method.

CONCLUSIONS
the method presented was developed to support its application in high throughput experiments by quality check filtering based on spectra pair consistency and the accurate reporting of fold change confidence interval. the fold change confidence interval was found to summarize spectral quality nicely from several aspects such as noise, labeling efficiency and sample signal. we found that the confidence interval provided very valuable information, thus reducing the amount of time spent quality checking the underlying spectra manually. a matter of experimental reality is the occasional intrusion of an interfering species into a spectrum, which can be identified and eliminated using the leave-one-out robustness assessment presented. the described method can also be used for quantitation in a broader context such that different peptide isotope contributions  can be joined to yield a more accurate overall peptide fold change estimate and resulting protein quantitation. the presented method is thus useful for the elucidation of the constitution and dynamics of cellular signaling pathways by allowing the accurate measurement of residue-specific phosphorylation events.

