BACKGROUND
the use of growth promoters in meat production has been banned in the european union since  <dig> due to the potentially adverse effects of hormone residues for the consumer. council directive 23/96/ec requires the eu member states to adopt national monitoring plans to control the illegal use of these compounds. despite the ban, these substances are still administered and a black-market for the production, distribution, and use of multiple steroids has flourished  <cit> . to elude official controls, new anabolic compounds are developed and growth promoters are administered at low doses or combining different substances in hormone cocktails. to keep pace with such a moving target, constant innovation in screening and validation methods is necessary.

anabolic steroids act on multiple organs and metabolic pathways either through primary interaction or secondary effects. for this reason, indirect approaches, based on the evaluation of perturbations of different biological systems, have been proposed to identify growth-promoter-treated animals. target organ histology, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics have been explored as screening tools to better inform confirmative analysis  <cit> . the application of transcriptomics in toxicology has experienced an impressive growth in recent years, leading to the foundation of a new discipline, toxicogenomics  <cit> . although toxicogenomics has mostly focused on the effects of pharmacological compounds in model species, it is increasingly applied to monitor the effects of xenobiotics in non-model species . in this contest, gene expression profiles have been used to obtain indirect biomarkers for the use of growth promoters in beef meat production. initially, quantitative real-time pcr was used to analyze the expression of candidate diagnostic genes. this approach has already been successfully applied in several studies on experimentally treated animals  <cit> . however, good candidate genes are often difficult to identify and the use of single or few gene markers provides a limited and biased view of the biological response to xenobiotics. using either dna microarray platforms or rna-sequencing, it is possible to obtain whole-transcriptome expression profiles, which provide a broad and unbiased  picture of the biological response to toxicants. thanks to the decreasing costs of genomic technologies, transcriptomics is starting to be applied to the identification of gene markers for anabolic treatments in beef cattle. microarray analysis has been used so far to examine the effects of anabolic hormones in experimentally treated animals, as in the case of skeletal muscle samples from bulls administered with dexamethasone  and dex plus 17β-estradiol  <cit> , and with trenbolone acetate plus estradiol  <cit> , or livers from beef cattle after experimental treatment with dehydroepiandrosterone  <cit> . more recently, the potentiality of rna- sequencing technology for the detection of growth-promoters abuse in cattle was explored and successfully used to screen for highly regulated genes to be proposed as biomarker candidates for detecting the treatment with trenbolone acetate plus estradiol  <cit> .

in the present study, the use of transcriptomics is extended for the first time to unknown skeletal muscle samples, collected directly from beef cattle immediately after slaughtering. these samples are part of a larger survey during which also thymus and urine specimens were collected with the aim of detecting putative use of corticosteroids in commercial animals. histological analyses on thymic samples were used following a validated protocol to classify samples as positive, suspect or negative for corticosteroid treatment and results have been reported previously  <cit> , showing a relevant percentage of suspect animals for corticosteroid treatment compared to official data. here, detection of dex urinary excretion by liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry  was additionally implemented to provide direct evidence of illicit use of anabolic steroids. all samples  were analyzed using a cattle-specific oligo-dna microarray and compared with known negative controls. the goal of this study was to identify gene expression patterns that could classify unknown commercial samples as negative or putative positive  by comparison with untreated controls.

RESULTS
lc-ms analyses
lc-ms analyses were performed on urine from the slaughtered animals to obtain an analytical confirmation for the thymus histological results  <cit> . first, the lc-ms method was validated and results of method validation are summarized in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  the method validation process for dex analysis consisted of the analysis of  <dig> different blank urine samples in order to verify the absence of target analyte and potential interfering compounds. no interferences being detected in the analyte diagnostic chromatograms. figure  <dig> reports the extracted ion chromatograms obtained from a blank urine spiked with betamethasone  and dex  at  <dig>  ng/ml, showing the ability of the chromatographic method to separate the peaks of the two isomeric corticosteroids so avoiding the possibility of misrecognition. for all the analytes, the confirmation of the identity according to decision 2002/657/ec was demonstrated by comparing the relative retention time observed for the spiked analytes to the standards, furthermore two granddaughters ions, with a signal to noise greater than  <dig>  were monitored and all ion ratios of samples were within the recommended tolerance when compared with standards .

a relative retention time .

b area ratio of product ions from extracted ion chromatograms.

validation data for the determination of dex in urine by lc-ms <dig> .

the results of lc-ms <dig> analysis confirmed the presence of dex residues in urine of the four animals positive for histological data . the concentration of dex ranged from lod and  <dig>  ng/ml.

a value > cut off factor.

b value < loq.

n.d.: not detected .

results from urine randomly collected at slaughterhouse.

microarray analysis
microarray experiments for all the  <dig> bovine skeletal muscle samples were performed.

high quality, unbiased and reproducible gene expression data are always desirable in any dna microarray experiment, but when the aim is to apply transcriptomics for the identification of illicit use of steroid hormones, data quality becomes essential for obvious reasons. comparison of normalized, averaged spike-in signals across different experimental replicates provided a strong indication of the robustness of the normalization process as spike-in variation across samples was minimal. the filtering process on the basis of the second lowest spike-in concentration resulted in removing  <dig>  unique transcripts. finally, gene-specific quantitative  rt-pcr assays were developed and used to quantify relative expression of  <dig> genes in the whole set of samples. as shown in table  <dig>  a positive and significant correlation of expression values was found for all validated genes. the overall correlation of fc values calculated for the two methods  also showed a high correlation coefficient .

a hoxa <dig> gene expression values evaluated by qrt-pcr in some suspected samples were below the limit of detection and therefore arbitrary values were assigned.

fc was calculated comparing group b vs group a animals.

**p <  <dig> ; ***p <  <dig> .

after data extraction, normalization, and filtering, processed signals for  <dig>  unique transcripts in  <dig> muscle samples were analyzed using pca. the rationale for using this exploratory statistical tool is based on the need to reduce the inherent multidimensionality of microarray data and to avoid assumptions on the classification of the samples, without prior distinction between negative controls, positive samples, and unknown commercial specimens. the first two components, which account for a substantial fraction  of the total variance, clearly identified four main groups . negative controls were broadly distributed along the x-axis, which explained  <dig> % of the total variance. all the  <dig> holstein samples were clustered in group  <dig>  while the remaining five known samples, all cross-breed , were included in group  <dig> . group  <dig> included all the four samples  classified as positive for corticosteroid treatment by both histological and lc-ms analyses and the group  <dig> comprised exclusively samples collected at the slaughterhouse. the two sets of controls were different also with respect to age, as untreated animals in group  <dig> were animals between  <dig> and  <dig> months old, those in group  <dig> were all  <dig> months old bulls. to explore the potential association of breed  with the separation of samples along the two principal axes, a one-way anova was carried out using breed as the discriminant variable and individual samples pca scores either on the x- or the y-axis as dependent variable. a significant partition of samples along both axes  was evidenced. after excluding holstein samples, the other breeds were homogenously distributed on both components . age of animals showed no significant correlation with sample scores on the first component  and the second one . for a few animals the age was putatively approximated during veterinary inspection at the slaughterhouse.

based on these results, the observed dispersion of negative controls is likely to be attributable to the inclusion of holstein animals, which is a rather different breed than the french breeds or their crosses that are prevalent in the study. however, breed did not explain the separation of all other samples. two additional variables that are known to largely affect gene expression in the skeletal muscle, gender and muscle type  <cit> , could be excluded as they were identical for all samples by experimental design.

to avoid possible distortion in the pca plot due to breed effects, holstein samples were excluded from the subsequent analyses and the pca was repeated . here, the first two components, which account for  <dig> % of the total variance, identified two groups. the x-axis, which explained  <dig> % of variance, separated group a, which included the negative controls and some unknown animals, from group b, which comprised all four positive samples and other unknown samples.

to evaluate the statistical significance of the observed clustering, microarray data for the group b were compared to the group a in a two-class unpaired data sam test. even enforcing a stringent false discovery rate  and a conservative fold-change  threshold , a large number of differentially expressed genes  was obtained, with  <dig>  up-regulated and  <dig>  down-regulated transcripts , suggesting a highly significant difference in expression profiles between group a and group b in figure 3b.

to explore the functional significance of the observed difference, enrichment analysis of deg was carried out yielding several significantly enriched gene ontology  terms and kegg pathways . different signaling pathways  were found to be differentially regulated. in particular, the expression of several genes encoding odorant receptors  was significantly up-regulated. ors are expressed in several tissues, but their function outside the olfactory epithelium is largely unknown. however, it has been recently reported that ors might have a relevant role in myogenesis and muscle regeneration. griffin and colleagues  <cit>  analyzed  <dig> or genes and found that  <dig> were up-regulated during myogenesis in primary cultured of mouse muscle cells. most ors were over-expressed during myoblast fusion. in vivo expression analysis of one or  demonstrated that ors have an important role during muscle regeneration, guiding cell migration and fusion. in a previous study, carraro and colleagues  <cit>  examined gene expression profiles of bulls administered with a sub-therapeutic dose of dex for  <dig> days in comparison with untreated controls. within the large set  of transcripts that were significantly up-regulated in dex-treated animals, several genes were found to be involved in regulatory pathways that control myoblast differentiation and skeletal muscle regeneration. interestingly, the list of up-regulated genes in that study included  <dig> or-encoding genes  <cit> , similar to what observed in group b animals in the present work, which showed up-regulation of  <dig> or-coding genes.

go, gene ontology; bp: biological process; mf, molecular function; cc, cellular component; p value: modified fisher exact p value calculated by david software; fe, fold enrichment defined as the ratio of the two proportions: input genes involved in a biological process and the background information.

david functional annotation of the complete list of differentially regulated genes between group a and group b .

several sarcomere proteins were differentially regulated as well. high doses of dex were reported to lead to muscle atrophy, mostly affecting fast twitching fibres  <cit> . a recent study by stella and colleagues  <cit> , comparing protein expression profiles between beef cattle treated with dex, alone or in association with clenbuterol, using 2d protein gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry confirmed that the administration of dex favors a slow fiber phenotype. stella and co-workers reported that fast fiber specific proteins  and glycolytic enzymes were significantly under-expressed in dex-treated animals, while myosin light chain 6b  alkali smooth muscle and non-muscle and isoform  <dig> of troponin t  were significantly over-expressed. in agreement with such evidence, transcripts encoding tnnt <dig>  myl6b, and myosin binding protein c slow type were up-regulated in group b animals of the present work while three glycolytic enzymes were significantly under-expressed.

different myosin isoforms , myosin heavy chain  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , myosin regulatory light chain interacting protein  and myosin light chain kinase  were up-regulated in group b animals, supporting previous studies showing that glucocorticoids can promote myogenic repair and myoblast proliferation. in particular, while high doses of glucocorticoids in vitro impair c2c <dig> myoblast proliferation rate and differentiation capacity, lower doses increase the myogenic fusion efficiency of c2c <dig> cells  <cit> .

also ion channel activity was found to be modified between the two groups of animals. in particular, several genes involved in calcium signaling pathways were up-regulated. it has been reported that ca2+-dependent calcineurin signaling mediates skeletal muscle hypertrophy upon stimulation with igf <dig> or insulin associated with dex  <cit> . calcineurin is a calcium-activated protein phosphatase which, upon activation, transduces signal by removing specific phophorylation of the cytoplasmic transcription factor nuclear factor of activated t-cells . this allows nfat translocation to the nucleus, where it activates the transcription of il- <dig>  a cytokine that has a key role in autocrine/paracrine control of mammalian muscle growth  <cit> . in fact, il- <dig> and il- <dig> receptor were found to be over-expressed in group b animals sampled at the slaughterhouse as well as in dex-treated bulls  <cit> . muscle cell membrane depolarization due to k+ efflux has also been reported to activate calcineurin-mediated transcriptional responses  <cit> . intriguingly, several potassium voltage-gated channels were over-expressed in group b animals.

the putative similarity in the transcriptomic response in the skeletal muscle of beef cattle after low-dose administration of dex  <cit>  and in individuals clustering within group b in the present study is statistically relevant. overall,  <dig> genes were up-regulated in both sets of samples, showing a highly significant concordance . a few “common” transcripts are worth mentioning. colony stimulating factor  <dig> receptor  is part of the jak1-stat1-stat <dig> pathway, which was reported to induce myoblast proliferation  <cit> . protein phosphatase  <dig> , whose regulatory subunit pp2r1a and catalytic subunit isoform ppp2ca were up-regulated, has an activating role in wnt signaling, a pathway that was shown to be associated with satellite cell proliferation during muscle regeneration  <cit> . actin-related protein 2/ <dig> complex subunit 1a  is part of a complex that has a critical role in myoblast fusion during either muscle development or regeneration  <cit> . elevated expression of delta-like  <dig>  contributed to hypertrophy in callipyge sheep skeletal muscle  <cit> , while experimental over-expression of dlk <dig> in mouse skeletal muscle induced hypertrophy  <cit> . the highly significant concordance with gene expression modifications reported in dex-treated cattle suggests that all animals of group b might have been illegally administered with dex. this can explain, at least in part, the observed marked difference in gene expression profiles between group a and group b.

gene expression data from positive samples and negative controls were also analyzed to evaluate the ability to classify unknown samples with a reduced set of informative markers, using a statistical approach for class prediction implemented in the prediction analysis of microarrays  software. pam has been extensively applied to classify cancer types based on individual tumor expression profiles. it uses the method of nearest shrunken centroids to find out the minimal set of genes that provides the greatest accuracy of class prediction. the program first performs a discriminant analysis on “known” samples  to choose the smallest panel of genes that provide the greatest accuracy of class prediction . in the present study, the training set consisted of  <dig> samples, representing two classes, negative and positive. for the former class, the  <dig> cross-breed control animals were included. for the latter, the  <dig> samples  that were classified as positive by lc-ms and thymus histological analyses. pam allowed to exactly discriminate the two classes using only two genes . the accuracy of class prediction using two genes on the training sample set was then estimated through cross-validation . figure 4a shows that 100% accuracy was obtained for cross-validation. finally, the two genes were used to classify all the samples  not included in the training set . all animals originally clustering in group a were classified as negative, whereas all individuals in group b were predicted as putative positive .

discussion
two main findings were observed in the present study. first, broad variation in gene expression profiles exists across both known and unknown samples. the causes of such variation are not completely clear, although breed appeared to be the most important. this observation reinforces the obvious, yet often overlooked, need for a most comprehensive representation of biological variation, when indirect biomarkers are applied outside controlled experimental settings. second, after removing the main source of variation, unsupervised analysis of gene expression profiles showed a highly significant distinction between two groups, one including positive controls and a sub set of commercial samples, the other comprising all negative controls and the remaining unknown individuals. the observed separation was confirmed by a two-class sam test that identified over  <dig>  differentially expressed genes and a class prediction approach that was able to discriminate between the two groups using just two genes, using as a training set positive and negative controls and as test set all unknown samples. functional annotation of up- and down-regulated transcripts showed several biological processes and molecular pathways that have been already reported in previous proteomic and transcriptomic studies to be altered upon controlled administration of low dosage corticosteroids. such evidence seems to suggest that unknown animals clustering with lc-ms positive samples might have been administered with glucocorticoids as well. it cannot be completely excluded that all unknown samples in group b showed a transcriptomic profile similar to positive controls for other reasons than being treated with anabolic hormones. on the other hand, such explanation appears quite unlikely as both technical issues  and biological variables known to affect gene expression profiles have been carefully controlled. therefore, under the working hypothesis that group b samples should considered as suspect, how such hypothesis could be reconciled with the more limited evidence of positive animals  or suspects ? with regard to lc-ms results, one possible explanation is related to the fact that dex or other corticosteroids are often illegally administered as diluted solution spread on feed and differences in drug uptake can be evidenced across treated animals. such very low dosages and the rapid metabolism and excretion of these substances make determination of residues extremely difficult  <cit> , even by using targeted gc/ms and lc/ms/ms methods  <cit> . the urinary parent compound and its metabolites concentration are very low during all the treatment time and completely absent a short time after the interruption of the treatment  <cit> , while biological effects, including transcriptomic responses, might still be detectable as such effects are caused by anabolic compounds and often persist after the hormone has been eliminated. it is also well-known that corticosteroids are administered as cocktails of different chemical species with similar biological action to reduce the amount of single compounds. this could make lc-ms less sensitive. in particular, when targeted lc-ms analyses are carried out, for instance searching for dex, sensitivity is decreased when dex is not the major component of the cocktail or is entirely substituted with other corticosteroids. with regard to the results of histological analyses, it should be noted that while only four samples could be reliable considered as putative positive, others were considered dubious, including some those included in group b. in fact, the efficacy of the histological method has been recently challenged because of the lack of appropriate reference material considering the evolving nature of animal-rearing practices  <cit> . furthermore, administration of corticosteroids leads to thymus cortical atrophy and ‘starry sky’ appearance. however, age-associated thymic involution was evidenced in cattle as in other mammals. as the animals included in the present study were mostly all over  <dig> months old and most around 15– <dig> months of age, several positive cases might have been considered negative or dubious because natural thymic involution could not be distinguished from the effects of corticosteroid treatment. on the other hand, the biological effects of corticosteroids on gene expression data were proved to persist several days after time of withdrawal  <cit>  and thus may evidence the anabolic treatments even when the active compound and its metabolites have been excreted and they are no longer detectable, as mentioned above.

if the working hypothesis of all animals in group b being putative positive were correct, the number of suspect cases would be quite impressive. however, the actual importance of growth-promoter abuse in beef cattle is known to be underestimated  <cit>  because highly informative analytical methods are used on just a small number of cases and often such methods are not sensitive enough to detect residues of low dosage cocktails. this prompts for the development and use of more reliable and cost effective screening tools.

CONCLUSIONS
the present work showed that it might be possible to use just a few gene markers for highly reliable sample classification. however, global transcriptomic tools  are becoming increasingly affordable and rapid, and soon a whole-transcriptome analysis will be feasible in routine practice. such an approach avoids a priori selection of candidate markers, allows the identification of complex transcriptomic signatures through functional annotation and enables the comparison with other -omic and analytical/chemical studies. this will lead toward meta-analysis of data from controlled experiments as well as field studies and in turn, to the identification of indirect biomarkers less influenced by unknown variables.

