BACKGROUND
metagenomics is the study of environmental samples using sequencing  <cit> , focusing on microbes that cannot be studied in pure culture. rapid advances in sequencing technology are currently fueling a vast increase in the number and scope of metagenomics projects  <cit> .

the analysis of metagenomic datasets is an immense conceptual and computational challenge, and there is a great need for new bioinformatics tools and methods. however, this has so far, largely escaped the notice of the bioinformatics community. indeed, the term "metagenomics" does not appear in the main call for papers for any of this year's international bioinformatics conferences, including apbc, ismb, recomb and wabi.

the two first main computational problems in metagenomics are to estimate the taxonomical content and the functional content of a given dataset. a further task is to compare the contents of different metagenomic datasets. the difficulty of these challenges stems from the huge amounts of data to be processed, the poor sampling of reference sequences, the lack of adequate models for data acquisition and the demands of statistical analysis.

a number of facilities provide dedicated computational resources or services for metagenomics, including seed  <cit> , img/m  <cit>  and camera  <cit> . a number of publications have described new computational approaches . however, many of these are of limited practical use because the authors make little attempt to provide robust and user-friendly implementations of their methods.

in  <cit> , we published the first available stand-alone metagenomic analysis tool, called megan. the program now has over  <dig> registered users and has been used in a number of publications, including  <cit> . to analyze a metagenomic dataset using megan, the dataset is first compared against a reference database. for example, non-specific dna samples can be compared against the ncbi-nr database  <cit>  using blastx  <cit> , datasets targeting viruses can be blasted against the ncbi viral genome database, and ribosomal rnas can be compared against a dedicated rna database  <cit> . the program uses an "lca-gene content" algorithm to perform taxonomical analysis, placing reads on nodes at different levels of the ncbi-taxonomy, in a way that reflects the presence or absence of homologous genes in different species. the program also provides a comparative view of multiple datasets  <cit> . moreover, the next release will provide a functional analysis utilizing the gene ontology  <cit> .

many important metagenome projects are based on sanger sequencing, for example  <cit> . the main advantage of sanger sequencing is that the reads can be up to  <dig>  bp in length. such long reads are desirable for a number of reasons. first, longer reads usually give rise to longer and better matches to reference sequences, and so such reads can be assigned to specific taxa with higher confidence. second, reads of this length can contain whole open reading frames and thus are very useful for finding new genes. finally, the problem of assembling the most abundant species in a metagenome, when desired, is easier for longer reads. the main draw-back of sanger sequencing is the high price per base pair.

the first of the so-called "next generation" sequencing technologies, roche- <dig> sequencing  <cit> , has become more and more popular as an alternative to sanger sequencing. originally producing reads of about  <dig> bp in length, the attainable read length then grew to  <dig> bp, and now a read length of over  <dig> bp is possible, for a much lower price per base pair than sanger sequencing.

until quite recently, the second next-generation sequencing technique to become commercially available, illumina sequencing  <cit> , was not considered suitable for metagenomic studies because of its short read length in the range of  <dig> bp. recent improvements support a read length of  <dig> bp, and such reads can now be collected in a paired-read protocol. illumina sequencing has become an even cheaper option for metagenome sequencing.

the paired reads are sequenced from the two ends of individual fragments, which we will call clones. using two different protocols, illumina sequencing supports the paired-end sequencing of two different lengths of clones: short clone libraries of an average length of  <dig> bp, say, and long clone libraries, of an average length of  <dig>  bp. for more details, see the supplementary material of  <cit> .

in this paper, we report on a simulation study that we have undertaken to compare the performance of the lca-gene content algorithm for different types of sequencing technologies. our main goal is to determine whether it is better to apply paired-end sequencing to short clones or to long clones when performing a taxonomical analysis of a metagenomic dataset. also, we compare the use of illumina paired reads to the use of illumina single reads and roche- <dig> single reads. our performance study is focused on megan, as other available tools do not explicitly make use of paired-end reads.

our main results are that homology-based taxonomical analysis algorithms such as the lca-gene content approach implemented in megan can produce more specific taxonomical assignments of reads, when they are modified to combine the matches from explicitly paired reads, as one would expect. moreover, perhaps less obviously, using long clones, rather than short ones, show the best increase of specificity.

RESULTS
taxonomical analysis by homology and gene content
the diversity of the microbial world is believed to be huge. however, only about  <dig>  microbial species have been named  <cit>  and many of these are represented by only a few genes, at most, in public sequence databases. moreover, current databases are biased toward organisms of specific interest and were not explicitly populated to represent a wide sampling of biodiversity. for this reason, taxonomical analysis currently cannot be based on high similarity sequence matching, but rather depends on the detection of homologies using quite sensitive methods.

one approach is to use phylogenetic markers to distinguish between different species in a sample. the most widely used marker gene is the ssu rrna gene; others include reca, ef-tu, ef-g, hsp <dig> and rna polymerase b   <cit> . advantages of this approach are that such genes have been studied in detail and for some there are high quality phylogenies available that can be used as a reference to place reads from metagenomic dataset. however, this approach is not unproblematic: on the one hand, the use of "universal" primers to target specific genes suffers from the problem that such primers are not truly universal and so only a portion of the true diversity is captured. on the other hand, while the use of a random shotgun approach can overcome this problem, less than 1% of the reads in a random shotgun dataset will correspond to commonly used phylogenetic marker genes  <cit> , which seems very wasteful, as 99% percent of the reads will remain unused .

moreover, the goal of taxonomical analysis is not only to provide an estimation of the types of organisms present in a sample, but also to corral the sequence reads by taxonomical identity to facilitate further analysis, for example to study the gc content or to attempt the assembly of particular genomes.

our approach is to compare reads against the ncbi-nr database  to find homologous sequences, thus making use of the fact that homologies are easier to detect on the protein level. for the above-mentioned reason that current databases provide only a poor coverage of the true diversity of organisms, we treat all sequence matches of high significance as equally valid indications that the given read represents a gene that is present in the corresponding organism. in more detail, we place each read on the lowest common ancestor  of all the organisms that are known to contain the gene present in the read. so, in essence, the placement of a read is governed by the gene content of the available reference genomes and thus we will refer to our method as the lca-gene content approach.

an attractive feature of this "lca-gene content" approach is that it is inherently conservative and is more prone to err toward non-informative assignments of reads  than toward false-positive assignments . in particular, genes that are susceptible to horizontal gene transfer will not be assigned to any of the participating species, as long as more than one is hit in the reference database.

short clones or long clones?
most metagenome projects have used either sanger sequencing or roche- <dig> sequencing. however, the illumina genome analyzer now produces reads of length  <dig> bp in pairs. as mentioned above, these pairs can either come from short clones of, say,  <dig> bp length or from long clones, that can span  <dig> kb, say.

thus, illumina sequencing using paired-end reads now appears to be a viable alternative to roche- <dig> or sanger sequencing for taxonomical analysis in metagenomics. the question arises how the two different paired-read protocols compare with each other, and also with illumina and roche- <dig> single read sequencing. .

as mentioned above, the lca-gene-content approach implemented in megan suffers primary from a lack of resolution. a read that has a highly significant match to a sequence in the ncbi-nr database will often match similar sequences from other organisms, as well, and thus may be placed on a higher-level taxon.

assume that we have a set of reads collected using a paired-read protocol. if we process two reads from the same clone simultaneously, then the distance between the two reads in the source genome  will affect the performance of the lca-gene content algorithm: if the two reads are close together, as in the case of short clones, then it is more likely that the two reads will come from the same gene and thus will display the same pattern of hits among species. if, on the other hand, the two reads lie much further apart in the source genome, as in the case of long clones, then it is more likely that the reads will come from two different genes, and these might show quite different patterns of conservation among species .

indeed, in the simulations reported below, we observed that whenever the two reads of a short clone  matched the same taxon, then this is due to matches to the same gene in over 80% of the cases, whereas for long clones  this is true for just under 12%.

thus, if we modify the lca-gene content algorithm to place more weight on those species that are hit by both reads, then it should be the case that using long clones will give rise to more specific taxonomical assignments that when using short clones, without increasing the number of false-positive assignments. moreover, it should, of course, be the case that processing both reads of a pair together will provide better results than processing each read in isolation.

processing paired reads in megan
reads from metagenomic datasets are usually processed in isolation . megan has a pre-computational step where each read is blasted against a reference database such as ncbi-nr. megan filters the matches obtained for a read by bit score. first, only matches that exceed a minimal bit score of  <dig>  say, are kept . second, the hits are filtered further so that only those that attain a score that is within 10%  of the best score seen for the given read are kept . for each hit that passes these two filters, megan determines the corresponding species and then assigns the read to the lca of the species of all hits, as outlined above. a third filter, called the min support filter is then applied which removes all taxa from the reported result that were not hit by a specific number of reads.

to accommodate paired reads, we have implemented a new paired-reads mode in megan. after importing all reads, megan processes each pair of reads in turn. in more detail, matches to the same organism from the two different reads are treated as one match. to give one of these paired matches more weight, we propose to combine the bit scores s <dig> and s <dig> from the two reads using the following calculation:  

with r =  <dig>  k =  <dig>  , gap size g =  <dig>  effective length of the query m' =  , query length m, effective hsp h, effective length of the subject n' =  and subject length n. for more details on these parameters, see  <cit> .

the number of organisms that are hit by both reads of a pair will often be smaller than the number of different organisms that are hit by either of the reads on their own. the modified bit score of two combined hits will often be more than 10% higher than the score of uncombined hits and so, in many cases, only the combined matches will pass the 10% filter. in consequence, the resulting lca placement should be more specific.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have investigated the question whether the taxonomical analysis of metagenomic datasets can be performed by illumina paired reads, and, if so, whether short clones or long clones should be used. our simulation study suggests that illumina paired reads are well suited for this task and that long clones are more specific, even compared to much longer roche- <dig> reads , when using the lca-gene content algorithm. we have argued that this is due to the fact that the placement of reads from long clones are based on the gene-content pattern of two different genes, rather than just one. this is a general observation that will probably affect other analysis methods that consider paired reads, as well.

because illumina sequencing is much cheaper than roche- <dig> sequencing, it is clear that future metagenomics projects will use illumina sequencing, as well as sanger and roche- <dig> sequencing. to support the analysis of such datasets, we have modified our program megan explicitly to make use of paired reads in taxonomical analysis.

as the size and number of metagenomic datasets continue to grow, a major challenge is to significantly speed-up the sequence comparison step, while maintaining the sensitivity of blast. unfortunately, the many new fast read-mapping tools that have been developed for mapping short reads, in the context of resequencing, say, are not immediately applicable as they do not map dna to proteins.

