BACKGROUND
the addition of non-templated nucleotides to the 3′ ends of rna molecules is a widespread mechanism for their regulation. beyond the familiar long poly tails of messenger rnas, short 3′ tailing of uridine  <cit>  and adenosine  <cit>  nucleotides to noncoding rnas is gathering increasing appreciation. these simple oligonucleotide additions  can alter the stability, binding partners or activity of the enzymatic reactions in which these rnas participate. further, many of these 3′ terminally extended noncoding rnas, including u <dig> spliceosomal rna  <cit> , trnas  <cit>  and several snornas  <cit> , have annotated termini flanked by a stretch of genomically encoded u’s. the detailed interplay of transcriptional termination, trimming and post-transcriptional oligonucleotide addition has been elegantly characterized for a few systems  <cit> , but the precise 3′ processing cascade and functional termini for many other critical noncoding rnas remain unclear.

rnase mrp is a ribonucleoprotein complex with a single rna component  transcribed by rna polymerase iii  <cit> . mutation of the sole mrp rna genomic locus results in inviable yeast  <cit>  and a spectrum of pleiotropic human diseases  <cit> , supporting the assertion that mrp rna is essential to eukaryotic life. in association with at least  <dig> proteins in humans  <cit> , mrp rna is implicated in the specific endoribonucleolytic cleavage  <cit>  of several vital rna substrates  <cit>  found in the nucleolus  <cit> , cytoplasm  <cit>  and possibly mitochondria  <cit>  of the eukaryotic cell. all of the mrp proteins also associate with the rnase p rna  <cit>  to form the enzyme responsible for the cleavage of trna 5′ leader sequences. thus, rnase mrp requires tight regulation to discern its proper rna subunit and cleave its many substrates.

because 3′ end processing is a prevalent and potent means of regulation for other noncoding rnas and because one instance of dramatic 3′ extension of mrp rna was previously reported  <cit> , we sought to thoroughly examine the 3′ ends of mrp rna present in human cells. combining aspects of various protocols  <cit> , we employed a modified 3′ race with deep sequencing protocol and found a distribution of genomically encoded 3′ ends including variable u’s beyond the annotated 3′ nucleotide. modest oligo addition was also observed, particularly after more than one uridine. this profile contrasted with distinct distributions of u’s and a’s on other noncoding rnas and the relatively homogenous 3′ terminus of an in vitro transcribed control mrp rna.

RESULTS
to comprehensively define the 3′-hydroxyl ends of endogenous rna molecules in hek293t cells, we adapted an rna ligase-mediated 3′ race strategy coupled to deep sequencing . while similar methods have been previously reported  <cit> , our protocol incorporated a few modifications. precise 3′ terminal nucleotides were demarcated by ligation of whole cell rna preparations with four distinct oligoribonucleotide appendices, each containing a different 5′ terminal base and internal barcode to minimize structural bias during this reaction  <cit> . further, to ensure signal from low abundance rna species, a library amplification step was included after the race selection  <cit> .

we obtained an average of  <dig>  trimmed reads  per experiment for endogenous mrp rna. unlike typical pipelines, alignment of sequences to the reference genome was not performed, since this would have eliminated detection of extensions not mapping to the genomic template. instead, raw sequencing reads were filtered to obtain a rigorous set where each read contained both a 3′ region of mrp rna  and one of the appendix oligonucleotides. since our focus was 3′ extension, reads displaying rna termini truncated upstream of the annotated 3′ end were excluded by this analysis.

endogenous mrp rna molecules displayed a distinctive profile of 3′ ends. while the majority of these termini mapped to the rmrp gene locus , we observed a clear preference in this cell type for one previously annotated end  over another . additional uridines beyond these ends were also detected; these may arise from primary transcriptional termination beyond the annotated end, or post-transcriptional oligouridylation by 3′ uridyltransferases  <cit> . while these possible mechanisms cannot be distinguished by our methods, the apparent greater propensity for four or five uridines presumably indicates these endings are more frequently generated or are more stable species in this cell type. among the ~9% fraction of 3′ ends that failed complete alignment to the genomic template, most were additions of adenosines to genomically encoded termini. interestingly, these a’s were most likely to appear after multiple u’s , suggesting different 3′ ends have distinct propensities for the addition of oligo tails. our observation that various lengths of oligo are often followed by an a, but the a termini are not followed by u’s, was noted previously for signal recognition particle rna, 7sk rna, 5s rrna and u <dig> snrna  <cit> . to test whether the observed mrp rna 3′ ends were specific to the cell line tested, we sequenced mrp rna from a second human cell line  and found it to display similar genomically encoded and oligo termini .

to control for the possibility that our library preparation method could contribute to this profile of 3′ ends, we constructed a barcoded in vitro transcript of mrp rna , spiked it into our cellular rna, and prepared a single library for deep sequencing. the template for ivt-mrp was designed to have the commonly annotated …cu 3′ end produced by run-off transcription. as expected for this template, and in contrast to endogenous mrp rna, ivt-mrp showed no appreciable abundance of the …cugu ending nor a penchant for additional u’s or a’s . rather, 95% of the ivt-mrp ends represented the designed terminus  or single nucleotide additions to this terminus in which each base had a comparable propensity for incorporation . the number of reads for indexed ivt-mrp relative to endogenous mrp in the control libraries closely matched the expected ratio, based on northern hybridization . thus, the relative number of sequencing reads appears to correlate with relative rna abundance in the library. combined with the absence of multiple u’s or oligo additions on ivt-mrp, this argues that the presence of these endings on the endogenous rna directly reflects the mrp termini in vivo.

about 1% of ivt-mrp endings were strikingly complex . these extensions beyond the designed 3′ end were complementary to nearby regions of the mrp rna sequence . an attractive mechanism for generation of these observed termini is 3′ end loopback or duplex rna-dependent rna polymerase extension by t <dig> rna polymerase  <cit>  analogous to that observed for mouse b <dig> rna by rna polymerase ii  <cit> . the three examples shown demonstrate distinct registers of 3′ end loopback that would explain the observed extension sequences. because such complex termini were conspicuously present only on ivt-mrp when compared directly with endogenous mrp, we conclude that these complex 3′ termini were likely to have been produced during t <dig> transcription and then faithfully retained through library preparation and sequencing.

one key advantage to this 3′ race sequencing method is the transcriptome-wide scope of the ligated cdna library. thus, with this library in hand, any rna of interest can be amplified and subjected to deep 3′ terminal profiling . we found that rnase p rna, which is structurally similar to mrp rna and also transcribed by rna polymerase iii, had a distribution of additional genomically encoded u’s beyond its annotated 3′ end and virtually no propensity for oligo addition. u <dig> snorna, transcribed by rna polymerase ii  <cit> , was comparatively homogeneous with  <dig> % of reads yielding the annotated 3′ terminus. in contrast, the rna component of human telomerase, also transcribed by rna polymerase ii  <cit> , had a greater propensity for oligo addition, with each genomically encoded terminus being more likely to have multiple a’s than none  .

to assess whether similar 3′ termini are captured in other published datasets, we used our bioinformatic pipeline to reanalyze raw poly-depleted rna sequencing data  <cit>  and compared our profiles with theirs. of course, the read depth for any particular rna was much lower in the published whole-transcriptome datasets, e.g. an average of  <dig> reads for mrp rna per dataset compared with the average of  <dig>  obtained here. on the noncoding rnas analyzed for this study, we found a similar range of genomically encoded sequences with templated and non-templated oligo and oligo additions . complex 3′ ends were also observed at very low abundance, though with properties distinct from those presented in figure  <dig>  such endings included attachment of micrornas, ribosomal rna fragments and short sense or longer antisense regions of the rna being analyzed  and were idiosyncratic to the method of library preparation . thus, these initially-more-interesting extensions have the hallmarks of artifacts.

discussion
the information content of the eukaryotic genome is greatly expanded in the transcriptome through post-transcriptional processing events. well-studied examples include alternative splicing, rna editing, and modifications including methylation and pseudouridylation. recently, li et al. characterized extensive differences between rna and dna sequences within protein coding genes that produce corresponding peptides with sequences that deviate from the genomic template  <cit> . the rna 3′ end is another site at which post-transcriptional modification occurs and increases the information content of the transcriptome. here, we analyze mrp rna and other human noncoding rnas at a much greater sequencing depth than usual, and find a limited repertoire of sequence additions.

high-throughput sequencing is a powerful technology with continually emerging and illuminating applications. the coupling of deep sequencing to the classic race technique has provided unprecedented insights into low abundance functional 3′ termini heretofore underappreciated  <cit> . general appendix-tagged cdna libraries such as the ones produced in this study contain whole transcriptome information that can be specialized  to amplify any rna of interest. even rnas with non-ligatable 3′ modifications, such as the 2′,3′-cyclic phosphate on u <dig> snrna  <cit> , could be analyzed by comparison of libraries with and without enzymatic 3′-end deprotection . a further asset of the race sequencing technique is the ability to multiplex this general protocol at several stages, as demonstrated by orthogonal barcoding on the appendices, the control ivt-mrp rna and the gene-specific race primer. thus, comparison of 3′ terminal profiles across fractionated cellular compartments, associated protein partners, time courses or stress conditions enables the regulation of 3′ terminal extension to be comprehensively defined.

our 3′ race sequencing analysis of the steady-state populations of four noncoding rnas indicates that each rna has a distinct repertoire of 3′ termini. like mrp rna, rnase p rna is transcribed by rna polymerase iii and also has additional uridines beyond the annotated 3′ end. however, oligoadenylation is much less prominent with rnase p than with mrp rna. turning to the rna polymerase ii transcripts, we find u <dig> snorna to have a very homogeneous end. while processing intermediates with additional u’s have been observed in reporter expression systems of u <dig> snorna  <cit> , endogenous u <dig> is often present as a single species  <cit>  consistent with its highly efficient processing. although previous examination  <cit>  of htr 3′ sequences found the primary terminus to be unadenylated as we did, our data clearly show that a subpopulation of htr termini have oligo additions. this population was missed by the limited number of clones sequenced in the earlier study and emphasizes the value of deep sequencing.

the oligo additions found in this study are consistent with those added by the tramp complex to nuclear rnas targeted by the rna exosome . along with its primary function in rna surveillance and decay of both nuclear and mrnas  <cit> , the exosome processes the 3′ termini of some noncoding rnas . it is plausible that the transcript-specific variations in oligo propensity we observe are correlated with the fraction of each rna or specific terminus that is bound for exosomal processing or destruction. in that case, the relatively oligo-less u <dig> snorna and rnase p rna may be at one end of the stability spectrum relative to the highly oligoadenylated htr . alternatively, maturation of other snornas has been demonstrated to involve oligoadenylation by noncanonical poly polymerase papd <dig> and trimming by the poly specific ribonuclease parn  <cit> . the distribution of oligoadenylations observed on the rnas in this study may represent intermediates of a similar maturation process.

much of the initial incentive for this work came from the finding of 3′ extensions on mrp rna by maida et al.  <cit> , who reported full-length antisense extensions. although no such extensions were found by our method, long double-stranded rna might be resistant to amplification and sequencing, so the absence of such sequences in our study cannot be taken as proof that they don’t exist. we had observed mrp rna to have complex 3′ endings with potential loopback character akin to those in figure  <dig> at low and variable frequency in some early total rna preparations. because the abundance of complex extensions on endogenous mrp peaked at 1% of trimmed reads, hypothetical contamination of non-indexed ivt-mrp  could not account for all of these sequences. while it is tempting to speculate that the small level of loopback extensions on some preparations of endogenous mrp rna could be explained by an unidentified variation in cellular growth conditions, we have no further data to support this model.

CONCLUSIONS
while evidence for 3′ heterogeneity on mrp rna was presented as many as  <dig> years ago  <cit> , to our knowledge quantitative profiling has not been previously reported. as an essential rna demanding tight regulation for cleaving its diversely localized substrates, 3′ terminal extension likely plays a role in mrp rna control. the distinctive profile of u’s and a’s on mrp rna described here provides the necessary framework for testing this hypothesis, prompting further study into the potentially distinct 3′ terminal profiles of rnase mrp subpopulations in the nucleolus and cytoplasm, or associated with different subcomplexes of mrp proteins. the potent ability of 3’ race sequencing to isolate the terminal sequences of the mrp rna from the intricate mixture of rnas present in eukaryotic cells makes it an attractive method to address the functional consequences of these 3′ termini.

