BACKGROUND
approximately half of human genes are members of duplicate gene families  <cit>  and such genes might be playing an important role in the robustness of organisms against mutations . do most duplicate genes retain the functions of their parental singleton gene? or do they diverge after duplication? and how rapidly does this divergence occur? several models predicting preservation of both duplicate gene copies  have been proposed  <cit>  and reviewed in  <cit> , however, their relative prevalence in the fates of duplicate genes is presently unknown. originally, these questions were addressed by analysis of the protein-coding sequences of duplicate genes. namely, the pattern of nonsynonymous vs. synonymous substitutions between duplicate genes was used to predict divergence in function . however, protein-coding sequences possess only partial information about gene evolution and function. the availability of genome-wide mrna expression data allows one to study another important aspect of duplicate gene evolution, that is divergence in gene expression after duplication .

the divergence of duplicate genes in gene coexpression networks, where connectivity is based on similarity in gene expression patterns , represents yet another facet of duplicate gene evolution that awaits detailed investigation. gene coexpression networks as well as many other biological networks  were shown to be scale-free  <cit> : the topology of these networks is dominated by a relatively small number of highly connected nodes, also called hubs  <cit> . scale-free networks were found to be tolerant against random removal of nodes, but particularly vulnerable to preferential removal of hubs  <cit> . the studies of the evolutionary origins of scale-free biological networks suggested that gene duplication can lead to both network growth and preferential attachment and to result in a scale-free topology  <cit> . thus, duplicate genes are likely to be the major players in the evolution of biological networks and investigation of their divergence in these networks is of great importance. so far, the divergence of duplicate genes has only been examined in yeast transcriptional regulation and protein-protein interaction networks  <cit> , however, it has not been explored in networks of more complex organisms, e.g., mammals.

in mammals, where genome-wide transcriptional regulation and protein-protein interaction data are limited  <cit> , coexpression networks provide an alternative for investigation of duplicate gene divergence at the systems biology level . coexpression and functional relationship of genes are expected to be positively correlated. indeed, clustering of mrna expression data has been successfully used for grouping genes similar in function  <cit>  and a global correlation was found between gene expression and protein-protein interaction data  <cit> . additionally, thousands of coexpression connections between genes were found to be evolutionarily conserved among distant organisms  <cit> , again suggesting a strong link between similar expression pattern and functional relatedness. however, some individual links between genes might not represent direct functional relationships due to the noisiness of microarray data and network transitivity.

in the present study we build a human gene coexpression network based on human tissue-specific microarray data. we examine the divergence of duplicate genes in this network by addressing the following questions:  are duplicate genes or singletons represented more frequently among network hubs;  how rapidly do duplicate genes lose shared parental partners;  how quickly do they acquire new coexpressed partners;  is the divergence in the gene coexpression network symmetric or asymmetric between two duplicate genes in a pair; and  do duplicate genes and singletons play different roles in maintaining the robustness of this network.

RESULTS
description of the network
to build the gene coexpression network, we used the mrna expression data that provide information about ~ <dig>  transcripts assayed in  <dig> human tissues  <cit> . we mapped probe sets to genes  and as a result obtained a data set with one-to-one probe set to gene correspondence. this data set consisted of  <dig>  genes, including  <dig> tissue-specific and  <dig> ubiquitously expressed genes.

two genes  were connected by an edge if  both of them were simultaneously expressed in at least t common tissues, and  the pearson correlation coefficient of their logarithmically transformed  expression values was greater than or equal to r  <cit> . nine networks were constructed depending on the combination of t and r . here in addition to the pearson correlation coefficient we used a threshold of the minimal number of common tissues in which both genes are expressed. relying on the correlation coefficient alone could lead to non-biological artifacts, e.g., artifactual similarities based on non-expression or expression in a few tissues only. thus, by adding this additional criterion we obtain a meaningful correlation coefficient as it is calculated from at least five data points and only for tissues in which both genes are expressed . to characterize the global topology of these networks, we used several graph measures  <cit> . first, the average node degree <k> reflected the average number of genes expressed together with a given gene. second, the average shortest path length <d> specified the average number of edges required to travel from one gene to any other gene. third, the average clustering coefficient <c> measured the connectivity of the neighborhood of a gene. with increases in t and r, the number of genes in the main cluster and the average number of genes coexpressed with a given gene decreased, while the average shortest path length increased .

additionally, we investigated the node degree distribution p describing the frequency of the number of genes with k coexpressed genes. for five  networks, this distribution approximated a power law distribution , a characteristic of scale-free networks  <cit> . we used the network with t ≥  <dig> and r ≥  <dig>  for further examination, since for these thresholds the degree distribution had a power law tail  and we still retained a large number of genes for a statistical analysis . this network contained  <dig>  nodes  with the average degree of  <dig>  . the density  of the present network is  <dig> , which is comparable to the value of  <dig>  obtained for a human gene coexpression network consisting of ~ <dig>  genes and confirmed by at least three microarray data sets  <cit> .

interestingly, we found a complex relationship between clustering coefficient c and degree k: c increased steadily with increasing k for k < ~ <dig>  then it slowly decreased . the increasing relationship was more pronounced since it represented a larger sample of nodes. this implied that genes with a moderately high number of coexpressed genes usually had highly connected neighbors. this observation was unexpected as other scale-free networks display either negative or no correlation between clustering coefficient and degree  <cit> . initially we suspected that the relationship observed here could be explained by a large number of ubiquitously expressed genes that have a high probability of being clustered among themselves and with other genes. however, a largely positive correlation between c and k was observed for either ubiquitously expressed or non-ubiquitously expressed genes , suggesting that this is a general property of the studied network.

differences between duplicate genes and singletons
a total of  <dig>  duplicate genes were identified among  <dig>  ensembl  known and novel proteins . the studied network consisted of  <dig>  singletons and  <dig>  duplicate genes. interestingly, while genes in the two categories had similar degree distributions , duplicate genes had a lower average node degree and thus were less connected in the network than singletons, although the difference was small . ranking the nodes by degree indicated that among highly connected genes the proportion of singletons was higher than the proportion of duplicates . thus, the effect of increased copy number might be more severe for genes with numerous coexpressed partners in the network and, as a result, duplications of such genes might have a lower propensity to become fixed in a population as compared with duplications of genes with few connections  <cit> . interestingly, the average clustering coefficient was significantly lower for duplicates than for singletons . this suggests a lower likelihood of a duplication fixation for a gene that has a tightly connected neighborhood. in this network, the percentage of duplicate gene pairs with at least one gene ontology  <cit>  term overlap was higher among pairs connected by a link vs. unconnected pairs . this is a much higher percentage than that observed for singletons – either linked  or unlinked . thus, duplicate genes, especially if they are linked, had greater functional similarity.

among the strongest hubs for duplicates, the proteins participating in nucleotide, nucleic acid, atp, and protein binding were overrepresented . in addition to these categories, mitochondrion, signal transduction, and membrane proteins were overrepresented among singleton hubs. interestingly, similarly to duplicate hubs, duplicates with the lowest number of links were involved in protein and atp binding. however, singletons with a small number of links had different functions: e.g., receptor, transcription factor and transcription regulation activity.

duplicate genes rapidly lose shared coexpressed partners
we investigated the dynamics of loss and gain of coexpressed partners  between two duplicate genes constituting a pair. we denoted the number of partners of one and the other duplicate gene in a pair as n <dig> and n <dig>  respectively, and the number of partners shared between the two duplicate genes as n <dig> . we assumed that immediately after duplication, each duplicate gene was expressed together with n <dig> = n <dig> = n <dig> other genes . with time, duplicate genes lose shared partners and acquire new ones. here we assume that shared partners in a duplicate pair are inherited from a parental gene.

we discovered that duplicate genes lose shared partners rapidly with evolutionary time. we calculated the fraction of shared partners among all partners for each duplicate gene pair, n12/, and used the synonymous rate per site, ks, as a proxy of evolutionary time since gene duplication . for this analysis we used the  <dig> independent duplicate gene pairs  for which both genes were present in the network and ks was less than  <dig>  our initial observation was that the fraction of shared partners for duplicate genes within each pair was usually low: it was <20% for  <dig> out of  <dig> duplicate pairs studied . a significant negative correlation was observed between n12/ and ks . the fraction of shared partners for a duplicate pair was on average  <dig> % after only ~ <dig> million years  since duplication . at ks ≈  <dig>  this fraction approached  <dig> %, and the partners for the two duplicate genes in a pair were as different as those for a pair of unrelated singletons .

several factors could have affected our results. at low ks, the fraction of shared partners could have been underestimated because the youngest duplicate genes were excluded from the analysis due to the lack of unique microarray probes . at high ks, some of the shared partners could have been acquired independently  by each gene in a duplicate pair and not inherited from a parental gene. and finally, our assumption of identical expression profiles for two daughter duplicate genes immediately after duplication might not be valid in all cases. indeed, sometimes the duplication unit is known to partially or completely exclude the promoter of the parental gene and hence the two daughter genes might substantially differ in their expression  <cit> .

acquisition of new coexpressed partners by duplicate genes
we analyzed the same set of  <dig> independent duplicate genes and explored the change in the total number of partners of each duplicate gene pair  with evolutionary time. here we assumed that the average degree of a parental singleton gene before duplication is equal to the average degree of a singleton in the contemporary network. according to this assumption, immediately after gene duplication, the total number of partners of a duplicate gene pair is equal to that of a parental singleton gene, i.e. n <dig> + n <dig> - n <dig> = ns . following duplication, as the two genes diverge in their expression profiles, their partners can be classified into three groups :  partners inherited from a parental singleton gene and still shared between the two genes in a pair ;  partners inherited from the parental singleton gene but present now only in one of the two duplicates ; and  new partners acquired independently by one of the duplicates . the present study does not allow us to differentiate between unique ancestral and unique acquired partners directly, but we can make indirect inferences about their relative numbers.

in our data set, shared partners constitute a small fraction among the partners of a duplicate gene pair: on average lower than  <dig> % . if, on average, following duplication, n <dig> + n <dig> - n <dig> <ns , this indicates loss of ancestral partners by duplicate gene pairs. if n <dig> + n <dig> - n <dig> ≈ ns , this can be explained by the presence of a small fraction of shared partners and a large fraction of unique ancestral partners, i.e. all of the original partners of parental genes might still be retained by a duplicate pair . if, however, n <dig> + n <dig> - n <dig> > ns , an excess of an average number of partners for duplicate pairs over that for singletons can be explained by acquisition of new partners.

the average number of partners for duplicate gene pairs in our data set was significantly  greater than that for singleton genes , suggesting acquisition of new partners by duplicate gene pairs. this suggests that on average more than one third of partners of a duplicate gene pair were acquired after duplication and not inherited from a parental singleton gene. such gain of new partners was rapid: even at low ks , members of a duplicate gene pair were already expressed together with  <dig>  genes , while a singleton gene was expressed together with  <dig>  genes . depending on ks, we observed some variation  in the average total number of partners for a duplicate gene pair . importantly, at any time point examined , n <dig> + n <dig> - n <dig> was greater than ns.

asymmetric expression divergence of duplicate genes
two duplicate genes in a pair usually diverged asymmetrically in the network and this asymmetry was acquired quickly after duplication. for  <dig>  independent duplicate gene pairs with ks <  <dig>  we drew a scatter plot with the numbers of partners for two duplicate genes at the x and y coordinates . the assignment of a duplicate gene from each pair to either x or y was random. note that the plot predominantly reflected unique partners, since the proportion of shared partners was low . our simulations showed that if the divergence in gene expression were symmetric, we would expect a positive correlation between the numbers of partners for two duplicate genes in a pair . however, in reality, we found a negative correlation , indicating that usually two duplicate genes had different numbers of partners. interestingly,  <dig> out of  <dig>  duplicate gene pairs were located on either the horizontal or vertical axis, suggesting that one gene had some partners in the network while the other one had none. additionally, we observed that the difference in degree between duplicate genes in a pair was not related to ks . thus, the asymmetry in expression divergence was established early and was maintained throughout the evolutionary time examined.

robustness of the network
to study the role of duplicate genes vs. singletons in the robustness of this coexpression network, we computationally perturbed the network by random removal of nodes  and degree-based removal of nodes . error and attack were performed separately on three categories of genes – singletons, duplicate genes, and all genes taken together. thus, a total of six experiments were performed. in each experiment, we removed nodes in 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, and 50% increments calculated from the total number of nodes in the network. the relative size s  and the average path length <d> of the largest connected cluster were measured at each increment . the decrease in s and increase in <d> indicate network breakdown.

random removal of duplicate genes, singletons, or all genes had minimal effect on the network . the size of the main cluster did not decrease beyond the reduction expected due to node removal and the average path length remained approximately constant, indicating that most unremoved nodes stayed connected. this error tolerance was expected due to the high connectivity and scale-free nature of the network  <cit>  and to the similarity in degree distribution of the three categories of genes .

the network also appeared to be resilient to the degree-based node removal of either singletons or duplicate genes. attack on singletons was expected to lead to a faster crash of the network than attack on duplicate genes because of the higher average degree of singletons  and their higher proportion among hubs . at the 40% and 50% increments, the degree-based removal of duplicate genes indeed yielded a slightly smaller average path length , thus providing marginal support for this expectation. however, contrary to the expectation, attack on singletons and attack on duplicate genes led to similarly minimal decreases in the relative sizes of the main cluster .

in contrast with attack on either duplicate genes or singletons, attack on all genes severely damaged the network . after 50% of all genes were removed by attack, the network broke down into many small clusters and as a result the relative size of the main cluster was only  <dig>  as compared with  <dig>  after error . additionally, this led to ~two-fold increase in the average shortest path length as compared with the effect of error .

why did the network break down so rapidly after we attacked duplicate genes and singletons combined? we hypothesized that this could be due to the removal of a large number of hubs and edges. indeed, although the same number of genes was removed in each experiment, more strong hubs were removed by attack on all genes  than on either duplicates or singletons separately . similarly, more edges were eliminated by attack on all genes  than on either duplicates or singletons .

CONCLUSIONS
the analysis of duplicate genes in the human gene coexpression network allowed us to make the following conclusions. first, in agreement with analysis of yeast duplicate genes , our observations suggest that human duplicate genes quickly lose similarity in gene expression profiles. as a result, except for immediately after duplication, they cannot be considered redundant parts in the network. this might explain why the network was similarly tolerant to attack and error on either duplicate genes or singletons – rapidly after duplication, duplicate genes diverge in their expression profiles, reaching the level of similarity only slightly higher than that observed for random singletons. since only  <dig> tissues were examined in our study, we cannot exclude a possibility that some additional links among duplicate genes could be revealed in other tissues and/or under different physiological conditions.

second, the acquisition of new coexpressed partners was found to be rapid and to play a prominent role in the evolution of duplicate genes. this process might lead to attainment of new functions and operate as an engine creating diversity at the phenotypic level that is vital for adaptation. the importance of addition of new interactions was also pointed out in the yeast transcriptional regulation network, although there a net loss of interactions was observed  <cit> . the proportion of unique acquired partners is difficult to determine precisely in the present study, because we cannot directly distinguish between unique ancestral and unique acquired partners. for instance, as mentioned above, acquisition of new partners can be compensated by loss of ancestral partners and in this way will not be reflected in the total number of partners for a duplicate pair. in the future, experiments using expression information for an outgroup should allow one to differentiate between the two classes of unique partners and to provide more precise estimates of their numbers.

although more evidence is necessary, asymmetry might represent a common scenario in the functional divergence of duplicate genes. yeast, fruit fly, nematode, and human duplicate genes exhibit asymmetric divergence at the amino acid level  <cit> . additionally, asymmetric divergence of protein-protein interactions was found for yeast duplicate genes  <cit> .

in summary, this study provides an example of the use of duplicate genes to investigate the evolution of a gene coexpression network. by investigating the divergence of duplicate genes in the network, the speed and pattern of divergence within a network can be assessed. an alternative approach is to compare orthologous genes in the networks of different organisms  <cit> . unlike the analysis of orthologs where divergence is determined by speciation time, utilization of paralogs provides an opportunity to inspect a range of divergence since duplications usually occur at various times in the evolution of a lineage . a paralogous approach has an additional advantage of requiring sequence and expression information from just one genome. utilization of paralogous and orthologous information is expected to provide complementary information and bring us closer to understanding network evolution.

