BACKGROUND
the increasing use of nuclear dna  sequences in phylogeographic studies, in combination with sequence data from a haploid organellar locus, has been driven by the considerable improvements in strength and accuracy of historical inference that multi-locus analyses can provide  <cit> . the development of conserved intron-spanning polymerase chain reaction  primers has facilitated amplification of low- or single-copy nuclear loci in non-model species  <cit> , and anonymous nuclear sequence loci have also been successfully applied in phylogeographic studies of diverse taxa . however, assaying ndna sequence variation for reasonably large population-genetic sample sizes remains a major challenge  <cit> . there are several molecular laboratory techniques suitable for screening codominant markers by physically isolating sequence-variable alleles  <cit> , but none have been broadly adopted owing to perceived or real logistical and/or technical limitations .

algorithm-driven reconstruction of nuclear allele haplotypes following direct sequencing of diploid pcr products has become increasingly popular in phylogeographic and related applications . these methods are based on the premise that the phase of alleles occurring in either homozygotes or heterozygotes that are polymorphic at only a single position can be resolved without ambiguity, and so this information can assist in resolving the phase of multi-site heterozygotes. one major advantage is that the per-locus cost of population screening is comparable to sequencing a fragment of animal mitochondrial dna or plant chloroplast dna, which is now quite routine and for which the necessary equipment and expertise are usually readily available. in addition, resolving power is thought to be quite good . at present, one of the most widely used haplotype reconstruction methods is implemented in the software phase  <cit> . this bayesian approach employs a neutral coalescent prior, making it suitable for population-genetic datasets, and it is able to accommodate recombination. moreover, because phase uses markov chain monte carlo to sample the posterior distribution of potential haplotype pairs that could account for an observed ambiguous genotype, confidence probabilities for the phase of each segregating site and for each reconstructed haplotype pair can be estimated. in the context of genotype-phenotype association studies, phase has been shown to perform quite well with simulated and/or empirical human genetic datasets, but it is also frequently reported that rare haplotypes are susceptible to inference error  <cit> . this suggests that in applications where rare haplotypes are informative, computational approaches alone may be inadequate  <cit> .

to date, few assessments of phase have been performed using non-coding gene regions, or datasets from species with complex evolutionary histories that are typical of non-human phylogeographic studies. however, patterns of variation at nuclear loci may be impacted by features of organismal biology such as effective population size, or past events and processes including population fragmentation, long-term isolation in refugia, and/or the existence of semipermeable landscape-level barriers to gene flow. for example, nuclear gene phylogeography of arthropods has revealed that extant taxa can exhibit highly polymorphic loci with many alleles segregating in large, deeply subdivided populations  <cit> , and hybridization at zones of secondary contact can potentially generate genotypes comprised of distantly-related or novel recombinant allele haplotypes  <cit> . previously, huang et al.  <cit>  performed the first assessment of phase using a large population-genetic dataset from a non-model species . the anonymous single copy nuclear locus examined in that study was characterized by high overall heterozygosity  and many rare alleles, with  <dig> % of the  <dig> distinct multi-site heterozygote genotypes present at frequencies <1%. the authors reported that 9% of individuals with ambiguous genotypes remained unresolved owing to confidence probability values below the chosen phase threshold of  <dig> . in a smaller scale study, harrigan et al.  <cit>  examined phase performance using a sample of  <dig> dabbling duck  individuals with ambiguous genotypes, and found that 13- <dig> % were unresolved when running the software with comparable settings.

broadly speaking, genetic datasets known to be impacted by technical artefacts that operate in a non-random manner need to be analyzed and interpreted with caution . however, an examination of papers focusing on phylogeography, hybridization and speciation indicates that in most empirical applications of phase, unresolved genotypes are simply omitted from the dataset . although this practice is generally considered to have negligible impacts on subsequent estimates of population genetic parameters and associated phylogeographic inferences  <cit> , no formal assessment has been performed to date  <cit> . indeed, there are reasons to believe that the duel loss of rare alleles and heterozygous genotypes could introduce systematic bias into downstream analyses. for example, consider the parameter Θ . this parameter is central to widely-used coalescent phylogeographic analyses , and ne-values derived from Θ underpin simulation-based tests of alternative vicariance scenarios  <cit> . the estimation of Θ is heavily dependent on the number of segregating sites in a sample of sequences  <cit> , and rare alleles usually contribute new segregating sites. it is therefore possible that computational haplotype reconstruction leads to the removal of a sufficiently large number of genotypes containing rare alleles so as to downwardly bias Θ. the potential for systematic bias also extends to other analyses. for example, contrasts between within-population heterozygosity and the number of alleles form the basis of tests for recent genetic bottlenecks  <cit> , and the frequency distributions of allele haplotypes  <cit>  or pairwise nucleotide differences  <cit>  are commonly used to distinguish exponential growth from population size constancy .

auses all inferred haplotypes from the run with the best average goodness-of-fit

bincludes studies that implicitly calculated theta as part of coalescent analyses 

in the present paper we assess the performance of phase using five large ndna sequence datasets from two collembola species , for which all genotypes have been resolved by laboratory procedures  <cit> . in addition, we analyze  <dig> simulated datasets with contrasting levels of polymorphism and, for the first time, examine the impact of unresolved genotypes and 'lost alleles' on downstream phylogeographic analyses. outcomes are considered under phase confidence probability thresholds of  <dig>   and  <dig> , both of which are commonly used in the relevant empirical literature . we conclude with a discussion of the complementarity of laboratory-based physical isolation of alleles and computational haplotype reconstruction.

methods
literature survey
papers citing stephens et al.  <cit>  or stephens and donnelly  <cit> , and focusing on phylogeography, speciation or hybridization of natural populations of non-primate animals, were identified using web of science® . literature searches were conducted using the keywords "phylogeograph*", "speciation", or "gene flow" to find relevant papers in any journal, and by examining all citing articles in bmc evolutionary biology, evolution, molecular ecology, and molecular phylogenetics and evolution. if papers were within the scope of this survey, the methods and results sections were examined. papers that primarily used phase in conjunction with non-coding ndna sequence data were included, because we wanted to determine how the software was being used, and the types of downstream analyses that were performed using computationally-phased datasets.

datasets and polymorphism levels
our empirical ndna sequence datasets were generated as part of a comparative phylogeographic investigation that included two saproxylic collembola species  <cit> . sequence variation at five nuclear loci was assayed in > <dig> individuals of either acanthanura sp. nov.  or pseudachorutinae gen. nov. sp. nov. . these markers included an intron  and three non-coding anonymous loci. the number of nucleotides ranged from 92-266-bp, and alleles were phased by physically isolating them from diploid pcr products using single-stranded conformation polymorphism  followed by targeted dna sequencing  <cit> . this experimental approach minimizes artefacts that can arise from pcr recombination because it is cloning-free. marker development and population screening methods are given in garrick and sunnucks  <cit> . four of the five nuclear loci had alleles with several discontiguous insertion/deletion  mutations. these were recoded using arbitrary nucleotide characters, with contiguous multi-base indels treated as a single event. in the present study, a 28-bp region of locus sm <dig>  was removed owing to unusually high polymorphism that exceeded the limits of phase. to reconstruct the sequences that would have been generated by direct sequencing of diploid pcr products from these five loci , the two alleles from an individual genotype were collapsed into a consensus sequence using mesquite v <dig>   <cit> . because this transformation of phase-known to ambiguous data includes no scoring error, our datasets represent idealized conditions.

genetically distinct populations of two collembola species identified previously  <cit>  were pooled prior to reanalysis using phase, but are separated here for comparison with the single-population simulated datasets. n is the number of diploid individuals, and 'ambiguous genotypes' are those containing at least two heterozygous sites. polymorphism measures are: s, number of segregating sites; an, number of different alleles; gn, number of different genotypes; ho, observed heterozygosity.

simulated dna sequence datasets comprising  <dig> diploid genotypes sampled from a hypothetical panmictic population of constant size were generated with mesquite. given that it is common for screening of ndna loci to be performed on a subset of individuals taken from a larger phylogeographic study sample , our chosen sample size achieves a balance between statistical power and the reality of empirical datasets. coalescent gene trees with  <dig> allele copies  were simulated backward-in-time within an isolated population of haploid ne =  <dig>  individuals and age =  <dig>  organismal generations. this scheme of 2ne generations since isolation represents the theoretical expectation of the average time taken for alleles at a haploid locus to become reciprocally monophyletic on a gene tree. we did not use more complex models that included growth or decline because we wanted to assess phase performance under a best-case scenario, where the underlying assumptions of neutral coalescence within a single unstructured population of constant size were satisfied. next, nucleotide characters  were evolved forward-in-time along the branches of the coalescent gene trees using a hky <dig> substitution model . this substitution model and base frequency set is representative of our empirical collembola data, and also typical of ndna loci assayed for other organisms, as reported in the phylogeographic literature. to ensure independence, only one dna sequence dataset was simulated per coalescent tree. during this process, scaling factors were used to convert branch lengths of coalescent gene trees  into units that are typical of dna sequence datasets . to obtain levels of polymorphism that span the full range seen in empirical studies, scaling factors were determined by trial-and-error. we used the number of different alleles  and segregating sites , calculated using dnasp v <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , as yardsticks of overall polymorphism. scaling factor values between  <dig>  × 10- <dig> to  <dig>  × 10- <dig> generated a pool of  <dig> datasets, and from these we arbitrarily selected  <dig> datasets with s-values of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> . within each of these  <dig> datasets, diploid genotypes were manually constructed by randomly pairing two haploid dna sequences , to generate a diploid genotype. this represented random mating in a sexual out-crossing species. to mimic the phase-unknown genotypes produced from direct sequencing of diploid pcr products, consensus sequences for each genotype, with standard iupac nucleotide ambiguity codes at heterozygous positions, were generated in mesquite . in addition to calculating s and an for each empirical and simulated dataset, we also quantified overall polymorphism via the number of different genotypes , and observed heterozygosity . although the four summary statistics are non-independent , they do reflect different components of the standing genetic variation, and so it is useful to investigate their relationships with phase performance.

phase error, unresolved genotypes and lost alleles
simulated and empirical datasets were analyzed using phase v <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , with files formatted in seqphase  <cit> . we employed the mr model which makes explicit allowance for intragenic recombination, and compared to the non-recombination model, it performs better. however, the primary reason for choosing this model was because assessing evidence for recombinant alleles  is important when using ndna sequences in empirical population-level studies. for tri-allelic single nucleotide polymorphisms, the parent-independent mutation model was used. runs consisted of  <dig> iterations as burn-in,  <dig> main iterations, and thinning interval =  <dig>  datasets were run three times with a different starting seed, and consistency across runs was checked by eye. the replicate with the best average goodness-of-fit value was used in subsequent analyses.

in the present paper we focus on the accuracy of phase in reconstructing whole haplotypes  and diploid genotypes under two alternative thresholds,  <dig>  and  <dig> . these values encompass commonly used cut-offs . under each threshold, three aspects of performance were investigated:

nerr number of individuals with a confidently resolved  haplotype pair that included errors.

nlcp number of individuals with genotypes that remained unresolved due to low confidence probability values . we also quantified the number of these individuals with correctly and incorrectly inferred haplotype pairs .

nlost number distinct gene lineages  that were present in the original phase-known dataset but were lost as a consequence of excluding individuals with unresolved  genotypes.

error
there have been contrasting reports regarding the relationship between phase error and the number of heterozygous sites in an ambiguous genotype , so we assessed the correlation between the latter and the sum of nerr + nlcp incorrect. we also examined which type of mistake was most prevalent in cases where phase haplotype pair error is analogous to false positives , as well for those where the software appropriately indicated low confidence probability values , using the following four categories that capture all observed mistakes:

ecor + nov one haplotype is correct, the other is novel .

ecor + mis one haplotype is correct, the other is misidentified .

emis + mis both haplotypes are misidentified.

emis + nov one haplotype is misidentified, the other is novel.

unresolved genotypes
intuitively, phase determination for highly variable nuclear sequence loci should be more challenging than for relatively invariable markers. despite this expectation, there is still a relatively limited understanding of the specific features of a dataset that drive uncertainty associated with haplotype pair reconstruction , and so this warrants further investigation. similarly, although the presence of rare alleles is known to contribute to difficulties with inferring phase of segregating sites in multi-site heterozygotes, there is little information on the importance of the specific genotypic configurations in which rare alleles occur. first, to determine whether relationships between nlcp and each of the four measures of dataset polymorphism levels  exhibit different relative strengths, regression analyses were performed, with comparisons made using r2-values. second, for each unresolved genotype in our simulated datasets, population frequencies of the two constituent alleles were calculated. these data were then summarized in box plots to assess the prevalence of small versus large asymmetries . corresponding plots were constructed for empirical datasets.

lost alleles
we employed two analytical approaches to assess the impact of omitting unresolved  genotypes on 'phylogenetic diversity'  <cit> . to examine overall loss of distinct gene lineages, nlost values were scaled by the number of different alleles in each original dataset, and a regression analysis was performed using corresponding nlcp values as the predictor variable. we also investigated whether lost alleles tended to be more divergent than other alleles in the dataset, as measured by proportion of nucleotide differences between a pair of sequences  calculated in mega v <dig>   <cit> . we chose this simple measure of genetic distance  because the vast majority of polymorphic sites  were consistent with an infinite-alleles mutation model, and uncorrected p is often used for ndna sequence datasets in population-level studies. we plotted the difference between the mean from only those pair-wise comparisons involving the lost allele under consideration  and the mean of all pair-wise comparisons within a dataset . datasets with > <dig> lost allele have non-independent data points because multiple comparisons are made using the same pdataset value. in these cases , plost values were first summed, and then deducted from pdataset, thereby generating a single data point per dataset.

standard phylogeographic analyses
the omission of unresolved genotypes from a genetic dataset could potentially introduce biases into downstream phylogeographic analyses. we assessed the magnitude and directionality of differences in point estimates of two measures of population genetic diversity , as well as two measures of demographic growth or neutrality . empirical studies focusing on phylogeography, hybridization and speciation that use phase often estimate these parameters . for each simulated dataset, parameter values were calculated in dnasp for the original phase-known dataset, and then recalculated after removing unresolved genotypes under each of the two thresholds. significance of differences in parameter values was assessed via one-tailed paired t-tests, implemented in statsdirect v <dig> . <dig> http://www.statsdirect.com. finally, we investigated the extent to which lost alleles can alter estimated root probabilities in intraspecific haplotype networks. to do this, statistical parsimony networks constructed for simulated datasets using tcs v <dig>   <cit>  with the 95% confidence criterion enforced. the allele with the highest outgroup weight was determined for each of the original phase-known datasets, and then compared to results obtained when constructing statistical parsimony networks for the corresponding 'pruned'  datasets.

RESULTS
literature survey
sixty papers from  <dig> journals met our search criteria . each major vertebrate group and a diversity of invertebrates were represented. based on those studies that reported how unresolved genotypes were treated, the most common course of action is complete exclusion. in some cases, the overall reduction in dataset size per locus was considerable . few studies used laboratory procedures in conjunction with computational phasing. although the  <dig> papers used a variety of population-level analyses, Θ and π were frequently estimated. many studies also examined evidence for selection acting on ndna and/or demographic growth using fu's fs, tajima's d, mismatch distributions or related statistical procedures, and phylogenetic relationships among alleles were often represented as networks or bifurcating trees.

datasets and polymorphism levels
simulated datasets encompassed a broad spectrum of polymorphism levels , and the number of ambiguous genotypes ranged from 2- <dig> . these polymorphism levels were considerably higher than those for each of the genetically-distinct collembola populations, but at least superficially similar to the mean values obtained for the collembola data pooled across loci and species . most papers included in the literature survey simultaneously analyzed multi-population datasets with phase, and reported an values were usually within or slightly above the range seen in our empirical datasets. in this context, the present paper should provide a useful framework for understanding impacts of unresolved genotypes and lost alleles on downstream phylogeographic analyses. on the other hand, large differences exist between empirical versus simulated values of ho, and we recognize that this discrepancy warrants some caution when drawing generalizations from present study. a likely reason for this discrepancy is the presence of geographic substructure within and among collembola populations. generally speaking, where geographic substructure exists, rare alleles can occur at locally high frequencies with at least some in homozygous form, rather than at uniformly low frequencies and always as heterozygotes. ultimately this would reduce heterozygosity, and in particular, may result in fewer ambiguous genotypes that contain rare alleles never before seen in homozygous form.

phase error, unresolved genotypes and lost alleles
phase inferences were consistent across replicate runs, indicating that search settings were adequate. where several alternative solutions for a particular haplotype pair were recovered in the replicate with the best average goodness-of-fit, we used the reconstruction with the highest confidence probability value. if necessary, we randomly selected one of the equally well-support alternatives.

error
the relationship between phase error  and the number of heterozygous sites in an ambiguous genotype was negative for simulated and empirical datasets . under the  <dig>  threshold, false positives  were very rare when considering all simulated datasets together , and use of the lower stringency threshold had little impact . similarly, no increase in false positives was seen for the pooled empirical data . for those datasets in which false positives occurred, error rates were as high as  <dig> % , but all others were <10% irrespective of phase threshold . although only 2- <dig> of  <dig> simulated datasets  included at least one false positive, this proportion was higher for the empirical datasets . in all cases, the most prevalent type of mistake was where one haplotype is misidentified and the other is novel .

false positives  and incorrect reconstructions that had appropriately low confidence probabilities  are reported for simulated and empirical datasets under two alternative phase confidence probability thresholds. error categories reflect the nature of inference mistakes, and are described in methods.

unresolved genotypes
most simulated datasets had some genotypes that were not resolved at or above the specified confidence levels . under the  <dig>  threshold, the number of these unresolved genotypes  per simulated dataset ranged from 0- <dig> . overall,  <dig> % of these unresolved genotypes were nonetheless inferred correctly. lowering the phase threshold to  <dig>  led to reductions in the number of unresolved genotypes, but also in the proportion of correctly reconstructed haplotype pairs . the same general trends were seen in the empirical datasets . when nlcp was represented as a proportion of the number of ambiguous genotypes  present in each simulated dataset, the frequency distribution for the percentage of ambiguous genotypes that were not resolved under the  <dig>  phase threshold  is slightly off-set to the right compared to that of the  <dig>  threshold . this indicates that enforcement of a higher-stringency limit on acceptable confidence probability scores generally leads to an increased proportion of unresolved genotypes per dataset.

for the simulated data, regression analyses showed that significant positive relationships exist between each of the four polymorphism measures and nlcp . with the exception of ho , the overall strength of each relationship increased considerably as the phase threshold was decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , indicating that inclusion of 'marginal' haplotype pairs in the nlcp category  mostly contributes noise. for both thresholds, the strongest predictor variable was an . regressions of the empirical data showed no significant relationships between nlcp and any of the four polymorphism measures, but these analyses were limited by small sample sizes . qualitatively, only one predictor variable  showed a marked discrepancy between slopes of simulated versus empirical datasets , but this was limited to the higher phase threshold, whereas there was essentially no difference under the lower stringency settings . overall, the simulated datasets generated under panmixia, and the empirical datasets that include considerable substructuring, show similar relationships with polymorphism measures.

the majority of unresolved genotypes in simulated datasets included at least one singleton allele . a considerable number of these  included a second 'rare' allele , indicating that genotypic configurations involving two low-frequency alleles are disproportionately represented . other aspects of nlcp genotypic configurations also indicate that they are non-random with respect to population allele frequencies. for example, there is usually no overlap between the inner 50% quantile calculated for 'frequency of most common allele in an unresolved genotype' versus that calculated for 'frequency of most common allele in the dataset' . the two exceptions  both have upper and lower 25% quantiles that do not extend beyond their inner 50% quantile, and so are likely to have been impacted by small sample sizes. if these two tentatively unreliable box plots are ignored, only two meaningful comparisons across phase thresholds are possible for the simulated datasets . qualitatively, empirical datasets show the same general patterns relating to genotypic configuration of unresolved genotypes seen in simulated data, and phase thresholds do not appear to alter outcomes .

lost alleles
the number of lost alleles per simulated dataset ranged from 1- <dig> or 1- <dig> . regression analyses showed a significant positive relationship between nlcp and reductions in the number of gene lineages in simulated datasets . the nature of this relationship was similar for both phase thresholds , indicating that inclusion of 'marginal' haplotype pairs in the 90-nlcp category contributes to this trend. this systematic loss of phylogenetic diversity with increasing nlcp was mirrored by the empirical data under the  <dig>  threshold, but unexpectedly, not the  <dig>  threshold .

when considering pairwise sequence divergences among alleles, there are indications that lost alleles tend to be more divergent than retained alleles in simulated datasets. although distributions of the difference in mean p-distance  under both phase thresholds show modal values centered on zero , the plots are right-skewed . this trend was also seen when summarizing the data using other measures of central tendency and degree of asymmetry . loss of divergent alleles owing to below-threshold phase confidence probability scores of reconstructed haplotype pairs also extends to empirical datasets .

standard phylogeographic analyses
estimated values of four commonly-used population genetic parameters showed marked directional biases as a consequence of omitting unresolved genotypes from simulated datasets, and the magnitude of these biases was similar for the two phase thresholds . the two measures of genetic diversity  were increasingly underestimated as more unresolved genotypes were omitted, whereas the two measures of demographic growth or neutrality  were progressively overestimated. regression analyses confirmed that relationships were significant , with the strongest relationships seen for decreases in Θw  and increases in fu's fs . moreover, paired t-tests showed that parameter values obtained after removing unresolved genotypes differed significantly from those of the corresponding phase-known datasets . when considering all simulated datasets together, the maximum downward bias affecting Θw and π were relatively small considering the 'true' mean values estimated from the original phase-known datasets . however, at the level of individual datasets, reductions in Θw were ≥ 20% of the 'true' value for 9- <dig> of the  <dig> simulated datasets with unresolved genotypes. for the pooled simulated data, the two demographic growth or neutrality parameters showed large maximum upward biases compared to the true values .

in our study, the omission of unresolved genotypes led to changes in the rooting of haplotype networks in three of  <dig> simulated datasets . the example of a root switching error shown in figure  <dig> was also seen in a dataset  that produced a more complex set of three disconnected networks. in the latter case, switch errors affected two of these networks. however, changes in the rooting of haplotype networks do not always involve root switching. for example, one of our simulated datasets  produced two disconnected networks, but following removal of unresolved genotypes, these were subsequently split into four . this was caused by the loss of a single allele that occupied an important position in one of the original networks-a position that served as a link between otherwise distantly-related alleles .

discussion
haplotype reconstruction errors
false positive phase inferences, defined here as ambiguous genotypes for which above-threshold haplotype pair reconstructions included errors, were generally very low . at the level of individual datasets, rates were usually <10% . considering all simulated datasets together, false positive rates were <1%, and <3% for the pooled empirical data. haplotype pair reconstruction errors usually involved misidentifying an existing allele coupled with the creation of a novel allele, such that both inferred haplotypes were incorrect . the misidentified allele was usually inferred to be the most common allele in the dataset . our data also showed a negative correlation between the number of heterozygous sites and phase error , and so even two-site heterozygotes can be difficult to reconstruct accurately . however, given the low false positive rates, overestimation of common allele frequencies is unlikely to impact downstream analyses.

low false positives from phase have been reported in several studies based on simulated data and/or well-characterized functional loci in humans  <cit> . the present work, together with two recent papers  <cit> , extends these assessments to non-coding anonymous or intronic ndna from other organisms. the consistently good performance suggests that phase is robust to some violations of the underlying neutral coalescent model .

drivers of uncertainty
although highly polymorphic nuclear sequence loci often carry considerable phylogeographic signal, they also tend to produce challenging datasets for computational haplotype reconstruction. the number of different alleles  is a particularly strong predictor of the number of unresolved  genotypes because allele-rich datasets usually contain many rare alleles. indeed, the presence of a rare allele in an ambiguous genotype is perhaps the single most important determinant of phase's ability to confidently and accurately reconstruct haplotype pairs  <cit> . in populations that have undergone relatively recent and rapid range expansion, coalescent theory predicts an excess of low-frequency haplotypes  <cit> , and so demographic history may contribute to the number of unresolved genotypes.

our investigation of the influence of rare alleles on phase confidence probabilities indicated that genotypic configurations involving two low-frequency alleles were disproportionately represented in the pool of unresolved genotypes . in out-crossing panmictic populations, these heterozygotes will tend to be very uncommon. however, in hybrid zones, the propensity for rare alleles to reach locally high frequencies or for novel alleles to be found only in individuals of mixed ancestry is well documented  <cit> . in these cases, the coupling of two otherwise rare alleles in a single diploid genotype may account for a non-negligible proportion of the total dataset. for example, in a study of the passerina amoena  and p. cyanea  hybrid zone, carling and brumfield  <cit>  reported that phase was unable to confidently resolve genotypes of as many as  <dig> individuals per locus. phylogeographic studies often detect the signals of both range expansion and secondary contact  <cit> . accordingly, complex organismal histories may have a compounding effect on the number of unresolved genotypes.

impacts of omitting unresolved genotypes
rare alleles constitute an important component of the molecular signature used to estimate several population genetic parameters, and so omitting genotypes in which rare alleles reside could affect phylogeographic analyses. however, as noted by edwards and bensch  <cit> , this has not previously been assessed. we found that systematic biases do exist, and that the absolute number of unresolved genotypes omitted from a dataset is a significant predictor of the magnitude of bias. the parameters Θw and π tend to be underestimated , whereas fu's fs and tajima's d tend to be overestimated . even when only 3- <dig> unresolved genotypes are omitted, parameter estimates can still be quite biased . although Θw and π were mostly used for descriptive purposes in the studies included in our literature survey, they are increasingly important in phylogeographic hypothesis-testing. for example, estimates of Θ may be used to set effective population size  when modelling alternative vicariance scenarios  <cit> , and it is widely appreciated that fixed parameters such as ne can have a large impact on the outcome of such tests. the parameter Θ can also be important when ranking alternative models under an information-theoretic framework for phylogeographic inference  <cit> . similarly, the combination of tajima's d and π has been identified as particularly powerful when testing simultaneous vicariance under an approximate bayesian computation inference framework  <cit> .

tests for distinguishing population growth from size constancy often use information from the frequency of distribution of dna substitutions or haplotypes, where an excess of singletons is indicative of expansion  <cit> . in the absence of selection and intra-locus recombination, significantly negative values of tajima's d and fu's fs are consistent with population growth. indeed, many species have experienced rapid population expansions since the last glacial maximum. in these cases, current practices of omitting unresolved genotypes should have greater impacts on analyses than those seen from simulations performed under a model of constant population size. however, even under the best-case scenario represented in simulations, our results indicate a strong upward bias in these two statistics when unresolved genotypes are omitted from a dataset . in a highly cited paper, ramos-onsins and rozas  <cit>  reported on the superiority of fu's fs to detecting population growth, and this statistic is now widely used in phylogeographic analyses. the marked overestimation of fs reported in the present paper could ultimately mask the signature of expansion. in a comparative phylogeographic context, understanding species' demographic histories is critical for assessing the degree to which co-distributed taxa have responded to past landscape-level events in concert  <cit> . given the increasing number of studies that include re-analysis of datasets generated by other research groups  <cit> , it may become necessary to make a clear distinction between computationally- versus experimentally-phased ndna sequence datasets.

some comparative phylogeographic analyses focus on the topology and branch lengths of estimated gene trees. here we have shown that omitting genotypes with low confidence probability scores usually leads to reductions in two components of phylogenetic diversity-the number of gene lineages and pairwise sequence divergences among them . rare alleles can be particularly difficult to resolve , and so some loss of distinct gene lineages is expected. however, we also detected an unexpected bias towards loss of divergent alleles . this can alter estimated root probabilities in intraspecific haplotype networks . the implications for downstream network-based analyses  is an area of research that demands further study, but is beyond the scope of the present paper. the systematic loss of rare alleles could also potentially impact outcomes of molecular dating methods that require removal of short branches  <cit> , or tests of topological congruence between taxa  <cit> . for these reasons, some caution is warranted even when performing phylogeny-based phylogeographic analyses with computationally-phased datasets.

mitigation of observed biases and other sources of error
we have found sscp to be efficient for physically isolating alleles from diploid pcr products  <cit> , but the utility of cloning or allele-specific pcr has also been demonstrated . regardless of which approach is considered most feasible, we reiterate the point made by huang et al.  <cit>  that the effort invested in experimental haplotype determination can be minimized by targeting genotypes that remain unresolved following computational approaches. indeed, it may not be necessary to experimentally phase all unresolved genotypes given that biases in the four population parameter estimates examined here were always quite low when unresolved genotypes accounted for ≤ 2% of the total dataset under the  <dig>  phase threshold . notably, lowering the phase threshold to  <dig>  often reduces the number of unresolved genotypes with little or no increase in false positives .

the potential for some genotyping error to arise when scoring heterozygous sites from directly-sequenced diploid pcr products is well-documented. for example, base composition bias can contribute to highly asymmetric signal intensities  <cit> , chain termination sequencing chemistry may cause certain nucleotides to produce small peaks compared to other bases at the same heterozygous position  <cit> , and the sequencing primers themselves can have a substantial effect on accuracy  <cit> . furthermore, variable sites in close proximity to the 5' or 3' ends of an alignment may be difficult to score accurately  <cit> , although it is not clear if this is a general phenomenon. problems may also arise when one allele amplifies in pcr with low efficiency relative to another allele  <cit> . taken together, if inconsistencies are seen between forward and reverse sequence chromatograms for the same diploid template, it would be prudent to experimentally validate these genotypes. indeed, bos et al.'s  <cit>  recommendation for ground-truthing a sub-sample of the haplotypes inferred by phase is well justified.

CONCLUSIONS
in contrast to harrigan et al.  <cit> , we have not been able to escape the conclusion that a combination of experimental and computational approaches for resolving phase of segregating sites in phylogeographic applications is essential. we have shown that the current practice of omitting unresolved genotypes  introduces systematic bias into estimates of important population genetic parameters. as expected, these biases have their most pronounced effects on summary statistics that draw on the signal embedded in the number of rare alleles . fortunately, with targeted application of laboratory procedures that enable unambiguous phase determination via physical isolation of alleles from diploid pcr products , relatively little investment of time and effort is needed to overcome potential biases. this notion that the 'best' strategy involves a duality of approaches represents a recurring theme in phylogeography  <cit> .

authors' contributions
rcg conceived the study, performed the analyses, and drafted the paper. ps and rjd contributed ideas to the study design and interpretation of results, and revised drafts of the paper. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
increase over time in the use of phase in empirical studies relating to phylogeography, speciation or hybridization. figure is based on the  <dig> articles included in our literature survey . all of these studies focus on non-primate animals and used phase to reconstruct haplotypes from directly sequenced non-coding nuclear loci.

click here for file

 additional file 2
frequency distribution of the relationship between number of segregating sites  and number of different alleles  in the  <dig> simulated datasets from which  <dig>  were arbitrarily selected for further analysis using phase. figure shows that none of the  <dig> datasets are atypical , and so the results presented in the main text are free from bias relating to the dataset selection procedure.

click here for file

 additional file 3
correlation coefficients between the four measures of dataset polymorphism. in this figure, values were calculated from the pooled empirical datasets , and pooled simulated datasets . s, number of segregating sites; an, number of different alleles; gn, number of different genotypes; ho, observed heterozygosity.

click here for file

 additional file 4
supplementary references. list of  <dig> papers from  <dig> journals included in the literature survey of empirical studies that used phase for haplotype reconstruction .

click here for file

 additional file 5
relationship between alternative measures of dataset polymorphism  and the number of unresolved genotypes . simulated and empirical datasets are represented by solid circles and open circles, respectively. a-b, number of segregating sites  under the  <dig>  and  <dig>  thresholds; c-d, number of different alleles  under the  <dig>  and  <dig>  thresholds; e-f, number of different genotypes  under the  <dig>  and  <dig>  thresholds; g-h, observed heterozygosity  under the  <dig>  and  <dig>  thresholds. all regressions were significantly positive  for simulated data, but not for the empirical data.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
this work was supported by grants from the national science foundation  to rjd and john nason, the australian research council  to ps and dave rowell, and the holsworth wildlife research fund to rcg. the paper benefited from discussions during the environmental futures network phylogeography and coalescence workshop , and thoughtful comments from saverio vicario, herve philippe, and three anonymous reviewers.
