BACKGROUND
the drosophila melanogaster sex determination hierarchy consists of an alternative pre-mrna splicing cascade  that directs somatic sex differences in morphology reviewed in  <cit> , sex chromosome dosage compensation reviewed in  <cit> , and adult reproductive behaviors reviewed in  <cit> . sex differences initiate during early embryogenesis with the sex-specific splicing of sex-lethal  pre-mrnas, producing functional sxl protein in females. sxl regulates its own pre-mrna splicing  <cit>  and directs the sex-specific splicing of transformer   <cit> . female-specific transformer  in conjunction with non-sex-specific transformer- <dig> , control all aspects of somatic sex determination by regulating the splicing of the pre-mrnas that encode the sex-specific transcription factors doublesex   <cit>  and fruitless   <cit> , reviewed in  <cit> . this level understanding of the sex hierarchy has taken several decades of effort , however the complete gene regulatory network  is still unknown.fig.  <dig> the drosophila sex determination hierarchy in females. transcripts are in red and proteins are in blue. solid arrows are genetic interactions  and dashed arrows are protein translation.  spf45 → sxl  <cit> ,  snf → sxl  <cit> ,  vir → sxl  <cit> ,  vir → tra  <cit> ,  fld → sxl  <cit> ,  sxl → sxl  <cit> ,  sxl → tra  <cit> ,  sxl -| msl- <dig>  <cit> ,  fld → tra  <cit> ,  tra → dsxf  <cit> ,  tra2 → dsxf  <cit> ,  dsxf → yps  <cit> ,  her → yps  <cit> ,  ix → yps  <cit> 



recent efforts to expand the sex hierarchy grn have used genomic approaches to characterize global changes in gene expression associated with large-effect mutations in tra , dsx  <cit> , and fru . these studies have identified thousands of novel genes regulated by the sex hierarchy, but how best to incorporate these results into the existing knowledge of the pathway remains elusive.

here we exploit natural alleles to provide a window into the relationships among genes in the d. melanogaster sex hierarchy grn. mutation is a driving force of evolution and natural populations are reservoirs of genetic variation. segregating allelic variation provides many small-effect mutations in regulatory and coding regions of almost every gene reviewed in  <cit> . natural variation provides an opportunity to study the impact of genetic variation on the sex hierarchy specifically and more generally on grns . while the phenotypic consequences of large-effect mutations in the sex hierarchy are well characterized , the consequences of small-effect mutations are under investigation  <cit> . for example, genetic variation in upstream splicing factors of the sex hierarchy are known to affect the transcript abundance for downstream targets like yolk protein  <cit> .

gene expression, from adult female heads, was modeled using two separate transcriptomic datasets from populations of natural alleles. the first was a microarray dataset of 596 f1-hybrids created by crossing recombinant inbred lines  from each sub-population in the drosophila synthetic population resource   <cit> . the second was a rna-seq dataset from   <cit> . this cegs population was made by crossing natural isogenic females from two north american populations of d. melanogaster – drosophila genetic reference panel  and winters california  <cit>  – to males of a laboratory stain .

a variety of methods have been used to re-construct grns including partial correlations  <cit> , differential equations  <cit> , graphical gaussian networks  <cit> , and bayesian networks . to expand the sex hierarchy grn, we first built a baseline structural model using the existing molecular knowledge. then variations of the baseline model were explored and tested using structural equation modeling   <cit> . sem is a supervised approach based on sewell wright’s path analysis  <cit> , where the order and direction of the relationships between genes is an intrinsic part of the structural model.

sems not only have been used historically  <cit> , but have also been applied to variety of genetic questions. sems have been used to model relationships between qtls and phenotype in plant development in arabidopsis  <cit> , grain yield in wheat  <cit> , height and diameter in loblolly pine  <cit> , body size in mouse  <cit> , bmi in humans  <cit> , and others . sems have also been used to order cis-eqtl  <cit> . in time course studies, the latent variable structure available in sems has been applied to model protein-dna interactions in yeast  <cit> , transcription in yeast  <cit> , cell lineage determination in c. elagans  <cit> , and cell cycle in yeast  <cit> . they have also been used to construct local grns based on patterns of differential gene expression  <cit> . here we use the sem framework to enable grn expansion. using existing knowledge about a grn as a baseline model, we systematically scan the genome for additional components and improve our understanding of the existing grn in a context that enables interpretation and confirmation. we identified several novel relationships among genes in the sex hierarchy and were able to add novel genes to the sex hierarchy. these new relationships were validated using additional gene expression data from tra and dsx mutants.

RESULTS
mrna isoforms were initially modeled, as the sex hierarchy is regulated by alternative isoforms, but covariation among genes in female head tissue was similar for different isoforms. therefore, genes in the sex hierarchy were modeled using sems and model fit was assessed using four penalized model fit statistics . a baseline model was constructed from the current molecular understanding of the sex hierarchy . this baseline model was expanded by adding new paths among genes in the sex hierarchy grn or by adding new genes to all possible locations in the sex hierarchy grn. paths that improved model fit compared to the baseline model were considered putative relationships. these models were validated using transcriptomic data from the existing literature and two independent mutation studies for tra  <cit>  and dsx .

baseline model
the directional path between any two genes in the sex hierarchy was determined from prior molecular knowledge . for each regulatory relationship identified in the literature, the corresponding directed path parameters β and γ  were estimated in a baseline model. the dspr and cegs populations had slightly different baseline grns because dsx expression was not measured in the dspr. the dsx branch of the sex hierarchy regulates three closely related yolk protein genes . these three yolk protein genes were highly correlated in both the dspr and cegs, to avoid issues of multicollinearity only yp <dig> was included in the baseline model.fig.  <dig> identification of appropriate covariance structure for baseline model. three separate covariance models were compared for the dspr  and the cegs . the full covariance model  allows all independent, or exogenous, genes to freely co-vary . the full covariance model implies that there are unknown regulatory factor that is drive expression of the genes in the sex hierarchy grn. the no covariance model  constrains all covariances between exogenous genes to  <dig>  the no covariance implies that the independent genes in the model are truly independent and are not regulated by some unknown factor. the partial covariance model  allows exogenous genes to freely covary . the partial covariance models implies that some of the exogenous genes in the sex hierarchy grn may be controlled by an unknown factor such as the transcriptional or splicing machinery



many of the direct relationships between genes in the sex hierarchy have been described, however the covariance patterns among genes are not described. therefore, three patterns of covariance were compared in the dspr and cegs data.  the full covariance model estimates covariance parameters between all independent genes . the full covariance model implies that there is at least one unmeasured factor  causing correlation among residual error. the full covariance model simultaneously estimates a matrix of covariance parameters  for all pairwise relationships among independent genes.  the no covariance model assumes that all independent genes in the pathway are not co-regulated . the no covariance model constrains all covariance parameters  to  <dig>   in addition to the two extremes, full covariance and no covariance, it is possible to specify a model where some covariance is allowed. a partial covariance model has both co-varying genes and independent genes. covariance may be due to co-regulation or to hidden effects. the current sex determination literature does not suggest direct co-regulation. however, we saw evidence of co-variation among d) in both dspr and cegs data, and use this empirical observation to fit a partial covariance model . the partial covariance model constrains some covariance parameters of independent genes to  <dig> while estimating the remaining residual covariance parameters in the sem .

the three covariance models were compared in both the dspr and cegs populations using four penalized fit statistics: adjusted goodness-of-fit , parsimonious goodness-of-fit , consistent akaike’s information criterion , and bayesian information criterion  . all  <dig> fit statistics selected the no covariance model in the dspr, while the cegs results were less clear : agfi selected the full covariance model, pgfi selected the no covariance model, and both caic and bic selected the partial covariance model. an examination of the residual matrix suggest that there are potentially unidentified components of the model. together with the unambiguous results from the dspr, this suggest that no covariance model is the most likely, with unknown components present. for these reasons we focus on the no covariance model for the remaining analyses for both dspr and cegs.table  <dig> comparison of baseline models using  <dig> penalizing fit statistics


aindicates the model with the best fit according to the given fit statistics



adding new paths to the sex hierarchy grn
while much is known about the sex hierarchy, there are potentially unidentified regulatory relationships among the genes in this pathway. indeed, after accounting for all the known relationships in the sex hierarchy grn in our baseline model, there were locations in the residual matrix that showed large differences between the estimated and observed values . model fit statistics were used to explore these relationships. all possible additional paths – i.e., all possible pairwise interactions between genes in the baseline model excluding interactions already present in the baseline – were individually added to the sex hierarchy and each model fit was compared to the baseline model using bic. there are  <dig> possible new paths in the dspr data and  <dig> possible new paths in the cegs data. in the dspr,  <dig> paths improved model fit using bic  and  <dig> paths improved model fit in the cegs data . twelve of these paths overlapped between the dspr and cegs . these  <dig> paths included five reciprocal relationships  and two directed relationships . the reciprocal relationships could represent co-regulation, while the directed relationships could represent direct or indirect causal paths . the direct causal path of fru → sxl is supported by molecular evidence showing that sxl locus contains fru dna binding sites  <cit> .fig.  <dig> new paths added in both the dspr and cegs populations. directional arrows represent the path between genes. the baseline sex hierarchy sem is indicated with black arrows and is based on the current understanding of the literature . twelve additional paths improved model fit for both the dspr and cegs population compared to their respective baseline models . ten of these show bi-directional relationships  and two had a single directional relationship 



identifying new genes and adding paths in the sex hierarchy grn
the sex hierarchy is a splicing and transcriptional regulatory cascade, that affects expression of many genes  <cit> . to order potential targets in the sex hierarchy, all expressed genes in the dspr  and cegs  datasets were added one at a time to all possible locations in the sex hierarchy grn, putative genes were identified by assessing model fit  compared to the baseline model. the type i error rate of this procedure was estimated via simulation . there were  <dig> possible locations in the dspr no covariance baseline model, and  <dig> possible locations in the cegs no covariance baseline model. in dspr, none of the  <dig>  tested models improved bic compared to baseline, while cegs had  <dig>  models  out of  <dig>  total tested models  that improved bic by more than the level representing a 5 % type i error rate. to determine how sensitive our inferences were to the specification of the covariance model, we repeated the adding genes procedure with the full covariance model for both populations. no genes were added with to the dspr and  <dig> genes were added to the cegs model. the  <dig> genes added by the full covariance model contained all  <dig> genes from the no covariance model along with an additional  <dig> genes . we conclude that the results are similar regardless of covariance structure used. in order to determine whether the addition of genes to the baseline model was sensitive to the structure of the model, we used the dspr baseline model  for the cegs data. here we found that 98 % of the genes added with the original cegs baseline model are also added alternate baseline model . we also added msl- <dig> to the cegs baseline model and the results from adding genes to this expanded cegs baseline were also almost identical to the original cegs baseline model. finally, we removed tra from the original baseline model and identified 95 % of the same genes. it is worth noting that while the vast majority of the same genes are identified, their most likely positions are subject to change. the addition of genes is robust to some deviations in the baseline model specification.fig.  <dig> sex hierarchy expansion. a all genes expressed in the cegs data were added to the baseline model one at a time to all possible paths and model fit was assessed using bic. for each possible addition the regulatory relationship  has a parameter estimate . there were  <dig> genes with bic values lower than the baseline. some examples include: msl- <dig> downstream of sxl
b
, psa in between tra and fru
c, and inr downstream of sxl
d




validating expanded grn
the core sex hierarchy grn terminates with the transcription factors dsx and fru. new models that incorporated genes downstream of dsx  or fru  were clear targets for validation studies. there were  <dig> genes where model  <dig>  or model  <dig>  improved model fit over the baseline model. of these,  <dig> genes selected model  <dig> or model  <dig> as the most likely model . similarly there were  <dig> genes where model  <dig>  improved model fit over the baseline model, and five of these genes selected model  <dig> as the most likely model . reassuringly, four of the five genes identified as most likely to be downstream of fru contained a fru dna binding motif  <cit> .table  <dig> genes whose best fitting model was downstream of dsx




afru binding sites identified in  <cit> 



dsx encodes sex-specific transcription factors known to control nearly all aspects of somatic sex differentiation outside of the nervous system, and has a role in the nervous system . sex-specific splicing of dsx pre-mrnas results in a smaller c-terminal region in dsxf that can interact with the obligate binding partner intersex  to regulate transcription  <cit> . genes affected by dsx were identified by comparing differences in gene expression between chromosomally xx dsx null animals  and two strains of wild-type files . to control for background affects, a gene was considered differentially expressed if an exonic region showed differential expression in the same direction for both control comparisons , with an fdr ≤  <dig> . there were a total of  <dig> genes that increased gene expression and  <dig> genes that decreased gene expression as a result of dsx knockout. of these  <dig> genes,  <dig> genes added to the sex hierarchy grn and were enriched for dsx binding sites  .table  <dig> genes added to sex hierarchy grn that were also repressed by dsx knockout

fru binding siteb
dsx binding sitec

aimprove fit indicated by smaller bic than baseline  - 12


bgenes containing fru binding sites from  <cit> 


cgenes containing dsx binding sites  <cit> 



comparison with unsupervised approaches
similar to supervised approaches, unsupervised grns can be re-constructed from genome-wide expression studies. unsupervised grns reflect the correlation structure in the gene expression data, often suggesting novel connections and thus facilitate hypothesis generation. there are many methods for the re-construction of unsupervised genome-wide grns . here we use the genenet package  <cit>  to build an unsupervised grn using graphical gaussian networks . the ggn of the dspr  and cegs data  show no obvious clustering among genes in the sex hierarchy, independent of whether the network was constructed using data from genes or transcript isoform . to improve visualization, nearest neighborhoods were created by focusing on sub-networks of genes 1-step and 2-steps away from genes in the sex hierarchy. again, no obvious clustering of genes in the sex hierarchy is evident in either the dspr  or cegs data . finally, the sex hierarchy regulatory structure could not be captured by only focusing genes in the sex hierarchy .fig.  <dig> genome-wide graphical gaussian network of genes in the dspr and cegs. red boxes represent genes that are part of the sex hierarchy or associated splicing factors. blue boxes are remaining genes in the dspr  or cegs .  visualization of the genome-wide ggn.  the primary neighborhood 1-step out from sex determination genes.  the secondary neighborhood 2-steps out from sex determination genes



isoforms of the same gene were reasonably close in the estimated network. for example, when looking at the nearest neighborhood sub-network for any of the fru isoforms, all  <dig> fru isoforms were within two steps in both the dspr and the cegs datasets . the sex hierarchy specific ggn also clusters isoforms from the same gene in the dspr data . transcript isoforms are expected to share expression regulatory mechanisms including common transcription factors, therefore highly correlated expression patterns are not surprising between isoforms.

the lack of proximity among genes known to be part of the core sex hierarchy was disappointing. most genes were not within two steps of each other with few exceptions. . ggns show some plausible novel relationships. for example, the dspr ggn shows a putative novel relationship tra and tra <dig> . in females, tra and tra <dig> form a protein complex that regulates dsx and fru splicing  <cit> . protein-protein interactions are not necessarily expected to be re-capitulated in grns, but transcriptional co-regulation of tra and tra <dig> makes biological sense. ggns also identify a large number of genes  not previously associated with the sex hierarchy, though they show strong expression correlations to members of the sex hierarchy. these genes are candidates to further examine. this unsupervised network re-construction did not robustly detect known relationships among genes in the sex hierarchy.

discussion
drosophila lines from natural populations contain a reservoir of genetic variation, with each line containing a unique combination of numerous mutations of small to moderate effect. for instance, among seven d. simulans natural genotypes, 80 % of proteins have at least one allele with altered protein sequence  <cit> . these alleles are viable in the wild, implying that they are unlikely to be large-effect deleterious mutations. furthermore, mutations in regulatory regions are likely to result in differences in gene expression between any two genotypes. for example, when two different drosophila lines are compared, approximately 10 % of genes exhibit transcript abundance changes of  <dig> -fold or larger . gene expression is also highly heritable  <cit>  and there is abundant genetic variation in the transcript level of all sex determination genes  <cit> . therefore, a collection of a several dozen unrelated lines is expected to contain regulatory mutations in almost every gene.

genetic variation in the context of a grn contributes to phenotypic differences in complex traits  and natural variation is a powerful tool to expand knowledge of grns  <cit> . the number of regulatory relationships that can be elucidated by any model, is expected to depend upon the number of observable allelic combinations in the population. the sex hierarchy is an excellent target for proof of principle studies, with relatively few genes in the core pathway  and there is extensive knowledge about the relationships among these genes. this prediction was borne out by our analysis, where the allelic combinations in the dspr and cegs dataset readily identified possible new paths among genes already in the sex hierarchy .table  <dig> the number of alleles per gene of the sex determination hierarchy in the dspr and cegs populations

na: indicates that depth of coverage was insufficient to estimate the number of alleles



in the cegs population, the core sex determination pathway was expanded. while in the dspr there was not enough evidence to add genes to the core pathway. these two populations differ in their origin and construction and there are several possible explanations for this discrepancy. the inclusion of dsx in the cegs data where it was not detected in the dspr, is the most obvious possibility. this is unlikely to be the whole explanation as there were only  <dig> genes that selected downstream of dsx as their most likely model. we also used the dspr baseline model  and found that 98 % of the genes added in the original cegs baseline model we added to the dspr baseline model using the cegs data. taken together, this evidence suggests that the absence of dsx in the dspr is not driving the lack of addition of new genes to the dspr data. another possibility is the amount of allelic variation at each locus. the cegs data have almost twice the number of alleles at each locus, while the sample size is smaller. to test this idea a random 50 % subset of cegs lines were used and the modeling process repeated with this subset. the number of alleles, and the results were nearly identical in this subset  further suggesting that the number of alleles is more important than the number of lines. another possibility is the presence of trans-effects. there is evidence for trans- effects among these genes in d. simulans  <cit> . since the dspr have a much higher degree of diversity among the alleles, the trans- effects in the dspr may be larger than in cegs, increasing the noise relative to the signal  <cit> .

one of the struggles in genomic studies is how to validate associations. the dspr and the cegs population are two independent populations, created from different starting populations and assayed using different technologies. the intersection of  <dig> additional links lends strength to these associations, as it is unlikely that the same spurious results would be found in two independent populations. in particular, the fru to sxl link has additional support with the existence of fru binding sites in the regulatory region of sxl  <cit> . the question of how to validate the addition of genes is more complex, as the dspr with fewer alleles did not show evidence for grn expansion. however, the sex hierarchy has been the subject of much exploration; therefore, it is possible to use the accumulation of knowledge from previous studies for validation of novel links suggested by the sem models as well as the results from knock-out, knock down and overexpression studies.

genes identified by grn expansion show previous evidence of sex-biased differential expression, regulation by the sex determination hierarchy, and sex-biased splicing. there were  <dig> genes in the expanded grn that have previously been shown to have sex-biased differential expression upstream or downstream of tra  <cit> . one of these sex-biased expressed genes, msl- <dig>  is known to be regulated by sxl in males  <cit> . the inclusion of msl- <dig> improved model fit over baseline in all models, and the most likely model just upstream or just downstream of sxl . the expanded grn was also enriched for genes with evidence of sex-biased splicing  <cit>  . for example, rm <dig> improved model fit over baseline in all models, and has been shown to have sex-biased splicing in whole bodies  <cit> . given that the sex hierarchy is a sex-specific splicing cascade it was not surprising to find genes associated with b <dig> splicing  <cit>  were enriched in the expanded grn .

of the  <dig> genes identified as co-regulated with the sex determination grn, there was enrichment for chromatin binding  and helicase activity  after fdr correction . genes associated with these go terms are consistent with a role in sex determination. the chromatin genes include transcriptional regulators of the homeotic and polycomb group  that are involved in producing sex-specific adult morphology, such as mxc and ph-p; as well as regulators of dosage compensation. dosage compensation is the component of sexual differentiation that yields a similar ratio of x-chromosome to autosome gene expression in males and females  <cit> . in drosophila males, the proteins msl <dig>  msl <dig>  and msl <dig> combine with the helicase mle to form a chromatin-binding complex called msl. in females, sxl protein inhibits formation of msl complex by inhibiting the translation of the msl- <dig> mrna. in our female experiment, msl- <dig> is linked to sxl. msl titrates the histone acetylase mof away from the autosomes, thereby reducing autosomal gene expression. msl also modulates mof activity on the x to produce a net two-fold increase in x chromosome gene expression relative to the autosomes. regulation of gene expression by msl and mof involves the pcg group genes and chromatin modifying complexes, including helicases. the identification of chromatin binding genes and helicase genes is logical in this context. interestingly, the genes that are identified on the chromatin list also include components of the pirna pathway, which regulates transposon expression and chromatin structure in the germ-line cells. the pirna pathway was recently shown to regulate sex-determination in the silkworm bombyx mori  <cit>  and these genes are logical candidates for expansion of the sex hierarchy grn. finally, components of the nonsense-mediated decay  pathway, which is involved in regulation of gene expression at the level of rna, including the sex-determination gene tra  <cit>  were also identified.

in addition to the use of the literature as validation, we conducted a mutational study for validation purposes where dsx null mutants were examined. genes directly regulated by dsx should contain a dsx binding site. of the  <dig> genes added by grn expansion and differentially expressed in the dsx null experiment, inr and heph contained a dsx binding site  <cit>  suggesting that these may be direct targets of dsx.

the present grn analysis suggests a connection between inr and sxl, . however, this relationship may be more complicated given that there are also dsx binding sites in the inr locus. the lack of consistent differences in inr transcript abundance between males and females in head tissue supports the link found by the sem between sxl and inr rather than a direct link from dsx to inr. in drosophila, sxl is the master switch of the sex hierarchy. sxl is an rrm-type rna binding protein  <cit> , that is involved in splicing and translational regulation reviewed in  <cit> . according to current gene models, inr isoforms do not show exon skipping, indicating that the putative sxl action is binding to the 3’utr and influencing mrna stability or translation efficiency. there is previous indirect evidence for a connection between the sex hierarchy and metabolism; drosophila females are larger than males and inr is required for the sex-dimorphism in size  <cit> . furthermore, studies have also found an association between natural variation in inr and body size  <cit> . changes in insulin signaling also affects re-mating behavior  <cit> . the drosophila fat body, analogous to adipose tissues, is important for courtship behaviors  <cit>  and the fru-expressing neurons that underlie courtship behavior are obesity blocking neurons  <cit> .

natural allelic variation provides an elegant way to estimate and potentially order relationships in a grn. large scale unsupervised approaches quickly run out of degrees of freedom and are often difficult to interpret in the context of the existing literature. in the experiments presented here, unsupervised methods identified isoforms as belonging to the same gene, but failed to cluster genes in the core sex hierarchy and did not yield many associations that were able to be verified in the existing literature. in contrast, a supervised sem approach combined with a genome-wide scan of expressed genes leads to logical expansions of the grn. novel relationships were validated by their presence in two independent experiments, the dspr and the cegs. genes that are part of the putative grn expansion suggest that the sex determination pathway is involved with sex-biased splicing in adult female heads and further than the pathway’s expansion is significantly enriched for components likely to help mediate this sex-biased splicing. these results here also support recent literature suggestion that transcription and splicing are part of one continuous process reviewed in  <cit>  and that the sex hierarchy in adult females is an active part of this process.

unlike with unsupervised approaches, grns constructed based on existing understanding of a particular provide testable hypotheses. the promise of this approach is that it can be applied directly to human populations where population level expression studies can be modeled with sem and cell culture experiments can be used to test new links.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding the biological processes by which genotype contributes to phenotype, has as a logical step along the way of understanding how genes interact with each other in a regulatory framework. here we use a novel method which combines classical molecular genetic approaches  with populations of natural alleles to not only identify but order transcriptional regulatory interactions. like other population genetic studies, the number of alleles limits the number of observable interactions and differences in population panel design will have different strengths and weaknesses. here we not only identify novel transcriptional relationships among genes within the sex hierarchy grn , but identified  <dig> candidate genes to add to the existing pathway structure. these genes were enriched for sex-biased splicing, components of the spliceosome, chromatin factors, and helicase activity. many of the genes added to the sex hierarchy grn have previous evidence in the literature for a connection, which the sem models confirm and/or were supported by the dsx mutation study. intriguingly, a connection between the sex hierarchy and metabolism is suggested here with the identification of inr as associated with this pathway.

