BACKGROUND
the problem of accurate prediction of protein three-dimensional structure continues to be one of the challenging problems in bioinformatics. the large-scale genome sequencing efforts have made this problem even more significant. roughly 50% of the proteins in a genome have at least one homolog in protein structure databases and their structure can be predicted efficiently by homology modeling  <cit> . however, for the other half of the sequences no structural template is currently known. to date, the performance of ab initio three dimensional prediction methods are still far from being perfect  <cit> . therefore, in order to obtain information about the structure of a novel protein, one may consider simpler tasks, like one dimensional prediction of protein characteristics  <cit> . acquiring such information is a key step in understanding the relationship between the protein folding and protein primary structure. the goal of protein secondary structure  prediction methods is to predict whether each residue is in a helical structure , a strand , or in other structures .

in the past decades, many prediction methods based on the database of known protein structures have been developed. historically, the first generation of the ss prediction algorithms was developed by chou and fasman.  <cit>  this algorithm, which is usually referred to as the chou-fasman method, tries to find structures based on the difference in the probability of observing each of the twenty residues in helices, sheets and other structures. this method has an accuracy of about 50–60%  <cit> , although it has been shown that this method can be improved greatly with the application of several amendments  <cit> . it should be noted that other statistical methods  have been also applied for protein ss prediction  <cit>  and it seems that their prediction accuracies are comparable to current methods.

the second generation of ss prediction methods started by the method of garnier, osguthorpe and robson   <cit>  and improved in several steps  <cit> . this method, with an information theory approach, relates sequence to ss type and evaluates the state of each residue with a sliding window approach. using this approach, better prediction accuracies, up to 64%, can be obtained  <cit> .

the third generation methods use multiple sequence alignment and machine learning techniques like nearest neighbors and neural networks to predict the secondary structure. apssp  <cit> , jpred  <cit> , sspro  <cit> , phd  <cit> , psipred  <cit> , pmsvm  <cit> , and other methods based on support vector machines  <cit>  can be considered as the representatives of this generation. these methods generally achieve very good prediction accuracy, of up to 76%. it should be noted that recently, achievement of 80% accuracy is reported using a large-scale training  <cit> .

some years ago, it was thought that improvement of the methods will steadily result in the improvement of the ss prediction accuracy in the future  <cit> , but now it seems that there is some kind of "barrier" that prevents all the above mentioned approaches to leave the 80% accuracy behind, and approach the theoretical prediction limit, which is estimated to be about 88%  <cit>  or maybe up to 90–95%  <cit> . one possible barrier for ss prediction might lie in the neglect of other factors that may influence the tendencies of amino acids for being in different secondary structures. for example, it has been reported that amino acid propensities for secondary structures are influenced by the protein structural class  <cit> , and by the organism from which the proteins are obtained  <cit> .

it has been previously suggested that more accurate ss predictions can be achieved by taking relative solvent accessibility  into account  <cit> . the logic for the usefulness of such information lies in the fact that the environments around the protein residues can affect their propensities for different structures  <cit> , and therefore, amino acids may behave differently when they are in the protein interior vs. surface of protein  <cit> . this effect is extensively studied in case of internal and surface beta-strands  <cit> .

based on these observations, one may ask why rsa is not routinely used today in the prediction of protein secondary structures. the answer lies in the fact that rsa prediction is not an easy task itself. the two original reports simply used dssp  <cit>  assignments to extract rsa information  <cit> . however, in the real-world version of the problem, protein sequence is almost always the only available information. for that reason, it was later tried to predict real-value rsas  <cit>  and to apply it for the improvement of protein ss prediction, in a method called sable  <cit> . while the performance of sable seems to be very good , there seems to be much room for improvement of the method, as sable relies on an rsa prediction method with a correlation coefficient of  <dig>   <cit> .

in the present work, we investigate the effect of the alteration of the rsa threshold on prediction accuracy. our results imply that significant improvements in the prediction of ss can be obtained if the rsa cutoffs are selected according to the residues. we also discuss why predicted real-value rsas might not be suitable for the improvement of ss prediction at this moment. finally, we suggest that rsa prediction should be combined with the present ss prediction techniques, since the addition of rsa information improves the prediction, independent of the prediction approach.

RESULTS
the effect of application of different rsa thresholds on the prediction of secondary structures
it was previously reported that when a 25% threshold for predicted rsa values is used to classify residues into {b, ex} classes , this additional information increases the accuracy of ss prediction  <cit> . we decided to try other thresholds to see how they affect the predictions.

in our analysis, we first investigated the effect of adding the actual rsa values , for different rsa thresholds using gor, chou-fasman and hmm . accuracies of ss prediction for gor, chou-fasman and hmm methods, without consideration of rsa information are summarized in additional file  <dig>  figure  <dig> depicts the level of improvement of ss prediction, compared to the prediction accuracy of classical method . for all selected thresholds, some improvements are obtained which is consistent with the results obtained by other investigators  <cit> . our results suggest that the best threshold for the improvement of ss prediction in gor and chou-fasman methods is about 16%, while hmm performs best with a 4% rsa threshold. therefore, the 7% cutoff used by zhu and blundell  <cit> , and also the 50% cutoff used by macdonald and johnson  <cit>  might not be optimal.

as an additional test, we also divided amino acids into three discrete groups, i.e. we classified the residues to buried, intermediate and exposed,  <cit> . for each classification, therefore, a fixed threshold pair is used. the results for these methods are presented in the additional file  <dig>  the results generally show that classification into three groups yields a better result compared to a two-group classification. among the tested classifications, namely , ,  and , the first pair was the best choice for all methods.

then we decided to find out whether different amino acids show similar improvement trends. the results for the gor method are presented in figure  <dig>  it has not shown a promising picture for the prediction improvement, because the behaviors of some amino acids are opposite. for example, lys  is best predicted with the 16% rsa threshold, while the prediction of tyr  is the worst by this threshold. in addition, the prediction of some amino acids as ile  always becomes considerably worse with the addition of rsa information, independent of the selected threshold for rsa. the results for chou-fasman and hmm methods were generally the same.

while these results prove that the addition of rsa information with a fixed cutoff is not a good recipe for improvement of ss prediction, it clearly shows that one should choose different thresholds for different amino acids .

application of residue-specific rsa thresholds for the improvement of secondary structure prediction
in the previous section, we have shown that with the application of a fixed threshold one cannot obtain improvement for all residues. this is something previously observed by macdonald and johnson  <cit> , who reported that proline  is always considered "buried" in their analysis . since with the selection of a fixed rsa threshold the predictions of all residues are not improved, we decided to consider "residue-specific" rsa thresholds.

we tested the usefulness of "mean rsa" and "median rsa", i.e. to assume them as the thresholds for each residue x. we first obtained the actual distribution of rsa values for each of the twenty amino acids, and then calculated the mean and the median of each of these distributions . then, in two separate tests, the mean and the median were used as residue-specific rsa thresholds.

the values show percentage of improvement. the bold-underlined values are those values that show improvements when they are compared with the original gor method. see the text for more details.

we then studied the effect of consideration of three-state residue specific rsa information in ss prediction problem. we tested two types of thresholds again. for the first analysis we chose  and  of the rsa distributions as the selected pair of thresholds. for the second analysis, in case of each amino acid rsa distribution, two rsa values, t <dig> and t <dig> were selected so that one-third and two-third of the observations were smaller than t <dig> and t <dig>  respectively. we will refer to t <dig> and t <dig> as the first tertile and the second tertile, respectively. these values are summarized in additional file  <dig> 

the values show percentage of improvement using leave-one-out cross-validation. the bold-underlined values are those values that show improvements when they are compared with the original gor method. see the text for more details.

in the next step, we tried to see if the effect of adding the rsa information is dependent on the ss prediction method. table  <dig> summarizes the results. clearly, great improvements are also obtained when chou-fasman and hmm are used for ss prediction. interestingly, prediction of the two challenging residues, met and ile, shows some improvement here.

the bold-underlined values are those values that show improvements using leave-one-out cross-validation when they are compared with the original method. see the text for more details.

our results clearly suggest that considerable improvements are obtained in ss prediction independent of the applied method. it is also important to test the validity of this observation for more popular methods like psipred <cit>  and phd <cit> , which work based on finding conserved sequences that form regular structures. however, this is not an easy task. our approach works by changing the twenty-letter alphabet of amino acids; therefore it is not possible to do the blast search with blosum, pam, or any other classical  <dig> ×  <dig> matrix, as we need mutation matrices in which rsa information is also considered.

finally, to assess the usefulness of our suggested residue-specific thresholds, we tried to test the effect of considering random thresholds for classification of rsa data. in each simulation, we randomly assigned one or two thresholds to each amino acid and classified the residues into two or three classes respectively. then, with the addition of rsa information we computed the prediction accuracy. this procedure was repeated  <dig> times. the results of the simulation are summarized in additional file  <dig>  it can be observed that in almost all cases the improvement of the accuracy of prediction is not as high as the suggested residue specific thresholds.

application of predicted rsa values for the improvement of secondary structure prediction: can we use real-value rsas?
we demonstrated that rsa information can positively influence the protein ss prediction. however, in practice, we only know the sequence of the protein, and we may only rely on the predicted rsa values for the improvement, not on the actual values.

adamczak et al. have previously shown that the predicted real-value rsa information can be used to enhance ss prediction  <cit> . we used predicted values to test the validity of our approach for this case.

for obtaining predicted rsas we used rvp-net program  <cit>  to predict rsas for a given protein sequence in our dataset, and then implemented these predicted rsas into our method.

for fixed thresholds, the prediction accuracy dropped by  <dig> % to  <dig> % . when we used means or medians as the residue-specific thresholds, the prediction accuracy was more than original method in all cases. however, when we used tertiles or mean ± standard deviation as the thresholds, the resulting accuracies were more than original method in gor and hmm methods, but surprisingly, not in chou-fasman method .

the reason for such a difference lies presumably in the nature of chou-fasman algorithm. in this algorithm one must first calculate helix and strand residues and then predict the coil residues. the rsa for strand residues are generally less than 50%. we used rvp-net program to predict the required rsas. correlations between observed and predicted values of rsa for different ranges of solvent exposure are shown in figure  <dig>  this figure suggests that residues with rsa less than 50% are generally significantly underestimated. thus when we used these data for ss prediction, residues in strand conformation might be inaccurately predicted. in chou-fasman algorithm this will also result in incorrect prediction of coils. for two-state rsa assumption, this problem is not a major one, since many residues in each class are still predicted correctly. however, when we classified the rsa data into three groups  this problem was intensified, since for the residues with the intermediate rsa, only a small ratio of them are correctly classified as intermediate, and most of them were wrongly categorized as buried.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have shown that, combination of actual and predicted rsa greatly improves the prediction of protein secondary structure. in practice, one cannot take advantage of the actual rsa information and it is necessary to use predicted rsa values for this purpose. however, one should notice that rsa prediction methods are still far from being faultless. therefore, it is critically important to consider the weak points of rsa prediction methods when incorporating their results into ss prediction methods.

