BACKGROUND
the diversity of feeding specialization of phyllostomid bats are unique among all mammals  <cit> . they range from insect-to diverse vegetable-feeding strategies, as well as omnivory, carnivory, and even blood-feeding  <cit> . this ecological diversification is accompanied by morphological, behavioural and physiological adaptations  <cit> . a striking example is specialization for nectarivory, with several species feeding primarily on nectar. these bats have the ability to hover in front of a plant, while drinking nectar with their elongated and extensile tongues adorned with brush-like papillae and grooves for ingestion of nectar  <cit> . they digest and metabolize nectar and pollen quickly  <cit> . phyllostomid bats represent the second largest chiropteran family after the vesper bats , with more than  <dig> species in at least  <dig> genera. their distribution ranges from southern arizona and the west indies to northern argentina  <cit> .

although phylogenetic analyses of morphology, chromosomes, and molecules have helped to illuminate relationships among many genera and subfamilies of phyllostomid bats, relationships among nectarivorous genera are still unclear. many phylogenies based on morphological characters suggest a monophyletic origin for all specialized nectarivorous phyllostomids  <cit> . we provide a well-supported phylogenetic estimate of phyllostomid bats based on a large molecular data set, comprising  <dig> bp from a total of twelve nuclear-and mitochondrial genes, and try to clarify phylogenetic relationships among nectarivorous taxa by testing whether they share a close common ancestry. furthermore, we used a molecular clock approach to evaluate the evolutionary time frame of diversification in phyllostomid bats.

RESULTS
phylogeny of the phyllostomidae
a separate analysis of all mitochondrial and nuclear loci  resulted in high congruent phylogenies . among the frugivorous species relationships changed between the independent inferences. a sister-group relationship between carolliinae and glyphonycterinae could not be inferred from the mitochondrial data set. in this reconstruction glyphonycterids were found basal to all frugivores. but this relationship obtained low support  compared to the reconstruction based on nuclear loci, where carolliinae is sister taxon to them .

maximum likelihood  analysis based on our supermatrix  revealed a well-resolved phylogeny for the phyllostomidae , with most nodes receiving high bootstrap support . monophyly of all subfamilies recognized by baker et al.   <cit>  was verified, and relevant nodes were highly supported by different measurements .

different measures were calculated to describe clade stability: posterior probability, bootstrap value , decay index , bayesian cluster recognition  and branch length. further, trophic level of the bats was also considered . decay indices were obtained with treerot.v <dig>  <cit>  in combination with the phylogenetic software paup  <dig>  beta  <cit> . a decay index greater than ten is considered as strong support for a specific node. automated cluster recognition via the "generalized mixed yule-coalescent"  approach with multiple threshold extension was used  <cit> . branches longer than the mean branch length  are considered as long. congruence indices were calculated by the number of useable support measures for a specific node divided by the number of cases in which there was high support.

three basal lineages, comprising the taxa macrotus , micronycteris , and the vampire bats desmodus and diaemus , were confirmed . a bifurcation in more or less omnivorous bats  and predominantly vegetarian species followed. within the frugivores a sister-group relationship between rhinophyllinae and the stenodermatinae was well-supported . however, support for a sister-group relationship of carolliinae and glyphonycterinae was weak . the highly specialized nectarivorous taxa lonchophylla and lionycteris do not align closely with other nectarivorous phyllostomids . instead, they shared a common ancestor with the frugivores, as previously proposed by baker et al.   <cit>  and others  <cit> .

divergence time estimation and model decision
the analysis under the lognormal relaxed clock model  produced the smallest confidence intervals compared to the exponential- or strict clock model . estimates of mean likelihood, substitution rate, and node age were most accurately inferred under the ucln model . the assumption of the relaxed clock, that branches differ in their substitution rates, was confirmed. a coefficient of variation of  <dig>  indicated moderate rate variation  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the dated bayesian tree inferred with beast under the ucln model. the common ancestor of all phyllostomids was dated to the middle eocene , with a confidence interval between 49- and  <dig> mya. basal lineages within the phyllostomids arose shortly thereafter in the late eocene or early oligocene . the prominent amount of the remaining lineages emerged in a time frame of about ten million years at the transition from oligocene to miocene , with  <dig> out of  <dig> lineages already present in the early miocene .

divergence time estimations of specific nodes under different molecular clock models and different calibration settings are shown. strict- , relaxed exponential-  and relaxed lognormal-  clock models are compared. likelihood value, mean mutation rate, root age and time to the most recent common ancestor  of taxon subsets are given.  estimated age of taxon subset in million years ago .  estimate of the evolutionary rate across the whole tree in units of substitutions per site per million years . < > lower and upper bound of the 95% highest posterior density  interval. 95% hpd is the shortest interval, that contains 95% of the sampled values and is equivalent to a confidence interval.

reconstruction of ancestral states
discussion
phylogeny of the phyllostomidae
our molecular phylogenetic reconstructions based on more than  <dig> kb dna sequences obtained high bootstrap support for almost all nodes and challenges several phylogenetic relationships derived from morphological data sets. our results partly disagree with recent classifications of phyllostomid bats  <cit>  including:  placement of insectivorous genera macrotus, micronycteris, glyphonycteris and trinycteris within the phyllostomidae;  relationship of the fruit-eating genus rhinophylla to other frugivores; and  relationships among nectarivorous phyllostomids.

the molecular data suggest that the genera macrotus and micronycteris do not belong to the subfamily phyllostominae as proposed by koopman   <cit> , mckenna and bell   <cit> , wetterer et al.   <cit> , and jones et al.   <cit> . instead, they form two divergent basal lineages within phyllostomid bats . our data are in line with the findings of baker et al.   <cit> . the authors proposed a classification of two different subfamilies macrotinae and micronycterinae. three studies placed the genera glyphonycteris and trinycteris within the subfamily phyllostominae  <cit> . in contrast, our data revealed a close relationship of glyphonycteris and trinycteris with frugivorous species of the subfamily carolliinae. despite low support for this sister-group relationship , our data support a closer relationship of glyphonycteris and trinycteris to fruit-eating species  than to omnivorous phyllostomids of the subfamily phyllostominae.

the genus rhinophylla does not belong to the subfamily carolliinae, as proposed by mckenna and bell   <cit> , wetterer et al.   <cit> , and jones et al.   <cit> . our data support a sister-group relationship between rhinophylla and the subfamily stenodermatinae, as proposed by baker et al.   <cit> .

many authors excluded the genera phyllonycteris, erophylla and brachyphylla, all endemic to the west indies, from other nectarivorous phyllostomids and placed them mostly into the subfamilies phyllonycterinae and brachyphyllinae  <cit> . in contrast, our data show that these nutritionally more generalized bats belong to the glossophaginae . the three genera are closely related to more specialized nectarivorous bats of the genera glossophaga, leptonycteris and monophyllus. this is in line with an earlier molecular phylogeny of baker et al.   <cit> . the phylogenetic position of highly specialized nectarivorous bats of the genera lonchophylla and lionycteris is controversial. several studies, primarily based on morphological analyses, placed them within the glossophaginae  <cit> . instead, our molecular data suggest that they are closer related to rhinophyllinae, stenodermatinae, carolliinae, and glyphonycterinae than to the glossophaginae. this finding is in line with previous studies of koopman   <cit> , jones et al.   <cit>  and baker et al.   <cit> . the distinctness of lonchophyllinae is also supported by fixed differences in the tongue morphology  between representatives of the lonchophyllinae and glossophaginae  <cit> .

in summary, our study supports the classification of phyllostomid bats after baker et al.   <cit> . their division into more subfamilies, compared to koopman   <cit>  and simmons   <cit> , seems justifiable, because this better reflects the remarkable ecological diversity of this family.

dietary diversification
the vast majority of bats feed on insects  <cit> . this includes the family mormoopidae, which represents the sister group of the phyllostomidae. in addition, the diet of the most basal subfamilies macrotinae and micronycterinae consists mainly of insects . these findings indicate, that the common ancestor of phyllostomid bats was an insect-feeder. this supposition is also supported by the maximum-likelihood reconstruction of the ancestral state .

members of the phyllostominae have a mixed diet. the reconstruction of the ancestral state for this group revealed that their physiological pre-adaptations to omnivory could have evolved only once, and involved metabolic changes from insectivorous to an omnivorous diet. however, too little is known about the diet of these bats. a high spacial and seasonal plasticity is observed  <cit> . a few members of the phyllostominae are carnivorous and feed on small vertebrates  <cit> . for example, trachops cirrhosus is specialized on tungara frogs  <cit> . such a unique specialization likely evolved in a formerly insectivorous/omnivorous species. it was shown, for the seasonally carnivorous greater noctule bat , that only minor changes are needed to switch from insectivory to carnivory   <cit> . the transition from large-bodied insects to small vertebrates as prey does not need any major adaptations and occurred several times independently in different bats and is correlated with an increase in body size  <cit> .

a large number of phyllostomid species have a vegetarian diet. they form a monophyletic clade , comprising the subfamilies rhinophyllinae, stenodermatinae, carolliinae, glossophaginae, lonchophyllinae, and surprisingly the glyphonycterinae. the last subfamily includes several strict insectivorous species; thus, a shift from a vegetarian diet back to insectivory seems to be the most plausible scenario. alternatively, the glyphonycterinae retained the ancestral insectivorous lifestyle. this assumption would require that the frugivorous subfamilies rhinophyllinae, stenodermatinae and carolliinae have evolved their feeding specialization independently from each other. however, the relevant node is weakly supported in our phylogenetic reconstruction. it is also possible  that the glyphonycterinae represents a basal lineage to all frugivores and therefore possess the plesiomorphic state for this group. the common ancestry of all frugivore species was also postulated by previous studies  <cit> . however, there is a high dietary plasticity in this group. for example, carollia is a known switch hitter between fruits and insects depending on the season .

the diphyly of the nectarivorous lonchophyllinae and glossophaginae is surprising, since they resemble each other in many morphological, behavioural, ecological, and physiological traits . accordingly, these similarities have evolved independently by natural selection during the adaptation to a nectar-feeding lifestyle. this hypothesis is supported by some obvious differences in these adaptive traits  <cit> : the lonchophyllines have a deep longitudinal groove in their tongue, lined dorsal and ventral with hairlike papillae. this groove is missing in the glossophagines and hairlike papillae are distributed anterodorsal, forming a brush tip. furthermore, the lonchophyllines lost most types of papillae found on the tongues of other phyllostmids, including the glossophagines. also, the internal tongue structure is very different. the lonchophyllines have complex, omnidirectional bundles of muscles within the tongue, while glossophagines have predominantly horizontal skeletal muscle bundles. the complex orientated muscles in the lonchophyllines are supposed to control the shape of the groove during nectar feeding  <cit> . drinking behaviour varies widely between both subfamilies . other characters show similar apomorphic states in lonchophyllines and some glossophagines , however, there are no consistent patterns. the endemic west indian genera, brachyphylla, erophylla, and phyllonycteris, show many plesiomorphic characters. it seems that functional constraints on the muscular innervation of the tongue curtain the evolutionary signals of these characters. hence, it is possible that lonchophyllines and glossophagines may have evolved these adaptations for nectar-feeding independently .

the large number of species within the clade of frugivorous and nectarivorous bats  suggests, that a shift to a vegetarian diet accelerated the diversification rates in this group. the majority of phyllostomid bats,  <dig> out of  <dig> listed species  <cit> , i.e. 74%, belong to this clade. possibly the presence of numerous vacant ecological niches in tropical and subtropical regions of america  resulted in allopatric speciation.

time frame of evolution
our analysis revealed a time frame of ten million years  from oligocene to early miocene, in which all prominent lineages evolved . most of the species diversification occurred subsequent to the oligocene epoch . during the miocene substantial changes of the landscape occurred in tropical america due to massive plate tectonics  <cit> . global climate cooled and resulted in an increase in aridity  <cit> . frequent isolation events could have resulted in allopatric populations and thus promoted speciation  <cit> . interestingly, the radiation of extant hummingbirds , another alimentary competitor, shows a similar pattern of diversification in the middle miocene  <cit> . geologic upheavals as well as the ability of ecologically generalized species to invade new regions were considered as major forces promoting hummingbird radiations in newly arisen montane regions. in order to test whether these factors has also promoted speciation in bats, and to infer other underlying evolutionary mechanisms, a much denser taxon sampling is required.

CONCLUSIONS
our analysis of more than  <dig>  base pairs of concatenated dna sequences reveals a strongly supported phyllostomid phylogeny, thus allowing for clear predictions about the evolution of feeding specialization of these bats. several morphological and even molecular studies were unable to resolve the specific branches with sufficient support, either due to the convergent nature of the analyzed characters or insufficient amount of sequence data. our multi-gene approach, combined with a relaxed clock analysis, detected and dated major splitting events within this family. this study gives support for the classification of phyllostomid bats after baker et al.   <cit> . all prominent lineages with diverse feeding strategies evolved within a relatively short time frame of about ten million years from oligocene to early miocene. geological and climate changes as well as the shift to a vegetarian diet may have promoted the radiation into diverse lineages. in this context, the diphyly of the nectarivorous lonchophyllinae and glossophaginae is remarkable. despite many similarities between both groups, it seems plausible, that they evolved their adaptations to nectarivory independently from each other. this would represent an example of convergent evolution within bats that led to very similar features, which play a major role in food acquisition.

