BACKGROUND
comparative studies based on molecular data are not only essential to gain insights into genome evolution and species phylogeny, but also for the study of the function and evolutionary dynamics of developmental processes. traditionally, such studies were based on the analysis of small sets of carefully selected rrna- or protein-coding genes. more recently, larger sets of expressed sequence tags , or high-throughput data based on whole-genome sequencing have been used for phylogenomics. probably the best illustration of the importance and success of this approach is the establishment and elaboration of the new animal phylogeny
 <cit> . in general, phylogenomic approaches have greatly improved our ability to robustly reconstruct highly resolved phylogenetic trees
 <cit> . a relevant example in our context is the clarification of relationships between groups of holometabolan insects
 <cit> . here, we are using comparative transcriptomics — based on whole-transcriptome shotgun sequencing , and de novo transcriptome assembly
 <cit>  — to examine deep phylogenetic relationships among diptera . this approach provides sequence data for a large number of genes, which is not only useful for phylogenomic analyses, but also as a resource for rapid identification and cloning of genes. a couple of recent examples illustrate the potential of this approach. for instance, hittinger et al.
 <cit>  used rna-seq to resolve the evolutionary relationships of ten mosquito species. moreover, kalinka et al.
 <cit>  employed high-throughput transcriptome analyses to quantify variability in gene expression across developmental stages in different species of sequenced drosophilid fruit flies.

we are interested in extending such comparative transcriptomic analyses beyond drosophilids and mosquitoes with sequenced genomes
 <cit> . non-drosophilid dipteran species are becoming increasingly important as model systems to study the evolution of transcriptional regulation
 <cit> , cellular architecture
 <cit> , and a diverse range of developmental processes, such as axis specification
 <cit> , segment determination
 <cit> , morphogen-based spatial patterning , thoracic bristle patterning
 <cit> , and the specification of extra-embryonic tissues
 <cit> .

rigorous and systematic studies of the problems and processes described above require ‘omic’ resources. however, apart from three species of mosquitoes
 <cit> —which are difficult to handle in the laboratory and to use for embryological studies—there are no published genomic data sets available for non-drosophilid dipteran species. here, we fill this important gap by analyzing and comparing high-throughput transcriptomic data in early embryos of three emerging dipteran experimental model systems: the moth midge clogmia albipunctata , the scuttle fly megaselia abdita , and the hoverfly episyrphus balteatus  . they were chosen based on their position in the dipteran phylogenetic tree, and their tractability for embryological studies . of these species, only e. balteatus is among the  <dig> non-drosophilid dipterans whose transcriptomes will be sequenced as part of the 1kite project , which aims at characterizing  <dig>  different insects by rna-seq.

c. albipunctata belongs to an early-branching dipteran lineage, which has traditionally been considered the sister group of all brachycerans . this position has recently been disputed, placing the psychodids as an early branch of the culicomorph lineage which includes the mosquitoes and blackflies 
 <cit> . m. abdita and e. balteatus were chosen since they belong to basally branching cyclorrhaphan lineages. the taxon cyclorrhapha comprises the majority of brachyceran species, including the drosophilids
 <cit> . therefore, m. abdita and e. balteatus occupy intermediate phylogenetic positions between c. albipunctata and drosophila melanogaster . in addition, e. balteatus is the only non-drosophilid dipteran species for which sequenced maternal and early embryonic transcriptomes are already available
 <cit> .

in this study, we used roche  <dig> and illumina hiseq technologies and de novo assembly to characterize the early embryonic transcriptomes of c. albipunctata and m. abdita . we verify the information present in our data by manual curation and in situ hybridization. we compare our early embryonic transcriptomes to that of e. balteatus <cit> , as well as transcriptomic and genomic sequences from drosophilids
 <cit>  and/or mosquitoes
 <cit> .

our transcriptomic data sets form the basis of a new phylogenomic assessment of gene evolutionary histories and dipteran species relationships. a maximum likelihood analysis of  <dig> concatenated orthologous genes places psychodid moth midges  as an early offshoot along the branch leading to the brachyceran lineage. this agrees with earlier morphological studies , but stands in contrast to the recent molecular phylogeny of wiegmann et al.
 <cit>  which places psychodidae with mosquitos. our analysis indicates that deep dipteran relationships remain difficult to resolve, and that more genomic and/or transcriptomic data will be needed for us to fully understand the early radiation of diptera.

RESULTS
transcriptome sequencing, assembly, and annotation
we obtained early embryonic transcriptome sequences  from the moth midge clogmia albipunctata and the scuttle fly megaselia abdita using rna-seq based on the roche  <dig> and illumina hiseq platforms . raw read sequences are available from the european nucleotide archive  under accession number erp <dig>  our analysis also includes an early embryonic transcriptome for the hoverfly episyrphus balteatus, which has been sequenced and published previously
 <cit> .

 <dig> reads were assembled with newbler v <dig> . <dig> , while illumina reads were assembled alone or in combination with  <dig> reads using the trinity assembly tool . to compare the different assemblies and sequencing strategies, we annotated the reconstructed transcriptomes using blastx
 <cit>  against drosophila melanogaster proteins . annotated transcriptome sequences are available online at http://diptex.crg.es. a detailed analysis and comparison of annotation results is presented in additional file
 <dig>  section s <dig> .

our analysis indicates that illumina sequencing combined with de novo assembly using trinity is a reliable approach to reconstruct transcriptomes in non-model organisms. this confirms results reported by grabherr et al.
 <cit> . although  <dig> pyro-sequencing combined with newbler assembly achieves longer average contig lengths, this did not result in the detection of markedly higher numbers of genes. the very extensive overlap between the different data sets indicates that we are achieving a considerable degree of saturation in our coverage.

verification of annotation
we assessed the quality of our transcriptome annotation by performing reciprocal blast searches to check for the presence or absence of  <dig> candidate genes known to be expressed during the blastoderm stage and early germband extension in d. melanogaster. the results of this analysis are summarized in additional file
 <dig>  section s <dig> . they confirm near-saturation coverage of our data sets, and indicate that automatic pipelines lead to mis-annotation or lack of annotation for a number of genes. this number can only be reduced by careful manual curation.

many regulatory genes expressed during early dipteran development show complex spatial expression profiles
 <cit> . we used sequences present in our transcriptome data sets to make riboprobes against a set of candidate genes in order to test whether the genes present in our transcriptome data sets are expressed in spatially specific patterns between the blastoderm and the extended germband stage. examples of conserved gene expression patterns in m. abdita and c. albipunctata are shown in figure 
 <dig>  caudal  shows a conserved posterior expression pattern in the blastoderm as in d. melanogaster . tarsalless  is expressed in a pair-rule-like striped pattern during germband extension . segment-polarity genes such as engrailed , hedgehog , or wingless  show conserved segmental pre-patterns as in d. melanogaster . the hox gene deformed  can be detected around gastrulation time . dorso-ventral and mesodermal patterning genes twist  and snail  show ventral expression at the blastoderm stage, and later during gastrulation . zerknüllt  is expressed at the blastoderm stage in the amnioserosa anlage . dorsocross  shows a conserved expression pattern during germband extension similar to that observed in d. melanogaster . all in all, we were able to detect spatial expression  for  <dig> out of  <dig> tested candidate genes. an additional gene  showed signal in m. abdita but not c. albipunctata , while the other candidates could not be cloned in either species, or did not show any consistent spatial expression patterns. this confirms the usefulness of our data sets as a resource for evolutionary developmental biology , since expression of genes present in our transcriptome data is also detectable by in situ hybridization for a majority of tested cases.

finally, we verified our annotated data sets in terms of their ability to predict alternative splice forms. previous work indicated that newbler shows a low rate of false positive prediction of alternative transcripts, but fails to predict the complete set of isoforms identified by rt-pcr
 <cit> , while no equivalent evidence is available for trinity. our analysis  reveals that a large percentage of the predictions by trinity are inaccurate. therefore,  <dig> pyro-sequencing and newbler assembly should be used if reliable predictions of alternative splicing events are required.

comparative transcriptome analysis
table 
 <dig> summarizes the number of genes identified by our analyses in all three species. we compare these to two estimates of the number of genes expressed during early embryogenesis in d. melanogaster: lecuyer et al.
 <cit>  provide a lower limit for this number of  <dig> , which is consistent with the  <dig>  uniquely identified protein-coding genes present in modencode transcriptomes during the first four hours of development 
 <cit> . our data sets contain  <dig> % ,  <dig> % , and  <dig> %  of the  <dig>  genes detected during early embryogenesis in d. melanogaster <cit> .

total number represent uniquely identified genes from both  <dig>  and  <dig> & illumina hiseq  assemblies , and from  <dig>  and  <dig>  assemblies  taken together. the number of genes for d. melanogaster is determined from modencode rna-seq data sets for 0– <dig> hrs of development; genes were considered to be expressed if rpkm>0
 <cit> .

we compared the identified sets of genes between all four dipteran species. for this purpose, we used transcriptome data from the modencode project for d. melanogaster <cit> . as shown in figure 
3a, there is a large overlap between data sets, as a large number of genes is expressed in early embryos of all four species. nevertheless, our analysis predicts a significant number of genes, which are specific to only a subset of species analyzed. the extent of overlap between data sets does not seem to correlate with phylogenetic distance . assuming that we are not missing a significant proportion of expressed genes, this indicates considerable plasticity in early development across different species, a phenomenon which has previously been described in drosophilid flies
 <cit> .

to further investigate the nature of this plasticity, we have carried out an enrichment analysis for gene ontology  terms across species
 <cit> . detailed results from this analysis are shown in additional file
 <dig>  they reveal that the range of go categories is wide in all three species. apart from a slight enrichment in transmembrane factors in c. albipunctata and m. abdita, we found no biologically significant differences between data sets. furthermore, analysis of species-specific genes did not yield any obvious enrichment . this is not surprising, since early embryogenesis is strongly conserved among dipterans . therefore, similar spectra of gene functions are to be expected, while plasticity between species is most likely to involve temporal or spatial changes in gene expression, or different factors carrying out similar biological functions.

phylogenomics
to obtain evolutionary insights from our newly sequenced dipteran transcriptomes, we performed an exhaustive phylogenomic analysis in the context of sixteen other dipteran species with fully sequenced genomes . this includes twelve drosophila genomes
 <cit> , and four mosquitoes
 <cit> . in addition, we included the lepidopteran bombyx mori <cit> , and the coleopteran tribolium castaneum <cit>  as outgroups. our phylogenomic analysis consists of the reconstruction of a phylogenetic tree for every gene in the transcriptome. such a set of gene trees is called a phylome
 <cit> . this approach has been successfully applied to the analysis of genomes
 <cit> , but not yet to transcriptomes. therefore, our transcriptomic data sets provide a unique opportunity to assess the performance of large-scale phylogenetic analyses on this type of data.

an expected limitation of reconstructed transcriptomes, as compared to whole genomes, is that reconstructed genes may be incompletely assembled. this is likely to affect the retrieval of homologs as well as subsequent steps in the phylogenetic reconstruction. our pipeline successfully reconstructed phylogenetic trees for  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of the genes identified in the c. albipunctata, m. abdita, and e. balteatus transcriptomes, respectively. this is much smaller than the  <dig> % coverage of the genome-based d. melanogaster phylome deposited in phylomedb
 <cit> . however, these figures are hardly comparable: a transcriptome-based phylome will necessarily miss the genes not expressed at the relevant developmental stage. furthermore, there are several closely related species for d. melanogaster, which facilitates the identification and retrieval of homologs.

nevertheless, a comparison of coverage among the three transcriptome-based phylomes is informative, since they are based on similarly divergent species and represent similar developmental stages. in this context, the smaller coverage of the e. balteatus phylome is likely to indicate a lower quality and/or coverage of this transcriptome.

in support of this, we found that the number of homologs that could be retrieved by searching with blast with a given transcript as a query  correlates significantly  with the length of the transcript sequence relative to the length of its d. melanogaster ortholog. in other words, more complete transcripts were able to detect a larger number of homologs.

in addition, the lower coverage observed for the e. balteatus phylome also seemed to result from a lower average number of homologs per gene tree  as compared to those in the c. albipunctata , and m. abdita  phylomes. taken together, this suggests that transcript length in the seed transcriptome determines coverage in terms of reconstructed trees and detected homologs in the resulting phylome. this, in turn, may result in errors during downstream analyses as shown before for low-coverage genomes
 <cit> .

the use of a reasonably closely related species with a complete genome  as an alternative seed could help to alleviate this problem, at least for those genes in the target species that have homologs in the alternative seed species. to test this, we reconstructed a new phylome comprising the same set of species but using the d. melanogaster genome as a seed. our results show that trees reconstructed from d. melanogaster seed genes include a larger number of homologs , while still covering a significant part of the target transcriptomes .

finally, a combined phylome resulting from the addition of trees reconstructed from non-drosophilid species-specific transcriptome seeds whenever a transcript is not covered in the d. melanogaster phylome provides the highest coverage over the target transcriptomes  while ensuring the maximal quality of each individual tree. we therefore adopted the combined phylomes for our subsequent analyses and recommend this as a general approach in future phylogenomic analyses of newly obtained transcriptomes.

gene phylogenies can serve to accurately establish orthology and paralogy relationships across species
 <cit> . we used an automated, phylogeny-based pipeline to produce a comprehensive catalog of orthologs and paralogs among the  <dig> insects considered, and annotated  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>  transcripts based on gene ontology terms transferred from functionally annotated orthologs, of which  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  respectively were based on one-to-one orthology relationships. this catalogue and functional assessment will clarify equivalences among genes in different model organisms and facilitate future comparative analyses. all phylogenetic trees alignments and orthology and paralogy predictions are available through the phylomedb  and diptex  databases .

deep dipteran phylogeny
the deep phylogenetic relationships between basally branching dipteran lineages are not firmly established, particularly with respect to the position of the family psychodidae, to which c. albipunctata belongs. initial analyses based on molecular and morphological data suggested psychodida and closely related families  as the sister group of brachycera, and this has been the predominant view . however, recent analyses based on a combination of 18s and 28s ribosomal rna genes, complete mitochondrial genomes, and up to  <dig> nuclear-encoded proteins, have tentatively placed psychodomorpha as a sister group to culicomorpha 
 <cit> .

our transcriptomes of species from this and other basally branching lineages provide a unique opportunity to re-assess their phylogenetic relationships using an extended molecular data set. to do so, we selected  <dig> gene families that displayed strict one-to-one, phylogeny-based orthology relationships across all species considered. this constitutes thus far the largest phylogenetic data set to assess the debated position of basal dipterans. a maximum likelihood analysis of the concatenated 160-gene data set produced a highly-supported topology .

we assessed the existence of compositional bias in our dataset using a principal component analysis of amino acid distributions . our results  show that the three transcriptomes considered here have rather divergent amino acid compositions, different between each species and also different from other sequenced dipterans. to rule out a possible effect of the compositional bias in the obtained topology, we applied a trimming recoding method to minimize compositional heterogeneity, as implemented in bmge
 <cit> . the trimmed alignment produced exactly the same topology as shown in figure 
4a, using both maximum likelihood  and bayesian  approaches. this topology is fully congruent with the established species relationships across mosquitoes
 <cit>  and drosophila species
 <cit> , illustrating the ability of our data to recover known phylogenetic signal.

with respect to the position of c. albipunctata, our results are consistent with psychodomorpha being the sister-group of brachycera , and thus, is in contrast with the molecular study by wiegmann et al.
 <cit> .

with respect to the branching order within cyclorrhapha, on the other hand, our analysis is congruent with that of wiegmann et al.
 <cit> . it corroborates the fact that syrphidae  are more closely related to schizophoran flies  than phoridae . this has important implications for the study of the evolution of developmental features such as the presence of the anterior morphogen bicoid  and the reduction of extra-embryonic tissues into a dorsal amnioserosa within the cyclorrhaphan lineage
 <cit> .

an alternative approach to reconstruct species relationships from multiple genes is the reconstruction of supertrees by combining the topological information of individual gene trees
 <cit> . we implemented this by using two alternative parsimony approaches, one that finds the topology, which results in the least number of duplications when all the individual gene trees are reconciled, as implemented in duptree
 <cit> , and one that renders the topology which is most congruent with all the gene trees in terms of observed bipartitions , as implemented in clann
 <cit> . while the first supertree approach resulted in a topology that was fully congruent with that in figure 
4a, the second one rendered a slightly different topology : here, c. albipunctata appears as sister group to mosquitos, consistent with wiegmann et. al.
 <cit> . this latter result reflects a larger gene tree support  in the relevant node for the scenario in figure 
4b  as compared to that in figure 
4a .

thus, our two independent supertree approaches provide conflicting results with respect to the position of c. albipunctata, which correspond to  the classical scenario in which c. albipunctata is a sister group of brachycera
 <cit> , and  the most recently supported topology by wiegmann et. al.
 <cit>  in which c. albipunctata is the sister group of culicomorpha. to compare both scenarios, we reverted to topological testing using a maximum likelihood framework and the approximately unbiased  test
 <cit> , as implemented in consel
 <cit> . both topologies shown in figure 
 <dig> were tested, allowing for free optimization of the branch lengths, and computing their likelihood on the alignment of  <dig> orthologous genes, both before and after correcting for compositional heterogeneity.

consistent with our results above, the clustering of c. albipunctata with brachycera received stronger statistical support in both cases. notably, the second scenario, in which c. albipunctata is the sister branch of culicomorpha, could only be discarded  after compositional heterogeneity correction. this suggests that the compositional heterogeneity present in the data disrupts the main signal observed in the alignment in favor of the second topology.

phylogenetic artifacts such as long-branch attraction or compositional bias are known to have a stronger effect in individual phylogenies, where the number of informative residues is smaller
 <cit> . thus, methods like gene concatenation, which directly—rather than indirectly, as in supertree approaches—use the combined information of gene sequences are generally considered more robust
 <cit> . the sparse taxonomic sampling of basal dipterans for which genomic data is available results in relatively long branches for the three groups involved in the conflicting relationships . this, together with the fact that transcriptomic data are incomplete, makes our individual gene tree dataset prone to errors, particularly with respect to the position of the three species where only transcriptomic data is available.

note that the gene tree parsimony approach used by duptree is expected to be robust to missing data , whereas the split fit approach used by clann is more sensitive
 <cit> . finally, our results point to the presence of compositional heterogeneity in the data, which favors the branching of c. albipunctata with mosquitoes. taking all this into consideration, the results based on the concatenation of  <dig> conserved genes with additional support from one of the supertree approaches, provides strong support for the placement of c. albipunctata as the sister group of the brachycera.

gene duplications and gene family expansion
gene duplication is considered one of the major sources for functional innovation
 <cit> . analyses of complete eukaryotic genome sequences have revealed that gene duplication has been rampant, and that this process can be linked to important evolutionary transitions or major leaps in development and adaptive radiations of species . to reconstruct the history of duplications for the genes identified in our transcriptomes within the dipteran lineages considered here, we used a phylogeny-based method to detect and date gene duplication events
 <cit> , and calculated the average number of observed duplications per gene in each of several relevant lineages in our phylogeny .

on average, 38% of the genes analyzed have experienced at least one duplication event in any of the lineages studied. the distribution of duplications across lineages shows a somewhat larger duplication rate in the cyclorrhaphan lineage , which may reflect a larger evolutionary distance represented by this branch. duplications specific to each particular lineage were generally low, affecting less than 5% of the genome. of note, roughly  <dig>  duplications occurred during the period extending from the separation of mosquitoes from other dipterans up to the separation of the aschizan  and schizophoran  lineages. this shows the utility of our newly generated transcriptomes for providing a more accurate picture of the evolutionary period at which the different gene families were duplicated.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have presented a comparative transcriptomic analysis of three non-drosophilid dipteran species: clogmia albipunctata, megaselia abdita, and episyrphus balteatus. these species are located at informative positions within the dipteran phylogeny, and constitute emerging model systems for comparative embryology and physiology. our results indicate a high degree of conservation in gene expression during early development in dipteran insects. they are important both from a methodological, and a phylogenetic point of view.

in terms of methodology, we show that high-quality de novo assembly of transcriptomes can be achieved using illumina sequencing technology with the trinity assembly pipeline. the resulting transcriptomes are not only useful as resources for gene cloning and expression analysis, they also enable comparative and phylogenomic investigations that are more systematic and robust than those based on ests or selected candidate genes.  <dig> sequences  are only required if accurate predictions of alternative splicing events are needed. with respect to phlyogenomic analyses, we obtained the most comprehensive sets of gene trees when combining phylomes in the following manner: first, we used a sufficiently closely related seed species with a sequenced genome , and then combined the trees derived from it with additional ones that are only present in phylomes based on the transcriptomes of each non-model species.

our most important result, however, re-opens the discussion about deep dipteran relationships, which are difficult to resolve due to a rapid early radiation of flies, midges, and mosquitoes. a recent study, based on a large sample of species but a restricted amount of sequences from a selected subset of genes, placed psychodid midges such as c. albipunctata with the culicomorph branch of the diptera, which includes the mosquitoes and blackflies
 <cit> . in contrast, our phylogenomic analysis, based on a much larger sample of genes, suggests that the psychodids are a sister group of the brachycera, or ‘higher flies’, which includes phorids , syrphids , as well as the drosophilids. this is consistent with the placement of the psychodids in earlier phylogenetic analyses .

in addition to trees based on concatenated sequences, our analysis included the use of so called supertree approaches, which combine the information obtained for thousands of individual gene trees. in this case, the use of alternative optimization criteria provided ambiguous support for the clustering of c. albipunctata with either brachycera or culicomorpha. our analysis indicates that this ambiguity is due to the presence of compositional bias, which favors the clustering of c. albipunctata with culicomorpha. it seems that individual gene trees  are more strongly affected by compositional bias resulting in pervasive presence of the alternative signal. this is further corroborated by the fact that we can overcome this problem through the concatenation of a sufficient number of the most completely sampled genes, and by application of methods to correct for compositional heterogeneity. both of these measures result in strong support for the classical affiliation of c. albipunctata as sister group of brachycera.

all of the evidence described above points towards a grouping of psychodidae with brachycera. however, it remains controversial whether high species sampling or high sequence coverage yields more reliable phylogenetic trees
 <cit> . therefore, we cannot yet conclusively determine the position of c. albipunctata. future studies with both a larger number of species, and a higher sequence coverage will be required to resolve these deep evolutionary issues.

