BACKGROUND
the in vitro brain slice preparation has become an indispensable tool for neurophysiological research since its introduction nearly 50 years ago by henry mcilwain
 <cit> . the popularity of this method stems from its unique balance of ease of use, high controllability of experimental conditions and retained tissue function at molecular, cellular and network levels.

an important issue for slice experimentalists is how best to assess tissue viability from one slice to another — and in so-doing make a sound judgment as to whether to exclude a given sample from experimental testing. this should be of more than just passing interest, because variation in slice condition from trial to trial has potential to greatly confound results. in slice studies in which seizure-like event  field potentials are the main output, event amplitude is the go-to criterion for inclusion or exclusion
 <cit> . surprisingly, this practice has been adhered to despite a lack of firm scientific evidence for its justification
 <cit> .

a separate  issue is how best to judge slice viability in protocols in which sle activity is intentionally suppressed. there are occasions when experimental protocols require comparison groups in which sle activity is inhibited
 <cit>  ― and there are currently no recognized means of classifying slice viability under these conditions.

in this study we sought to address both of these matters using the zero-magnesium sle model. accordingly, the study was divided broadly into two parts. in the first, we characterized the sle parameter that correlated with deteriorating or compromised slice health. the aim was to determine unequivocally whether sle amplitude  is a reliable means of judging slice condition. in the second, we explored the anecdotal finding that insertion of extracellular electrodes into quiescent tissue sometimes induces a rapidly waning burst of high frequency activity in the field potential recording. we hypothesized that appearance of this high frequency activity reflects the response of healthy tissue to the trauma of electrode insertion ― and could be used to evaluate slice viability when sle activity has been suppressed.

RESULTS
an example of the pattern of seizure-like event extracellular field potential activity induced by removal of magnesium from the artificial cerebrospinal fluid  is shown in figure 
 <dig>  the seizure-like bursts are typical of those recorded under zero-magnesium conditions.

pattern of sle activity in deteriorating/compromised slices
sle activity changed variably over time as the tissue deteriorated . while event amplitude, frequency and length all trended downwards over time, the only significant change was a reduction in event amplitude. the data indicate that sle amplitude of less than 50 μv is indicative of tissue that is poorly viable and may not be able to sustain population activity for more than 30–60 minutes. however, it is important to note that this is a generalization based on variable data. for example, in two cases, sle amplitude was greater than 200 μv within 30 minutes of all activity ceasing. furthermore, in one slice sle amplitude at the beginning of the recording was 10 μv but continued to deliver stable activity for upwards of 7 hours.

*p <  <dig> , compared to seg <dig> and seg <dig> .

data are median.

the alterations made to the slice preparation methods were designed to deliberately undermine tissue condition ― with the aim of establishing unequivocally whether low sle amplitude correlated with poor slice viability. the results were clear in showing that all three interventions resulted in significantly lower sle amplitude compared to our “standard” protocol . the data confirm that a peak-to-peak amplitude value of approximately 50 μv or less is a good indication that tissue condition has been compromised. with the exception of a lower sle frequency in the tap water group, event amplitude was the only variable affected. under the conditions tested in this study and for the analysis methods employed, we can conclude that event amplitude is the single most useful variable for assessing slice viability.

“standard” conditions are defined in the methods section.

*p =  <dig> , compared to “standard” conditions .

**p =  <dig> , compared to “standard” conditions .

quiescent tissue viability correlates
an example of the pattern of activity induced by electrode placement into quiescent tissue is shown in figure 
 <dig>  of the  <dig> recordings, sles developed in  <dig> cases. in these, the mean change in spectral power following electrode insertion was  <dig> %; compared to  <dig> % in the  <dig> “non-responders”. the difference is statistically significant . sles occasionally  developed even though no noticeable change  in high frequency power was observed, but the opposite was never true. that is, sles developed in 100% of instances where the increase in power was >20% . furthermore, the greater the spectral power increase, the larger the amplitude of the sles that subsequently developed ; and , the higher the sle frequency  . sle frequency was also positively correlated with the length of time the slices were held in normal acsf prior to recording, which may account for some of the variability in sle frequency outcome. there was no correlation between normal acsf hold time and either sle amplitude  or sle length .

when slice viability was intentionally compromised , the change in spectral power following electrode insertion was  <dig> %, compared to  <dig> % under standard conditions . in the compromised group, sles developed in only 50% of cases, compared to 86% under standard slicing conditions — with a median amplitude of  <dig>  μv and  <dig>  μv, respectively  ― confirming the relationship between slice viability, the tissue response to electrode insertion and sle development.

discussion
in this study we addressed two questions relating to the evaluation of cortical brain slice viability. firstly, when recording sle activity under zero-magnesium conditions, is event amplitude a valid method for judging the health of the slice? event amplitude is widely used to evaluate slice condition at the beginning of an experiment, with many researchers applying amplitude-based exclusion thresholds
 <cit> . the logic is sound, because a greater number of viable cells will be potentially recruitable for each event in a healthier slice. however, the amplitude of population activity is not governed solely by the number of active units, but also the synchrony of those units
 <cit> . thus, lower amplitude activity does not by a priori mean fewer viable cells. it’s surprising then that examination of the literature uncovers scant objective investigation of this topic. in this study, we approached the subject by quantifying sle characteristics following interventions designed to be detrimental to tissue health. the group comparisons confirmed that compromised tissue tended to produce sles of lower amplitude. furthermore, the other measures of sle activity did not associate with slice condition, validating event amplitude as the most suitable parameter. as a caveat to this, it should be noted that the downward trend in event amplitude may be more informative than the absolute value, making the choice of threshold for slice exclusion/inclusion more difficult.

secondly, we were interested in whether the tissue response to electrode penetration could predict subsequent sle development; and hence identify healthy slices in which sle activity had been intentionally suppressed. the results paralleled those of the first part of the study, showing that the amplitude  of the high frequency response to electrode-induced tissue trauma correlated with the amplitude of sle activity recorded from the same slice. in other words, the amplitude of field potential population activity per se reflects the underlying health status of the tissue, independent of the method used to generate the activity.

in this study we used the zero-magnesium model of epileptogenesis. this method has been widely used for investigating mechanisms of epilepsy
 <cit>  and has also been applied to the study of anaesthetic drug effects
 <cit> . the model therefore has wide applicability in the field of neurophysiology. moreover, the two complementary facets of this study suggest that the findings can be extrapolated to other slice models involving different methods of tissue activation.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the amplitude of population activity ― independent of its mechanism of production ― is a robust electrophysiological measure of neocortical slice viability.

