BACKGROUND
bipolar disorder is a severe psychiatric illness characterised by alternating episodes of mania and depression. dysregulation of the pins signalling pathway has been implicated in the pathophysiology of the disorder by magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies  <cit> . furthermore, commonly prescribed drugs used to treat the illness  alter neuronal growth cone morphology, a phenotype that is reversed by addition of extracellular myo-inositol  <cit> .

brain inositol levels are regulated by: a) transport from blood, b) recycling of intracellular inositol phosphates, and c) synthesis from glucose-6-phosphate to myo-inositol-1-phosphate  by the enzyme mip-synthase  <cit> . mip-synthase expression in the brain appears to be confined to the vasculature  <cit> , suggesting that inositol synthesis may not play a key role in neuronal inositol signalling. rather, an uptake system seems to be required to transport inositol across the plasma membrane into neurones, which may play a role in the regulation of signalling. three myo-inositol transporters have been identified to date – the sodium myo-inositol transporters  <dig> and  <dig>   <cit>  and the phylogenetically distant h+/myo-inositol transporter   <cit> . mrna expression studies identified hmit, but not smit <dig> or smit <dig>  transcripts in rat neurones  <cit> . also, hmit expression appears highest in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, areas which are implicated in mood disorders  <cit> .

hmit is a glycosylated protein containing three conserved internalisation signals: an endoplasmic reticulum  retention signal in the n-terminal region, a dileucine internalisation signal and a tyrosine based internalisation motif at the c-terminal  <cit> . mutation of the retention signals is required for plasma membrane localisation of the recombinant protein in xenopus oocytes and mammalian cells, and this surface localisation correlated with functional inositol uptake into the cells  <cit> . furthermore, hmit is a symporter of myo-inositol and protons, since inositol uptake was only evident under acidic extracellular conditions and was associated with an inward electrical current and decreased intracellular ph  <cit> . it has been proposed that translocation of recombinant or endogenous hmit to the plasma membrane may be activity-dependent following, for example, neuronal depolarisation or protein kinase c  activation  <cit> .

whilst hmit represents an attractive candidate as a neuronal inositol transporter, it is unclear if hmit contributes to the inositol-reversible effects of mood stabilisers on neurones  <cit>  through transport of inositol into the cell. to address this question, we undertook studies to further characterise the localisation and functional properties of hmit in recombinant systems and native tissue. we have analysed hmit expression in rat and human brain tissue using immunohistochemistry and investigated the conditions necessary for its translocation to the plasma membrane in heterologous cells and cultured neurones. functional expression was probed using -myo-inositol uptake, -cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol  accumulation and whole-cell electrophysiology assays.

RESULTS
intracellular myo-inositol measurements in rat cortical neurones
to determine if extracellular myo-inositol can be taken up by neurones, we measured intracellular myo-inositol concentrations following incubation of cultured neurones with myo-inositol  for  <dig> min or  <dig> h. after cell supernatant removal, cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline  and lysed with ice-cold acetonitrile containing ammonium acetate; intracellular myo-inositol concentration was measured using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry . intracellular inositol levels were found to be significantly increased after overnight extracellular application , indicating that inositol can be taken up across the plasma membrane. intracellular inositol concentration was not changed after  <dig> min incubation . we subsequently proceeded to investigate whether hmit is involved in the transport of myo-inositol into neurones by studying its expression and function.

hmit expression in the brain
in order to analyse hmit localisation, we generated a specific antibody, as demonstrated by western blotting, immunoprecipitation and immunocytochemistry . the cellular specificity and localisation of hmit was analysed by confocal microscopy of rat primary cortical cultures co-stained with anti-hmit: <dig> antibody and either a neuronal, astrocytic or golgi marker. we observed no co-localisation of hmit and the astrocytic marker gfap , indicating little or no expression of hmit in primary astrocytes, which are a cell contaminant in the neuronal preparation. the images in figure 1c show that hmit co-localised with βiii tubulin in the cell body and neurites, indicating neuronal expression. furthermore, the hmit antibody co-localised with the golgi marker 58k golgi protein , suggesting that hmit is present in an intracellular compartment associated with the golgi apparatus.

to investigate hmit localisation in the rat brain, immunohistochemistry was performed in sagittal slices from adult rat brain with staining visualised using the odyssey infra-red detection system  . staining was observed in the hippocampal region, with high expression levels of the hmit protein in ca2- <dig> and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus . in addition, the immunising peptide effectively competed with the observed signal in rat brain . subsequently, fluorescence and colorimetric immunohistochemistry were performed to investigate the detailed anatomical and cellular distribution of hmit-like immunoreactivity  in rat and human brain. hmit-li appeared to be distributed in discrete regions of the rat brain with a strong expression in the hippocampus, particularly in the ca2- <dig> regions and in the dentate gyrus . moderate hmit expression was observed in the cerebral motor cortex . in the human brain, a moderate to high hmit-li signal was detected in the cerebral cortex  and hippocampus . as shown in figure 2b  and in figure 2f  the hmit-li seems to be localised predominantly intracellularly.

analysis of hmit triple mutant
we first studied and characterised hmit function using the hmit triple mutant . it was previously shown that recombinant hmit is localised in the cytoplasm of hek <dig> cells and that expression of an hmit triple mutant was required to achieve plasma membrane localisation  <cit> . in order to confirm and extend these findings, we transfected hek <dig> cells with pcdna <dig> /v5-his-topo-hmit triple mutant and analysed hmit localisation by immunocytochemistry using the anti-hmit: <dig> antibody and an anti-pan cadherin antibody to confirm plasma membrane localisation . hmit triple mutant co-localised with pan-cadherin staining, indicating that the hmit triple mutant is expressed at the plasma membrane, in contrast to the wild-type recombinant hmit. in the -inositol uptake assay using hek293t cells transfected with the hmit triple mutant, inositol uptake activity was observed at ph  <dig>  and this was partially reversed by treatment with the non-selective inhibitor phloridzin . in contrast, the activity measured at ph  <dig>  was much lower  . these data indicate that the hmit triple mutant is expressed at the plasma membrane and is functional at ph  <dig> .

hmit activity was further analysed using patch-clamp electrophysiology. whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings were made from egfp-positive hek <dig> cells transiently co-transfected with the hmit triple mutant and egfp plasmids. myo-inositol  was applied by fast perfusion for  <dig> s at  <dig> s intervals under various conditions. at the holding potential of - <dig> mv, no current responses were observed at extracellular ph  <dig>  . however, when the extracellular ph was  <dig> , myo-inositol evoked an inward, non-desensitising current. this response was independent of extracellular na+ and showed weak voltage-dependence . the magnitude of the inositol-evoked currents increased as the extracellular environment was further acidified and reached a plateau level between ph  <dig> and ph  <dig> . characterising the concentration-response relationship of myo-inositol gave an ec <dig> of  <dig>  mm, with a hill slope of  <dig>  . this contrasts with the affinity constant  of  <dig> μm as reported by uldry et al.  using oocytes. in this study, the inositol-evoked currents were sensitive to inhibition by phloridzin  and a similar level of inhibition was also observed in the absence of extracellular na+ . in addition we investigated whether inositol triphosphate  is also a substrate for hmit. in hek293t cells transiently transfected with the hmit triple mutant, application of ip <dig>  did not generate any responses at ph  <dig> . when the extracellular ph was set at  <dig> , application of ip <dig> evoked an outward current  while myo-inositol  induced a current of opposite polarity . the opposite direction of the net current can be explained by the negatively charged ip <dig> compared with the neutral inositol molecule. we confirmed that these responses were mediated by the hmit triple mutant as no currents were observed at ph  <dig>  when the experiment was repeated using hek293t cells transfected with egfp only as a control .

hmit-mediated currents in rat neurones
following characterisation of the hmit triple mutant, we investigated rat brain tissue for endogenous hmit-mediated responses. whole-cell recordings  were carried out in cultured cortical neurones and to ensure hmit was not unknowingly inhibited, we did not include tetrodotoxin  to block spontaneously occurring synaptic currents. at both extracellular ph  <dig>  and  <dig> , applications of myo-inositol  did not evoke any current responses .

our localisation data showed hmit staining in interneurones of the ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions of the hippocampus . to test for hmit function in these cells, we made whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings in acute rat hippocampal slices and applied myo-inositol  onto the cell bodies by micro-pressure application. as illustrated in figure 4b, we found no inositol-evoked currents in interneurones located in the ca <dig> stratum radiatum, ca <dig> stratum lacunosum-moleculare or ca <dig> stratum lacunosum-moleculare. to test if neuronal activity is required for hmit translocation to the plasma membrane, we stimulated the slices using various conditions and found no current responses on application of myo-inositol . these data obtained in rat dissociated neurones as well as in rat slices suggest that functional hmit is not present at the plasma membrane of the soma.

inositol studies in hmit null-mutant neurones
we further investigated the functional expression of hmit in cultured neurones using the -cdp-dag accumulation assay by comparing wild-type  and hmit null-mutant  mice. cells were stimulated with the muscarinic receptor agonist carbachol  to activate pins signalling, and treated with licl to block the enzyme inositol monophosphatase, therefore reducing intracellular inositol with the consequent accumulation of cdp-dag. -cdp-dag accumulation was measured in cortical neurones from wt and ko mice . application of extracellular myo-inositol clearly reversed -cdp-dag accumulation, at physiological ph in wt neurones. no difference was observed between wt and hmit null-mutant neurones, thus indicating that inositol enters the cell despite genetic ablation of hmit   <cit> .

discussion
in this study we show that hmit is a neurone-specific protein that is widely expressed in the brain. the brain distribution is supported by the data from the allen mouse brain atlas  and northern blot analysis  <cit> . the cellular localisation data obtained in the present study, however, contrast with that reported by uldry et al.  <cit>  which suggested widespread astrocytic localisation. the latter is inconsistent with our immunohistochemical data and also the qpcr data of cahoy et al.  <cit> , which suggest a neuronal expression . the discrepancy may be explained by the relative specificity of the antibodies used in the two studies. we confirmed antibody specificity for hmit using a series of methods including tagged-hmit and peptide competition assays. intracellular localisation was investigated both in vitro in primary neurones and ex vivo in rat brain sections. we showed that hmit is co-localised with a golgi marker and is not present at the cell surface or in neuronal processes. the golgi localisation data support findings by  <cit> , who observed intracellular staining as demonstrated by co-localisation with the intracellular er marker calreticulin. we also demonstrated hmit expression in several regions of the human brain by immunohistochemistry, with the signal being consistent with an intracellular localisation.

in agreement with previous studies, triple mutant hmit is localised at the plasma membrane when overexpressed in hek <dig> cells. the triple mutant was functional, as shown by both electrophysiology and inositol uptake assays, and we confirmed the characteristics of hmit inositol transport – ph dependence, sodium independence, phlorizidin sensitivity – first reported by uldry et al.  <cit> . we extended our analysis to rat primary neurones and hippocampal tissue slices where we were unable, even after stimulation, to demonstrate inositol-induced currents. we recognised that as pressure application of inositol was aimed at the soma we cannot exclude that translocation of hmit may occur further away in the processes. however, in our localisation studies there was clear staining in the soma with no indication that hmit is enriched in the processes. we used acutely prepared brain slices and primary dissociated neurones in contrast to uldry et al.  who showed translocation in rat brain aggregates, and preferential expression in regions of nerve growth and varicosities in primary neurones overexpressing recombinant hmit. the lack of stimulation-induced hmit activity was unlikely to be due to insufficient time course as translocation of hmit was observed after  <dig> min application of pma by  <cit> , while we did not observe inositol-induced currents even after 30– <dig> min stimulation of slices. although experiments were performed at room temperature, we did not observe any difference when slices were incubated at 30°c for more than  <dig> h suggesting that function was not affected by lower temperature.

our data on localisation and function suggest that hmit is not a plasma membrane transporter. the novel observation that hmit can also transport ip <dig> provides an interesting alternative function for this protein. we speculate that hmit may play a role in intracellular regulation of inositol and phosphoinositides, e.g. by sequestering ip <dig> into vesicles, possibly affecting intracellular calcium signalling.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our study has shown that hmit is expressed at the plasma membrane and is able to transport inositol  but only under artificial conditions whereby it lacks intracellular retention motifs. in contrast, the native protein has secondary structural features consistent with intracellular localisation and retention and immunocytochemical analysis confirms its localisation in the er/golgi network. we could not demonstrate any activity-dependent inositol transport in vitro or ex vivo in neurones. these data suggest that hmit is not involved in the neuronal transport of inositol from the extracellular environment and the mechanism underlying this process remains to be identified.

