BACKGROUND
a key criterion for invasion success is the ability of an invading population to grow to the point at which it becomes viable. to achieve this, it is essential that individuals do not lose behavioural traits important to survival, or behavioural variation in such traits  <cit> . recent evidence suggests that individuals with greater variability in behavioural traits are more likely to establish viable populations in an invasion scenario  <cit> . furthermore, founder populations of invading species are often small  <cit> , limiting intra-specific encounters and consequently the benefits of mating with multiple partners. here we ask whether the colonization ability of a multiply mating invasive species is impaired by forced monogamy, as may occur in an introduction situation.

the guppy  is established in at least  <dig> countries outside its native range of trinidad and north-eastern south america  <cit> . mosquito control programmes and the release of unwanted pets contribute equally to its non-native distribution  <cit> . both routes typically involve initial introductions of a single fish or a few individuals to confined waterbodies such as tanks and troughs  <cit> , although occasionally guppies may be released directly into natural streams and rivers.

the reproductive biology of this live-bearing species, particularly its ability to store sperm, helps explain its success in invading new habitats. a female guppy can produce repeated broods over a period of several months without the need for re-mating  <cit> . indeed, single females collected from the wild and housed for one year in small water tanks – similar to those into which guppies are typically placed for purposes of mosquito control - establish viable populations in around 90% of cases  <cit> .

a second variable, that may be important during invasion but has not been examined previously in this context in guppies, is multiple mating. female multiple mating is ubiquitous in guppies  <cit> . in fact, guppies hold the highest total number of putative sires per brood recorded for a vertebrate species  <cit> . multiply-mated females have been shown to produce larger broods  <cit> , with greater levels of genetic and phenotypic variability  <cit> . all of these multiple mating benefits could be advantageous in an introduction scenario, where founding numbers are often low  <cit> . for example, by giving birth to multiply-sired broods, potential demographic bottlenecks may be minimised, and more variation maintained in the resulting population  <cit> .

a typical invasion sequence begins with the transportation and introduction of a small number of individuals from their native range to a new environment  <cit> . the vast majority of introduction events will fail to result in an invasion  <cit> . a key criterion for invasion success is the ability of an invading population to grow to the point at which it becomes viable. a viable population being one that establishes successfully, and in which the behavioural performance and versatility of the progeny is not degraded  <cit> . as invasion events tend to involve only a few individuals, females may not have the opportunity to mate with more than one male. it is therefore important to examine whether females who have not had access to multiple males are less successful in founding a viable population during invasion.

two aspects of behavioural performance relevant here are the survival abilities of offspring, and the mating vigour of males. offspring are born with innate abilities to school with conspecifics, cautiously inspect novel stimuli and display an escape response when threatened  <cit> . male guppies engage in a range of courtship behaviours, including consensual sigmoid displays and coercive ‘sneaky’ gonopodial thrusts  <cit> . previous studies have found evidence of reduced courtship vigour and mating success in male guppies after 1- <dig> generations of inbreeding  <cit> . to produce a viable population it is essential that the individuals produced in the new habitat maintain the ability to respond to the threat of predation, recognise potential mates and adjust their mating behaviour according to the context  <cit> . failure to retain these behaviours, and variability in these behaviours, can lead to reproductive failure  <cit>  and may decrease the chances of success of a newly established introduced population  <cit> .

in this study we ask whether guppy females can successfully found a population at the outset of an invasion, when mating partners are scarce and forced monogamy is their only option. we report the results of an experiment in which we measure the ability of both singly-mated and multiply-mated females to found viable populations. we also examine the magnitude and variability of the behavioural responses of the progeny produced under these two treatments. this experiment is designed to mimic the conditions that prevail in the earliest stages of an invasion when single or very small groups of guppies are released into containers or small pools where no other fish are present.

RESULTS
population establishment
of the  <dig> mesocosm tanks,  <dig>  successfully established populations that still persisted one year after initial introduction. of the five extinctions, three were from the single and two from the multiple mating treatments. in all cases, the extinction was due to a failure of the female to establish a population at all; no offspring were ever recorded in these five tanks. population growth trajectories from the visual census data show no difference between the treatments . one year after establishment, the full census also showed no significant difference in final population size between those founded by singly or multiply-mated females .

male colouration diversity
mesocosm populations from the ‘multiple’ mating treatment showed significantly greater between-fish complementarity in colour patterns , thus suggesting that multiple mating had indeed led to multiple paternity in this treatment.

behavioural performance and variation
there was no significant difference in the antipredator performance of newborns descending from single or multiple mesocosms , or in the mating behaviour of male descendants .the results from the multivariate analysis of dispersion for juvenile antipredator performance revealed no significant variation within or between mating treatments . in terms of male mating behaviours, the analyses revealed a significant difference in variation in male mating behaviours between mesocosms  but not between mating treatments  .


treatment 

treatment 

error terms

total
**significant at the 1% level.


treatment 

treatment 

error terms

total
discussion
exotic species often find themselves in very small numbers in the early stages of invasion, which can limit mating opportunities  <cit> . for a species such as the guppy, which ordinarily employs a strategy of multiple mating, it might be expected that such forced monogamy would hinder success. however, in this study we found no evidence that single-mating impeded the colonisation success of female founders. this suggests that multiple mating is not critical to the invasion success of the guppy. instead, it may be the degree of variability in mating strategies that contribute to their remarkable global success.

several studies have shown that multiply-mated females produce larger broods with greater viability than singly-mated females  <cit> . these benefits could influence the success of establishing new viable populations. our results, however, reveal that forced monogamy did not affect the chance of establishment or behavioural viability in our guppies. both treatments showed extremely high establishment success rates after 12 months  and there was no difference in growth trajectory or population size. guppies are plastic in response to environmental changes, including life history traits such as number of offspring  <cit> . a difference between our study and earlier work is that previous studies have been designed to track each generation and compare within a generation  <cit> . the design of our study meant that the offspring we were comparing could potentially range between f <dig> to f <dig>  the purpose here was to compare freely breeding populations, to mimic an introduction scenario, but this may also have added variability to both treatments. for this reason, we should be cautious in making direct comparisons between our results and those of previous studies.

the remarkable establishment success of the guppy, and specifically the ability of single females to found viable populations, has been previously demonstrated with wild caught fish  <cit> . here, we have taken this a step further by manipulating the mating opportunities of the founding females, replicating an early-stage introduction scenario in which the allee effect is predicted to act against success  <cit> . allee effects describe any reduction in individual fitness as a consequence of low population density  <cit> . the lack of mating opportunities when population size is low is one such effect  <cit> , and for introduced guppies may mean that the usual strategy of multiple mating is no longer an option. as well as benefits of multiple mating, potential costs also exist  <cit> . for example, the female in our multiple treatment may have experienced higher levels of harassment and/or more mating attempts than the female who was presented with the same male each day  <cit> . however, it is generally accepted that the benefits of multiple mating to the female tend to outweigh such costs. our results indicate that even those females denied the option of multiple mating, and consequently the associated fecundity benefits, can still found viable populations. this suggests that female multiple mating is not critical to colonization success and does not reduce behavioural viability, at least in the initial establishment stages of the invasion process.

furthermore, behaviours critical to survival and viability were maintained in these populations; twelve months after the female founder was introduced, offspring displayed antipredator behaviours at a similar frequency in both treatments. similarly, male descendants  from both treatments courted females with equal levels of vigour.

despite the genetic basis for courtship traits appearing to leave little scope for the manifestation of severe inbreeding effects  <cit> , previous studies have demonstrated that between  <dig> and  <dig> generations of full-sibling inbreeding can be sufficient to detect reductions in male courtship vigour in the guppy  <cit>  and other poeciliid species  <cit> , specifically in terms of frequency of sigmoid displays and time spent following females. we, however, found no evidence of this in our mesocosm populations. because we did not track generation in our experiment, it is possible that the levels of inbreeding  were insufficient to cause behavioural differences. ours is not the only study that did not find evidence of inbreeding effects on male mating behaviour in guppies  <cit> , and it has been shown that rather than relatedness, the type and frequency of mating behaviour employed by male guppies is highly plastic in response to social and environmental cues  <cit> . tested males came from populations with similar environmental and social conditions, which is likely to play a more important role than the treatments in determining variation in sexual behaviour  <cit> . it is also possible that genetic bottlenecks in the history of the laboratory population may have served to purge deleterious alleles, resulting in a natural tolerance for high levels of inbreeding  <cit> .

by retaining antipredator behaviours and courtship behaviours despite descending from just two individual founders, these populations are well equipped for survival, persistence and potential invasive spread. this is of particular relevance to a typical introduction scenario where few individuals are introduced into a well or trough for mosquito control purposes. the speed at which the mesocosm populations established and grew suggests that such populations are likely to be well established by the point at which they find an opportunity to escape to natural water bodies, for example during floods or monsoon rains  <cit> , and our findings indicate that at this stage they will have retained the behaviours that facilitate their survival.

in addition to the magnitude of behavioural performance, extent of behavioural variation was also the same in both treatments. maintaining greater within-brood variation has been postulated as one of the potential advantages of a multiple mating strategy in an introduction situation, as it could maximise the variation on which natural selection could act – especially in a novel or changing environment  <cit> . however, we found no evidence of reduced behavioural variation in the singly-mated treatment, despite the fact that we did detect reduced colour-pattern variation in the males from these tanks. that variation is maintained in behavioural traits despite the loss of genetic variation at this early stage of invasion is impressive, and may be relevant to the success of the guppy as an invasive species. it has recently been demonstrated that phenotypic diversity in guppies is maintained through negative frequency-dependent selection in which rare male phenotypes are favoured  <cit> . this mechanism could help explain the lack of differences in the behavioural dispersion between males from the two treatments.

our study used guppies descended from a population historically exposed to ‘high predation’ conditions. although previous work indicates that evolutionary history linked to predation regime is not critical to establishment success  <cit> , guppy populations are diverse and all will not necessarily show the responses documented here.

CONCLUSIONS
multiple mating does not appear to be critical to colonisation success in the guppy. even when founders are restricted to just one male and one female, resulting populations thrive, at the colonization stage at least. instead, it seems likely that rapid initial population growth is critical as it may both help minimize loss of behavioural variation as well as increasing propagule pressure early on in the invasion process  <cit> . these findings hold particular interest for scenarios, such as those commonplace in southern india and parts of africa  <cit> , where guppies and other poeciliids are being introduced into water containers for mosquito control. here, it is the initial stage of population establishment and persistence which is critical to their ability to spread into natural ecosystems at a later date – sometimes with disastrous consequences.

