BACKGROUND
in a host–parasite relationship at equilibrium, parasite fitness is optimized and costs to the host are minimized. disequilibrium of this relationship can cause harm to the host in the case of heightened virulence  <cit> , or conversely, rejection of the parasite caused by heightened host immunity  <cit> . aggressive host environments  have been shown to decrease parasite fitness. for example, reduced reproductive output in ticks  is associated with feeding on more resistant hosts  <cit> . increased parasite fitness while parasitizing more susceptible hosts is also observed in the differential developmental rates of the parasitic copepods caligus rogercresseyi and lepeophtheirus salmonis while infecting susceptible species , compared with that of resistant species  <cit> . in addition, fewer low molecular weight proteases  are secreted by l. salmonis in response to mucus from resistant salmon  relative to that from more susceptible hosts such as s. salar or o. mykiss  <cit>  indicating that in addition to reducing reproductive output and development rate, an aggressive host response may also interfere with physiological responses associated with parasite feeding.

the salmon louse, l. salmonis, is a naturally occurring parasitic copepod that parasitizes anadromous salmonids belonging to the genera oncorhynchus and salmo spp, and is consequently an important pest of salmonid mariculture  throughout the northern hemisphere with sub-species in the pacific  and atlantic  oceans  <cit> . during heavy infestations, degradation of the epidermis and mucosal layer leads to osmoregulatory distress, anaemia, lethargy, secondary infections and a general stress response . resistance to the parasite varies among juvenile salmon such that coho salmon   <cit>  and pink salmon   display a resistant phenotype characterized by well-developed inflammation at the attachment site, rapid parasite rejection and limited additional pathology. in contrast, atlantic salmon  , chum salmon  , and sockeye salmon   <cit>  display a susceptible phenotype characterized by weak or absent local inflammation, higher parasite burden and associated pathology.

the differing host responses to the salmon louse suggest that there are also host-specific parasite responses. behavioural studies indicate a preference of l. salmonis for salmonid over non-salmonid hosts  <cit> , and in particular a preference for atlantic salmon  <cit> . secretions from l. salmonis elicited by atlantic salmon mucus or dopamine extraction contain prostaglandin e <dig>  and trypsin proteases, which are potent immune-modulators  <cit> . however, there are many questions that remain including the mechanisms involved in the differential host responses, and whether the secretion of virulence factors is influenced by the host species. furthermore, most of the foundational studies on the differences in susceptibility in hosts  have not considered the co-evolutionary history of the host-parasite relationship.

there is a significant knowledge gap regarding the response of the salmon louse during feeding. to this end, we applied a transcriptomic approach to assess the effect of host resistance on louse feeding responses. we hypothesized that the transcriptomic feeding response on more susceptible species  would be enhanced in virulence factors and fitness-related pathways  relative to that elicited by a resistant species . however, our results indicate a specific enhanced response to atlantic salmon that was not explained by host acclimation but that may be due to differences in co-evolutionary history of the parasite and the hosts.

RESULTS
using a l. salmonis 38 k oligonucleotide microarray  designed with expressed sequence tags  from l. salmonis salmonis and l. salmonis oncorhynchi  <cit> , we detected  <dig>  probes that passed quality control filters. excluding duplicate probes, this included  <dig>  unique transcripts. differences in the expression of these genes were investigated l. salmonis infecting atlantic, coho, or sockeye salmon and in lice withheld from a host .fig.  <dig> experimental design. in the host-effect hypothesis experiment  atlantic , coho , and sockeye  salmon were infected with l. salmonis sourced during commercial atlantic salmon harvest. a sub-set of unattached lice served as the starved  control. at  <dig> and 48 h lice  were removed from every species and processed for down-stream microarray and rt-qpcr analysis. in the acclimation hypothesis experiment  l. salmonis were sourced from atlantic salmon  during harvest as well as from sockeye salmon  from a test fishery. lice from each species  were used to infect both atlantic and sockeye salmon. at  <dig> and 48 h, lice  were removed and processed for downstream rt-qpcr analysis




profiling the feeding response of the salmon louse
the total number of differentially expressed genes  at  <dig> and  <dig> hpi in lice parasitizing each host  was compared to a group of lice withheld from hosts . the feeding response of l. salmonis was determined by identifying degs common to lice parasitizing salmon regardless of species . gene ontology analysis of overexpressed feeding degs revealed enrichment in biological processes such as proteolysis , hatching , blood coagulation , oxidation reduction , and collagen metabolic process  .fig.  <dig> profiling the feeding response of l. salmonis. overexpressed transcripts in lice feeding on atlantic, coho or sockeye salmon relative to starved lice were compared to produce a list of unique genes involved in the feeding response of l. salmonis. these genes were analyzed using david to produce go enrichment results after a  <dig> and b  <dig> hpi. afold enrichment




using rps-blast and the conserved domain database  <cit>  as previously described  <cit> , conserved domains were identified within the feeding response genes. this analysis revealed  <dig> distinct domains overexpressed at  <dig> hpi with frequently identified domains including “trypsin-like” , “saposin-like” , and “cysteine-like” . at  <dig> hpi there were  <dig> distinct domains, with the most frequently identified domains including “trypsin-like”  and “glutathione peroxidase-like” . as expected, these domains are associated with feeding and digestion. the “trypsin-like serine protease” domain  was present in  <dig> genes including trypsin- <dig>  collagenase, chymotrypsin b <dig>  coagulation factor ix and hypodermin b. also well represented were “peptidase” domains, including “peptidase c1” , “peptidase c13” , “peptidase s28” , “peptidase m13” , and “peptidase m14”  .

although expression of these transcripts was evident during feeding on salmon regardless of species, atlantic-fed lice exhibited the highest expression of proteolytic-, metabolic- , and reproductive-associated  genes .fig.  <dig> enhanced transcriptomic response in atlantic-fed lice. hierarchical clustering of transcripts at  <dig> hpi enriched in go biological process categories of a proteolysis, b oxidative reduction, and c hatching revealed an enhanced response specific to l. salmonis feeding on atlantic salmon . expression levels are mean log <dig> normalized intensities of each transcript, with red and green representing low and high expression, respectively. these genes were significantly differentially expressed in response to feeding on atlantic salmon compared to starved 




some specific transcripts were identified in atlantic-fed lice that may be related to virulence in the salmon louse. for example, we detected a “phospholipase a <dig> bee venom-like” domain  that was overexpressed at  <dig> hpi in atlantic-fed lice compared to either coho- or sockeye-fed lice . additionally, “saposin b-like” domains , known to be important in lipid-interacting proteins such as nk-lysins, were well represented on the array , and expression of this gene was significantly higher in atlantic-fed lice  compared to coho-fed lice , while sockeye-fed lice expression of these domains did not pass the fold-change filter.

profiling the starvation response of the salmon louse
to determine the response to starvation, we evaluated overexpressed transcripts in starved lice compared to lice feeding on salmon, regardless of species. degs overexpressed in starved relative to salmon-fed lice represented the starvation response . there were  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts overexpressed in starved l. salmonis at  <dig> and 48 h, respectively. gene ontology analysis of these unique “starved” degs revealed one significantly enriched category at 24 h , and nine categories at 48 h including negative regulation of transcription , cell differentiation , and sarcomere organization  .

host-specific feeding responses of the salmon louse
we then assessed the host-specific responses of l. salmonis by focusing on the degs with fc ≥  <dig>  in atlantic- compared to either coho- or sockeye-fed lice. in atlantic-fed lice, an enhanced response was identified with an enrichment for digestion, reproduction and energy metabolism. conversely in either coho- or sockeye-fed lice, the response was enriched for skeletal and sensory system development , or cytoskeletal organization, regulation of growth and nucleosome organization  .

at  <dig> hpi the most significantly enriched go category in atlantic-fed lice  was proteolysis , and included proteases , carboxypeptidases , and matrix metalloproteases  . in coho-fed lice, the most significantly enriched go category  was cytoskeletal organization  and included genes like troponin c isoform  <dig>  and myosin heavy chain. in sockeye-fed lice, the most significantly enriched go category  was skeletal system development  and included genes like zinc finger protein  <dig>  and bone morphogenetic protein 2-b .table  <dig> proteolytic genes specific to atlantic-fed lice


carboxypeptidase b

chymotrypsin a chain c
1

chymotrypsin bi
1

coagulation factor ix
1

collagenase
1

cytosolic non-specific dipeptidase
3

dipeptidyl peptidase 4
1

hypodermin-b
1

legumain
1

neprilysin-2
2

ovochymase-1
1

probable cysteine proteinase at3g43960
1

putative serine protease k12h <dig> 
2

trypsin-1
5

trypsin-like serine protease
2

zinc carboxypeptidase a 1
3
proteases that were significantly upregulated in atlantic-fed lice compared to either coho- or sockeye-fed lice are shown 


agenes with similar annotation but from a different contig


bcompared to pacific salmon  at  <dig> hpi




at  <dig> hpi, there was no significant enrichment of biological processes in coho- or sockeye-fed lice, whereas enriched pathways remained abundant and highly populated in atlantic-fed lice. some of the most pronounced overexpression specific to atlantic-fed lice was observed in the genes involved in energy metabolism and protein synthesis, including genes enriched in the go category oxidative reduction , including cytochrome c oxidase subunit  <dig>  and  <dig> , and cytochrome b . additionally, genes associated with protein synthesis such as ribosomal protein p <dig> and 60s ribosomal protein l <dig>  were significantly overexpressed in atlantic-fed lice  .

enrichment of genes associated with reproductive-type processes was also specific to atlantic-fed lice and included the biological process go categories of hatching , female pregnancy , blastocyst development  and blastocyst hatching . these categories were enriched in the response to atlantic salmon but not to either coho or sockeye salmon, and included genes such as placental protein  <dig>  neutral ceramidase, granulin- <dig>  and estrogen sulfotransferase .

to characterize genes responding differently over time during infection with each species, k-means clustering of degs was performed and this further indicated the responses of sockeye- and coho-fed lice were similar to the starved lice and distinct from the atlantic-fed lice. in one of the five clusters,  <dig> transcripts associated with stress, including heat shock protein  <dig>  t-complex protein  <dig> subunit alpha, heat shock protein ssa <dig>  and heat shock protein homolog ecu03_ <dig> were up-regulated over time in coho- and sockeye-fed lice while down-regulated in atlantic-fed lice . transcripts involved in feeding, energy metabolism and reproduction were most highly expressed while feeding on atlantic salmon . thus the feeding response of l. salmonis indicated that atlantic salmon is the most desirable host compared coho or sockeye salmon.fig.  <dig> similar expression profiles over time of stress-related transcripts in coho-fed, sockeye-fed and starved l. salmonis. using k-means clustering analysis, genes associated with stress were shown to be up-regulated over time in lice feeding on coho and sockeye salmon, and by lice withheld from hosts . in contrast, these genes were down-regulated over time in lice feeding on atlantic salmon


fig.  <dig> enhanced expression of feeding and energy in atlantic-fed lice. differentially expressed transcripts identified by the microarray were profiled using rt-qpcr. expression of genes involved in proteolysis/digestion  and energy metabolism  are shown as log <dig> calibrated normalized relative quantities . expression in atlantic-fed lice  increased over time  and was significantly higher than in coho-fed  or sockeye-fed  lice. expression of sk-fed and co-fed lice was not significantly different from starved lice . significance was identified by two-way anova  followed by post-hoc tukey hsd test to determine pairwise significance. within a time point, lower-case letters denote differences between groups where groups that do not share a letter are significantly different. asterisks denote differences within a group between time points




temporal activation of the feeding response
we hypothesized that while parasitizing a more optimal host, responses associated with increased fitness  would increase over time . the responses of atlantic-fed lice increased over time, measured by the number of degs and the magnitude of expression of the degs. in contrast, the response in coho-fed or sockeye-fed lice either did not change, or was reduced. there was significant enrichment of up-regulated genes in the biological process categories such as proteolysis, digestion, and oxidative reduction in atlantic-fed lice while enrichment of down-regulated transcripts was only observed in coho-fed lice. there was no enrichment for up- or down-regulation over time in sockeye-fed lice .table  <dig> enrichment in genes over time  in feeding l. salmonis


increasing over time - atlantic-fed l. salmonis
decreasing over time - coho-fed l. salmonis

afold enrichment




conserved domain analysis was used to characterize the types of genes that were significantly different over time. of the  <dig> genes affected by time ,  <dig> were unannotated,  <dig> were annotated with domains, while  <dig> were annotated but did not contain a conserved domain. in total,  <dig> domains were present in the genes significantly overexpressed by l. salmonis over time . most domains were only represented by one gene, although  <dig> genes contained “trypsin-like serine protease”  domains, and  <dig> contained “peptidase m <dig> carboxypeptidase subfamily a/b-like” , “fkbp-type peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase” , and “fasciclin”  domains. genes with “trypsin-like serine protease” domains included trypsin- <dig>  ovochymase- <dig>  neurotrypsin, chymotrypsin a, and trypsin-like serine protease. importantly, although these genes changed over time and contained similar protein domains, they did not change in the same way. for example, expression of trypsin- <dig> increased over time in atlantic-fed lice, and either declined or remained constant in coho- or sockeye-fed lice. in contrast, expression of ovochymase- <dig> increased in sockeye-fed lice, but remained constant in atlantic- or coho-fed lice.

positively correlated expression profiles were observed for genes containing other domains. for example, genes with the “metallocarboxypeptidase” domain  were both down-regulated over time in coho-fed lice, and although expression in sockeye-fed lice did not pass fold-change filters, there was a trend towards negative regulation for both these genes .

several other domains associated with proteolytic-enzymes were up-regulated over time only in atlantic-fed lice including “peptidase m <dig> carboxypeptidase subfamily n/e-like” , “zinc-dependent metalloprotease astacin-like subfamily” , “papain family cysteine protease” , and “serine carboxypeptidase s28” .

one gene, tyrosine aminotransferase , was concordantly down-regulated over time in atlantic- , coho-  or sockeye-fed lice , indicating this gene is involved in the starvation stress response. similarly, the “alpha crystallin” domain  was specifically associated with starvation.

enhanced transcriptomic response to atlantic salmon is not explained by acclimation
we considered the possibility that enhanced transcriptomic responses in atlantic-fed lice were explained by acclimation to the host species, as the parasites had been collected from atlantic salmon. in a follow-up experiment, we assessed the expression of a subset of genes identified from the microarray experiment described above by exposing atlantic and sockeye salmon to lice collected from either atlantic or sockeye salmon . in the event of acclimation, we predicted enhanced responses in lice attached to salmon belonging to the same species as the source host. contrary to this, our results showed enhanced responses of atlantic-fed lice regardless of the source host species, for genes associated with protein synthesis , metabolism , and proteolysis . this indicates that the observed trends in expression were not due to acclimation, but rather to host-specific factors.

validation of the microarray
to confirm findings from microarray analyses, transcript abundance was analyzed for a sub-set of degs using rt-qpcr. genes with potential relation to feeding and energy production in l. salmonis were chosen for validation. there was high correlation between the rt-qpcr and microarray data . additionally, temporal trends observed in the genes from atlantic-fed lice by microarray analysis were also detected by rt-qpcr analysis which showed overexpression of proteases , mitochondrial enzymes , ribosomal proteins , and oxidative stress-associated genes . in contrast, in the rt-qpcr results, the overexpression of stress-associated genes  was specific to starved lice.fig.  <dig> enhanced expression of protein synthesis and oxidative-stress genes in atlantic-fed lice. differentially expressed transcripts identified by the microarray were profiled using rt-qpcr, and are shown as log <dig> calibrated normalized relative quantities . expression of genes involved in protein synthesis  and oxidative stress  were the highest in at-fed lice and increased over time .  expression of two genes associated with stress were highest in starved lice compared to either at-, co- or sk-fed lice. significance was identified by two-way anova  followed by post-hoc tukey test to determine pairwise significance. within a time point, lower-case letters denote differences between groups where groups that do not share a letter are significantly different. asterisks denote differences within a group between time points




discussion
this study tested the hypothesis that transcriptomic responses of adult female l. salmonis on susceptible salmon are enhanced relative to the responses measured on resistant salmon. furthermore, we predicted that characteristics of the enhanced response would be consistent with parasite fitness. compared to atlantic salmon-fed lice, differential expression of genes in lice feeding on either the susceptible or resistant pacific salmon species was relatively weak with low magnitude fold-changes and sparsely populated gene ontology categories. moreover, in lice feeding on the pacific salmonids, there was no increase in the response over time and often gene expression profiles were more similar to those observed in starved l. salmonis . the similarity of transcriptional responses in the pacific salmon-fed lice, despite differences in natural resistance of coho and sockeye salmon to l. salmonis, indicates that host resistance status does not explain the differential parasite response. we considered the possibility that the enhanced transcriptomic response in lice feeding on atlantic salmon was because of host acclimation as the lice were originally collected from atlantic salmon  <cit> . this possibility was addressed by conducting a reciprocal host exposure study using lice collected from sockeye salmon or atlantic salmon. in the event of acclimation, we expected an enhanced parasite response when lice were allowed to feed on the species from which they had been collected. however, we consistently observed that lice responded strongly to atlantic salmon, irrespective of the source host species, thus corroborating the host-effect hypothesis and further illustrating the desirability of atlantic salmon to the pacific salmon louse.

the characteristics of the transcriptomic response to atlantic salmon suggest increased parasite fitness. host blood is a main dietary component of the adult female salmon louse  <cit>  suggesting a need for haemolytic enzymes and anti-coagulants to maintain a free flow of blood to the site of feeding as observed for other hematophagous parasites . our data show that proteolytic and other digestive-associated enzymes were a major component of the salmon louse response to atlantic salmon . the overexpression of cathepsin l, trypsin- <dig>  neprilysin- <dig>  carboxypeptidase b, zinc carboxypeptidase a <dig>  and legumain was more pronounced on atlantic-fed l. salmonis, consistent with earlier reports of the secretion of proteases by this parasite . many of these genes are known virulence factors in other ectoparasites, and modulate the host immune response during feeding: cathepsin l is a virulence factor found in numerous parasites  that suppresses the host immune response while aiding in tissue digestion  <cit> ; legumain is important in blood digestion  <cit> ; neprilysin is associated with regulating inflammation  <cit> ; and carboxypeptidase-b prevents clotting and inhibits inflammation . these virulence factors likely provide similar functions for l. salmonis.

we detected the expression of several other feeding-associated genes in l. salmonis that may represent virulence factors based on functions observed in other organisms. for example phospholipase a <dig>  associated with feeding on atlantic salmon, is an important constituent of bee and snake venom  <cit>  and is also found in the secretions of hematophagous ectoparasites  <cit> . interestingly, pla <dig> induces a type- <dig> immune response in mice  <cit>  and possesses potent hemolytic activity  <cit> . another potential virulence factor detected in feeding lice was l-amino acid oxidase, a toxin found in snake venoms  <cit> . at  <dig> hpi, this gene was overexpressed in feeding l. salmonis irrespective of the host species. finally, a saposin-b like protein was significantly overexpressed in the feeding salmon louse transcriptome, and most highly by parasites feeding on atlantic salmon. saposin-like proteins  have been described from fasciola spp.  <cit> , schistosoma mansoni  <cit> , entamoeba histolytica  <cit> , and amblyomma americanum  <cit>  and are involved in cytolysis and lipid metabolism  <cit> . the high abundance of unique contigs containing the saposin-like protein domain indicates a need to further characterize the function of saplips in l. salmonis. similarly, the potential for hemorrhagic, fibrinolytic, cytolytic, and apoptotic effects, among others, warrants further investigation of the role of l-amino acid oxidase and pla <dig> in the salmon louse.

genes related to oxidative stress and iron homeostasis  were up-regulated in feeding l. salmonis, and expression was highest on atlantic salmon. in crustaceans, copper is critical as a cofactor for enzymes involved in many physiological processes including oxidative phosphorylation and mobilization of iron  <cit> . the mitochondrial enzyme cytochrome c oxidase  is a particularly abundant cuproprotein  <cit> . we observed prominent overexpression of metabolism-associated genes including cytochrome c oxidase  in lice feeding on atlantic salmon. enhanced mitochondrial activity, combined with significant overexpression of protein synthesis-related genes , indicate that feeding on atlantic salmon was associated with pronounced metabolic activity.

enhanced reproductive output is another proxy for higher parasite fitness, which influences host-choice and parasite virulence  <cit> . the salmon louse has been shown to prefer atlantic salmon, and parasite reproductive output and growth rates are increased while parasitizing atlantic salmon compared to coho salmon  <cit> . we provide evidence for enrichment of reproductive-associated transcripts  in l. salmonis feeding on atlantic salmon. further to this, enrichment for reproduction-like pathways was only present in atlantic-fed lice compared to either coho- or sockeye-fed lice.

we show distinct responses to atlantic and pacific salmonids, possibly reflecting alternative mechanisms by which the parasite contributes to the outcome of infection. the enhanced exploitation of atlantic salmon may be due to differences in host-specific factors such as skin structure  or physiology , or due to reduced genetic diversity in farmed populations  <cit> . furthermore, coevolution of the pacific louse subspecies with pacific salmon for between  <dig>  and  <dig> ma  <cit>  may have led to adaptations in the host-parasite relationships including variations in natural host resistance among salmon species, similar to what is observed in other host-parasite systems  <cit> , and possibly related to host life history strategies  and life stages  <cit> . for example, juvenile chum and sockeye salmon support high infections with l. salmonis and exhibit weakened cellular and humoral inflammatory responses at the louse attachment site, compared to those of juvenile coho or pink salmon . coho salmon also exhibit heightened resistance towards other ectoparasitic copepods  <cit> . similarly, juvenile pink salmon display a resistant phenotype that results in rapid rejection of the parasite  <cit> . however mature pink salmon lose much of this natural resistance  <cit> , and large abundances of the parasite are observed on mature pink salmon  <cit> .

our data support the hypothesis that atlantic salmon provides a host environment more permissive for l. salmonis fitness as shown by overexpression of transcripts related to virulence factors, energy metabolism, and reproduction. functional enrichment for reproduction was observed during louse infection of atlantic relative to either coho or sockeye. high energy metabolism is correlated with high reproductive output, and as such parasites have evolved to prefer hosts in which they are able to extract the highest available energy and maximize reproductive output  <cit> . energy metabolism and reproductive output may be used as a proxy for the relative nutritional value of the host and our data suggest the nutritional gain from atlantic salmon exceeded that from coho or sockeye salmon. balancing host immunity with nutritive value is a driver of parasite host-specificity observed in many host-parasite relationships  <cit> , and may explain the observed host preference of l. salmonis for atlantic salmon.

CONCLUSIONS
understanding host-specific feeding responses of l. salmonis may help explain the variable outcomes of infection among host species that have previously been associated with diverse host responses, such as the delayed or muted inflammation in atlantic, chum and sockeye salmon . contrary to our original expectations, the responses were similar for parasites feeding on coho or sockeye salmon, despite differences in their susceptibility, but differed strongly with those of lice feeding on atlantic salmon. we suggest that the prolonged evolutionary relationship between l. salmonis oncorhynchi and oncorhynchus spp. explains the more limited capacity for parasite response. in contrast, the non-native atlantic salmon elicits an enhanced parasite feeding response, which may dampen local host response mechanisms and facilitate an environment more conducive to parasite fitness. the identification of host-specific factors involved in enhanced functional and transcriptomic lice responses  will further improve our knowledge on this system. furthermore, a comparison of the responses of the atlantic salmon louse  on pacific and atlantic salmonids will be valuable to confirm the role of co-evolutionary host-parasite interactions in enhanced parasite fitness.

