BACKGROUND
high quality intact rna is an essential requirement for gene expression studies. the extent of rna degradation is of major concern for studies analysing tissues that have been subjected to a long post-mortem delay. recent studies have suggested that the stability of rna in post-mortem tissue varies with the type of tissue and the post-mortem tissue storage conditions  <cit> . several studies also suggested that even a considerable delay in processing of tissues may not adversely affect the rna integrity as reflected in the abundance of specific messenger rna  transcripts  <cit> . in the bovine, in spite of the potential application of rna technology in investigating the underlying biochemical pathways of determining post-mortem meat quality, meat authentication and forensics, the feasibility of recovering intact rna from tissues from commercial meat plant where availability of tissue samples often involve a time lag due to carcass processing, or from meat samples after a long post-mortem delay such as those from a retail market chain, has not been investigated. since the post-mortem stability of an mrna population can not be generalised  <cit> , knowledge of tissue specific stability of mrna transcripts of interest is essential for evaluating the usefulness of post-mortem tissues for gene expression studies.

gene expression profiling holds great potential for unravelling complex biological traits in livestock including the interaction of dietary nutrients in gene expression  <cit>  and the downstream implications on meat quality attributes  <cit> . although knowledge of real time expression of genes in the live animal can only be generated through functional analysis of biologically active tissues ideally obtained through biopsy, gene expression studies frequently need to be conducted on post-mortem tissues, which may often be subjected to various lengths of post-mortem delay  <cit> . for example, gene expression studies in bovine tissues undergoing long post-mortem delay are often inevitable for studying the post-mortem changes determining meat quality traits like tenderness, flavour and juiciness  <cit> .

with the availability of the bovine genome sequence database and the advent of commercially available microarray and snp-chips, the role of novel candidate gene/genes in animal health, nutrition and physiology are being investigated. animal nutri-genomic studies involving the expression of genes in animal tissues due to the action of dietary nutrients has potential applications in developing gene expression based bio-markers for livestock production and authentication  <cit> . genes whose expression can be influenced by dietary components from different production systems of livestock like the retinol binding protein gene  <dig>   <cit>  and the stearoyl-coa desaturase gene   <cit>  in cattle, have the potential to serve as bio-markers of different production systems. the expression of the rbp <dig> gene in the bovine tissue is likely to reflect the dietary intake of β-carotene, which is abundant in fresh grasses  <cit> . similarly, expression of the scd gene occurs due to dietary inclusion of feedstuffs rich in essential fatty acids derived from natural sources such as fresh grasses and plant and fish oils  <cit> . consequently, the expression levels of these two genes have the potential to serve as biomarkers for grass-based production systems in bovine tissues.

the tissue specific variation of rna stability in laboratory animals and humans subjected to various length of post-mortem time has been extensively investigated in forensics  <cit>  and human disease diagnosis  <cit> . however, in the bovine, the potential of recovering biologically useful rna remains unexplored. rna stability during post-mortem storage of animal tissues in general and of bovine tissues consumed as meat in particular, remains mostly unknown since time-points beyond  <dig> h were not investigated in previous studies. it is a normal practice for beef to be consumed after 2– <dig> weeks due to the fact that an elaborate meat tenderization process occurs over this time period. this experiment was designed to mimic the real life situation  from the slaughtering of the animal to the length of time when meat is made available to consumers in retail outlets. the objective of this experiment was to qualitatively and quantitatively assess the integrity of total and mrna extracted from bovine skeletal muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and liver stored at 4°c at a range of time points up to  <dig> days post-mortem. these tissue storage conditions were designed to mimic the environment prevailing during the transport of beef from the abattoir to retail outlets.

RESULTS
stability of total rna in skeletal muscle
a similar total rna stability pattern was observed in all four animals used in this study in skeletal muscle samples. intact 28s ribosomal rna  was apparent up to  <dig> days and 18s rrna up to  <dig> days post-mortem as determined by agarose gel electrophoresis . this was consistent with the banding pattern generated with the agilent bioanalyzer. the appearance of conspicuous low molecular weight bands at  <dig> days post-mortem indicated that some rna degradation had occurred after  <dig> days post-mortem .

the rate of change of the intensity of the two major rrna molecules over  <dig> days post-mortem was determined by exponential regression analysis . the high molecular weight rrna  was less stable than low molecular weight rrna  during post-mortem storage. the pattern of change in the ratio of the 28s:18s rrna over the post-mortem time period, as calculated by the exponential regression analysis, indicated that the 28s:18s ratio decreased by 50% after  <dig>  days post-mortem .

 change in the intensity of 18s rrna of the skeletal muscle after  <dig> days post-mortem, exponential model failed to fit the 18s data)

stability of mrna in skeletal muscle
the reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain reaction  products of two housekeeping genes  and two diet-related genes  were detectable on agarose gels and had uniform band intensities over the  <dig> days post-mortem . the real time quantitative rt-pcr  data were analysed by genorm and norm finder  to measure the overall stability of gapdh, actb, rbp <dig> and scd gene transcripts in post-mortem skeletal muscle . both methods assigned the highest stability  to actb among the four genes. on the other hand, rbp <dig> gene was the most unstable in post-mortem skeletal muscle. the stability ranking of gapdh and scd genes slightly differed between the two methods of analysis.

the normalised relative abundance of rbp <dig> and scd gene transcripts in post-mortem skeletal muscle clearly showed that compared to  <dig> h time-point, after  <dig> days post-mortem, there was an increase in the relative abundances of rbp <dig> and scd genes . the relative abundance pattern of these two genes indicated that deterioration of total rna quality as characterised by disappearance of 28s rrna after  <dig> days post-mortem  had no adverse affect on the relative abundances of these two genes.

stability of total rna in adipose tissue
the 28s and 18s rrna molecules were intact at  <dig> h post-mortem in adipose tissue in all animals. however, there was a high intra- and inter-animal variability in the intensities of the two rrna bands on agarose gel . the rna stability profile of the four animals indicated that after  <dig> h post-mortem, there was substantial variation in the degradation of the 28s rrna. although the 28s rrna degraded more quickly than 18s rrna in post-mortem adipose tissue, degradation of the latter was also evident during  <dig> days of post-mortem storage . the pattern of change in the ratio of the 28s:18s rrna over the post-mortem time period, as calculated by the exponential regression analysis, indicated that the 28s:18s ratio decreased by 50% after  <dig>  days post-mortem .

stability of mrna in subcutaneous adipose tissue
the rt-pcr products of the gapdh, actb, rbp <dig> and scd genes were visible on agarose gels , although the band intensities gradually decreased over time for all genes with the exception of rbp <dig>  the observed intra animal variability of gene transcripts as characterised by slightly variable band intensities across the time points may likely be due to the characteristics of adipose tissue samples which caused intra animal variability of total rna stability. adipose tissue characteristics such as different thickness of subcutaneous adipose tissue used for sampling at different time points could be a contributing factor to this intra animal variability. as analysed by genorm, the stability of gapdh and actb genes were closely similar to each other in post-mortem adipose tissue, however, slightly higher stability was assigned to the actb gene compared to the gapdh gene when the same data were analysed by norm finder . the rbp <dig> gene was the most unstable of the four gene transcripts evaluated in post-mortem adipose tissue . compared to the  <dig> h time-point, the normalised relative abundance of the rbp <dig> gene increased whereas that of the scd gene decreased over the  <dig> days post-mortem .

stability of total rna in liver
a rapid decline in the intensities of the 28s and 18s rrna bands after  <dig> h post-mortem indicated that rna was unstable in post-mortem liver . the 28s and 18s rrna degraded substantially after  <dig> h and  <dig> h post-mortem, respectively. the 28s rrna was not detectable after  <dig> h using the agilent bioanalyzer; therefore, quantification of total rna degradation in liver was performed only up to this time-point . short half-lives of both rrna molecules in post-mortem liver were evident . the 28s:18s ratio decreased by 50% after  <dig> h post-mortem .

stability of mrna in liver
the agarose gel electrophoresis of rt-pcr products indicated that the gene transcripts of gapdh, actb and scd genes rapidly decreased over time in post-mortem liver . however, the amplification was obtained up to  <dig> days post-mortem for the rbp <dig> gene. somewhat variable degrees of amplification also occurred at the later time points for gapdh, actb and scd genes which could be due to amplification of the gene transcript using too many  pcr amplification cycles. the overall stability of the gene transcripts, as determined by genorm and norm finder, indicated that gapdh, rbp <dig> and scd genes had closely similar stability and that the actb gene was the most unstable in post-mortem liver. the pattern of change in the relative abundances of rbp <dig> and scd genes showed a rapid decline after  <dig> h post-mortem .

discussion
the present study evaluated the qualitative and quantitative variations in the integrity of total rna and mrna of two common housekeeping genes  and two diet-related genes  in bovine skeletal muscle, adipose tissue and liver stored at 4°c for up to  <dig> days post-slaughter. the tissue storage conditions were designed to mimic the environment prevailing during the transportation of beef from the abattoir to retail outlets. tissue specific variation existed in the stability of 28s and 18s rrna in post-mortem bovine tissues. total rna was more stable in skeletal muscle compared to both adipose tissue and liver. similarly, real time rt-pcr analysis in these tissues revealed the presence of gene specific variation in the stability of mrna transcripts of gapdh, actb, rbp <dig> and scd genes.

the most surprising result of this study was the fact that total rna was present for  <dig> days and specific mrna transcripts were present for as long as  <dig> days post-mortem in skeletal muscle. in contrast, the rna transcripts degraded much more quickly in liver and adipose tissues. to our knowledge, there have been no previous investigations on the stability of total rna or specific gene transcripts in any biological tissue over such a long time period. previous studies have observed intact total rna in bovine reproductive tissues up to  <dig> h post-mortem at room temperature  <cit>  and in connective tissues and liver of rabbit up to  <dig> h post-mortem at 4°c  <cit> . rna stability at longer post-mortem times is unclear because time-points beyond  <dig> h were unreported in previous studies.

the underlying cellular mechanism that permits the rrna molecules to remain intact for a considerably long period of time in post-mortem bovine muscle at 4°c has not been ascertained. however, since the storage temperature, post-mortem ph and metabolic activeness of tissue can greatly influence the integrity of rna  <cit> , the high stability of rna in skeletal muscle could be due to a cellular microenvironment that is unfavourable to rapid degradation of rna molecules. skeletal muscle tissue is unusual in terms of its molecular activity post-mortem, as a series of biochemical pathways are actively involved in the meat tenderisation process  <cit> . in contrast, the low stability of total rna in liver may be due to some ribonuclease activity at 4°c since liver is a ribonuclease rich tissue in vivo  <cit> . in fact, highly unstable rna in mammalian liver has been previously reported  <cit> . the high inter-animal variation of rna stability in adipose tissue observed in this study may be due to the variable thickness of the subcutaneous adipose tissue layers whereby cellular nucleases, induced by the mechanical injury, may be associated in thin adipose tissue layers.

changes in the relative abundance of different mrna transcripts were observed throughout the 22-day experimental time period. for instance, the stability of the two housekeeping genes  was different in skeletal muscle with actb more stable than gapdh. variation in mrna stability has previously been observed in other mammalian tissues though gapdh mrna was more stable than actb in bovine uterine tissues  <cit>  and similar to each other in rat brain tissue  <cit> . the suitability of rna collected post-mortem for the expression of specific genes is ultimately determined by the presence of intact mrna populations containing the mrna transcripts of interest. even in the later collections of tissue where there was considerable 28s and 18s rrna degradation, mrna transcripts were still present for the diet-related genes of interest. this is in agreement with the findings previously been reported in micro-array hybridization  <cit>  and real time qrt-pcr assays  <cit> . recent findings on gene specific stability revealed wide variation among different species of mrna  <cit> . the stability of any specific mrna is highly influenced both by the primary and secondary structures of the transcript and the rate of translation in vivo  <cit> . the implication of this variation in rna stability over time is that it would not be appropriate to perform microarray experiments on these tissues and extrapolate the data back to studies of global gene expression in the live animal  <cit> . it would however, be of interest to identify the gene clusters and systems pathways that are still active during this time period as they are most likely fundamentally involved in biochemical pathways that influence parameters such as meat tenderisation, flavour etc.

the two major rrna molecules had somewhat variable stability where the 18s had higher stability compared to 28s in all three tissues. higher stability of 18s rrna molecules has been previously reported  <cit> . although the 28s:18s rrna ratio is a commonly used measure of total rna integrity  <cit> , our data suggests that the 28s:18s ratio is not a reliable marker for evaluating the suitability of tissue samples for gene expression analysis, especially when the 18s rrna also degrades. for example, it was observed that 28s:18s rrna ratio decreased from  <dig>   to  <dig>   in adipose tissue, whereas the same decreased from  <dig>   to  <dig>   in skeletal muscle. in the latter instance, the 18s rrna was highly stable and the decrease in 28s:18s was mostly due to a decrease in the intensity of 28s rrna molecules. unlike in skeletal muscle, in adipose tissue, as the 28s, the intensity of 18s rrna also decreased over time and due to this decrease , the 28s:18s ratio still remain high even after  <dig> days post-mortem. therefore, 28s:18s rrna ratio could be misleading in situations where both the rrna molecules degrade proportionately.

interestingly, the stability measurements indicated that rbp <dig> mrna was least stable in skeletal muscle and adipose tissues although there were substantial increases in the relative abundances of this gene in these two tissues up to  <dig> days post-mortem. this further showed that in these two tissues, the 28s:18s ratio of rna inadequately reflects the presence of specific mrna transcripts. whether the post-mortem relative abundance of the rbp <dig> mrna was due to a high stability of the mrna transcript or a continuous transcription of the gene, needs further research. recent work involving mrna stability of post-mortem mammalian tissues has shown that there are a subset of mrna that may increase with increasing post-mortem storage time  <cit>  which is in agreement with the observed high abundance of the rbp <dig> mrna. unlike skeletal muscle, the rbp <dig> mrna in liver degraded quickly. since mrna turnover is high in liver, the degradation of the majority of mrna species in post-mortem liver may occur quickly. in skeletal muscle, the scd mrna was also considerably unstable since the relative abundance of scd gene considerably increased after  <dig> days post-mortem. the scd mrna was least stable in the adipose tissue but the reason is unclear. a number of factors, including the cellular content of fatty acids, may influence the stability of scd mrna as demonstrated in adipocyte culture  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this experiment demonstrate that rna is more stable in post-mortem skeletal muscle at refrigeration temperature than adipose tissue and liver. quantitative gene expression analysis by real time rt-pcr showed that the relative abundance of gene transcripts in post-mortem tissues varies with the type of tissue and gene species. the skeletal muscle can be a suitable tissue for recovering biologically useful rna even if the tissue is subjected to post-mortem storage for weeks whereas adipose tissue and liver should be processed within  <dig> hours post-mortem.

