BACKGROUND
mobile genetic elements  play a fundamental role as drivers of genome evolution, shaping both genes and genomes and often constitute a large fraction of the genome . the mutagenic effects of mge behaviour are well documented and include a spectrum, from point mutations to whole genome restructuring. in addition, mges have occasionally become "domesticated" and evolved to fulfill essential functions in genome dynamics e.g. telomerase  <cit> . consequently, mges and their derivatives have been identified in almost all organisms. laboratory evidence has repeatedly demonstrated that mges can have either a beneficial  <cit>  or detrimental  <cit>  effect on the host's fitness depending on the downstream effects of transposition. to counteract the detrimental effects, some organisms have developed protective mechanisms against invading mges, such as the repeat-induced point  mutation system in neurospora crassa, which silences repetitive elements by methylation and subsequent mutation of cytidine to thymidine nucleotides  <cit> . this explains the unusual situation in n. crassa where very few, if any, active mges have been detected.

mges are usually classified according to their mechanism of replication and whether they are autonomous  or non-autonomous   <cit> . the two broad groups are those which are mobile via either a dna or rna mechanism . the dna group makes use of a self-encoded transposase that facilitates excision and integration from one site to another, while the rna group utilizes an rna intermediate and represents a more functionally and evolutionarily diverse group of elements. mges employing an rna intermediate use reverse transcription to re-invade the genome, increasing their copy number along the way. in the rna group, long terminal repeat  retrotransposons are evolutionarily related to retroviruses while the non-ltr retrotransposons form a discrete group and transpose via a unique target primed reverse transcription  mechanism  <cit> . an offshoot of the non-ltr retrotransposons is the non-autonomous non-ltr retrotransposon group. these elements lack the enzymatic machinery for self-replication and mobilization and their survival depends on hijacking the replicative machinery of active non-ltr retrotransposons. mge open reading frames  code for the relevant enzymes that are required for replication and transposition .

another intriguing group of mobile elements are the mobile introns. divided into three groups based on their mechanisms of mobility , these are evolutionarily ancient mges and are believed to be the progenitors of non-ltr retrotransposons and eukaryotic spliceosomes. the group ii introns have an extraordinary array of enzyme activity, including reverse transcriptase, maturase, rnase h and endonuclease activity as well as functional ribozymes. to date, group ii introns have only been found in organellar genomes  and a few cyanobacteria.

very little is known about the occurrence of mges in plasmodium species and the role they may have played in the evolution of the parasites' genomes. initial reports after sequencing of the p. falciparum and p. y. yoelii genomes suggested that there may be a complete absence of mges in p. falciparum and no comment was made about mges in p. y. yoelii  <cit> . there is bioinformatic and laboratory evidence for the presence of a domesticated derivative of a non-ltr retrotransposon, namely telomerase, in p. falciparum and p. y. yoelii  <cit> . the only other evidence we could find in the literature for mge-derived or related sequences in plasmodium spp. are the alu elements  located within the antigen coding genes of p. vivax  <cit>  and the tares  found within the multigene superfamilies that code for antigen variation e.g.var, rif and stevor in p. falciparum  <cit> . the function of these repeats is uncertain although it is proposed that they facilitate antigenic change and immune evasion.

we report here a comprehensive genome analysis of potential mges and their derivatives in p. falciparum, p. y. yoelii and p. vivax. this provides further insight into plasmodium genome evolution with particular reference to the compositional bias in p. falciparum.

RESULTS
potential mge domains determined from interpro and pfam databases
ipr <dig>  reverse transcriptase; ipr <dig>  integrase catalytic domain; ipr <dig>  ribonuclease h fold; ipr <dig>  retroviral integrase c terminal; ipr <dig>  integrase n terminal zn binding domain; ipr <dig>  env polyprotein; ipr <dig>  endonuclease cenp-b protein; ipr <dig>  hat element; ipr <dig>  retroviral gag protein; ipr <dig>  retrotransposon gag protein; ipr <dig>  group ii intron-encoded maturase; ipr <dig>  dna-binding part of catalytic domain of tc <dig> transposase; ipr <dig>  aspartic protease from pao retrotransposon family; ipr <dig>  group i excinuclease; ipr <dig> telomerase reverse transcriptase; ipr <dig> excinuclease; ipr <dig> intron endonuclease group i; ipr <dig>  deoxyutp pyrophosphatase; ipr <dig>  peptidase a2a, retrovirus; ipr <dig>  retroviral nucleocapsid protein gag .

hmm for group ii introns
there were no hits identified in the p. falciparum organellar genomes  in plasmodb with e values less than  <dig> that demonstrated significant similarity to either of the two group ii intron hmms. where significant similarity did arise, this was due to upstream exons being fused to the mitochondrial group ii introns used in generating the hmm, e.g. pfb0795w is the plasmodium gene orthologue of the atp synthase gene and corresponds to a fused exon located upstream of several mitochondrial group ii introns.

reverse transcriptase domain
the washu-blastp  <dig>  search of plasmodb using the rt consensus sequence developed in this study, detected two p. y. yoelii  and four p. falciparum  orfs with similar e values . of the two p. y. yoelii genes, py <dig>  which is annotated as a putative telomerase reverse transcriptase in plasmodb, was not detected by the interpro tert hmm. py <dig> is a hypothetical protein of  <dig> amino acids, making it too short for any meaningful comparison, and was not investigated further. of the four p. falciparum genes only pf13_ <dig> and pfe1555c appear to have significant non-random homology in the most conserved residues, despite the e values of all four being similar. pf13_ <dig> is annotated as a putative telomerase reverse transcriptase in plasmodb and bioinformatic evidence for this has already been published  <cit> . pfe1555c is a hypothetical protein. an alignment of the rt consensus sequence generated in this study with these two genes is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  some of the highly conserved residues, as well as some residues shown to be essential for rt activity, are present in both sequences.

the rt consensus sequence was also used to probe the p. vivax genome available from tigr  <cit> . a washu-blastp  search revealed one hit that demonstrated significant similarity to the rt domain, including many of the highly conserved residues. this orf  exhibits significant sequence similarity to the putative terts in p. falciparum and p. y. yoelii. figure  <dig> is an alignment of these two sequences with the putative p. vivax tert  which is reported here for the first time.

an orthologue of the pfe1555c gene, pv <dig>  was identified by a simple blastp search of the p. vivax genome.

mge domains in the p. vivax genome
ten p. vivax orfs were identified by a blastp homology search as orthologues of the p. y. yoelii and p. falciparum genes located in interpro . hmmer searches of the p. vivax genome using pfam_fs hmms identified  <dig> orfs containing mge domains. in total therefore,  <dig> p. vivax orfs containing mge domains were identified and these are listed in table  <dig> 

discussion
we report here the presence of mge signature domains in potential protein coding sequences of three plasmodium species: six in p. falciparum, eight in p. y. yoelii and  <dig> in p. vivax. in each species there are three potential domesticated derivatives of mges. they are meiotic recombinase, dna repair protein rad <dig> and tert. although these three proteins are common to all eukaryotes and are no longer active mges, they have clearly defined mge domains and are included for completeness. recently, identification of the putative tert genes in p. falciparum and p. y. yoelii has been of interest and bioinformatic evidence of this has been published  <cit> . we have identified a candidate for the tert orthologue  in p. vivax using the conserved rt sequence developed in this study . we cannot discount that other, as yet uncharacterized, domesticated derivatives may be among the orfs detected.

of the remaining orfs identified, only three are present in p. falciparum. one is homologous to the catalytic domain of a phage integrase, a second to an intron-encoded nuclease and a third to a reverse transcriptase. although the latter does not contain all the highly conserved residues, there is significant homology to the rt consensus sequence used in this study and warrants further investigation . the highly conserved "dd" motif, located in domain c, aligns with a "de" residue pair in pfe1555c. while almost all rt sequences have been found to contain the "dd" motif, some non-ltr retrotransposons used in interpro to generate the rt hmm  have a glutamic acid  substitution for aspartic acid .

there were seven orfs identified in p. y. yoelii with similarity to signature domains of mges: two transposases, two phage integrases, one intron-encoded nuclease and two domesticated derivatives. one of the orfs with similarity to a phage integrase domain was a putative yir <dig> protein . the yir family in p. y. yoelii is analogous to the rif, stevor and var superfamilies in p. falciparum where recombination events play an important role in antigen switching. analysis of the p. vivax genome yielded a relatively large number of rt domains,  <dig> in total. the reasons for this are not clear and require further investigation.

whole genome analytical methods
the interpro entries for tert failed to detect the two tert orthologues in p. falciparum and p. y. yoelii, probably due to the stringency of the hmm search. this highlights the pitfalls of using generic bioinformatic programmes for studying a genome as exceptional as that of plasmodium. the problems associated with using bioinformatic methods to compare divergent sequences have been discussed before  <cit> . it must be stressed therefore that the findings presented here cannot be extrapolated further than the limits of the methods used. in particular, mge detection in compositionally biased genomes may be affected by the lack of sensitivity of the scanning techniques employed. it is also possible that not all mges have been described to date and therefore not detected in this comparative study. we did, however, refine the genome mining process in two ways. firstly, we employed biological data  to generate a consensus rt sequence to expand the scanning process. this increased the sensitivity and detected the p. y. yoelii and p. falciparum terts and the pfe1555c orf discussed above. secondly, less stringent statistics were used in the scanning process. while it is more common to use e values of 10- <dig>  we used values of  <dig> or  <dig>  despite the relatively high e values there were few positive hits  and we eliminated potential false positives by excluding sequences that demonstrated random homology patterns or which demonstrated no homology in the conserved domains.

to further refine and validate our data we excluded orfs that could potentially represent contaminating dna. this was done by scanning the genomes of the vertebrate hosts that were used in the respective sequencing projects. all available saimiri boliviensis boliviensis sequences and the related mucaca mulatta genome were searched for orfs with similarity to the potential p. vivax mges identified in this study. similarly, the mus musculus and the homo sapiens genomes were scanned for orfs with similarity to the potential mge domains detected in p. y. yoelii and p. falciparum respectively . no potential contaminating vertebrate host dna was identified amongst the potential p. vivax and p. falciparum mge domains. however, several p. y. yoelii sequences demonstrated >80% identity to orfs in the m. musculus genome and were rejected from the data as being contaminating sequences. these were py <dig>  py <dig>  py <dig>  py <dig>  py <dig>  py <dig> and py <dig>  the fact that these orfs have homologues in other rodents e.g. rattus norvegicus, confirms they are contaminating sequences.

mges and the p. falciparum genome
given the above limitations and that the evidence presented here would need to be confirmed experimentally, these findings raise some interesting questions. while there are potentially several mges of different classes in p. y. yoelii and p. vivax, p. falciparum appears to contain very few. mges are ubiquitous in nature and are considered important catalysts for genome evolution. an interesting exception is the fungal genus neurospora, which has the widest array of genome defence mechanisms found in eukaryotes, including the repeat-induced point mutation  mechanism whereby cytidine is mutated to thymidine  <cit> . this has had a profound impact on the organism's genome: it has extinguished active mges and driven the genome to become at-rich, particularly in the non-coding regions  <cit> . since the discovery of rip-induced mge silencing in neurospora, this mechanism has been demonstrated in all kingdoms of life. most recently, kuhlmann et al have demonstrated that a rip-like mechanism is capable of silencing retrotransposons in dictyostelium  <cit> . this not only extinguishes mge activity, but drives the at bias in repeated sequences by subsequent deamination of methylated cytidine residues. these two features – an at-rich genome  and an apparent lack of active mges – are notable features of p. falciparum. in addition, two putative dna methyltransferases  and a putative cytidine deaminase  have been identified in p. falciparum, suggesting that the potential exists for methylation and deamination of cytidine residues in the genome.

the evolutionary forces that drive genomes to become compositionally biased are complex and largely theoretical. the arguments put forward depend upon the ecological niche of the individual organism and proposed hypotheses are therefore species specific. no hypothesis has been forthcoming for the at richness found in p. falciparum. since the initial effect of mge invasion on the host genome is almost always negative  <cit> , a selective pressure would exist to minimize mge activity. based on the data presented in this study, we propose the following two hypotheses, both of which may offer an evolutionary explanation for part of the at richness of the p. falciparum genome:

i) a genome protective mechanism, such as the rip-induced silencing of transposable elements, has been a potential driving force behind the compositional bias of the p. falciparum genome.

ii) the at-rich genome of p. falciparum has been selected for as a result of its inherent resistance to mge invasion.

the finding that the putative rip machinery is represented in the p. falciparum genome lends support to the first hypothesis. the second hypothesis is based on findings that various mges may require specific recognition sequences as potential sites for integration e.g. the mariner element from drosophila mauritiana appears to recognize specific nucleotide patterns as potential sites for integration  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
a comprehensive genome analysis of the three complete sequences of p. falciparum, p. y. yoelii and p. vivax revealed that a decrease in the frequency of transposable elements coincides with an increase in at bias. a causal relationship between these two parameters remains to be established since there are limitations in the currently available bioinformatic screening methods. however, the hypothesis that a genoprotective mechanism exists in p. falciparum and that this may contribute to the compositional bias should be considered. whole genome analytical methods that are particularly suited to compositionally biased genomes would be of value in further understanding the p. falciparum genome.

