BACKGROUND
passeriformes are the largest tetrapod order, with over  <dig>  species found across the globe
 <cit> . the vast majority of these are oscine passerines, or songbirds , with far fewer species of suboscines  and just  <dig> extant species of basal new zealand wrens  . passerines are distinguished by a number of traits including their distinctive foot anatomy adapted for perching, an altricial pattern of offspring growth, and an exceptionally high metabolic rate
 <cit> . unique to songbirds is the complex syringeal morphology and underlying brain circuitry for vocal learning, the ability to imitate a tutor’s song transmitted across successive generations
 <cit> . vocal learning provides the basis for human speech acquisition, and is exceedingly rare in the animal kingdom
 <cit> . aside from humans, it has been convincingly found in few other mammalian groups , where the underlying brain circuitry and mechanisms are unknown, and just  <dig> of more than  <dig> extant orders of birds . notably, interconnected forebrain circuitry involved in the perception and production of learned vocalizations has been discovered in all three avian vocal learning groups
. best studied in songbirds, this circuitry includes cortical-like, basal ganglia, and thalamic nuclei .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic analysis used to identify the set of novel genes unique to songbirds .  schematic diagram summarizing phylogenetic relationships among organisms included in genomic analyses, not to scale. full details on genomes included in these analyses are reported in main avian phylogenomics and comparative genomics papers
 <cit> .  simplified schematic of the zebra finch nuclei specialized for vocal learning and their connections. red projection: the posterior vocal motor pathway for vocal control, originating in hvc, in yellow, continuing to ra, in orange, to the hindbrain vocal motor nuclei, in black. blue projection: the anterior forebrain pathway for vocal learning, originating in hvc, which projects to a set of interconnected nuclei  analogous to mammalian cortical-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops for somatosensory learning. abbreviations: dlm, medial part of the dorsal lateral nucleus of the thalamus; lman, lateral magnocellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium; hvc, proper name; nxiits, tracheosyringeal portion of the hypoglossal nucleus; pam/ram, nucleus para-ambiguus/retroambiguus; ra, robust nucleus of the arcopallium.



the zebra finch , a songbird native to australia, has been an important model for understanding the neurobiology of sensorimotor integration, memory, and sexual differentiation, among other functions, as well as being the primary model for studying the neural basis of vocal learning. the completion of the zebra finch genome
 <cit>  made it possible to search for genomic features that might be unique to songbirds. the emergence of novel genes has been shown to provide a genetic substrate for lineage-specific adaptations and the evolution of new functional traits
 <cit> . it is thus possible that novel genes might also be associated with the evolution of characteristic songbird traits like vocal learning. the initial comparative analysis between zebra finch and chicken , a previously sequenced, non-learning species
 <cit> , led to the identification of candidate novel gene duplications and expansions in zebra finches
 <cit> . however, without additional genomes that span the large phylogenetic distance between galliformes and passeriformes, it was impossible to conclude whether these features are specific to zebra finch, or originated more basally in finches, oscines, passeriformes, or elsewhere within neoaves. moreover, it has not been determined whether these genomic features are associated with vocal learning and related circuitry, or with other phenotypic differences between oscines and non-oscines. in the few cases where this question has been examined, there is only very limited evidence of regional or differential gene expression in the brain
 <cit> .

a requirement for accurate comparative genomics are well-curated sets of 1-to- <dig> orthologs among the organisms being compared. obtaining the true set of orthologs is an ongoing problem, and many genomes remain partial and/or insufficiently annotated, in part due to errors by ab initio gene predictive algorithms to identify all exons of a given ortholog, even when these are present in the genome assembly
 <cit> . these issues have led to erroneous annotations of zebra finch models as novel, non-detection of orthologs that are in fact present in the assembly, and erroneous conclusions about gene duplications and expansions
 <cit> . thus, the search for genomic features unique to zebra finches, or more broadly to songbirds, and that may relate to their distinct traits, is still very incomplete.

here, we have curated the zebra finch ensembl gene models annotated as novel or duplicated, as well as several previously identified novel expansions in the zebra finch genome , and then determined their presence or absence in  <dig> recently sequenced, high-coverage  genomes spanning the avian phylogeny . as a result, we have identified a set of genes that are clearly novel in songbirds, and provide evidence for chromosomal rearrangement as a potential mechanism for their origin. we also show that some of these genes are expressed in the brain, and that a small subset are differentially expressed in song nuclei relative to surrounding areas, representing molecular specializations of the songbird vocal control system; others are expressed in various non-neural tissues. in contrast, we found that several hundred putative previously reported novel songbird gene models represent artefacts, previously known genes, or genes that are present in non-songbird species. our results provide an approach for improved genome annotation, as well as identifying novel targets for investigating genes unique to a lineage or trait, including vocal learning and its associated brain circuitry in songbirds.

RESULTS
we implemented a comprehensive and exhaustive annotation pipeline to identify genes that evolved in songbirds subsequent to their divergence from all other birds. specifically, we first focused on the best-annotated songbird species, the zebra finch, retrieving all zebra finch ensembl gene models annotated as novel, duplicated, or expanded , and removing models ensembl considered to have orthologs in other species , as well as those mapped to chromosome unknown , which were likely to represent allelic variants. the mrna and protein sequences of the remaining models  were blat-aligned to chicken, currently the best-annotated avian species, and zebra finch, and synteny for all hits of sufficiently high score was verified to identify conserved orthologs. loci present in zebra finch but not chicken were then aligned to additional genomes—turkey , lizard , frog , zebrafish , mouse , and human —to distinguish songbird novel genes from losses in the galliform lineage .

we found a distinct group of putatively novel or duplicated genes in zebra finch that do not present an ortholog in ensembl  and ncbi databases . this included several expanded gene sets located on various zebra finch chromosomes, suggesting that they do not represent local assembly artefacts. we added to this group a set of genes  previously reported as expanded in zebra finch , and an additional set of duplicated loci that lack a predictive model , detected in the course of blat-alignments during the candidate novel gene curation analysis.

to determine whether these genes represented true novel genomic features unique to and shared across songbirds, we conducted blast searches of the genomes of  <dig> avians, including  <dig> newly sequenced species, representing a broad sampling that covers all major extant radiations of avian diversity . this provided initial confirmation of the existence of songbird-unique genes, but as the blast output was to unannotated scaffolds, putative songbird novel gene sets were analysed in more detail using custom optimized blat-alignment algorithm and syntenic analysis in the igv browser  in a subset of these new avian genomes that are of direct comparative interest to our goal of identifying songbird-specific genes: two additional songbirds, the medium ground finch  and the american crow ; a suboscine passerine, the golden-collared manakin ; a basal passerine, the rifleman ; and the budgerigar , a parrot, the sister taxon to passeriformes. this analysis allowed us to discard spurious hits from the blast search. in some cases it also allowed for the identification of the “parent” gene, shown through syntenic conservation to be orthologous between songbirds and non-songbirds, and which underwent duplication to give rise to the novel genes. confirmed novel genes were categorized into several subsets based on their presumed phylogenetic origin .

we discovered  <dig> genes that are present in the  <dig> songbird species studied and absent in all  <dig> avian non-songbird and  <dig> non-avian organisms examined, thus representing novel genes that are unique to songbirds. these included  <dig> cases of gene duplication resulting in a single novel paralog unique to songbirds and  <dig> case where the gene duplication resulted in two songbird-specific novel paralogs . in some cases the parent gene is known , in others the parent gene could not be established . we also identified one entirely novel gene which appears to have arisen de novo in songbirds. altogether, the parent genes and the expanded and de novo novel loci comprise a total of  <dig> genes . we describe here their characterization, followed by further details on the general curation effort.table  <dig> 
novel genes exclusive to songbirds


gene name
¥

a4galt-related*

casc1-related

fn3krp-related

hydin-related*

novel 

riok2-related

rnf4-related*

urb1-related

ythdc2-related*
families of genes where at least one member has been determined to be present uniquely in all songbirds. tandem duplicates, where clear orthology cannot be determined, are distinguished with dashed numbers . other duplicates are named after being ‘like’ their orthologous parent gene . ensembl ids and chromosomal locations refer to the zebra finch genome. expressed sequence tags  providing evidence of gene expression in the brain
 <cit>  and rna-seq data derived from other tissues
 <cit>  are from zebra finch, non-brain ests are derived from dark-eyed junco
 <cit> . ¥: gene symbols have been corrected based on our curation of ensembl annotation, *: gene family previously reported as being expanded in zebra finch, ‡: parent gene, †: parent gene cannot be determined, √: est is specific to this gene locus.



association of novel genes with genomic rearrangement sites
to determine whether the identified novel songbird genes are located close to regions of chromosomal instability in birds, we first generated a map of the sites of avian syntenic disruption  likely representing chromosomal breakpoints, by comparing the syntenic order of zebra finch vs. chicken genes in syntenytracker. we manually verified the consistency of the synteny groups with previous reports
 <cit> , using our curated ensembl models to allow for a more precise identification of genes in the vicinity of the sds. we also analysed chromosomes 11– <dig> and z, which were not included in previous studies . finally, we examined the syntenic arrangement of these blocks in several outgroups  to distinguish sds that are specific to the chicken lineage, where the flanking regions of zebra finch blocks are either identical or highly similar to those in non-avian species , from sds specific to the songbird lineage, where the flanking regions of zebra finch blocks differ from that of the other species examined . compared to previous studies
 <cit> , this analysis resulted in a refined and comprehensive list of sds representing likely chromosomal breakpoints specific to the songbird lineage.

next, we examined whether novel songbird genes as well as their parent genes map within or near songbird lineage-specific sd sites. we found that  <dig> of  <dig> novel genes are present at the start, end, or within sd regions . this suggests that a large proportion of the duplication events that gave rise to novel genes seems to have occurred in regions of chromosomal instability. two regions were associated with multiple duplication events: a chromosomal inversion in chr1a , and a chromosomal rearrangement on chrz . interestingly, most of the putative de novo novel  and ~50% of the duplicated  genes that are not unique to songbirds  are also located within or close to sds, supporting the association between chromosomal breakpoints and the emergence of novel genomic features in non-songbirds as well.figure  <dig> 
example of songbird novel and duplicated genes associated with regions of syntenic disruption. chromosomal maps of the syntenic order of genes in chicken  compared to zebra finch  reveal that songbird-unique de novo novel gene  and duplicated/expanded novel genes  are located in chromosomal regions containing syntenic disruptions  that are unique to the songbird lineage . small black up/down arrows next to each gene indicate orientation on the minus/plus strand of dna. line colours denote genes in rearranged syntenic blocks, with shaded regions representing apparent chromosomal inversions.



predicted protein analysis of songbird-unique genes
we assessed the potential function of novel songbird genes by examining the predicted protein domains of the largest open reading frame. these were obtained either from the zebra finch ensembl model, or by mapping the zebra finch parent gene and its chicken ortholog onto the novel gene locus, in cases where an ensembl model for the novel duplicate was absent or incomplete . we then compared the predicted domains between parent and duplicate genes to identify potential changes in function. as an outgroup to birds, we verified the domain organization of the parent genes in humans, where gene predictions are often more complete than in other vertebrates.

in one case, we found one gene where the duplicate copies are nearly identical. the a4galt expansion consists of  <dig> complete tandem copies; all contain a glycosyltransferase dxd-sugar binding motif and an alpha  <dig> -glycosyltransferase domain, the latter involved in protein glycosylation. due to high conservation, it is hard to determine which copy is orthologous to the ancestral a4galt. for the remaining gene families, we found differences in domain annotation between the duplicate and parent genes, with some genes representing partial copies and others gaining additional exons.

for riok <dig>  the parent gene contains a rio-like kinase, a rio <dig> kinase n-terminal domain, a winged helix domain that confers dna binding properties, and a coiled-coil domain, indicative of a function in the regulation of gene expression. the model-less riok2l contains only the coiled-coil domain, and thus is a partial duplicate. since there are no sequence gaps upstream of the model, the missing n-terminal domains and exons cannot be in a gap. interestingly, riok2l overlaps with, and is antisense to, one of the 3’-splice variants of fn3krpl <dig> 

as in the chicken and human orthologs, fn3krp and its duplicate paralog present in all passerines  contain six exons, and the predicted large fructosamine-3-kinase domain that covers most of the open reading frame is indicative of a role in deglycation and functional activation of proteins protective against hyperglycemia. fn3krpl <dig> has additional downstream exons, part of several transcripts that are alternatively spliced in the 3’utr region of this gene. the copy specific to songbirds , however, lacks the amino-terminus exon  of the parent gene. since there are no sequence gaps upstream of this locus where that exon might be located, this copy is partial, with a likely disruption of the main functional domain.

both copies of casc <dig> in songbirds lack a coiled-coil domain close to the amino-terminus present in the chicken and human orthologs. however, since the predicted peptides lack a starting codon, this domain may be present in the gaps upstream to the models. furthermore, casc1- <dig> is shorter than casc1- <dig>  consisting only of the  <dig> amino acid residues at the carboxy-terminus.

as in chicken and human, the parent urb <dig> gene in songbirds contains a predicted nucleolar pre-ribosomal-associated protein  <dig> domain close to the amino-terminus and an armadillo  like fold involved in interactions with other proteins and nuclei acids. the expanded set of duplicate urb <dig> copies do not contain either of the domains above, although in some cases the missing domains might be hiding in gaps.

in the case of the ythdc <dig> expansion, the expanded set includes several copies that are differently shared across species, and which display marked changes in the predicted structure across the different copies . in human and chicken, the parent gene contains several domains  involved in functions like binding to and inducing conformational changes in single stranded nucleic acids . in songbirds it is highly truncated , lacking most predicted domains. the songbird-unique duplication  also lacks all domains except the ha <dig> and ob-fold. the alignment of an est containing a polya at this locus confirms that the sequence is complete at the 3’ end, thus this copy lacks the yth domain. all  <dig> songbirds contain relatively complete copies of the gene that lack the amino-terminus  but contain most other domains of the parent gene at different syntenic locations . overall, these observations suggest continued expansion of this gene following divergence of songbirds.figure  <dig> 
syntenic and protein functional domain analysis of
ythdc2l1
and
ythdc2l <dig> 
 schematic representation of conserved chromosomal loci in avian and non-avian vertebrate species showing the relative position of ythdc2l <dig> , a novel expansion of ythdc <dig> that is only present in songbirds. adjacent genes are indicated in black. the chromosome or scaffold number is indicated beneath each species common name.  an alignment of the protein family domains predicted for amino acid sequences derived from chicken ythdc <dig>  the orthologous ythdc <dig> “parent” gene in zebra finch, as well as the copies of ythdc <dig> that are only present in songbirds , and zebra finch . specific protein family domains predicted by interproscan <dig> are aligned relative to chicken ythdc <dig>  and are indicated by the various coloured symbols. ythdc <dig> and ythdc2l <dig> lack nearly all of the major protein family domains that are characteristic of ythdc <dig>  in contrast, ythdc2l <dig> appears to be a nearly complete copy of ythdc <dig> 



all hydin-related copies are partial compared to the parent gene in chicken and human, which contains a predicted papd-like domain related to periplasmic chaperoning function, and a p-loop ntpase domain thought to be involved in modulating conformational changes in other proteins. the zebra finch hydin parent gene contains only a short fragment of the parent gene and has no predicted model; all other duplicates contain truncated portions of the 5’ part of the parent gene. because these loci are flanked by gaps and several unassembled sequences  contain portions of the gene, some of which close to the 3’ end, several assembled loci may be partial due to assembly incompleteness. we also note that the alignment scores of the chicken parent gene and songbird-expanded copies are rather low, reflecting considerable divergence.

similarly to the orthologous gene in chicken and humans, rnf <dig> and its duplicates in passerines each contain a predicted single ring finger motif close to the carboxy-terminus. however, the songbird-specific copy and one of the copies shared by passerines are truncated, lacking most of the 5’ half of the gene. low alignment scores of these duplicates point to significant divergence from the parent locus.

we identified one novel gene  with no identifiable parent gene that appears to have arisen de novo in the songbird lineage. its only trace outside of songbirds is in the form of a short, truncated segment of one of its coding exons in the correct syntenic position in two non-songbird species . its predicted protein  contains a putative amino-terminus cytoplasmic domain, three transmembrane domains, and a carboxy-terminus extracellular domain, the latter with a putative c-type lectin domain . thus, it appears to encode a polytopic transmembrane α-helical protein, suggesting a role related to the cell surface, possibly involving carbohydrate binding activity. due to a gap in the zebra finch genomic sequence, this analysis required sequencing an estima cdna, ck <dig>  the longer of two brain-derived cdnas that map specifically to this locus . results were confirmed by comparing cloned cdnas from the dark-eyed junco, another songbird species
 <cit> . based on its predicted structure and discrete expression in the song nucleus ra , we annotated this gene tmra .figure  <dig> 
schematic model depicting the predicted structure of
tmra
in the plasma membrane. protein functional domain analysis  predicts the protein coding sequence of tmra contains three transmembrane spanning domains connected to an extracellular c-type lectin-like  domain that is typically associated with carbohydrate binding.



expression analysis of songbird-unique genes
to gain insights into the possible functional roles of the identified novel songbird genes, we performed an expression analysis using both publicly available expressed sequence tags  and rna-seq transcription data
 <cit>  from brain, liver, muscle, skin, spleen, testes, and whole embryo of zebra finch and dark-eyed junco; as well as in situ hybridization of zebra finch brain sections. our results fell into several categories: songbird novel genes with no evidence of expression in these tissues , expressed in non-brain tissues only , expressed in multiple tissues including brain , and one gene with expression detected solely in the brain . in the case of a4galt, we found no evidence for expression of either the parent gene or the duplicate copy unique to songbirds in these tissues. in contrast, for all other novel genes, we find that transcriptional data reveal differential tissue expression of parent and novel genes, suggesting functional differentiation among loci .

in some cases, songbird novel genes show more limited expression than their parent genes. songbird-unique gene hydinl <dig> has lost expression in liver relative to parent gene hydin. for the riok <dig> and rnf <dig> gene expansions, we found evidence of expression in brain and other tissues for the parent genes, but limited  or no expression  of the songbird duplications . in both cases, we were unable to detect parent gene expression in the brain by in situ with probes from brain-derived cdnas, suggesting that expression levels are either very low and/or brain state-dependent.

in other instances, the songbird duplication was expressed in additional tissues beyond those of the parent gene, as in the case of fn3krpl <dig>  which is expressed in liver and skin, as well as sharing expression in embryo with parent gene fn3krp . several brain-derived ests map specifically to parent gene fn3krp and to passerine duplicate fn3krpl <dig>  thus both loci are transcriptionally active in the brain. interestingly, several transcript variants for fn3krpl <dig> differ on the length of the 3’utr region. in situ hybridization revealed that fn3krp and fn3krpl <dig> expression, including several transcript variants for the latter, is uniformly low throughout the brain, including nuclei of the song system . in contrast, there was no evidence that songbird-specific fn3krpl <dig> is transcriptionally active in the brain.

with urb <dig>  we found further evidence of expressional divergence. rna-seq showed the parent gene to be expressed widely in embryo, liver, muscle, skin, and testes; whereas expression of songbird duplicate urb1l <dig> was only detected in skin . in situ hybridization revealed uniform brain expression of the parent gene and duplicate copies . however, due to cross-alignment of probes, we cannot unequivocally assign cdnas from the duplicate copies to a specific locus. at higher resolution, the labelling of both parent and duplicate genes is cellular, but rather than displaying the cytoplasmic pattern typical of most mrnas, expression is concentrated within nuclei, consistent with nucleolar localization .figure  <dig> 
expression of
urb1
in the adult male zebra finch brain.  photomicrograph of in situ hybridization showing uniform expression of urb <dig> in the pallium.  high-power view reveals urb <dig> enrichment in individual pallial neurons. note that in several of the cells indicated by the arrowheads the intracellular labelling appears more robust in the nucleus than in the surrounding cytoplasm, forming a pattern reminiscent of a fried-egg. scale bar: 10 μm.



in the case of casc1- <dig> and casc1- <dig>  rna-seq revealed shared expression in embryo and testes, with casc1- <dig> also expressed in spleen and casc1- <dig> detected in liver and muscle . we identified two zebra finch brain cdna clones, fe <dig> and dv <dig>  associated with casc1- <dig> and casc1- <dig> . fe <dig> aligns completely  to exons 2– <dig> of the 5-exon casc1- <dig>  it also aligns well  to casc1- <dig>  but this alignment is partial, since the casc1- <dig> locus lacks the 100 bp 4th exon predicted in casc1- <dig> and present in fe <dig>  thus, fe <dig> is transcribed from casc1- <dig>  indicating that this gene is unequivocally expressed in the brain. in contrast, zebra finch clone dv <dig> aligns completely with high scores to both loci, thus we cannot establish from which locus it is transcribed. because we cannot exclude the possibility that both clones are transcript variants from casc1- <dig>  we cannot conclusively establish whether casc1- <dig> is transcriptionally active in the brain. since we use high stringency hybridization conditions, and these clones are relatively small, we predicted that we might detect differences in their brain distributions, if present. indeed, these clones displayed partially overlapping but distinct patterns. dv <dig> revealed strong labelling throughout the brain, including the pallium, thalamus, and both granular and purkinje cell layers of the cerebellum . the distribution and density of labelled cells in the pallium was uniform, but the relative level of expression varied from cell to cell . fiber tracts and white matter were devoid of signal, suggesting the probe is detecting transcripts that are not expressed in glia, but cells in walls of the lateral ventricles were strongly labelled . in contrast, fe <dig> revealed specific expression in the cells that define the ventricular wall , and in large neurons within the globus pallidus .figure  <dig> 
differential expression of
casc1
genes in song nucleus lman of the adult male zebra finch.  photomicrograph of an in situ hybridization conducted with a probe  that is not locus specific reveals expression of casc1- <dig> and/or casc1- <dig> throughout the brain . the approximate positions for the photomicrographs shown in panels b-d are depicted by the black squares. 
casc1-1/ <dig> mrna is highly expressed in song nucleus hvc , the globus pallidus , and ependymal cells of the lateral ventricle . in contrast, casc1- <dig>  revealed by a probe that is specific to this locus, is differentially expressed in ependymal cells of the lateral ventricle , large likely gabaergic cells in globus pallidus , and ependymal cells of the fourth ventricle in the midbrain . the dashed rectangles in b indicate the approximate positions of the high-power photomicrographs depicting labelled cells in the globus pallidus. anatomical abbreviations: hvc, proper name; gp, globus pallidus; st, striatum; v., lateral ventricle. scale bars: 100 μm.



the truncated ythdc <dig> parent gene lacks any est or rna-seq evidence of expression, supporting the conclusion that it is functionally inactive in songbirds . we identified several zebra finch brain cdna clones that align to varying degrees to the  <dig> ythdc2-related genes . based on alignment scores and the presence of unique exons, we were able to unequivocally assign two clones to specific copies of ythdc <dig> . ck <dig> aligns with  <dig> % identity to songbird-unique ythdc2l <dig>  including a 3’ exon that is not present in any of the other ythdc2-related loci, whereas dv <dig> aligns with 100% identity to zebra finch-unique copy ythdc2l <dig>  including a first exon that is not present at any other loci. thus, both ythdc2l <dig> and ythdc2l <dig> are transcriptionally active. in situ hybridization reveals that ythdc2l <dig> is expressed at low levels throughout the brain , with rna-seq data revealing expression in all other tissues examined . in contrast, songbird copy ythdc2l <dig> appears to be exclusively expressed in lman , a brain nucleus critical for song learning and vocal variability
 <cit> . strongly labelled cells are uniformly distributed throughout lman, displaying cellular labelling that is diffuse in the cytoplasm and strong in the nucleus. the labelled cells have very large somata , indicating that they likely correspond to the large magnocellular projections neurons that are found within the core region of lman
 <cit> . in some cases we note that we also detect signal within the nucleus in the form of labelled foci, suggesting that we may be detecting sites of active transcription .figure  <dig> 
differential expression of
ythdc2l1
in song nucleus lman of the adult male zebra finch brain.  a schematic depicting a sagittal brain section ~2 mm from the midline shows the approximate location of the in situ photomicrographs presented in panel b.  photomicrograph of in situ hybridization of songbird novel gene ythdc2l <dig> shows discrete expression in song nucleus lman.  detailed view of this section reveals that expression of ythdc2l <dig> is restricted to large cells of lman, with labelled foci evident in some cells pairs within cellular nuclei .  a comparable view of paralogous gene ythdc2l <dig> shows low levels of expression, non-differential in lman. anatomical abbreviations: a, arcopallium; h, hyperpallium; hvc, proper name; lman, lateral magnocellular nucleus of the nidopallium; m, mesopallium; md, dorsal mesopallium; mv, ventral mesopallium; n, nidopallium; ra, robust nucleus of the arcopallium; st, striatum. scale bars: 100 μm in b–d; 20 μm in c inset.



for the de novo gene tmra, rna-seq data detected wide expression in embryo, liver, muscle, spleen, and testes; brain expression was shown by the presence of finch and junco cdna clones which mapped specifically to this locus . tmra is sparsely expressed throughout the nidopallium, but enriched in the mesopallium . most strikingly, tmra is a prominent marker of song nucleus ra , a structure required for the production of learned song
 <cit> . labelled cells have large somata , a characteristic feature of established populations of hvc and ra projection neurons
 <cit> . as with urb <dig> and ythdc <dig>  expression is enriched in cellular nuclei , and in many cells labelling appears focal, perhaps indicating that the transcript is concentrated in nucleoli, or that we are detecting independent transcriptional sites.figure  <dig> 
differential expression of
tmra
in song nucleus ra of the adult male zebra finch.  photomicrograph of in situ hybridization showing the distribution of tmra expressing cells in a parasagittal brain section that includes song nucleus ra .  high-power view reveals the enrichment of tmra in individual cells within ra.  detailed views reveal that in some cells in ra , labelling is largely restricted to nuclei, and expression is low in the surrounding cytoplasm. anatomical abbreviations: a, arcopallium; h, hyperpallium; m, mesopallium; n, nidopallium; st, striatum. scale bars: 100 μm in a and b; 20 μm in c.



curating misannotated novel genes in songbirds
many genes in the candidate set, including those reported in previous studies , did not pass our criteria for songbird-unique novel genes. we provide corrected annotations for these false positives, based on the results of the comparative blat alignments and syntenic analysis, subdividing them into several categories .

a large set of apparent duplications consisted of typically large, multi-exonic genes where the ensembl prediction failed to group all exons under the same model, resulting in two or more partial adjacent models annotated as duplicates or expansions of that ortholog . such cases were easily identified by examining the blat alignment to the zebra finch genome of a more complete ortholog from a different species such as chicken, mouse, or human .

another large group consisted of separate gene pairs or sets, often members of the same gene family, where one or more models were misidentified as a gene duplication or expansion. these false positive duplications were found in tandem on the same chromosome , or on separate chromosomes . in other cases, the models represent true duplicate pairs, but these expansions are also present in chicken and/or non-avian organisms, and thus they are not unique to songbirds . some of these are also present in lizard, frog, and/or fish, but not in mouse or human, thus they appear to be duplications that occurred in a distant vertebrate ancestor but were lost in mammals . other cases appear to have originated in birds, as they also occur in chicken and/or turkey, but not in non-avian species .

among zebra finch genes misannotated as novel and without identified orthologs in other species, the vast majority consisted of short segments of known genes that were not incorporated into the main ensembl model, likely due to sequence gaps or regions of low assembly quality . a smaller subset consisted of previously uncharacterized genes, described as novel by ensembl, but orthologous loci could be identified in chicken and/or other organisms . of note, some of the chicken loci in this subgroup did not have a predictive ensembl model but could be found at the correct syntenic location through blat-alignment.

a small set of candidate novel ensembl gene models  were found to be part of massively expanded gene families . as their curation would require extensive further analysis to establish correct orthology, these were not studied further. finally, a subset of candidate novel genes  displayed a loss of intronic regions and had flanking repetitive elements  characteristic of retrotransposon-mediated duplication. these genes will be further reported elsewhere.

our phylogenetic searches revealed some gene duplications present in zebra finches but in no other species . while these could represent real zebra finch-specific features, in most cases the two genes in a duplicated pair occur in tandem, often in regions of poor sequence quality, flanked by gaps, and tend to have very high  percent identities. they likely represent assembly artefacts, due to improper placement of allelic variants or misassembly of repetitive sequences. we are currently generating further sequence and a new genome assembly for the zebra finch, and intend to further examine this subset elsewhere.

a distinct subset of novel zebra finch genes were also present in the medium ground finch but not in the crow or in any other bird; they thus appear to be specific to the finch lineage . in other cases, the genes were present in all passerines  but in no other birds; they thus represent features shared among passeriformes . yet other cases could be found in numerous avian species, but not chicken; these likely originated early in the radiation of neoaves, or represent genetic losses specific to galliformes .

discussion
our analysis identifies with high certainty several songbird-unique genes, and drastically reduces the number of genes misannotated as novel by automated detection algorithms
 <cit> . in addition to significantly extending and improving upon previous lists of songbird novel genes
 <cit> , this effort demonstrates the necessity of a systematic curation pipeline that incorporated synteny analysis in order to accurately predict gene identity, and establishes a template for using comparative genomics to identify novel genes in any genome. the pipeline is particularly effective in eliminating false positive novel gene annotations by identifying orthologs undetected by automated gene prediction algorithms due to gene model incompleteness. this effort also illustrates how analysis of a large number of genomes can enable the discovery of genomic features unique to specific groups and possibly associated with group-specific traits, a strategy that will become increasingly feasible as larger collections of genomes from other animal groups become available.

although we have focused on the contribution of novel genes to the evolution of the songbird lineage in this study; other factors are likely to have played a role as well; including differential gene substitution rates, chromosomal rearrangements, retrotransposon-related events, and modification of regulatory regions. several of these are being explored in companion papers to this study
 <cit> .

lineage-specific expansions have been reported in zebra finch versus chicken
 <cit> , but the incorporation of  <dig> newly sequenced, high-coverage  avian genomes as well as representative non-avian genomes allows us to identify the specific set of duplications that arose following the divergence of ancestral oscine passerines from their closest living relatives , but before the songbird crown radiation which includes both finches and crows 
 <cit> . we note that this represents a high-confidence set: if these genes were not unique to songbirds, and their absence in non-songbirds a consequence of incomplete sequencing, we would expect them to be randomly distributed across the  <dig> non-songbird genomes sequenced. instead, we find them only in songbirds, and in none of the non-songbird species examined. due to our strict criteria, our list of songbird-unique genes is likely an underestimate, as we have excluded loci not mapped to a known chromosome, due to the possibility that these represent alleles rather than actual paralogs, as well as gene sets annotated by ensembl as one-to-many orthologs, which require further analysis to establish exact orthology. in addition to identifying genes uniquely present and shared among songbirds, this analysis also reveals further sets of lineage-specific genes which characterize finches, passerines, neoavian birds, or galliformes. the identification of gene sets common to these avian clades represents a significant advance for identifying genomic innovations whose emergence may be linked to some of the characteristic traits of these groups.

our identification of sds that emerged following evolutionary divergence of galliformes  and neoaves  substantially improves on previous studies
 <cit>  by refining the location of sd sites, identifying breakpoints on chrs 11– <dig> and z, and distinguishing sds present in zebra finch only, thus possibly specific to songbirds, from those present in chicken only, and thus possibly specific to galliformes. the fact that the majority of novel genes, both those unique to songbirds as well as those present in other avian groups, are located within or immediately adjacent to sds suggests that chromosomal rearrangement is a major mechanism for the emergence of novel genomic features in passerines and other avian groups, as found in other lineages
 <cit> . this corroborates previous reports establishing non-allelic homologous recombination following inter- or intra-chromosomal rearrangement as an essential mechanism for genome evolution
 <cit> . of note, songbird chromosomes  <dig> and 1a are known to have undergone significant rearrangement, having split from chicken chromosome 1
 <cit> , which our findings suggest has had repercussions for novel gene evolution: a single rearrangement on chr1a can be associated with multiple novel genes; another sd on chr <dig> harbours the previously described growth hormone gene duplication 
 <cit> , which we conclude to be passerine-specific. related to these rearrangements, avian sds have been previously associated with a high occurrence of repetitive elements
 <cit> , which are thought to provide a substrate for non-allelic homologous recombination and genomic instability
 <cit> . it is also possible that some of the genes reported here, as well as others containing repetitive elements, may have arisen through retrotransposon-mediated duplication mechanisms
 <cit> .

a major outcome of this study was the discovery that most of the novel songbird genes are transcriptionally active, with both est and rna-seq data supporting differential tissue expression of parent genes and songbird novel loci, indicating a diversification of function following duplication. compellingly, some novel genes’ brain expression indicates an association with songbirds’ neural system for learned vocalizations, suggesting that their evolution could be related to the emergence of this characteristic songbird trait. although other studies have identified gene enrichments in song nuclei
, this is the first report that genes found only within the songbird lineage are transcriptionally active in these nuclei. this suggests that certain novel genomic features of songbirds may have evolved to support the function of the circuitry dedicated to vocal learning behavior. for other novel genes, transcriptional evidence suggests that their function is associated with other, non-neuronal tissues, including skin, muscle, liver, and testis. although more targeted experimental approaches involving gene manipulations will be required to establish the exact functions of songbird novel genes, we discuss potential implications in the context of their predicted protein domain architecture and selective tissue expression.

the multiple copies of a4galt are complete, thus this gene expansion might represent an increase in molecular function, or a diversity of functions if accompanied by divergent expression patterns. although we found no evidence of expression of these genes, in other organisms a4galt has been implicated in glycosylation of surface antigens related to the p blood group system, indicating that this gene and its expansion are likely related to organs and systems outside of the range of tissues explored in our analyses
 <cit> .

several other gene expansions  are predicted to encode much shorter proteins that lack specific domains compared to the parent genes, sometimes even lacking a recognizable orf. for these genes, there are indications of differential expression in non-brain tissues by rna-seq, although we cannot unequivocally demonstrate brain expression due to cross-alignment of cdnas to multiple loci . these truncated genes could act as partial competitive inhibitors of the parent gene, as seen with the human specific duplication of the srgap <dig> gene, which in turn causes slower brain development in humans relative to other mammals
 <cit> . it is also possible that these might represent pseudogenes resulting from a complete duplication followed by a degradation of the coding sequence and loss of transcriptional activity of one paralog. a notable exception was fn3krp, a gene related to deglycation of proteins and thus possibly protective against hyperglycemia
 <cit> . fn3krpl <dig>  which is shared by all passerines and complete in terms of coding domains, has even gained complexity in the form of multiple 3’utr variants. we also note that in some cases we found evidence of brain expression of the parent gene only  or of the parent gene and its duplicates . while the patterns were broad and uniform, thus uninformative with regards to regional specializations, they establish a link to basic, non-specialized aspects of brain function. intriguingly, we note that two songbird novel genes exhibit exclusive expression in skin , a finding without clear precedent that points to potential unexplored molecular specializations of songbirds.

there is significant sequence divergence between casc1- <dig> and casc1- <dig>  which, along with the differential expression patterns detected, suggests a divergence of molecular function. the restricted expression of the casc1- <dig> in the ventricular zone is intriguing, given that the parent gene is related to the control of cell proliferation
 <cit> , and the subventricular region adjacent to the ventricles is a site of continued proliferation of neuronal precursor cells in adulthood
 <cit> . the other transcript is broadly expressed but cannot be unambiguously linked to either paralog. one possible interpretation is that the two paralogs have very distinct expression patterns. in this regard, the chromosomal rearrangement that gave rise to this duplication  likely disrupted the regulatory promoter of casc1- <dig>  leading to differences in expression patterns. alternatively, the two transcripts analysed might be variants of casc1- <dig>  with casc1- <dig> representing a pseudogene. in either scenario, further studies of the casc <dig> duplication are worth pursuing, and analysis of additional genes in the proximity of genomic rearrangement sites could lead to further insights into evolving patterns of gene regulation in the avian brain.

the ythdc <dig> gene expansion clearly illustrates a divergence of function across paralogs, which differ in both structure and expression. ythdc <dig> is predicted to encode a protein capable of binding to rna  and inducing conformational changes . although the functionally complete copy ythdc2l <dig> is expressed broadly in the brain and other tissues, the songbird-unique copy ythdc2l <dig> is expressed solely in song learning nucleus lman in the brain, and is highly truncated relative to the parent gene, retaining only the ha <dig> and ob-fold domains associated with rna helicase activity regulation
 <cit> . this indicates a neofunctionalization of songbird paralog ythdc2l <dig>  and suggests that it may play a role in rna regulation in lman, a conclusion that will await targeted experimental confirmation.

it is unclear how the complete tmra arose in songbirds, but given the presence of a short, exonic segment in the correct syntenic position in falcon and trogon, two clades recently shown to be closely related to songbirds
 <cit> , tmra appears to represent a de novo gene gain in songbirds with ancestral non-coding origins, as shown previously for genes which originated de novo in human from non-coding sequences in chimp
 <cit> . tmra is a remarkable marker of song nucleus ra, suggesting a role related to the neural coding of learned vocalizations, as ra represents the cortical output for vocal-motor control and is essential for the production of learned vocalizations
 <cit> . tmra is a member of the clec family of transmembrane protein genes, with a function likely associated with cell surface recognition processes required for cell-cell and/or cell-substrate interactions
 <cit> . although one cannot exclude the possibility that tmra may play a role in response to pathogens, as occurs for other members of the lectin family
 <cit> , we note that members of some gene superfamilies related to immune system function  also play major roles in the nervous system, modulating cell-cell adhesion and interactions with extracellular matrix that are critical for neural development and function
 <cit> .

the discovery of novel songbird genes expressed specifically in the vocal control system provides evidence that some molecular specializations unique to this group may be associated with vocal learning. this trait evolved in three avian lineages , all possessing dedicated circuits for this behavior with marked similarities in their neuroanatomical organization
 <cit> . given these parallels, one might expect convergent similarities in the molecular organization of these circuits. recent evidence supports a much closer relationship between parrots and passerines than previously recognized
 <cit> , leading to the intriguing possibility that some molecular specializations of their vocal learning circuits may have evolved in a common ancestor. indeed, recent studies have identified a number of shared molecular specializations in analogous vocal control nuclei across avian vocal learners
 <cit> . our demonstration that songbird novel genes have been incorporated into their unique vocal control nuclei suggests that in addition, these lineages also possess unique molecular specializations related to their particular vocal learning circuits. these specializations could relate to neuronal populations and connections unique to songbirds. for example, the songbird direct pre-vocal motor cortical projection to the basal ganglia, hvc-to-area x, is absent in parrots
 <cit> , and possibly also in hummingbirds . alternatively, the roles played by songbird-unique genes could be subserved by functionally analogous genes in parrots and hummingbirds. further study of avian vocal learners may reveal further group-specific specializations, as well as shared molecular features that may represent fundamental requirements for vocal learning.

CONCLUSIONS
our efforts resulted in: 1) a well-curated list of novel zebra finch gene models, allowing for the identification and analysis of songbird-unique genes as well as improving the annotation of the zebra finch genome by establishing orthology for hundreds of genes previously reported in error as being novel; 2) a refined map of synteny disruption sites likely representing chromosomal breakpoints in songbirds in comparison with non-songbird avian species and other vertebrates; 3) a set of songbird-unique genes that are transcriptionally active with expression patterns that diverge from those of parent genes, likely associated with unique aspects of songbird biology; and 4) a subset of songbird-unique genes that are specialized in nuclei of the vocal control system. these findings provide novel information on molecular processes that operate at the level of brain circuitry involved in vocal control, and represent prime candidate targets for gene manipulations of vocal learning.

