BACKGROUND
in multicellular organisms, communication between cells is essential, and is profoundly influenced by the extracellular matrix  components. this scaffolding structure coordinates the biochemical reactions of the different types of cells within the tissues and organs  <cit> . the mammalian ecm is composed by a wide array of functional molecules, biochemically and biophysically diverse, including proteins, glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans. the glycosaminoglycans  are some of the most dominant ecm components, greatly influencing the cellular behaviour. these highly charged polysaccharides, frequently sulphated, can be found covalently attached to protein cores, forming proteoglycans , which regulate the gag distribution and turnover  <cit> . a high molecular diversity arises from the different combinations of pgs protein cores with one or more types of gags chain. these are responsible for the wide variety of biological roles, including structural scaffolding, signalling and growth factor storage  <cit> .

bacteria and fungi are able to form multicellular three-dimensional communities, such as stalks  <cit> , mats/biofilms  <cit>  and colonies  <cit> . these are supported and protected by an extracellular polymeric substance, or ecm, which originates from cellular synthesis and secretion processes, as well as from the lysis of embedded cells. when these microbial multicellular communities developed in natural environments, their ecm components account as well with contributions from the surrounding environment, for example from an infection host  <cit> .

the ecm from saccharomyces cerevisiae colonies revealed the presence of proteins  <cit> , some of which highly glycosylated  <cit> , which remain unidentified. in candida ecm biofilms, several studies also reported the presence of proteins, as well as polysaccharides and dna  <cit> . importantly, an exopolysaccharide composed of α-d-glucose and β-d-glucose, α-d-mannose, α-l-rhamnose and n-acetyl glucosamine was identified in the ecm from a c. albicans biofilm recovered from an infected intrauterine device  <cit> . additionally, the ecm-like substance from flocs of s. cerevisise, overexpressing flo <dig>  were shown to be composed of glucose and branched mannose  <cit> . overall, the major players of the yeast colonies and biofilms remain unknown. therefore, the identification of the molecules composing yeast ecm will contribute for the future understanding of cell-cell communication and other multicellular aggregation processes, namely quorum sensing.

this work provides the foundations for the detailed identification of yeast ecm  components, presenting the development of a protocol to produce yecm, which robustness was challenged through inter-species reproducibility. subsequently, methodologies for yecm extraction and fractionation were optimized, providing unprecedented analytical-grade protein and sugar fractions for chromatographic assessment. these methodological advances will open the way to future research on the processes and players of eukaryotic multicellular life-style.

RESULTS
overlay development and ecm extraction
molecular and structural assessment of yecm components requires a high amount of cells-free homogenous material, chemically purified into fractions proper for applying analytical techniques. therefore, a critical step is the reproducible growth of yeast onto large multicellular aggregates without risking large biological heterogeneity between cells, either in very diverse metabolic states and/or different life cycle phases. s. cerevisiae growth onto biofilms is not common. previous studies showed that the yecm recovered from a s. cerevisiae single colony, or a set of some colonies, was not enough for the in-depth analysis of its components  <cit> . the development of giant colonies, originated from a drop with several thousand cells, was the most common approach to overcome this obstacle  <cit> . we took this concept one step further and inoculated enough cells to produce a whole-plate three-dimensional overlay. the method was tested with wild type strains of s. cerevisiae and c. albicans.

cells collected from a single colony were grown overnight until exponential growth phase, and these fully active cells were used to inoculate homogeneously the whole surface of the ypda plates. the plates were firstly dried under a sterile air flow until the inoculum was properly absorbed and then incubated at 30°c. the cell growth and overlay development was followed until the so-called “mature overlay” presented a high quantity of biomass. this happened as a result of 7 days of growth for the case of s. cerevisiae, and 5 days growth in the case of c. albicans, consistently with the latter being a faster grower. longitudinal slices of these cultures are shown in figure  <dig>  the further development of the culture into more days of incubation was assessed, yet resulted in an increased accumulation of dead cells  in the interior of the aggregate as monitored by flow cytometry , which is in accordance with previous works  <cit> . multicellular aggregates in their innate environment, during development and maturation, will inevitably contain intracellular material deriving from cellular debris originated from cell death  <cit> , which may eventually play some role in the aggregate biological properties. nevertheless, the method hereby devised aimed at avoiding as far as possible this “contamination” so to assess the basic components of yecm.figure  <dig> 
overlays of
s. cerevisiae
and
c. albicans
cultures. longitudinal cuts of overlays of cultures of s. cerevisiae and c. albicans grown for  <dig> and 5 days, respectively, on ypd at 30°c. micrographs were obtained with a leica microsystems dm-rb fluorescence microscope and ueye digital camera.



the biomass from the mature overlay was carefully collected through washes with pbs buffer. considering the interference of nacl in several biochemical analysis techniques, namely 2de and nmr, and in order to maximize the utilisation of yecm samples by a large variety of techniques, the amount of nacl in the pbs buffer was reduced to 100 mm. the cellular suspension was very gently placed into a roller incubator to promote the solubilisation of the several molecules present in the intercellular space, followed by centrifugation at  <dig>  rpm to induce the deposition of the cells and insoluble molecules. the supernatant was further cleaned by filtration, reducing the possibility of drag intracellular material of the next steps. the filtered supernatant was subsequently lyophilized to enable the concentration of the sample and the resuspension in the appropriate buffers for the following phases of the protocol.

the above-mentioned procedures allowed to retrieve the s. cerevisiae and c. albicans overlay biofilm-like yecm in high amounts, crucial for their molecular and structural-characterisation, while ensuring reproducibility between samples, and a low level of putative sample contamination with intracellular contents.

ecm purification and analysis
proteins
few studies addressed the proteins present in the extracellular space of microbial multicellular communities, and most of such studies focus on liquid cultures  <cit> . in s. cerevisiae colonies, proteins and glycoproteins from the extracellular environment were briefly assessed  <cit> . the hereby-developed protocol recovered the proteins present in the yecm and allowed a proteomics approach.

the samples intended for the precipitation and recovery of proteins were collected in the presence of a cocktail of protease inhibitors , precluding the action of proteases, remodelling enzymes or others in yecm. precipitation was done using the chloroform/methanol protocol by wessel and flugge  <cit> . this protocol was chosen to avoid the presence of salt and other contaminants detrimental to the protein analysis and identification procedures. a high amount of proteins was recovered, based on the different solubility in diverse solvents. the current protocol avoids the addition of compounds such as tca  or doc  that compromise the downstream analysis. furthermore, this protocol in comparison with tca-based protocols, presents the extra advantage of not promoting the formation of an insoluble pellet, therefore maximizing protein recovery. importantly, this method also allows the resuspension of the proteins directly in the sample buffer, after evaporation of the solvents.

the isoelectric focusing -compatible buffer mentioned in materials and methods presents a high protein solubilisation capacity and is compatible with the most common protein quantification methods, namely with bradford quantification  <cit> . moreover, this sample buffer is well suited for both sds-page and 2de . this guaranties that the same sample can be analysed by both techniques, without resorting to different buffers that may not solubilize with the same efficiency.figure  <dig> 
sds-page and 2de separation of yecm proteins.  sds-page of the ecm proteins from s. cerevisiae and c. albicans. the methodology was capable of recover the extracellular proteins from two yeast species and detect the differences in the ecm composition.  2de of the s. cerevisiae strain ecm proteins. the 2de allowed the identification of proteins present in the yecm .



the combination of all these procedures results in a highly reproducible methodology, which allows the analysis of ecm from different yeast strains with similar success . importantly, the protein samples obtained through such methodology are pure enough to be analysed by 2de, known for its sensitivity to detergents, salts, and other molecules that interfere with the proteins’ isoelectric point. besides, those samples can further be subjected to more sensitive techniques as 2d-dige or mass spectrometry. figure 2b displays the 2de gel of s. cerevisiae yecm protein sample. the two dimension separation of the proteins also allowed the unambiguous identification of several proteins present in the s. cerevisiae ecm, the glycolytic tdh <dig> , tpi <dig> , pdc <dig> , eno1/ <dig> , sod <dig> , hsp <dig> , and cpr <dig>  . some of these proteins were previously described in the extracellular environment by several authors . namely, tdh <dig> was found overexpressed in the ecm of c. albicans biofilms  <cit> , and enolase has been reported externally located in both yeasts and mammalian cells  <cit> . in yeasts, proteins found using the present procedures may derive from the outer layers of the cell wall as previously suggested . their location in vivo has though to be secured by loose attachment, since the present procedures preclude the extraction of covalently linked cell wall materials that require harsh methods to be extracted  <cit> . the identification of all the proteins present in yecm, will be possible analysing all the spots present in the 2de, or using a high throughput technique, as liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry .

polysaccharides
similarly to what occurs with the proteins, little information is available on the polysaccharides of yecm, other than the presence of a few glycoproteins in s. cerevisiae colonies, and the identity of some components of c. albicans biofilms  <cit> . the sugar fraction of yecm was therefore collected and analysed, for which the procedures widely used to extract the high eukaryotes ecm were adjusted  <cit> . the samples were subjected to the action of the broad range protease papain, eliminating the proteins and releasing polysaccharides that might be attached to them. this reaction was performed overnight to warrant complete digestion. after protein separation by centrifugation, the samples containing solubilized polysaccharides were treated with ethanol overnight at 4°c. ethanol, disrupts the hydration of the polysaccharide and the charged ions, and when combined with low temperatures, maximizes the precipitation of both neutral and acidic polysaccharides. the utilisation of ethanol in this step is also beneficial because it is easily removable by evaporation. the precipitated polysaccharides can be dissolved, without difficulty, in deionized water or other required solution for the subsequent analysis.

the s. cerevisiae and c. albicans yecm polysaccharides recovered by this procedure were evaluated using  <dig> -diaminopropane acetate agarose electrophoresis  . this technique allows the separation of compounds with different degrees of chemical substitution, and is commonly used to separate sulphated polysaccharides  <cit> . s. cerevisiae presented two differently migrating compounds, whereas using c. albicans only one compound was detected. this suggests that the yecm composition is different from species to species. importantly, the methodology proved capable of detecting those differences, showing its appropriateness for the study of yecm.figure  <dig> 
electrophoretic profiles and chromatographic fractionation of yecm polysaccharides.  diaminopropane agarose electrophoresis of the ecm polysaccharides from s. cerevisiae and c. albicans. the methodology was efficient in detecting differences between the two species yecm glycosidic fraction. std – gag standards .  anionic exchange fractionation of s. cerevisiae ecm sample. fractions were analysed for the presence of total sugars , which indicate the presence of at least two different compounds. fractions were also analysed for uronic acids  and metachromasia .



s. cerevisiae ecm polysaccharides were further analysed by fast performance liquid chromatography  . identically to dae, this technique also separates polysaccharides through the total charge-to-mass ratio. in this way, fractions of s. cerevisiae were collected and tested for  total sugars through reaction using sulphuric acid:phenol reaction  <cit> ,  uronic acids, through carbazole method  <cit> , and  possible chemical substitution, analysing the metachromatic shift of  <dig> -dimethylmethylene blue   <cit>  . in total accordance with the dae results, the s. cerevisiae fplc profile shows two major peaks , indicating the existence of at least two different polysaccharide species. the presence of some kind of uronic acid in their composition , is suggested by carbazole staining, and chemical substitution by the presence of metachromasia . uronic acids are very common in extracellular polysaccharides, both in microorganisms and higher eukaryotes  <cit> . conversely, sulphation is the most frequent chemical substitution of higher eukaryotes ecm polysaccharides  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present work provides the foundations for the detailed identification of yecm components and the understanding of its biological functions. a novel and simple protocol to produce yecm from overlays/mats multicellular aggregates was developed. its robustness was challenged through inter-species reproducibility, using s. cerevisiae and c. albicans. the overlay culture mimicry of a multicellular aggregate warrants the future study of yecm development and regulation, through easy modulation of the microbial culture conditions or yeast genetic background. moreover, methodologies for yecm extraction and fractionation were optimized, providing analytical-grade protein and sugar fractions, in view of its further assessment by powerful chromatographic analysis, as far as nmr. the procedures in this work consist in the first sensible and easy to use approach to support molecular and chemical characterisation of the yecm, opening the way to the in-depth study of the microbe multicellular aggregates structure and life-style.

