BACKGROUND
the investigation of network dynamics in biology is a major issue in systems and synthetic biology. recent advances in high-throughput technologies for comprehensive observation of cells produce a lot of data for analyzing dynamics of complex system such as gene regulatory networks and metabolic pathways. time-series with dynamic behavior are one of such data involving enormous amount of information regarding the regulation of biological network in vivo. however, as such information is entirely implicit, it requires the development of adequate analytic and computational methods to reconstruct biological systems. the key in developing such computational methods is to build a reliable mathematical model for analyzing biological networks, and to explore parameter values in the model within vast searching space. tominaga et al. and maki et al. have developed a novel method  <cit>  inferring conceptual biological networks by the combination of a dynamical network model called s-system  <cit>  with a traditional parameter estimation based on simple genetic algorithms  <cit> . the s-system is based on an ordinary differential equation, in which the temporal  dynamic process of system components are characterized by power-law formalism. the s-system is suitable for conceptual modeling and describing complex systems with a loop or a cyclic interaction because the dynamic behavior of the network can be easily obtained by numerical integration and customized  <cit> . the values of interrelated coefficients in the formalism are directly or indirectly related to the regulation mechanism in the network model. the inferred network structure from the inference of parameters provides one of the best candidates for the biological network structure. however, s-system requires a large number of parameters that must be estimated to identify dynamical biological networks; the number of estimated parameters is 2n .

we previously proposed efficient procedures for inferring biological network based on experimentally observed time-series data of mrna or metabolites  <cit>  using s-system and real-coded genetic algorithms   <cit>  with a combination of uni-modal normal distribution crossover  <cit>  and minimal generation gap  <cit> . other groups have also developed several methods to optimize parameters using s-system  <cit> , beside of s-system modeling, a lot of network reconstruction algorithms from time-series have been developed  <cit> . however, most of the works focused on the improvement of computational efficiency in large-scale network inference of complex systems with cyclic relations and few attempts have been done for answering practical problems occurred in real biological systems. herrg책rd et. al., shen-orr et. al., and lee et. al. proposed that the gene regulatory network in escherichia coli or saccharomyces cerevisiae identified by experimental studies is composed of the limited number of network motif; each motif has simple form of relationships between transcription factors and genes  <cit> . little attention has been paid to evaluate the performance of network inference for such simple network motifs with dynamical modeling, s-system. in this paper, in order to evaluate the inferring performance of our previously proposed network inferring algorithms, we applied our algorithm to  <dig> kinds of simple form of network motifs proposed by shen-orr et. al.  <cit> , herrg책rd et. al.  <cit> , and lee et. al.  <cit>  shen-orr et. al. and herrg책rd et. al. suggested repeated appearances of highly significant motifs. lee et. al suggested network motifs based on genome-wide location data.

RESULTS
results of network identification
we inferred network candidates  <dig> times for each network motif, based on artificial generated time-series data sets . after obtaining  <dig> network candidates, we calculated precision and recall  to evaluate the accuracy and efficiency of our algorithm from network structural  point of view. in the case of network inferences for dor, ff, rm and tm networks, the value of recall becomes around  <dig> , which indicates about 40% of interactions in the network model are properly reconstructed by our algorithm. the better case were for ri, ar , and ml network, and our algorithm could reconstruct around 60% of interactions in the network motif. we also calculated f-measure to evaluate balance of accuracy and efficiency of network identification. also in f-measure, network identification for ri, ar, and ml network represents better estimation results compared with dor, ff, rm, sim and tm. on the other hand, the low values of precision were observed in the all cases, indicating that network candidates inferred from our algorithms. the performance of inferring accuracy  was relatively low, namely, the inferred network candidates contain many false-positive interactions. figure  <dig> shows the best case of identified network topology for sim . figure  <dig> contains all regulatory interactions in network motif for sim ). however, this contains many false-positive interactions, such as self-degradation for synthetic process, and inhibitory regulation from x <dig>  x <dig>  and x <dig> to x <dig> 

however, the lower values of precision were often observed in our previous works applied to other types of networks, so that we have already developed a method to remove the false-positive interactions inferred by parallel computing  <cit> . even though we can apply our previously proposed method to improve the precision values, our aim here is to see how both precision and recall values can be improved by altering the information content of time-series data.

we thus focus on the inferred network candidates for sim since the performance of accuracy and efficiency ) was very low. there is a possibility that the imbalance between huge degree of freedom in s-system network modeling and information amount in reference time-series data yields such low performance of accuracy and efficiency. in other words, the information content of the single reference time-series data ) is not enough to identify network candidates. to overcome this situation, we tried to infer network candidates by testing another kind of time-series data, more strictly, one-factor disrupted model. we prepared time-series data for one-factor disrupted model as shown in figure  <dig>  the s-system parameters for reconstructing networks are same as figure  <dig> and  <dig> except the rate constant for the synthetic process of disrupted factor. we prepared time-series data for the one-factor disrupted model with the rate constant for the synthetic process of disrupted factor i set to  <dig> . we inferred  <dig> network candidates from  <dig> time-series data including wild-type ) and one-factor disrupted strain. the comparison between single and  <dig> time-series in inferring accuracy and efficiency is shown in figure  <dig>  the result shows that the performance is remarkably improved compared with the case in single time-series. we applied the same data to other motifs  and found that the introduction of time-series data using one-factor disrupted model can improve the performance of our algorithm.

CONCLUSIONS
we applied our previously proposed algorithm to the network motifs proposed by herrg책rd and shen-orr. as a result, the efficiency  of our method exhibited relatively high in most of network motifs. in particular, in the regulatory interactions  model, we reconstructed about 68% of interactions in the model. interestingly, the performance of network inference for complex regulatory network including cyclic interactions  was better than that for simple network analyzed in this study. it is likely that the abundant information related to dynamic behavior contained in time-series data for complex regulatory network constrains the degree of freedom s-system modeling, for this reason, the false-positive or false-negative interactions for complex network are reduced.

in order to examine how to improve both the accuracy and efficiency, we attempted to infer the network candidates based on  <dig> time-series data including time-series for one-factor disrupted model. in this situation, the performance of inferring accuracy and efficiency remarkably increased. this result suggests that the inferring performance can be improved by adding other kinds of time-series data.

note that the present performance is examined by a set of data generated from arbitrary given parameter values. we should test the performance of our method for various structures of networks with different parameters as well as for observed data. from practical point of view, there have been various kinds of data accumulated under different experimental conditions. the differential information content of such data is expected to further improve the performance of our method. a continuous examination of inferring well-established network motifs in biology would strengthen the applicability of our algorithm to the realistic biological network including gene regulatory networks or metabolic pathways.

