BACKGROUND
horizontal gene transfer  implicates the transfer of genetic material between species. genes acquired by this process can provide novel functions to the recipient organism, particularly when that organism is naive for functions associated with the newly acquired gene. therefore, hgt has the potential to play an important role in the exploitation of new niches. hgt has been inferred in many biological processes including the emergence and spread of virulence-factors, resistance to antibiotics, and the long-term maintenance of organelles  <cit> . thus far, hgt on a large-scale has mainly been described from organelles to the nucleus transfer  <cit> , and between different species of bacteria and archaea  <cit> , and on a smaller scale from eukaryotes to bacteria  <cit> . the least well-documented form of large-scale hgt deals with the uptake of dna into eukaryotic cells. individual examples include transfer from bacteria to fungi  <cit>  or ciliates  <cit>  in the rumen. the transfer of  <dig> bacterial genes to nematodes  <cit>  and of  <dig> such genes to entamoeba histolytica  <cit>  are the only examples where hgt from bacteria to eukaryotes has been investigated on a large-scale.

here we investigate hgt from the bacteria to rumen ciliates – a monophyletic but rather diverse group of unicellular eukaryotes. these organisms co-exist in the rumen under conditions that have been shown to allow hgt in vitro  <cit> . ciliates form an extremely diverse taxonomic group of protozoa with an enormous diversity of known species. they are the most complex single cell eukaryotes, some having genomes with more than  <dig>  genes  <cit> . they are abundant in almost every aqueous environment, from ocean waters to small ponds and even pockets of soil water; and they can grow as symbionts, commensals or parasites in pelagic, benthic, sapropelic or intestinal ecosystems. one of the intestinal environments in which ciliates have been described is the rumen, a highly specialized foregut differentiation in herbivorous mammals like cattle, sheep and goats. in these animals the rumen is the primary site for digestion of plant material consumed as a food source. digestion is performed by a numerous and diverse microbiota including bacteria, anaerobic fungi, and ciliates. the resulting fermentation products, such as short-chain fatty acids, but also the microbial biomass substantially contribute to the nutrition of the host. there is a certain degree of genomic plasticity within this environment, with some evidence for hgt between organisms  <cit>  and one bacterial species being naturally transformable  <cit> .

given the close contact between ciliates and bacteria in the rumen, this environment promises optimal conditions to study hgt from bacteria to eukaryotes, in particular, because ciliates engulf and digest bacteria  <cit> . in the process of breakdown and digestion of the bacteria, some of the bacterial dna may be taken up by the ciliates and incorporated into their genomes.

thus far, there have been reports of hgt to the rumen ciliates of a xylanase  <cit> , a cellulase  <cit>  and a glutamate dehydrogenase  <cit> . whether these are incidental occurrences or whether there is indeed evidence for large-scale hgt from bacteria to ciliates within this environment remained to be discovered. here we have undertaken random cdna sequencing of rumen dwelling ciliates in order to identify expressed hgt candidates. as part of the eu-funded programs ercule , and cimes  cdna libraries were constructed from ten species of rumen ciliates and were sequenced randomly . thus we have obtained a large set of cdnas  from ciliates belonging to the order entodiniomorphida: i.e. entodinium simplex, entodinium caudatum, eudiplodinium maggii, metadinium medium, diploplastron affine, polyplastron multivesiculatum and epidinium ecaudatum and from isotricha prostoma, isotricha intestinalis and dasytricha ruminantium, which belong to the order vestibuliferida. here we examine these est data for hgt from bacteria. using large-scale sequence comparisons and phylogenetic analyses we find  <dig> genes that are likely to have been horizontally transferred to the ciliates. the majority of these genes are involved in the catabolism of complex carbohydrates and in the adaptation to an anaerobic environment. this supports the hypothesis that hgt plays an important role in the exploitation of new niches.

RESULTS
best hit within the bacteria
a total of  <dig> sequences were generated. following filtering of sequences  we clustered the remaining  <dig> ests to remove redundancy. grouping sequences with >97% identity over a stretch of at least  <dig> nucleotides resulted in  <dig> clusters containing between two and  <dig> sequences, and  <dig> single sequence clusters . in order to find potential cases of hgt, we first performed a best hit search  against the predicted proteomes of  <dig> completely sequenced genomes. examining the longest sequence per cluster resulted in  <dig> clusters out of  <dig>  with a best hit in one of the complete genomes. the species distribution of the best hits , ranging from plasmodium falciparum with the most hits, followed by arabidopsis thaliana and danio rerio is in agreement with the phylogeny of the eukaryotes proposed by baldauf et al.  <cit> . according to that phylogeny the sub-class ciliophora is most closely related to the apicomplexa , then to the viridiplantae  and then to the opisthokonts .

of the  <dig> best hit proteomes shown in figure  <dig>  the top  <dig> proteomes are eukaryotic. nevertheless, we also found a substantial number of ests with a bacterial best hit. the bacterium with the most best hits is clostridiumacetobutylicum, a firmicute which has previously been isolated from bovine rumen fluid  <cit> . a total of  <dig> different firmicutes were identified with best hits, plus nine "other" bacteria and two archaea species.

firmicutes, as with other "intestinal" bacteria are likely hgt donors because they live in close contact with the studied ciliates in the gastrointestinal tract of the ruminants  <cit> . according to edwards et al., low g+c gram positive bacteria represent 54% of the rumen bacterial ecosystem, followed by the cytophaga-flexibacter-bacteroides group   <cit> . nelson et al.  also show that gram negative bacteria were poorly represented in the gastrointestinal tract of wild herbivores  <cit> .

a best hit approach can only provide an indication of the relationship between sequences in different organisms, and it does not always reflect the closest neighbour  <cit> . therefore, we used a phylogenetic approach to further analyse those ciliate sequences which have a best hit in the bacterial genomes.

furthermore we show details of the complete swx comparison against the  <dig> proteomes in additional file  <dig>  among  <dig> sequences with a best hit in bacteria,  <dig>  only hit bacteria and this number raise to  <dig>  that hit both bacteria and archaea.

phylogenetic analysis
of the  <dig> sequences that have a bacterial sequence as best hit,  <dig> had enough homologs  to construct phylogenetic trees . in  <dig> of these  <dig> trees, the ciliate sequence clusters within the bacteria . further examination of these  <dig> trees shows that in  <dig> trees the ciliate sequence clusters within firmicutes, in nine trees within proteobacteria, in three trees within actinobacteria, in three trees within bacteroidetes and in one tree within spirochetes. in the remaining  <dig> trees the ciliate sequence clustered within a taxonomically more varied set of bacteria. we also considered  <dig> ciliate sequences that clustered between the bacteria and archaea as hgt candidates, as well as two that clustered within the archaea. thus a total of  <dig> sequences were studied in more detail. we included all trees that showed evidence of hgt, irrespective of their statistical support, because we are interested in an estimate of the amount of hgt. the dominance of one functional class among the hgt candidates  indicates the robustness of our results.

no bias of codon usage was detected, indicating complete adaptation to the codon usage of the ciliate host and confirming that the hgt candidates are not contaminations .

over-representation of genes involved in anaerobic metabolism among hgt candidates
out of  <dig> clusters in our database,  <dig> were assigned to at least one kog or cog. among the hgt candidates there is an over representation of genes involved in metabolism: while in the complete est dataset the functions involved in cellular process and signalling  are prevalent, most of the hgt candidates are involved in metabolism  .. comparing the numbers of ests per cluster we found no indication that horizontally transferred genes are higher expressed than non-transferred ones .  <dig> sequences out of the  <dig> hgt candidates encode enzymes , more than 35% of them are glycosyl hydrolases , enzymes that are involved in the degradation of carbohydrates from the plant cell wall.

more specifically, most of the horizontally transferred enzymes are involved in the catabolism rather than in the anabolism. a description of these  <dig> candidates can be found in additional file  <dig>  notably, we find a spectrum of enzymes in the entodiniomorphids that is very different from that we find in the vestibuliferids. the vestibuliferids expressed some enolases, fructokinases, glucokinases that we did not find in the entodiniomorphids. in contrast, the entodiniomorphids expressed enzymes such as cellobiose phosphorylases, cellulases, xylanases, pectate lyase, aspartate-ammonia lyase and nitroreductase that were not found in the vestibuliferid sequences. moreover the only ghs that were found in the vestibuliferids  are not fibrolytic enzymes. this matches the observation of williams and coleman  that vestibuliferids do not ingest fibres. these ciliates depend on the uptake of starch and bacteria.

glycosyl hydrolases  and other enzymes involved in the degradation of complex carbohydrates
the hgt candidates are dominated by the presence of one class of enzymes, namely the glycosyl hydrolases. these are a widespread group of enzymes that hydrolyse the glycosidic bonds between carbohydrates, or between a carbohydrate and a non-carbohydrate moiety. below, we described these enzymes, and more specifically the xylanases and cellulases.

we found twelve xylanases within the  <dig> hgt candidates. all of them are restricted to the entodiniomorphids . five of them are homologous to three genes of c. acetobutylicum  that are located in a single operon indicating that there might have been only a single transfer event involving a piece of dna containing the whole operon. in this case, we may expect that the other homologues of the xylanase genes that were located on the same operon in c. acetobutylicum but that were not present in our set, are present in m. medium, p. multivesiculatum and e. maggii genomes. on the other hand, without complete genome data, we cannot exclude gene loss either. table  <dig> describes domains present in these xylanases genes found in ciliates, and the domains found in the other glycosyl hydrolases.

the set of hgt candidates also contains nine cellulases, which were only found in the entodiniomorphids  and p. multivesiculatum ). seven of them belong to gh family  <dig> and only contain a cellulase domain. am <dig> belongs to gh family  <dig> and contains a glycol_hydro_ <dig> domain. am <dig> contains an endoglucanase e like domain. some cellulolytic bacteria and rumen fungi have cellulosome, which is a multi-enzyme complex for the degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides  <cit> . this cellulosome consists of a scaffoldin protein that binds several glycosyl hydrolases via specialized intermodular "cohesin-dockerin" interactions. finding such protein could reinforce the prokaryotic origin of the cellulases. however, we found no evidence for the presence of a scaffoldin and any cohesin domain was detected in the ciliate sequences. this could be explained by the fact that the occurrence of cellulases was restricted to those species that are able to ingest plant fibres. therefore, it is likely that these cellulases do not require cohesin domains as is the case in bacterial or fungal cellulases, which are excreted into the environment. our results on expressed genes are consistent with previous work on enzyme activities. we found cellulases in epidinium confirming previous work using recombinant dna technology  <cit> , in which an epidinium cellulase was shown to be functional. furthermore, the role of p. multivesiculatum in cellulose digestion  <cit>  is consistent with the presence of a cellulase in our polyplastron sequences. conversely, the absence of cellulase genes among the ests of entodinium, is consistent with in vitro studies of entodinium in which no cellulase activity was detected  <cit> .

beside the xylanases and cellulases mentioned above, we also found other enzymes involved in the degradation of the complex carbohydrates: an α-glucanotransferase, a β-hexosaminidase, a 6-phospho-β-glucosidase, three pectate lyases, a pectin degradation protein, four cellobiose phosphorylases, two glycosidases, an α-xylosidase, an α-glucosidase, a chitinase, a lysozyme, a polygalacturonase, a carbohydrate esterase, a sorbitol dehydrogenase and a galactoside o-acetyltransferase, two fructokinases, an aldose epimerase precusrsor.

adaptation to an anaerobic environment
among the other hgt candidates are an fe-hydrogenase and a malic enzyme, which are of interest because of their link with hydrogenosomes, membrane-bound organelles present in a number of anaerobic organisms such as the ciliate nyctotherus ovalis  <cit> , the chytrid fungi neocallimastix and piromyces, and the parabasalian flagellate trichomonas vaginalis. most hydrogenases are found in such membrane-bound organelles, but there are exceptions for example in giardia and entamoeba where hydrogenases are located in the cytoplasm  <cit> . similarly, also malic enzymes are found in various compartments of the eukaryotic cell: in trichomonas vaginalis, a cytosolic malic enzyme of bacterial origin was found as well as a hydrogenosomal homologue  <cit> . until now hydrogenosomes of rumen ciliates have not been studied in more detail, and it remains unclear as to whether all rumen ciliates possess hydrogenosomes  <cit> .

another enzyme, pyrophosphate-fructose 6-phosphate 1-phosphotransferase  can also be linked to adaptation to an anaerobic environment. this enzyme catalyzes the phosphorylation of d-fructose 6-phosphate to d-fructose  <dig>  biphosphate, using ppi rather than the standard 6-phosphofructokinase  which uses atp. ppi dependent phosphofructokinase typically occurs, besides in plants, among anaerobic unicellular species, and has been suggested to be an adaptation to a situation where the glycolysis is the sole source of atp  <cit> .

in the hgt candidates we also found some enzymes involved in nitrogen metabolism: four nitroreductases, two aspartate-ammonia ligases , an aspartate-ammonia lyase  and a nad specific glutamate dehydrogenase . these last three enzymes catalyse the reversible reactions between ammonia and the respective amino-acids: l-asparagine, l-aspartate and l-glutamate. in the rumen, the proteins are degraded into amino-acids, which are then rapidly deaminated to form ammonia. ammonia can then be excreted via urine and faeces or, alternatively assimilated by ruminal bacteria  <cit>  or by the ciliates themselves. indeed a glutamate dehydrogenase  probably acquired through hgt, has already been described in entodinium caudatum. this gdh was cloned and expressed in e. coli, where it expressed a high affinity for ammonia and α-ketoglutarate and a low affinity for glutamate, suggesting that the enzyme may be involved in the assimilation of ammonia by ent. caudatum in the rumen  <cit> .

discussion
detecting hgt by a phylogenetic approach after selecting candidates by best hit
a number of methods have been proposed to detect horizontal gene transfer, varying from best hit approaches  <cit>  to phylogenetic methods  <cit>  and methods that examine aberrant codon usage  <cit> . here we have combined a fast screening "best hit" method for the detection of potential candidates followed by two levels of phylogenetic analyses. first, we used the best hit method to restrict the data set of potential candidates. then, the fast neighbor-joining method highlighted the sequences that clustered within the bacteria. in the final step we used a maximum likelihood approach which is the more time consuming, but also a more reliable phylogenetic method. such a multi-step approach appears well suited for the detection of likely candidates when doing maximum likelihood analyses for all genes would be too time consuming. the large number of phylogenetic trees that had to be examined prompted us to use an automated method for their analysis: the examination of the species composition of the second smallest partition, allowing us to pinpoint the firmicutes as the largest group of potential donors of genes.

our large-scale analysis allowed us nevertheless to identify the few genes previously shown from small scale analyses, to have arisen through hgt , thereby confirming the usefulness and validity of our method.

hgt frequency
hgt seems to be an important process in the evolution of rumen ciliates. in total  <dig> % of the ests available for these ciliates appear to have been acquired by hgt. this number is at least one order of magnitude higher than the level of hgt found in  nematodes   <cit>  and about four times the 1% of potential hgt's found in  entamoeba histolytica  <cit> , although these differences might be biased due to the usage of est data instead of dna based gene predictions. however, even under the  assumption that the  <dig> candidates genes for hgt in rumen ciliates described here represent the vast majority of all hgt genes in the genome of a "standard" rumen ciliate with more than  <dig>  genes, the incidence of hgt would still be about  <dig> %.

the low number of transfers in nematodes  might be due to the fact the transferred genes must be incorporated into the germ line to be inherited. this hampers, for principal reasons, hgt into the genome of multicellular organisms. in contrast, entamoeba histolytica, which exhibits a genome-wide hgt incidence of about 1%, is a unicellular eukaryote without any germ-line soma differentiation. ciliates are in an intermediate position between unicellular organisms and multicellular organisms, being unicellular organisms, but possessing a differentiated germ-line , and a somatic nucleus , which accounts for all transcriptional activities during the vegetative growth of the cell. therefore, the high incidence of evolutionary hgt might be surprising in the first instance. however, the unusually high incidence of hgt in ciliates can be explained by  their bacteriovory, which eventually leads to the release of bacterial dna into the cytoplasm, and  their nuclear dimorphism, which allows amplification of foreign dna in the macronucleus  <cit> . furthermore, ciliates possess a sophisticated machinery of enzymes facilitating extended genome reorganizations obviously allowing the assembly of dna into novel genetic environments  <cit> .

the level of hgt in ciliates seems more comparable to that observed in bacteria   <cit> . most of the studies about hgt within bacteria are based on the nucleotide composition as it has been postulated that transferred genes retain the nucleotide composition of the donor for some time  <cit> . this is however a relatively poor indicator <cit> , particularly in the case of genes which have been incorporated long ago.

adaptive value of hgt in exploitation of new niches
the vast majority of the transferred genes that we found in this study are involved in the degradation of plant cell wall derived carbohydrates, indicating an adaptation to the carbohydrate-rich environment in which these ciliates live.

interestingly, also the few other examples of hgt from bacteria to eukaryotes tend to involve complex carbohydrate degradation enzymes. previously documented examples include an endo- <dig> -mannanase  in piromyces  <cit> , a β- <dig> -endoglucanase   <cit> , an endoglucanase and probably other glycoside hydrolases in orpinomyces, a rumen fungus  <cit>  and pectinases in the nematodes  <cit> . here we have shown that carbohydrate degrading enzymes also dominate in a large set of horizontally transferred genes. in contrast, in the analysis of horizontal gene transfer between e.g. archaea and bacteria, the transferred functions are not specifically involved in the breakdown of complex carbohydrates although there is a dominance of "operational" proteins over "informational" proteins  <cit> . the hgt candidates we found are mainly encoding proteins involved in the degradation of complex plant cell wall derived carbohydrates reinforcing the interpretation that genes were only retained that provide an evolutionary advantage for the host in the particular ecological niche. thus, we were able to substantiate our postulate that the lifestyle of ciliates in the gastro-intestinal tract of animals and their unique genome organisation, i.e. the presence of a macronucleus with highly processed, gene-dense chromosomes, together with a germ-line nucleus that tolerates large genome rearrangements  <cit> , would provide favourable circumstances for the acquisition of foreign dna. the observed high rate of hgt makes rumen ciliates ideal bio-monitors for identification of potential gene transfer events in the gastro-intestinal tract of farm animals. the frequency of the historical transfers observed here approaches the levels of bacterial hgts. as ciliates ingest bacteria, it also supports the "you are what you eat" hypothesis, since the sources for the historical hgt were clearly bacteria which are related to bacteria which are abundant in the rumen and gut of herbivorous mammals.

CONCLUSIONS
we have screened a large set of ests from rumen ciliates, eukaryotes that live in the foregut of the ruminant, by combining two methods: best hit and phylogenetic analyses. the amount of hgt  is larger than what has ever been described in eukaryotes. the results are consistent in the sense that the horizontal transfers are dominated by genes that internally encode enzymes involved into a few, specialized metabolic processes. rumen ciliate species live an anaerobic enviroment that is characterized by the availability of a rich source of plant polymers. since ciliates per se  seem to possess only a limited repertoire of enzymes allowing the catabolism of such carbohydrates, a substantial fraction of the genes involved in the breakdown of carbohydrates in the rumen ciliates appears to be acquired from firmicutes and other bacteria, which are well represented in the rumen.

thus the horizontally transferred genes identified in this research may have greatly facilitated the ciliates' colonization of their rumen habitat.

