BACKGROUND
chlorophyll molecules are major components of photosynthesis and play essential roles in harvesting light energy and charge separation. chlorophylls are actively synthesized during greening and are assembled with various apoproteins to form chlorophyll-protein complexes. apoproteins of core antenna complexes solely bind chlorophyll a, while apoproteins of peripheral antenna complexes bind both chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b  <cit> . since these chlorophyll-protein complexes are stoichiometrically assembled to form functional photosystems, chlorophyll metabolism must be tightly regulated to coordinate with the formation of these complexes. previous reports have suggested that the regulation of chlorophyll metabolisms is important from the viewpoint of photodamage. most of the chlorophyll intermediates are photoreactive compounds  <cit> . if the regulation of 5-aminolevulinic acid , a precursor of tetrapyrrole synthesis, is defective as the result of mutation of a regulation factor, protochlorophyllide is accumulated in excessive amounts under dark conditions  <cit> . consequently, this overabundance of protochlorophyllide results in the generation of reactive oxygen species  and finally causes growth retardation or cell death during greening  <cit> .

at the last step of chlorophyll biosynthesis, chlorophyll b is synthesized from chlorophyll a by chlorophyllide a oxygenase  <cit> . since an increase in cao mrna levels stimulates chlorophyll b synthesis, cao activity is considered to be partly regulated by cao gene expression  <cit> . in addition to the regulation on the transcriptional level, chlorophyll b synthesis is also regulated by protein stability. cao consists of three domains, which are named sequentially from the n terminus as the a, b and c domains  <cit> . the c domain contains binding motifs for a rieske center and non-heme iron and catalyzes the conversion of chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b  <cit> . although the precise function of the b domain is not known, it is considered to possibly function as a linker between the a and c domains  <cit> . although the a domain is not involved in catalytic function, it regulates cao protein stability  <cit> . when the a domain was removed from cao, and only bc domains were introduced and overexpressed in arabidopsis , the protein levels of cao were drastically increased and chlorophyll b was excessively accumulated  <cit> . we recently determined that the chloroplast clp protease plays an important role in cao protein stability  <cit> . however, excess chlorophyll b accumulation does not result in a distinct alteration of photosynthetic activity and does not induce photodamage in green leaves  <cit> . therefore, at the present time it is still not known why the protein level of cao is strictly regulated by the a domain.

in order to answer this question, we introduced genes corresponding to either the complete cao sequence or bc domains into arabidopsis. we subsequently investigated the greening processes of these transgenic plants under various light conditions. interestingly, transgenic plants expressing only the bc domains died when the etiolated seedlings were exposed to continuous light. in addition, chlorophyll synthesis was disturbed in these plants during etiolation and greening of seedlings. we discuss the role of the a domain in the regulation of chlorophyll synthesis and chloroplast development.

RESULTS
cao without the a domain caused photodamage during greening
in order to elucidate the physiological role of the a domain, we examined the light sensitivity of two types of transgenic plants that we named tgbcch and tgabcch in the ch1- <dig> mutant background. the ch1- <dig> mutant contains a deletion in the cao gene and does not contain chlorophyll b  <cit> . the tgbcch lines overexpress a chimeric transgene containing the gfp gene and the cao gene lacking the a-domain coding sequence  <cit> . in contrast, the tgabcch lines overexpress another chimeric transgene encoding gfp and the full-length cao protein  <cit> . both types of transgenic plants were grown under different light conditions and their phenotypes were compared to those of wild type and the ch1- <dig> mutant. when the seeds were germinated and grown under low light conditions, all four strains grew well, although the ch1- <dig> exhibited a pale green phenotype . when etiolated seedlings were transferred to low light conditions, most of the tgbcch plants were bleached and the growth of the tgbcch seedlings was retarded . when exposed to high light conditions, no etiolated and green seedlings of tgbcch survived . on the contrary, seedlings from the other three strains developed normally and grew under low and high light conditions . these results confirmed that the overexpression of the cao gene lacking the a domain resulted in photodamage to arabidopsis seedlings.

gfp-cao fusion transgenes were highly overexpressed in the etiolated and greening seedlings of all transgenic tgabcch and tgbcch plant lines . the expression levels of the transgenes, which correspond to gfp-abc or gfp-bc, were higher than that of full-length cao in wild type seedlings . the tgbcch transgenic lines accumulated a large amount of gfp-bc protein  in both etiolated and green seedlings . the gfp-bc proteins localized to etioplasts and chloroplasts . in contrast, the full-length cao  and the gfp-full-length cao  proteins were under a detectable level by immunoblotting in both etiolated and greening seedlings . it was evident that the full-length cao and the gfp-full-length cao proteins accumulated to certain levels in the green leaves because chlorophyll b was actively synthesized in the transgenic plants  <cit> . however, the protein levels of cao in the seedlings were too low for detection by immunoblot analysis. these data suggest that the low accumulation level of cao is sufficient to synthesize chlorophyll b. we should note that the excess accumulation of the fusion protein in the gfp-bc overexpressing plants was not due to the transcriptional or translational activation in these plants  <cit> . it was most likely that the lack of the a domain impaired the degradation of cao by clp protease  <cit> .

as shown in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  our transgenic lines did not show any obvious phenotypical differences between the lines. in the subsequent experiments described within this study, we also examined all transgenic lines shown in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  all of the lines produced results that were nearly identical.

next, we examined the accumulation of chlorophyll when etiolated seedlings were transferred to continuous light conditions. in comparison to wild type, chlorophyll levels were low in tgbcch and ch1- <dig> but slightly higher in tgabcch . in good accordance with chlorophyll accumulation, lhcb protein levels were higher in tgabcch and lower in tgbcch compared to wild type . the chlorophyll a/b ratio was very high soon after the onset of illumination and decreased gradually during the greening in wild type . in contrast, the chlorophyll a/b ratio was already low after illumination and gradually increased during greening in tgabcch and tgbcch . in tgbcch, the chlorophyll a/b ratio was extremely low. fig.  <dig> shows the hplc profiles of chlorophyll that accumulated after  <dig> min of illumination in wild type and two types of transgenic plants. under this condition, most of the chlorophyll molecules were derived from protochlorophyllide a that pre-accumulated during the dark condition. the wild type seedlings accumulated chlorophyll a but not chlorophyll b . it should be noted that the small peak at  <dig> min in wild type was not chlorophyll b because the spectrum showed different peaks . in contrast, the tgbcch only accumulated chlorophyll b, suggesting that chlorophyll a  in tgbcch was immediately converted to chlorophyll b  after the photoconversion of protochlorophyllide a into chlorophyllide a . both chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b accumulated in tgabcch and the level of chlorophyll a was nearly equivalent to the levels of wild type .

interestingly, we found that the fully-greened leaves of tgbcch accumulated a significant amount of 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll, which is an intermediate molecule in the conversion between chlorophyll b and chlorophyll a . the unusually high level of 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll suggests that the excess gfp-bc proteins or the excess chlorophyll b might activate the conversion between chlorophyll a and b  <cit> .

loss of the a domain results in a perturbation of chlorophyll metabolism
the tgbcch seedlings accumulated a low level of chlorophyll during the greening process . these data are consistent with the observation that the amount of protochlorophyllide, which is an end product of chlorophyll synthesis in etiolated seedlings, decreased in tgbcch transgenic plants . when plants were fed with ala, similar trends were observed between wild type and the transgenic plants . these results might suggest that certain enzymatic steps between ala and protochlorophyllide formation were disturbed and that this disturbance limited the chlorophyll synthesis in the tgbcch seedlings during greening.

the seedlings were grown for  <dig> days under dark conditions with or without ala  on wet filter paper. seedlings were subsequently harvested under dark conditions and their extracts were analyzed for their protochlorophyllide composition by hplc analysis .

in our next line of investigation, we examined the re-accumulation of protochlorophyllide in the dark after a brief illumination as a means to analyze the kinetics of protochlorophyllide synthesis in the seedlings. under these conditions, protochlorophyllide levels were similar in wild type, tgbcch and tgabcch during the first day of darkness . however, the levels decreased in the following 2-day period of darkness only in tgbcch . although the etiolated tgbcch seedlings seemed to synthesize protochlorophyllide normally, the pigment appeared to be broken down during dark condition by unknown mechanisms. alternatively, it is also possible that divinyl-protochlorophyllide a may inhibit an earlier step of chlorophyll biosynthesis in a feedback manner.

six-day-old etiolated seedlings were exposed to low light for  <dig> min and were returned to dark conditions. the seedlings after a  <dig> or  <dig> day additional dark incubation period were subsequently harvested under dark conditions. their extracts were analyzed for their protochlorophyllide composition by hplc analysis . the n.d. abbreviation indicates "not detected".

in order to investigate the chlorophyll b synthetic pathway in tgbcch, we compared the compositions of the chlorophyll intermediates in wild type, tgbcch and tgabcch. in spite of the accumulation of cao in tgbcch, protochlorophyllide b was not detected in etiolated seedlings . these data indicate that cao is unable to catalyze the conversion of protochlorophyllide a to protochlorophyllide b in arabidopsis. interestingly, a significant difference was observed in the accumulation ratios of divinyl-protochlorophyllide a to total protochlorophyllide a among wild type, tgbcch and tgabcch . the etiolated seedlings of wild type and tgabcch predominately accumulated monovinyl-protochlorophyllide a . conversely, monovinyl-protochlorophyllide a was accumulated to very low levels in tgbcch . this observation indicates that the loss of the a domain from cao resulted in an inactivation of  <dig>  8-divinyl protochlorophyllide a 8-vinyl reductase  <cit> .

discussion
the a domain protects cells against photodamage during greening
we previously reported on the light sensitivity of transgenic arabidopsis plants overexpressing prokaryotic cao which does not have the a domain. these transgenic plants accumulated much more chlorophyll b than tgbcch plants  <cit> . in this previous report, we concluded that the excess accumulation of chlorophyll b did not cause photodamage in the fully greened leaves of the transgenic plants  <cit> . however, in this study, we found that most of the etiolated tgbcch seedlings died during greening not only under high light conditions, but also under low light conditions. without the presence of chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b would not be incorporated into apoproteins. as a consequence, the free chlorophyll b might generate ros  <cit> . in contrast to tgbcch, transgenic plants overexpressing the full-length cao accumulated both chlorophyll a and chlorophyll b immediately after the onset of illumination. unlike tgbcch plants, the full-length-cao overexpression lines did not exhibit photodamage. it is possible that chlorophyll b is assembled with apoproteins in the presence of chlorophyll a. as a result, the generation of ros might have been suppressed. collectively, these results indicate that the a domain is essential in preventing photodamages that could be caused by excess chlorophyll b accumulation during greening. the etiolated seedlings of the transgenic arabidopsis overexpressing prokaryotic cao might cause obvious photodamage.

an unusually high level of 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll a, an intermediate molecule in the conversion between chlorophyll b to chlorophyll a, accumulated in the green leaves of tgbcch . this observation might indicate that excess chlorophyll b is reconverted to chlorophyll a by the chlorophyll cycle  <cit> . it is not likely that 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll was formed in the course of the chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b conversion. since cao catalyzes the two-step reaction from chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b by itself, the intermediate molecule, 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll, is supposed to be associated with the cao enzyme and is not released during the reaction  <cit> . in our study, 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll was not found just after the start of the illumination of etiolated seedlings, although chlorophyll b was actively synthesized . therefore, it would be reasonable to assume that 7-hydroxymethyl chlorophyll was predominantly formed in the course of the chlorophyll b to chlorophyll a conversion.

accumulation of gfp-bc protein interferes with the regulation of chlorophyll biosynthesis
in comparison to wild type plants, chlorophyll accumulation during greening was suppressed in tgbcch seedlings, even under low light conditions. it is possible that this suppression might be due to the oxidative stress generated by free chlorophyll b. the overabundance of protochlorophyllide generates ros, which causes growth retardation or cell death during greening in the flu mutant  <cit> . recently, we found that the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway is a target of oxidative stress  <cit> . however, all of the phenotypes of tgbcch could not be explained by oxidative stress alone. for example, the level of protochlorophyllide a in etiolated tissues of tgbcch was lower than that of wild type. since these plants were not exposed to light, the involvement of ros in the inhibition of protochlorophyllide accumulation can be excluded. we also observed an increase in the ratio of divinyl-protochlorophyllide to the total protochlorophyllide in tgbcch transgenic plants. these data indicate that the accumulation of the bc domains of cao inhibits the activity of  <dig>  8-divinyl protochlorophyllide a 8-vinyl reductase. on the contrary, overexpression of the gfp-abc protein enhanced chlorophyll accumulation. these phenomena are very interesting in terms of biological regulation since both cao and truncated cao affected not only chlorophyll b synthesis but also other chlorophyll metabolic steps. these results are reasonable because some enzymes, which are related to chlorophyll biosynthesis, are reported to form complexes or interact with other enzymes. for example, glutamyl-trna reductase and glutamate-1-semialdehyde aminotransferase form a complex which enables an efficient substrate trafficking between two enzymes  <cit> . in addition, bchh, one of the three subunits of mg chelatase of rhodobacter capsulatus, accelerated the mg-protoporphyrin ix monomethyl transferase activity  <cit> . if cao does indeed interact with other enzymes, the accumulation of truncated cao could potentially interfere with the activity of the target enzymes.

in addition, the loss of the a domain in cao impaired the conversion of divinyl-protochlorophyllide a to monovinyl protochlorophyllide a, and obviously reduced total protochlorophyllide a level under dark conditions. a possible scenario for the reduction of protochlorophyllide accumulation in the tgbcch seedlings is that the excessively-accumulated cao in these seedlings interfered with the enzyme that catalyzes the formation of monovinyl-protochlorophyllide a from divinyl-protochlorophyllide a, the latter of which may inhibit an earlier step of chlorophyll biosynthesis in a feedback manner. further studies are necessary and warranted to clarify this question.

cao does not catalyze the conversion of protochlorophyllide a to protochlorophyllide b
when etiolated seedlings of wild type are exposed to continuous light, chlorophyll a immediately accumulates after the onset of illumination. subsequent to illumination, chlorophyll a and b levels gradually increase after several hours of a lag phase. conversely, in tgbcch plants, chlorophyll b accumulated but chlorophyll a was not detected after  <dig> min of illumination . considering that protochlorophyllide b was not found in etiolated seedlings, these data indicate that chlorophyll a was immediately converted to chlorophyll b in tgbcch seedlings during the early phase of greening .

several research groups report that protochlorophyllide b does not exist in etioplasts  <cit> . contrary to these reports, another group claimed that the protochlorophyllide b could be detected in etiolated seedlings when they use diethylpyrrocarbonate-containing acetone for the extraction of pigments  <cit> . it was also proposed that protochlorophyllide b is synthesized via a pathway that is independent from the cao protein  <cit> . in addition, a cyanobacteria transformant with the cao and lhcb transgenes, accumulated protochlorophyllide b  <cit> . this observation indicates that cao is capable of converting protochlorophyllide a to protochlorophyllide b. in this study, we used 100% acetone as an extraction solvent for chlorophyll intermediates in order to avoid the artificial formation of chlorophyll derivatives and to maximize our extraction of the chlorophyll intermediates from seedlings  <cit> . consequently, we did not detect any protochlorophyllide b in etiolated tgbcch seedlings, even though a large amount of the cao protein accumulated. these results indicate that protochlorophyllide b is not a major intermediate product for chlorophyll b synthesis in planta.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results demonstrated that excessive accumulation of chlorophyll b is harmful to plants. this deleterious effect likely disturbs the proper synthesis of chlorophyll intermediates and the accumulation of photosynthetic proteins. therefore, we conclude that the regulation of the cao protein by the a domain is essential for the survival of etiolated seedlings under light conditions. since the a domain functions to maintain proper chlorophyll b levels throughout the development of plants  <cit> , it would be reasonable to assume that the regulation of the cao protein level is essential in various aspects of plant development and acclimation to light conditions. further studies on the regulatory mechanism of cao may elucidate the physiological roles of this mechanism throughout the life cycle of plants.

