BACKGROUND
safflower  is a thistle-like, self-compatible, annual, diploid  herbaceous crop that thrives in hot, dry climates, and is capable of surviving on minimal surface moisture. it is believed to have been domesticated somewhere in the fertile crescent region over  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . following its initial domestication, safflower cultivation is thought to have expanded to both the east and west  <cit> , with knowles  <cit>  ultimately recognizing seven "centers of similarity" . safflower lines native to each 'center' are remarkably similar in height, branching, spines, flower color and head size; however, consistent morphological differences are maintained between the centers.

for centuries, safflower was grown on a local scale for its flowers, which served as a source of dye  for textiles and food coloring, as well as for use in religious ceremonies  <cit> . floral extracts were also used to flavor foods, and have historically been valued for their numerous medicinal properties. cultivation of safflower in the new world commenced in  <dig>  and commercial production of safflower as an oilseed crop began in the 1950s  <cit> . more recently, there has been growing interest in safflower for its potential as a large-scale production platform for plant-made pharmaceuticals  <cit> .

to date, phylogenetic investigations of carthamus species have focused on either delimiting the sections within the genus , or on the development of dna fingerprinting methodologies for investigating relationships amongst safflower cultivars . relationships between closely-related species within each section are, however, only poorly understood, and details surrounding the origin and early evolution of safflower are lacking. what we currently know is that safflower belongs to a group of closely related diploid species  whose ranges extend from central turkey, lebanon, and israel in the west to northwestern india in the east. in addition to c. tinctorius, this section is composed of c. curdicus hanelt, c. gypsicola iljin, c. oxyacanthus bieb. , c. palaestinus eig, and c. persicus desf. ex willd.   <cit> . however, these species all exhibit some degree of cross-compatibility with one another  and thus reproductive isolation alone cannot be used to delimit the species. carthamus curdicus and c. palaestinus exhibit restricted geographical distributions , whereas c. persicus, c. gypsicola and c. oxyacanthus are more widely distributed throughout the middle east  <cit> .

hypotheses regarding the origin of safflower have focused on c. oxyacanthus or c. palaestinus as the most likely progenitors, although c. persicus has also been suggested as a possible progenitor  <cit> . here we report on levels of nucleotide diversity within and among species of sect. carthamus, and investigate the origin of cultivated safflower using data derived from seven nuclear genes.

RESULTS
dna sequence diversity
sequence data were collected from all seven gene regions for each of the  <dig> individuals surveyed , encompassing all species within sect. carthamus. all sequences have been deposited in the genbank data library and are available under accession nos. ef483951–ef <dig>  ef483983–ef <dig>  ef519712–ef <dig>  ef519732–ef <dig>  ef519754–ef <dig>  ef519774–ef <dig>  ef519795–ef <dig>  ef519815–ef <dig> and ef519838–ef <dig>  excluding indels, sequence lengths varied from  <dig> to  <dig> base pairs  per locus, and all sequences included both exons and introns . thus, we were able to analyze  <dig> bp of aligned sequence per individual with  <dig> bp  coming from exons and  <dig> bp  coming from introns. across taxa, the number of indel polymorphisms per locus varied from four to thirteen, with a total of  <dig> indels in the data set. all indels were excluded from the analyses of nucleotide polymorphism.

a numbers refer to the usda accession , vienna museum of natural history  or gatersleben herbarium accession . no number indicates a private collection. '-' indicates missing voucher specimens. more seeds are, however, available from these collections.

b asterisks refers to the seven accessions of safflower from the seven so-called "centers of similarity" 

primer names followed by 'a' or 'b' were designed to amplify a given locus in two parts. functional annotations were taken from the genbank record for each arabidopsis locus. for the unknown protein a blastn search failed to yield a putative function

a alignment size  after removing primers, indels, and ambiguous regions

b number of variable characters

single nucleotide polymorphisms  were considerably more common than indels. a total of  <dig> snps were found across the full data set, resulting in an average of  <dig> snp per  <dig> bp of sequence. considering just the  <dig> safflower individuals, there were  <dig> snps, corresponding to an average of  <dig> snp per  <dig> bp of sequence. estimates of nucleotide diversity for c. tinctorius, c. palaestinus and c. oxyacanthus are presented in table  <dig> 

a none of the estimates of tajima's d were significant

while diversity varied across loci, c. tinctorius generally harbored the lowest levels of diversity with watterson's θ  ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  , total nucleotide diversity  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , and silent-site diversity  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . carthamus oxyacanthus, on the other hand, exhibited the highest levels of diversity, with θw ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , πtot ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , and πsil ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  . carthamus palaestinus was intermediate to the other two species with θw ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  , πtot ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  , and πsil ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  .

because of the relatively small amount of exonic sequence included in each gene fragment , individual estimates of synonymous and non-synonymous diversity must be viewed with caution. averaging across loci, however, revealed that our estimates of non-synonymous variability are substantially lower than our estimates of synonymous variability, suggesting that diversity at these loci is primarily governed by purifying selection . after correcting for multiple comparisons, none of the tajima's d estimates were significantly different from zero .

phylogenetic relationships
comparison of the nj trees produced from the single gene analyses suggests that reticulate evolution and/or incomplete lineage sorting has occurred in carthamus sect. carthamus . while a number of overall similarities in tree topology are evident from these analyses, there are several instances in which the phylogenetic position of an individual varies depending on the gene analyzed. in some cases, individuals harbored divergent alleles at one or more loci, possibly indicating that contemporary hybridization has played an active role in the evolution of sect. carthamus. of particular note are the positions of the c. gypsicola alleles which are sometimes found in divergent clades . some c. oxyacanthus alleles show a similar pattern . when comparing the seven trees for the individual loci, however, some patterns begin to emerge. overall, c. oxyacanthus is most often found to be relatively distantly related to c. tinctorius, and frequently associated with alleles from c. gypsicola. of particular note is the close relationship between individuals of c. tinctorius and c. palaestinus, suggesting that the species most closely related to safflower  is c. palaestinus .

despite the occurrence of some incongruities between loci, the nj, ml and bayesian trees based on the combined data  are in overall agreement with our interpretations of the single gene analyses. carthamus oxyacanthus is resolved as the species most distantly related to safflower, with high ml bootstrap and bayesian posterior probabilities. within c. oxyacanthus the two lines from pakistan are more closely related to each other than they are to the line from afghanistan. carthamus persicus appears to be paraphyletic, perhaps due to recent gene flow. as predicted from the individual gene trees, c. palaestinus is the most closely related species to safflower, and we conclude that this species is the most likely progenitor of safflower. in the bayesian analysis, all four c. palaestinus individuals are found in a well-supported clade along with all of the safflower individuals. similarly, in the ml analysis, three of the four individuals of c. palaestinus are found in such a clade , with the fourth resolving at the base of this clade along with individuals of c. curdicus and c. persicus. some relationships can also be resolved among safflower individuals; for example, saffaz and saffac form a well-supported clade at the base of the safflower/c. palaestinus group. relationships between the other cultivars are, however, poorly-supported.

discussion
origin of safflower
a close relationship between members of sect. carthamus has been proposed based on data from crossing studies , the identification of natural hybrids amongst some species within the section  <cit> , and phylogenetic analyses involving some members of the section  <cit> . prior to the present investigation, however, the phylogenetic relationships amongst all species within sect. carthamus had not been investigated, and the identity of the progenitor of safflower had only been hypothesized. while ashri & knowles  <cit>  proposed that safflower was derived from hybridization between c. oxyacanthus and c. persicus, this hypothesis is clearly not supported by our results. rather, carthamus palaestinus and safflower are found in the same clade indicating a close relationship between these species. we thus propose that c. palaestinus, which is native to the deserts of southern israel and western iraq, is the wild progenitor of safflower. safflower and c. palaestinus share a self-compatible breeding system  <cit> ; thus, the near absence of heterozygous loci in these species  is unsurprising. carthamus persicus and some populations of c. oxyacanthus are self-incompatible, and this is evident from the presence of much more heterozygosity in these species . the cause of the non-monophyly of c. persicus remains unknown due to the small sample sizes necessarily employed here; however the retention of ancestral polymorphism and/or contemporary gene flow  could be responsible.

as noted in the introduction, knowles  <cit>  recognized seven distinct "centers of similarity" of safflower, including the far east, india-pakistan, the middle east, egypt, sudan, ethiopia and europe. interestingly, our data provide little support for the distinctiveness of safflower accessions from these disparate geographic locales. indeed, while there is a small amount of phylogenetic structure apparent within safflower, it appears that most of the accessions surveyed herein are highly similar at a genetic level. moreover, much of the substructuring within safflower is not well-supported in either the bayesian or ml analyses. the exceptions to this are a pair of accessions from the usa and canada , and possibly one accession from egypt . considering what we know about the history of safflower cultivation, the north american accessions  are presumably recent introductions, and from our data it appears that they may be derived from relatively divergent ancestral stocks . further investigation of the 'seven centers' hypothesis, will require the development and application of more variable markers to a much more robust sampling of the available safflower germplasm. while a recent investigation of safflower cultivars using rapds, issrs and aflps revealed some genetic structuring within the species  <cit> , the authors did not address the question of whether or not the seven morphological centers of diversity correspond to genetic subgroups within safflower.

levels of nucleotide diversity
the domestication of plant species is typically accompanied by a reduction in genetic diversity resulting from the population genetic bottleneck that occurs during domestication. although results vary across species, crops generally harbor ca. two-thirds of the diversity that is present in their wild progenitors  <cit> . we found a similar value here, with a 20–30%  reduction in nucleotide diversity in safflower as compared to c. palaestinus . because θw is roughly proportional to heterozygosity, we can further conclude that a randomly selected pair of safflower sequences will differ at an average of  <dig> out of every  <dig> bp . this makes safflower considerably less diverse than crops such as maize  and sunflower  but far more diverse than crops such as soybean .

CONCLUSIONS
insights into the origin of crop plants and knowledge of the identities of their progenitors are of great value in both basic and applied research programs. for example, the comparative analysis of crop plants and their wild progenitors can shed light on the genetic mechanisms underlying organismal evolution  <cit> . similarly, comparative analyses of this sort can be a powerful tool for identifying genes underlying agronomically-important traits  <cit> . the identification of c. palaestinus as the wild progenitor of safflower opens the door for such analyses within the genus carthamus. moreover, because safflower is a modern-day oilseed crop and a member of the same family as cultivated sunflower, which has been the subject of a great deal of recent study  <cit> , the initiation of such work in safflower would create a comparative framework for studying the evolution of oilseed crops within the asteraceae.

