BACKGROUND
the characterization of metabolic flux profile in living cells is an important issue in understanding the regulation of normal metabolism and the development of disease processes. such characterization is then necessary for the development of novel therapeutic strategies. stable isotope tracing using -glucose as a source of carbon, has been described as a very powerful tool for metabolic flux profiling  <cit> . the specific pattern of various 13c isotopic isomers  fractions measured using mass spectrometry or nuclear magnetic resonance techniques characterized the distribution of metabolic fluxes in the cells under the studied conditions. to evaluate the flux distribution from measured isotopomer distribution a special software tool is necessary.

classical 13c metabolic flux analysis  evaluated steady state metabolic fluxes based on isotopomer fractions measured under the conditions of isotopic steady state  <cit> . for non-stationary metabolic flux analysis we developed a tool called "isodyn"   <cit>  that simulates 13c redistribution in metabolites by automatically constructing and solving large systems of differential equations for isotopomers. although intracellular metabolites could reach isotopic steady state in a range of minutes, the existence of intracellular stores essentially delays the time necessary for establishing isotopic steady state. such stores as glycogen, aminoacids and lipids, which intensively exchange with intermediates of central carbohydrate metabolism, could prolong the pre-steady state phase for all isotopomers. of course, there is always a possibility of measuring the labeling of such stores and apply classical 13c-mfa for the "fast" intermediates of central metabolism considering that they are in quasi-steady state. however, the simulation of such "slow" variables provides additional information for the determination of the characteristics of the system.

moreover, there is another reason for using non-stationary analysis based on a kinetic model of considered pathways: it allows, when experimental data is enough, a more profound analysis of kinetic characteristics and regulation in the pathway. such advantages stimulated the development of other bioinformatic tools for non-stationary flux analysis  <cit> . here, an application of isodyn for revealing the characteristics of cancer cell metabolism and their change induced by a proapoptotic agent edelfosine is described.

apoptosis is a programmed cell death and the evasion of apoptotic programm is one of the most fundamental characteristics of cancer cells  <cit> . however, transformed cells still possess the components of apoptotic mechanism, and it could be induced by various agents. the strategy of selectively killing tumor cells by inducing apoptosis could be used for cancer therapy  <cit> , and the presented analysis provides information for the development of such strategy.

apoptotic process is a complex sequence of signaling events and metabolic changes. the cascade of signaling events resulting in cell death is well studied. however, the signals to apoptosis could be seen as a result of severe distortions in metabolism. in this way, the metabolic changes could be primary events that activate or inhibit apoptotic process. for example, the stimulation of mitochondrial metabolism related to reactive oxygen species  production  <cit>  or the inhibition of glycolisis  <cit>  has been linked with activation of apoptotic cascade. our objective was to understand whether relevant metabolic changes precede the development of apoptosis, or they just follow the progression of the apoptotic signaling program. to reveal the early metabolic changes, the metabolic effects of very low doses of edelfosine, which induce apoptosis in less than 5% of cellular population, were studied.

synthetic antitumour ether phospholipid edelfosine  selectively induces apoptosis in cancer cells  <cit> . the cell-killing mechanism of edelfosine is mediated by signalling events such as blocking some protein kinases  <cit>  or activation of specific apoptotic receptors  <cit> . also edelfosine induces the increase in mitochondrial reactive oxygen species  production  <cit> , which could be a consequence of certain metabolic distortions. if metabolic changes are primary with respect to the development of apoptotic program, it could be expected that essential changes in cell metabolism could take place at low doses of such drug, which hardly induce apoptosis.

in order to find the metabolic changes caused by the low doses of edelfosine, isodyn simulated the isotopomer distribution using the available enzyme kinetic information and the experimentally acquired 13c isotopomer distribution data. this approach allowed us to obtain sets of fluxes in the modeled metabolic network, which were consistent with the experimental distribution of mass isotopomers derived from labeled glucose in the presence of edelfosine. the determination of the metabolic conditions that promote apoptosis could be an essential contribution to the therapy of cancer.

RESULTS
glucose consumption and lactate production
the rates of glucose consumption normalized per cell volume  were defined taking into account the change of cell number and concentrations of medium glucose and lactate as it is described in "methods". these fluxes are summarized in table  <dig>  these values calculated directly from experimental data were used in the fitting of isotopic isomer distribution described below.

the fluxes are computed for the cells incubated in control conditions  and with  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> or  <dig> μg × ml- <dig> of edelfosine .

measured isotopomer distributions
since the objective of this work was to register metabolic changes that precede the development of apoptosis, very low doses of apoptosis inducing drug edelfosine were used  for 13c metabolite distribution experiments. after  <dig> hours of treatment, the dose of  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> induced less than 1% of apoptosis whereas the dose of  <dig> μg × ml- <dig> induced between  <dig> to 5% of apoptosis . incubation with -glucose as a tracer resulted in a specific isotopomer  distributions in metabolites, which was measured by gc/ms techniques in medium lactate and ribose-5-phosphate  derived from intracellular rna. the applied technique determined the fractions of different mass isotopomers: m <dig> , m <dig> , m <dig> , etc. these fractions for control and edelfosine-treated cells are shown in table  <dig> 

the distribution was measured after  <dig> hours of incubation was assessed in jurkat cells without drugs  or treated with either  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> of edelfosine that caused less than 1% of apoptosis  or with  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> of edelfosine that caused 4-5% of apoptotis . best fit obtained with isodyn is depicted in column "fit". for ribose, dilution  is also shown

simulation of measured isotopomer distributions
the distribution of isotopomer fractions of a metabolite contains information about the fluxes through the metabolic pathways of its formation. roughly, when -glucose is metabolized, anaerobic glycolysis produces mainly m <dig> lactate, whereas passage of labeled glucose through the tca cycle  or the oxidative and non oxidative branches of the pentose phosphate pathway results in m <dig> and m <dig> lactate. thus, the fractions of m <dig> and m <dig> with respect to m <dig> characterize the contribution of the tca cycle and pentose phosphate pathway. the simulation and fitting the measured isotopomer distribution allows the determination of a set of metabolic fluxes, which correspond to the measured isotopomer distribution. the details of such determination are described in method section and in  <cit>  and additional file  <dig> 

the results of data fitting by isodyn are also presented in table  <dig>  the quality of fit is characterized by χ <dig>  the sum of squares of differences between experimental and simulated data normalized by the standard deviations of experimental data. the ribose used for the analysis was extracted from cellular rna. thus, the isotopomer distribution in ribose contains information on both the label isotopomer distribution of the de novo synthesized nucleotides and also on the fraction of initial non-labeled nucleotides that were reused. the program calculates this initial fraction with respect to the one synthesized de novo during the treatment ; it is referred in the tables as "dilution" and characterized rna synthesis de novo. according to the data of table  <dig>  in edelfosine-treated cells dilution decreased, which indicates that a greater fraction of rna was synthesized de novo.

analysis of metabolic flux profiles
the fluxes were computed for cells incubated for  <dig> hours without drugs  or treated with either  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> of edelfosine that caused less than 1% of apoptosis  or with  <dig>  μg × ml- <dig> of edelfosine that caused 4-5% of apoptotis . left column for each condition shows absolute value of the flux , right column shows the values normalized per respective glucose uptake . the flux depicted as tca- > pyr is a sum of fluxes through pepck and malic enzyme, that resulted in the same isotopomer distribution and contribute to the 13c enrichment in lactate from the tca cycle. arrows indicate the directions of fluxes; stars indicate the fluxes for which the absolute values  are statistically different from control .

despite the changes in isotopomer distribution induced by a low dose of edelfosine is small, χ <dig> criterion is sufficiently sensitive to them. the program fits the data for control with very small deviations . howener, if this "control" set of parameters is used to simulate the data for treated cells, χ <dig> increases to  <dig>  which indicates that the model well accepted as a simulator of metabolic fluxes in control cells becomes unacceptable for the edelfosine-treated cells. subsequent fitting procedure decreases χ <dig> to  <dig>   just by increase of metabolic fluxes through the tca cycle and changes in the pentose phosphate pathway as table  <dig> indicates.

the activation of the tca cycle, revealed for a low dose of edelfosine, could be a reason for the activation of apoptotic process when higher doses of drug are applied. the main function of the tca cycle in energy metabolism is to produce substrates for mitochondrial respiration. therefore, the activation of tca cycle favors the reduction of electron transporters. this is a factor that could switch the mitochondrial respiratory chain to the state of damaging generation of reactive oxygen species   <cit> , which is an important component of apoptotic process. the low doses used for the metabolomic studies did not increase ros production, although their metabolic effect was significant. the increase of dose of edelfosine eventually produce significant increase of ros, as it is shown in figure  <dig>  this observation, which is in line with other experimental studies reported elsewhere  <cit> , validates the conclusion based on the isotopomer distribution data analysis.

another important distinction in the revealed flux profiles of control and edelfosine-treated jurkat cells is the difference in the fluxes of pentose phosphate pathway. in control cells all pentose phosphate fluxes were higher than those in edelfosine-treated cells . moreover, the model predicted an increase in ribose consumption for rna synthesis in edelfosine-treated cells, which led to a decrease in ribose 5-phosphate concentration, such that its synthesis became practically unidirectional. thus, newly synthesized ribose 5-phosphate was consumed for rna synthesis to a greater extent in edelfosine-treated cells than control , in accordance with the value of 13c dilution in r5p . in contrast, in control cells, the newly synthesized ribose 5-phosphate is not massively used for rna synthesis, but reutilized in the central energetic metabolism.

CONCLUSIONS
the simulation of changes in isotopomer distribution induced by low doses of edelfosine revealed essential activation of the tca cycle . such direction of changes in metabolism could enhance ros production when the higher doses of drug are applied. indeed, when doses of edelfosine causing >5% of apoptosis rate were used  the increase of ros production becomes measurable experimentally.

another effect of the drug is the stimulation of rna synthesis. both effects of the drug are consistent: the increase of the tca cycle fluxes are aimed in the increase of atp energy production necessary for biosynthetic processes induced by such stress factor as edelfosine.

