BACKGROUND
plants offer an alternative to microbial fermentation and animal cultures for the production of recombinant proteins. transgenic plants have come to be recognized as viable and efficient bioreactors for the large-scale production of recombinant proteins including pharmaceuticals and industrial enzymes  <cit> . several approaches have been used for the improvement of yields and stability of recombinant proteins in tissue expression and subcellular targeting of recombinant proteins  <cit> . the targeting to the endoplasmic reticulum  presents the advantage that er provides an oxidizing environment, an abundance of chaperones and a low protease activity, the most important factors affecting folding, assembly and post-translational modifications  <cit> . for efficient production of foreign proteins, however, plants should still overcome two main bottlenecks including protein accumulation levels and efficient purification procedures. as in bacteria and animal protein production platforms  <cit> , fusion strategies have been developed in plants  <cit> . one example is elastin-like polypeptides also called thermally-responsive synthetic biopolymers. they are composed of a repeating pentapeptide 'vpgxg' sequence  <cit>  that accumulate in er-derived protein bodies, when fused to a target protein and can be isolated by 'inverse transition cycling'  <cit> . recently the use of hydrophobins  has been reported as fusion partner for recombinant protein production in plants  <cit> . hfbi fusions were able to increase the accumulation of gfp in plants through the formation of novel protein bodies and purified by surfactant-based aqueous two-phase system.

zera protein, the proline-rich domain derived from the maize seed storage protein γ-zein, is a peptide of  <dig> amino acids that is able to induce the formation of dense endoplasmic reticulum-derived protein bodies , when fused to target proteins. this can facilitate the recovery and purification of fused recombinant proteins by density-based separation methods  <cit> . the pb inducing capacity of zera protein was demonstrated in a large panel of eukaryotes including mammalian, insect and fungi cells  <cit>  and there are evidences that it serves also as efficient fusion partner for recombinant protein production in plants  <cit> . when a protein of interest was fused to zera and expressed in different plant species, the fusion protein can be obtained in induced pbs in a highly packed and encapsulated manner. these vesicles could derive from general er mechanisms able to insulate protein multimers or aggregates and segregate them away from the secretory pathway and from both the vacuolar and er-associated degradation  pathways  <cit> . this ubiquitous zera behavior indicates the existence of intrinsic molecular properties responsible of zera self-assembly, protein fusion polymerization and hence, pb formation. it was previously shown that the most important traits of zera sequence are  the presence of cysteine residues, which participate in the inter-disulfide bonds between zera sequences and  the amphipathic feature of proline-rich repeat region which determines the efficiency of zera-zera self-assembly by hydrophobic interactions  <cit> .

however, the protein composition of these zera-induced pbs remains to be elucidated. our aim in the present study was to characterize the final protein composition of induced protein bodies in order to understand which proteins participates in pb formation and which ones are involved in an er-stress response or just be present by a passive trapping in zera-dsred polymer. n. benthamiana was selected as a host system and previously established protocols were adapted to isolate and characterize pbs from leaves transformed with zera-dsred by agroinfiltration.

RESULTS
isolation of zera-induced pbs in n. benthamiana leaves
the cdna sequence of the red fluorescent protein of dictyostelium discoideum  was fused at its n-terminus to the dna sequence coding the signal peptide and the proline-rich domain  of γ-zein. the entire chimeric zera-dsred gene was inserted to the plant binary vector pcambia  <dig> under the control of 35s camv promoter, a tev translational enhancer and the 35s terminator. the construct was coagroinfiltrated into n. benthamiana leaves together with a vector containing the coding sequence of the hcpro protein, a suppressor of silencing.

transiently transformed n. benthamiana leaves were collected and staining of proteins resolved on gels showed several bands, one of them being the most abundant and corresponding to zera-dsred  . zera fusions are known to oligomerize forming large polymers resistant to detergents  <cit>  then additional bands corresponding to high molecular mass oligomers of zera-dsred were also observed at the top of the gel . as expected, zera-dsred expression induced the formation of new organelles similar to that described for other zera-derived fusions  <cit> . under confocal microscope, zera-dsred protein bodies  appeared as numerous well defined highly fluorescent red spherical structures with diameters of 2- <dig>  microns at 5- <dig> days post infiltration  . moreover, immunoelectron microscopy of transformed leaf epidermal sections labeled with a polyclonal antibody against zera  detected protein bodies as electron dense structures embedded in the cytoplasm and surrounded by other organelles including mitochondria and chloroplasts .

our next aim was to investigate the protein composition of induced pbs by using proteomic approaches. pbs were isolated by density gradient procedures taking into account the well acknowledged limitations of organelle purity following density centrifugation  <cit> . we considered two factors to be important in optimizing the pb isolation procedure for proteome analysis:  the purity of the pb preparation and  the intactness of the organelle. immunocytochemical studies on thin sections of zera-dsred transformed leaves labelled with anti-r <dig> antibody indicated that zera-dsred pbs were derived from the er and appeared surrounded by a typical er membrane containing ribosomes . we took advantage of the high density properties inherent to these zera-fusion induced organelles to isolate pbs by subcellular fractionation  <cit> . in order to optimize the purification procedure, various density gradients based on sucrose and iodixanol  were checked. the different fractions obtained were analysed by protein electrophoresis and fluorescence microscopy and finally a discontinuous density gradient of iodixanol consisting of seven steps with densities ranging from  <dig>  g/cm <dig> to  <dig>  g/cm <dig> was selected to purify protein bodies for proteomic studies . analysis of protein profile of all gradient-purified fractions on silver-stained sds polyacrylamide gels  and western immunoassays with anti-r <dig>  and anti-dsred antibodies  confirmed the presence of recombinant protein zera-dsred mainly in the dense f <dig> fraction . the bulk of the other leaf proteins were accumulated in supernatant  and in the microsomal f <dig> fractions . the adequacy of the selected pb purification procedure for isolating intact pbs was then assessed by checking whether the er membrane surrounding the pbs is preserved after the isolation procedure. for this, we co-transformed n. benthamiana plants with a gene construct ecfp-sqs <dig> along with zera-dsred. the construct ecfp-sqs <dig> codes for the er transmembrane domain of squalene synthase  of arabidopsis thaliana  <cit>  fused towards n-terminus to a fluorescent protein oriented at the cytoplasmic side. the co-infiltrated leaves with ecfp-sqs and zera-dsred were used to isolate protein bodies and the fraction f <dig> of protein bodies observed under confocal microscope for the presence of the membrane envelope . we observed the cyan fluorescence label of membrane protein ecfp-sqs surrounding the red-labeled protein bodies indicating the preservation, either partial or complete, of the membrane envelope during the isolation procedure of protein bodies. thus, both the immunoelectron microscopy data described above  and confocal microscopy supported the conclusion that pbs were surrounded by er membrane.

pbs display a complex organization and pb proteome analysis reveals an unexpected complexity
in order to reduce the complexity and improve the depth of the analysis, we selected a sequential protein solubilization strategy where after incubation in a solubilization buffer, the putative pellet appearing at step n was resubmitted to solubilization at step n +  <dig> with a stronger solubilization buffer . for this purpose, the same sample was processed throughout and progressively extracted protein were collected. namely, the initial pellet of pbs purified on iodixanol gradient was first resuspended in sb <dig> . after incubation in this buffer, the supernatant was collected  and the insoluble proteins were pelleted. the pellet was then resuspended in the second solubilization buffer sb <dig> . once again, the supernatant was collected  and the remaining insoluble proteins were pelleted and resuspended in sb <dig> . by this procedure, we expected sb <dig> would solubilize proteins outside the pb core . sb <dig> would remove proteins mostly bound to the core of zera-dsred aggregate via intermolecular disulfide bounds or would release from the core trapped proteins and some zera-dsred monomers by decondensing zera-dsred aggregates . proteins sequentially extracted from purified pbs were analyzed by sds-page. figure 3a shows the strong enrichment of the zera-dsred protein in the pb extract before the sequential extractions with a pink color given by the dsred. the greenish color of s fraction suggests the presence of plastidial proteins, whilst the colorless r fraction emphasizes the efficient extraction of these chlorophyll-bound proteins by sb <dig>  heating gives a colorless h fraction containing mainly zera-dsred protein. it should be noted that 100% of fraction s and r but only 10% of fraction h were loaded on the gel suggesting that s and r represents only a small fraction of the pb extract and shows that the latter is mainly composed of zera-dsred protein . the  <dig> sds-page lanes containing s, r, and h fractions  were sliced into small squares  and proteins were reduced, alkylated and trypsine digested. peptides were analyzed through esi-ms/ms and generated data were queried against the ncbinr database, viridiplantae  using the mascot search engine . additional file 1: table s <dig> shows the  <dig> non-redundant peptides identified in the different fractions s, r, h  and the corresponding plant accession number . as the tobacco genome was not completely sequenced, the results were blasted against the arabidopsis genome in order to get a better insight and remove redundancy. 84% of the identified peptides  were found to be proteotypic  and the  <dig> proteins identified during the first search  were shown to correspond to  <dig> different arabidopsis proteins . in order to highlight specific pathways or protein functions that could be altered through the production of pbs, the  <dig> protein accessions were classified into  <dig> different functional categories using a simplified version of mapman categories  . strikingly, one third of the proteins showed chloroplastic origin, among which the majority  belonged to thylakoids. roughly, another third was related to folding, stress, redox, signaling and cell wall and were probably directly connected to the overexpression and/or the secretory pathway. 11% were related to protein synthesis and represent especially ribosomal proteins. these ribosomal proteins were probably bound to the cytoplasmic side of the er membrane and were dragged during pb purification.  <dig> % of proteins related to the cytoskeleton and 4% of protein were related to dna/rna metabolism. 5% were related to transport protein while almost 6% had mitochondrial origin. finally, 13% belonged to small categories  or had no known functions. nevertheless, some of these proteins seemed to be part of the secretory pathway like a cytochrome p450- related protein , a strictosine synthase family  or a lesion related protein  in agreement with several lanes of evidence like predicted location  and location by mass spectrometry .

regarding sb <dig> extracted fraction ,  <dig> proteins were identified . one third of them were only found in this fraction and 65% of these latter were predicted to display at least one transmembrane domain . overall, this fraction was dominated by proteins from chloroplast origin  and contained 11% of proteins with function in protein and/or amino acid metabolism and 8% of proteins involved in transport. other protein categories accounted for a minor part  .

in a second step, the resulting pellet was submitted to a complete laëmmli buffer  containing a high concentration of reductant and  <dig> proteins were identified in the derived supernatant. again, one third of these proteins were specific of the fraction, but the functional pattern was rather different. when compared to the previous fraction, both the proportion of chloroplastic proteins and proteins involved in protein and/or amino acid biosynthesis decreased by a factor of two. conversely, proteins involved in protein folding, degradation and stress responses were concentrated by a factor of three . finally, when the pellet was heated in laëmmli buffer for  <dig> min zera-dsred protein was efficiently solubilized,. in addition of zera-dsred protein,  <dig> proteins were found in this fraction  with roughly the same global content than in the previous unheated fraction .

zera-dsred pb's formation recruits endoplasmic reticulum proteins and traps secretory proteins
besides chloroplastic proteins, 36% of the remaining proteins identified in pbs were predicted to enter the secretory pathway. in eukaryotes, secretory and transmembrane proteins are synthesized on the rough er and translocated into the er lumen. we then focused the study on predicted secretory proteins because they were more likely to get involved in pb formation. secretory proteins in pbs may have been trapped during their formation or may have a more specific role towards pbs as for instance helping to fold/degrade zera-dsred protein or to reduce unwanted s-s bonds in the overexpressed protein. interestingly, three functional categories cumulated half the proteins predicted to be secreted . these included proteins involved in folding, stress responses and cell wall. among them, we found headstone folding er proteins i.e. bip and shepperd. bip has been shown to be highly enriched in seeds on the periphery of natural pbs  <cit>  and also helping to retain and assemble prolamins into an intracisternal inclusion granule  <cit> . the presence of bip protein in the pb preparation was confirmed using western immunoblot  and showed also its induction during pb formation. calnexin  and calreticulin  are other well-known er resident proteins that are involved in multiple cellular processes such as protein folding and calcium homeostasis. two isoforms of calreticulin  and cnx <dig> were found in pb proteome. calreticulins belong to two subfamilies in plants, one more specialized in chaperone activity  and the other one associated with immune responses   <cit> . we cannot speculate the impact of the zera-dsred overexpression on the expression/activities/location of these chaperones because, through pb purification, we have a limited access to the overall secretory pathway. furthermore, it has been shown that overproduction of recombinant proteins can disturb normal er retention and protein sorting inducing aberrant localization of er resident proteins such as crt and other chaperones as bips in the periplasmic space  <cit> . nevertheless, referring to the sds-page, bips are part of the more intense band  and probably play important folding role during pb formation. quantitation of pb proteome was far beyond the scope of this work. however, abundant proteins are usually identified with more than one peptide. interestingly, most folding proteins and accessions belonging to cell wall and stress categories were usually identified with several peptides, suggesting that proteins predicted to be secreted were also fairly abundant .

in order to get additional information about the possible passive recruitment of er resident proteins by zera-dsred polymers without any functional implications, we cotransformed tobacco leaves with zera-dsred and sp-ecfp-kdel constructs. with the signal peptide of γ-zein  and the er retention signal kdel the fluorescent protein ecfp will behave as a typical soluble er-lumenal protein. the co-infiltrated tobacco leaves were observed under confocal microscope after  <dig> dpi. as shown in figure  <dig>  sp-ecfp-kdel displayed a typical er pattern and zera-dsred fluorescent spots corresponded to pbs. in addition, the merge of images evidenced the co-localization of both proteins in the protein bodies , reinforcing the conclusion that a significant variety of er-soluble proteins could be recruited in zera-dsred-induced pbs, including some without link to pbs formation. one example of such proteins concerns the cell wall proteins, all predicted to normally enter the secretory pathway and that can be speculated to coprecipitate during pb formation, alike with the test construct sp-ecfp-kdel. this subset includes glycosidases and glycosyl transferases , that participate to the qc in the er and cross-talk with chaperones as bips. dgl <dig> is an essential protein subunit of the oligosaccharyltransferase complex, which is responsible for the transfer in the er of the n-linked glycan precursor onto asn residues of candidate proteins  <cit> . it is relevant to point here that, when transiently expressed as zera-xylanase in pbs of transformed tobacco, the xylanase enzyme was actually post translationally modified with n-linked high mannose type glycans  <cit> .

zera-dsred pb's formation induces expression of stress proteins in the secretory pathway
among the three main categories rich in proteins predicted to be secreted,  <dig> cysteine-type proteases and one aspartyl-type have been found in pbs beside folding proteins. these proteases, that are mainly expressed in senescent leaves and seeds according to transcriptomic data , may likely not represent housekeeping enzymes. we speculate that these proteases have been probably induced in response to the zera-dsred overexpression. degradation still represents a major hurdle for the production of recombinant proteins in plants and, among approaches aimed to minimize the problem, protein targeting to the cell secretory pathway has been shown to improve the stability, activity and yield of several recombinant proteins  <cit> . subunits of proteasome and f-box proteins have also been found and may reflect the recruitment of proteasome at the er surface. indeed, it is known that secretory and membrane proteins that fail to fold in the er are selected to erad and retrotranslocate to the cytosol for ubiquitin- and proteasome-mediated degradation  <cit> .

twelve stress proteins were found and half of them  are usually not present in leave tissue grown in regular conditions according to transcriptomic data . among stress proteins,  <dig> pathogenesis-related protein,  <dig> germin-like proteins and bgl <dig> were found. these proteins participate to the so-called systemic acquired resistance and their expression is usually induced by salicylic acid. infiltration of agrobacteria in tobacco leaves can potentially explain a transient induction of these proteins. however, stable transformation of zera-dsred protein in arabidopsis shows, after several generations, the same proteins bound to pbs . thus, their induction is probably related to the permanent stress sensed in the er due to the overexpression and pb formation.

discussion
proteome composition of zera-dsred pbs
in plant cells, zera-dsred over-expression induced the formation of new organelles derived from er compartment. indeed, zera fusions oligomerize forming large polymers resistant to detergents named protein bodies. these structures are as big as chloroplasts and can easily be seen through a regular microscope. we optimized the purification procedure of these pbs by using a discontinuous density gradient of iodixanol and we confirmed the presence of zera-dsred mainly in a dense fraction  by western immunoassays. we also checked the intactness of pbs and specifically the presence of the surrounding er membrane by co-transforming n. benthamiana plants with a gene coding for an er transmembrane protein  along with zera-dsred. the observations under confocal microscope and the immunoelectron microscopy data confirmed the presence of the er membrane either partial or complete, around most pbs. the bright pink color of the purified sample showed the high degree of enrichment of the construct. in a second step, to get insights into pb proteome composition and putatively also in pbs structure, a sequential extraction of pb proteins using different successive solubilization buffers was used and de facto increased the dynamic range of the protome analysis. the first  <dig> buffers used  were not able to solubilize the pb core but solubilized soluble and membrane proteins and removed proteins bound to the core via disulfide bridges. regarding the subset of membrane proteins, strikingly, very few er transmembrane proteins were identified. as many proteins with predicted transmembrane domains were identified, including thylakoidal, mitochondrial and vacuolar membrane proteins, a general failure of the extraction procedure to solubilize hydrophobic proteins can be ruled out. in addition, this unexpected feature contrasts with the observation that purified pbs actually displayed a surrounding membrane able to preserve er transmembrane proteins .

strikingly, one third of the proteins showed chloroplastic origin, among which the majority  belonged to thylakoids. previous confocal microscopic observations of isolated pb fractions did not suggest such a high level of potential chloroplastic contamination. although this event cannot be excluded, the occurrence of attractive forces between chloroplasts and er is also likely. for instance, chloroplasts isolated by gradient centrifugation from arabidopsis plants expressing gfp in the er lumen were shown to retain fluorescent er fragments, indicating that the er-chloroplasts attachments were strong enough to withstand the isolation procedure  <cit> . as pbs are delimited by er membrane, this attractive force between chloroplasts and er could be the reason for the identification of large number of proteins of chloroplastic origin in the pb proteome.

more generally, this situation posed questions about  the type of interactions between the er membrane and the other organelles   the traffic of organellar proteins through the er/secretory pathway  the protein composition of the dilated er membrane surrounding pbs. recent data indicate that tight interactions occur between er and different organelles. connections between er and chloroplast referred to as the chloroplast/er nexus  <cit>  or through specific extensions of the er  and chloroplasts  suggest that the interacting surfaces betweeen er and chloroplasts might serve as major conduits for bidirectional exchange of ions, lipids and metabolites between the two organelles  <cit> . moreover, the er and mitochondria exhibit tightly coupled dynamics and have also extensive contacts. er tubules may play an active role in defining the position of mitochondrial division sites because mitochondrial division occurred at positions where er tubules contacted mitochondria  <cit> . during pb purification, these tight interactions might explain a bandwagon effect and the presence of chloroplastic and mitochondrial proteins in pb extracts. the ripped out pieces of organellar membranes might entrap soluble proteins  and internal membrane  and could explain the occurrence of such proteins in pbs proteome. the identification of many thylakoidal proteins vs plastidial envelope proteins could be explained by the prevalescence of the former ones. as an alternative for chloroplast stromal proteins, it has been shown that during senescence and at times of stress, rubisco can be mobilized in living cells via rubisco-containing bodies using a specific autophagic pathway, which does not cause chloroplast lysis  <cit> . these autophagosomes have been found later in other organelles  <cit>  suggesting that through different internal structures  the plant cell can remobilize/re-allocate resources  to other compartments. in all cases, these organellar proteins represent a few percentage of the pbs protein abundance judged on the weak coomassie bands seen on the sds-page .

the lack of er membrane proteins is intriguing and we hypothesize that this membrane would be largely devoid of integral proteins and could constitute just a long-term storage compartment/subdomain by converting cisternal er to spherical pb. in plants, differentiation of subdomains of the er dedicated to protein export exists and is named "er export sites" . this differentiation is influenced by the type of export-competent membrane cargo to be delivered to the golgi via vesicle budding  <cit> . isolated transport vesicles usually contain membrane and internal proteins that are targeted to other compartments in the cell, but they are nearly devoid of proteins that are located in the er. thus the budding mechanism somehow distinguishes transported from er-resident proteins. in our case, we found er resident proteins in pbs proteome but no er membrane proteins suggesting that the compartment integrating pbs might be related to initial steps of vesicle budding impeded in its evolution. transmembrane proteins are inserted in the lipid bilayer and diffuse through er-membranes to be sorted to other compartments or retained in the er. we can speculate that these proteins once in the er, segregate from membrane surrounding large pbs to guarantee their diffusion and functionality.

response of the secretory pathway to the over-expression of zera-dsred
the er is an incredibly versatile organelle that must control protein secretory processes for normal cell function and in response to perturbation of er homeostasis.

dsred transient overexpression and pb formation can potentially be sensed as a stress in the er due the putative increasing need of loading and folding capacity and also to the obvious dilation of the compartment with an associated need for lipids. two mechanisms involved in the er integrity are the quality control  and the unfolded protein response . they are mostly composed of chaperonins or other factors, proteases, signaling factors and glycosylation enzymes. thus, analysis of a transient over-expression of zera-dsred leading to the formation of protein bodies can tell us how er senses the stress and the way the plant cell uses to overcome/circumvent that stress. the er can therefore be considered stressed when it accumulates defective proteins that have difficulty in folding  <cit> . bip proteins are folding helpers and we showed an induction/stabilization of these proteins in zeradsred transformed plants  pointing out how the plant reacts during pb formation with an overloading of misfolded proteins. we found also in pbs proteome  <dig> proteins classified into stress related proteins  and according to transcriptomic data found in the literature, half of them are likely to be induced by the construct because their trancript are almost not detectable in leaves grown in normal conditions. among these stress proteins  <dig> pr proteins were found and are involved in systemic acquired resistance. proteins from other categories are also involved in or related to stress response as chaperones hsp <dig>  or hsp <dig> , the  <dig> cysteinyl proteases usually found in senescent leaves, a lesion-induced protein  and a ralf 22-like protein  that is part of a family of polypeptide hormones that are known to regulate plant stress  <cit> . the overall picture suggests a stress in the secretory pathway and further investigations combining transcriptomic data and more extanded proteomic analysis  could help to decipher the answer and adaptation of the er facing the over-expression of proteins.

pbs display a complex organization
the successive extractions revealed a first set of proteins, from chloroplast and cytoplasmic origin but poor in integral er-membrane proteins, accessible upon solubilization with a detergent. the use of a reducing agent, cleaving s-s bridges, allowed to release proteins specifically involved in folding, degradation and stress, thus highlighting the cell response to the overproduction and pb formation. these proteins contain er retention signal or belong to the secretory pathway, further re-inforcing the bona fide location of these proteins. nevertheless, a complete laëmmli buffer was unable to solubilize zera-dsred unless after heating, attesting the strength of the forces involved in the assembly. actually, recent data  <cit>  provide strong evidence that in zera, hydrophobic interactions, through the  <dig> repeats of the pppvhl domain and disulfide bond formation by the  <dig> cysteine residues embedding the hydrophobic domain, are the two main driving forces for zera self-assembly. moreover, mutating the cysteine residues or reducing the number of ppvhl repeats often decreased significantly the formation of pbs. owing to both the complexity of the proteome also resolved only under the most stringent condition and its function similarity to that obtained without heating, it can be speculated that the assembly of zera-dsred polymers would generate pockets able to entrap additional proteins . thus, pbs appear to contain proteins  aggregated to zera-dsred polymer through "true/functional" interactions  and/or  trapped during zera-dsred polymerization and released during polymer dismantling through the action of amphiphiles and/or reducing agents.

CONCLUSIONS
transient overexpression of zera-dsred induces pb formation in tobacco leaves and pb isolation can be easily performed through iodixanol gradient centrifugation. ms/ms analysis of pbs allowed us to identified  <dig> proteins and shows that  the zera construct represents ca 85% of the total proteome in term of abundance,  pbs contain a large number of co-purified proteins with obvious relation with  or without  pb formation,  pbs recruit er proteins, trap secretory proteins and induce stress proteins in the secretory pathway and  that the pb's er surrounding membrane is mostly devoid of proteins.

