BACKGROUND
humans and great apes  share a common gut anatomy, consisting of a simple stomach, small intestine, small cecum terminating in an appendix, and a hindgut consisting of the large intestine, rectum, and anal canal  <cit> . nevertheless, significant differences have been reported in their gut proportions  <cit> . while the large intestine represents the majority of the great ape gut volume, the majority of the modern human gut volume consists of the small intestine  <cit> . initial surveys have also indicated modern humans have a smaller total gut volume to body mass ratio relative to the great apes  <cit> . however, this could be influenced by primate gut plasticity related to diet and genetic diversity  <cit> .

it has been proposed that gut proportions changed at some point within the human lineage in response to higher quality foods which can be digested in the small intestine  <cit> . the diets of hominids and/or early human populations improved, in part, due to cooking  <cit>  and the increased abundance of animal products obtained through scavenging, hunting, fishing, and dairy consumption  <cit> . in contrast, great ape species in the wild derive a significant amount of their total daily metabolic energy needs through the fermentation of lower quality plant materials in their hindguts  <cit> . although hindgut fermentation also occurs in humans  <cit> , there is evidence that wild great apes derive greater amount of total daily metabolic energy from this process than do humans on western diets  <cit> . however, seasonal changes in great ape diets and the limited dietary diversity of the humans studied will influence the interpretation of these data sets.

to explore the systemic consequences of hindgut fermentation activities in humans and great apes, we evaluated their physiological levels and cellular metabolic activities of phytanic acid, a branched chain fatty acid that can bind to and/or activate ppar-alpha  <cit>  and rxr  <cit>  transcription factors. humans do not synthesize phytanic acid, but rather acquire it from the diet  <cit> . in ruminants, the gut fermentation of plant materials liberates phytol, a constituent of chlorophyll, which is then converted to phytanic acid and stored in fats  <cit> . while humans can covert free phytol into phytanic acid, they do not accumulate significant amounts of phytanic acid as a result of consuming plant materials  <cit> . however, they can obtain phytanic acid from ruminant fats, fish, and dairy products  <cit> . humans with impaired phytanic acid catabolism can overaccumulate phytanic acid, which results in peripheral polyneuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and hearing loss  <cit> . this can also result in cardiac arrhythmias, shortened metacarpals or metatarsals, and ichthyosis  <cit> .

despite the demonstrated importance of maintaining appropriate levels of phytanic acid in humans and mice  <cit> , phytanic acid metabolism has not been studied in the great apes. based on the biochemical evaluation of red blood cells and cultured primary skin fibroblasts, we uncovered candidate human-specific differences in the ability to obtain phytanic acid from dietary sources relative to the great apes. we also provide indirect evidence that these changes could affect physiological functions relevant to the evolution and health of these species.

RESULTS
red blood cell  phytanic acid levels
rbcs are commonly used to evaluate the physiological abundance of phytanic acid  in clinical settings  <cit> . first, we measured rbc phytanic acid levels in a cohort of humans with western diets , chimpanzees , bonobos , lowland gorillas , and sumatran orangutans  . we found significant differences in rbc phytanic acid levels in humans with western diets relative to the great apes . chimpanzee , bonobo , gorilla , and orangutan  rbc phytanic acid levels were all elevated relative to those of this human cohort. this is remarkable given the higher phytanic acid content of human western diets, reportedly 50- <dig> mg per day  <cit> , relative to the minimal  daily amounts in the diets of our great ape cohort, even taking nutritional biscuits into consideration as described in the materials and methods section.

to begin to address these dietary differences, we compared rbc phytanic acid levels in great apes and humans on phytanic acid-deficient diets . the latter are based on a cohort of  <dig> humans on vegan diets for over one year . the absolute amount of phytanic acid intake in this population is unknown; however, it should be minimal , based on typical components of vegan diets  <cit> . phytanic acid rbc levels were lower in vegans relative to individuals on western diets . we also found robust differences in vegan rbc phytanic acid levels relative to the great apes . rbc phytanic acid levels in chimpanzees , bonobos , gorillas , and orangutans  were all dramatically higher relative to vegans.

given the composition of our cohort, we had adequate statistical power to screen for possible sexual dimorphism in human  and chimpanzee rbc phytanic acid levels. although no sex-specific differences were found in humans on western diets, male chimpanzees showed  <dig> -fold higher  rbc phytanic acid levels relative to females . this occurs despite the fact that our cohort of male and female chimpanzees had equivalent dietary exposure to phytanic acid and its precursor, phytol. although our power is limited due to the numbers of vegan males in our cohort, there was also no evidence of sexual dimorphism in vegan rbc phytanic acid levels .

phytanic acid catabolism in cell culture
to evaluate cellular rates of phytanic acid metabolism, we analyzed cultured human and great ape dermal fibroblasts , which are routinely used for the clinical diagnoses of phytanic acid and other peroxisomal disorders  <cit> . all fibroblast cultures showed robust catabolism of phytanic acid and its metabolite pristanic acid. nevertheless, the oxidation rates of phytanic acid  and pristanic acid  differed in human relative to great ape cells . human cells showed elevated phytanic acid oxidation rates relative to gorilla  and orangutan  cells . humans cells also showed elevated pristanic acid oxidation rates compared to chimpanzee , bonobo , and orangutan  cells .

comparative transcriptome analysis of peroxisomal α- and β-oxidation pathways
to evaluate potential in vivo consequences of cross-species differences in lipid metabolism, we reanalyzed oligonucleotide microarray gene expression data from  <dig> male chimpanzee and  <dig> male human livers, brains, kidneys, heart, and testes  <cit> . we only considered data from probes predicted to be perfectly matched to both genomes and calculated gene expression scores only for probe sets containing at least four probes after masking  <cit> . we focused on genes involved in peroxisomal phytanic acid α-oxidation, β-oxidation, and ppar-responsive genes relevant to phytanic acid metabolism . our criteria for differential gene expression are provided in the legend of figure  <dig> 

we found that cross-species differential expression of phytanic acid α-oxidation and peroxisomal β-oxidation genes in the liver, brain, and testes always reflected higher transcript levels in humans . genes in these categories also showed cross-species differential expression in heart and kidney; however, some transcripts were more abundant in humans  while others were more abundant in chimpanzees . strikingly, acox <dig> transcript levels were higher in humans relative to chimpanzees for all five tissues examined. in  <dig> tissues , phyh transcript levels were also higher in human relative to chimpanzee. to further explore this latter observation, we measured phyh levels in human, chimpanzee, bonobo, and gorilla fibroblast cultures  via quantitative pcr  using primers designed against a conserved region of this transcript. phyh levels were at least 2-fold more abundant in human relative to chimpanzee, bonobo, and gorilla fibroblasts .

lastly, we examined a group of five genes  previously used to evaluate ppar-activity in mice with phytanic acid disorders  <cit>  and pex11a, a direct transcriptional target of ppar-alpha  <cit> . all differentially expressed transcripts in heart  and testes  were more abundant in humans. fabp <dig>  dbi, and pex11a transcript levels were higher in human liver; however, cat transcripts were more abundant in chimpanzee liver. none of these six genes showed cross-species differential expression in brain or kidney.

discussion
microbial fermentation in human  <cit>  and great ape  <cit>  hindguts are responsible for the break down of complex carbohydrates not processed and absorbed in the small intestine. the major end products of hindgut fermentation are short chain fatty acids, which provide energy-yielding substrates for colonic mucosa that regulate its growth and blood flow and promotes sodium and water absorption  <cit> . it has been estimated that wild chimpanzees derive 21-33% and wild orangutans derive 7-57% of their total daily metabolic energy from fiber fermentation  <cit> . this could be as high as 30-60% for wild western gorillas  <cit> . in contrast, humans on western diets are estimated to obtain no more than 10% of their daily energy needs through hindgut fermentation; however, this is likely higher in populations with lower quality diets and instances of small intestinal malabsorption  <cit> .

although we contrast human and the great ape dietary strategies, it is important to consider diversity within the great apes. for example, gorillas and orangutans can and often do subsist on lower quality foods  relative to chimpanzees and bonobos, which can consume ample amounts of succulent ripe fruits  <cit> . furthermore, chimpanzees hunt colobus monkeys and other small mammals; however, this comprises a minor component of their diets and varies among individuals and communities  <cit> . thus, we propose that it is likely that the human, chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla and orangutan lineages have all acquired molecular adaptations relevant to their diets.

in the studies presented here, we began to evaluate the broader systemic consequences of hindgut fermentation and related lipid metabolic activity in humans and great apes. in principle, rbc phytanic acid can be an effective biomarker of hindgut fermentation of plant materials as long as phytanic acid or its precursor phytol is not appreciably present in the human or great ape diets. the phytanic acid content of western diets   <cit>  is estimated to be at least  <dig> × greater than its free phytol content  <cit> . since phytanic acid is primarily found in ruminant fats , dairy products , and fish   <cit> , human vegans are appropriate for our studies. in this regard, a survey of fresh vegetables and fruits all showed minimal phytol levels   <cit> . we also note a prior study demonstrating that an individual who ingested  <dig> -kg of boiled spinach leaves within a  <dig> hour period as a supplement to an uncontrolled mixed diet later showed serum phytanic acid levels within normal limits  <cit> . our captive great ape cohort should be exposed to similar low levels of dietary phytanic acid  and phytol  <cit> .

we discovered elevated rbc phytanic acid levels in all great apes relative to humans on both high-  and low-phytanic acid  diets . in principle, these could be influenced by differences in phytanic acid retention and/or biosynthesis. relevant to the retention hypothesis, both humans and great apes showed robust cellular rates of phytanic and pristanic acid oxidation . in fact, there were no differences in phytanic acid oxidation rates in human relative to chimpanzee or bonobo fibroblasts . although it is possible that the lower phytanic acid oxidation rates in gorilla and orangutan relative to human fibroblasts  relate to the dietary strategies of these species  <cit> , these observations need to be validated in larger-scale studies prior to commentary. we also cannot exclude the possibility that the cultured fibroblasts do not fully reflect in vivo activities; however, they are invaluable for the clinical diagnosis of phytanic acid oxidation disorders  <cit> . likewise, we cannot exclude the possibility that great apes, unlike humans, show robust biological retention of trace dietary phytanic acid. however, laboratory mice do not accumulate significant physiological levels of phytanic acid when fed standard diets not supplemented with additional phytol or phytanic acid  <cit> . in addition, rats on standard diets can rapidly catabolize artificially elevated stores of phytanic acid in their tissues  <cit> .

our preferred hypothesis is that all the great apes, unlike humans  <cit> , are capable of accumulating significant amounts of phytanic acid from the hindgut fermentation of plant materials. we propose that the great apes have maintained the ancestral condition and that humans diverged since their most recent common ancestor with chimpanzees and bonobos and now have a derived metabolism. we believe that changes in gut anatomy provide a likely basis for the proposed reduction of hindgut fermentation activity in the human lineage. in this regard, it has been proposed that improved dietary quality contributed to hindgut reduction in modern humans relative to great apes   <cit>  and the smaller total gut volume to body mass ratio in modern humans relative to great apes  <cit> . however, we also recognize that the human and great ape gut microbiomes, whose composition are influenced by the diets of these species and other environmental interactions  <cit> , could also contribute to the proposed differences in hindgut fermentation activity. thus, in principle, the improved dietary quality in the human lineage could have influenced the major factors  that we propose are most likely to be causally responsible for the observed differences in human and great ape rbc phytanic acid levels.

given that sexual dimorphism in human lipid metabolism is well-documented  <cit> , we screened for sex-specific differences in rbc phytanic acid levels. here, we found no evidence of sexual dimorphism in rbc levels in humans on western or vegan diets. however, we observed  <dig> -fold elevated rbc phytanic acid levels in male relative to female chimpanzees . the evolutionary implications and physiological origin of this sexual dimorphism are unclear. phytanic acid profiling in additional males and females from other non-human primates could shed light on the extent of this phenomenon. as discussed above, phytanic acid levels are affected by multiple factors, including gut anatomies, microbiomes, and gene expression, which provide candidate mechanisms for the observed sexual dimorphism in chimpanzees.

we note that sexual dimorphism in phytanic acid metabolism has been documented in rodents. c57bl/6j laboratory mice show sexually dimorphic phytanic acid accumulation in response to phytol-enriched diets; however, unlike chimpanzees, females showed higher phytanic acid levels than males  <cit> . there is no evidence as to whether this is a metabolic adaptation to diet or a non-specific result of inbreeding. it is thought this sexual dimorphism is influenced by the higher liver expression of sterol carrier protein-x  in males relative to females  <cit> . scp-x is required for branched chain fatty acid catabolism through its keto-acyl coa thiolase activity  <cit> . sexual dimorphism in liver scp-x expression has also been observed in fvb mice  <cit> , balb/c mice  <cit> , and laboratory rats  <cit> . this suggests that sexual dimorphism in phytanic acid metabolism could be present in additional rodent species. to date, scp-x expression has not been measured in human and chimpanzee livers, even in a recent study involving both sexes from each species  <cit> .

we also investigated possible relationships between human and chimpanzee rbc lipid profiles and their transcriptomes. while there is no known physiological role for phytanic acid, it can bind to and/or activate ppar-alpha  <cit> , rxr  <cit> , and likely other transcription factors  <cit> . experiments involving laboratory mice have concluded that phytanic acid is a physiological ligand for ppar-alpha  <cit> . while the estimated phytanic acid concentration in normal human serum  was at the threshold needed for rxr stimulation of one cell culture study, the authors concluded that phytol metabolites, such as phytanic acid, are compelling candidate physiological effectors of rxr  <cit> .

here, we found that multiple genes reported to be influenced by ppar-alpha activity, including those involved in peroxisomal α- and β-oxidation of fatty acids, show cross-species expression differences in the chimpanzee and human tissues surveyed . such genes were primarily more highly expressed in humans relative to chimpanzee for all tissues except kidney, where higher expression in chimpanzees was frequently found. exploratory work, not involving non-human primates, highlighted the lower fatty acid α-oxidation capacity in the kidneys, but not livers, of carnivorous relative to herbivorous animals  <cit> . also of interest, others have provided gene expression-based evidence that ppar-signaling is higher in human relative to chimpanzee liver  <cit> . the elevated fabp <dig> transcript levels in human liver suggests an increased capacity for humans to transport phytanic acid to peroxisomes for degradation  <cit> . nevertheless, we recognize phytanic acid is just one of several activators of ppar transcription factors and that the dietary information and rbc lipid profiles of the humans and chimpanzees in the gene expression profiling studies are unknown.

we have previously noted that the toxicity associated with abnormal phytanic acid accumulation in humans could provide selective pressure to maintain or enhance its degradation  <cit> . for example, refsum disease is an autosomal recessive disorder in humans that can result from mutations in the phyh gene and subsequent accumulation of phytanic acid in tissues  <cit> . this typically affects the peripheral nerves , movement , and senses   <cit> . these individuals can also show cardiac arrhythmias, skeletal malformations , and skin changes   <cit> . given that cardiac arrhythmias are suspected to be responsible for the sudden deaths of refsum disease patients  <cit> , the commonly observed sudden cardiac death, presumed secondary to fatal arrhythmias, in captive male chimpanzees  <cit>  could be influenced by their physiological levels of phytanic acid. however, the rbc phytanic acid levels in our cohort of male chimpanzees are far below those of refsum disease patients, which was approximately  <dig> times higher than normal in one case we evaluated. nevertheless, we raise the possibility that phytanic acid metabolism could influence physiological differences and medical conditions amongst human and non-human primates.

CONCLUSIONS
the candidate differences in human and great ape phytanic acid metabolism are consistent with prior reports that the regulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism likely evolved under directional selection in humans  <cit>  and that the promoter regions of nutrition-related genes are under positive selection in humans  <cit> . it is also relevant that the effects human diets have on mouse liver transcriptomes can be used as a model for expression differences between humans and chimpanzees  <cit> . we note that even if transcriptome data of humans and chimpanzees on matching diets were obtained, differences in how each species digests their food and extract regulators of transcription would have a major impact on the observed cross-species and sex-specific differences.

our study also relates to hypotheses that historic diets and/or changes in lipid metabolism influenced the evolution of numerous human traits  <cit> . to further explore such hypotheses, it will be necessary to determine if the rbc phytanic acid profiles in our cohort extend to other cell types. the comparative analyses of the lipid composition of human and great ape nervous and cardiovascular systems will be of special interest given the clinical phenotypes observed in humans with phytanic acid metabolic  <cit>  and other peroxisomal disorders  <cit> . in addition, prostate tissue could be of interest given the differences of phytanic acid metabolic activities in normal and cancerous tissues  <cit>  and male reproductive differences across human and non-human primates  <cit> . lastly, we propose that larger-scale lipid profiling studies will likely identify additional candidate metabolic adaptations to human and non-human diets and that investigations into the microbial contributions toward specific metabolic differences is warranted.

