BACKGROUND
alternative splicing  can have a biologically relevant effect on protein structure, as it allows the shuffling of protein domains rather than disrupting them  <cit> . consequently, alternative splicing can modulate the function of a gene, affecting, for instance, the signal peptides and the transmembrane segments  <cit> . the importance of as in many genomes has raised the question of its role in the context of evolution. modrek and lee  <cit>  have proposed as as an evolutionary mechanism that gives an organism the possibility to explore new protein functions by allowing the addition of novel domains while maintaining the rest of a protein intact. this has suggested that alternative exons may have more freedom to change its amino acid sequence. indeed, recent reports show that conserved alternative exons have higher dn than average  <cit> , and can even have higher ds than average  <cit> . however, the opposite effect has also been observed: alternative exons have been reported to have a dna sequence conservation higher than average  <cit> . the higher conservation has been attributed to the fact that alternative exons are in general more regulated than constitutive ones, and therefore contain more conserved sequence motifs, like exonic splicing enhancers and silencers, which function in a coordinated fashion. the conservation of these motifs is important for exon definition  <cit> , and in some cases a single nucleotide mutation can disrupt the splicing and lead to a disease state, like dementia  <cit>  or spinal muscular atrophy  <cit> . in fact, exonic regions with high density of regulatory motifs have been linked to regions of low snp density  <cit> , low synonymous snp density  <cit> , and negative selection against synonymous substitutions  <cit> .

orthologous exons with similar splicing regulation show sequence conservation of the cis-acting motifs  <cit> . on the other hand, it is known that cis-acting regulators of splicing are sometimes not conserved in sequence between orthologous genes  <cit>  or are not located at orthologous positions  <cit> , but still can preserve their function. furthermore, regulatory elements can function at different distances from the splice sites. this distance has been found to influence the strength of the splicing regulator  <cit> , and there seems to be a distance beyond which a motif becomes inactive  <cit>  or changes its regulating activity  <cit> . we therefore expect that if two orthologous exons have the same regulation, the cis-acting motifs responsible for this regulation should also show some positional conservation. conversely, two orthologous exons with different regulation should show low conservation in sequence and/or position of the regulatory motifs involved in splicing. additionally, as mentioned before, a variation in the sequence and/or the arrangement of the regulatory elements is found to affect the splicing pattern, hence we expect that an arrangement of regulatory elements that is not conserved between orthologous exons must be related to a lack of conservation of the exonic structure of the transcripts including that exon. the mrna produced from the pre-mrna is determined by the exonic and intronic signals regulating its splicing, hence the conservation of these signals during evolution implies a conservation of the definition of the exon-intron boundaries. conversely, transcripts that do not conserve the exonic structure across evolution must be defined by splicing regulatory signals that are not conserved in sequence and/or arrangement. based on these observations we expect orthologous exons, alternative or constitutive, participating in transcripts with non-conserved exonic structure to have less sequence conservation. a recent report shows that constitutive exons in transcripts with non-conserved exonic structure have greater non-synonymous substitution rate  <cit> . in this work we generalize these results. we provide further evidence for the differences in sequence evolution between alternative and constitutive exons and link these differences to the pattern of conservation of the exonic structure. we also define a measure of the conservation of the arrangement of exonic splicing regulators and study the variation of this arrangement and the relation to the sequence divergence of exons and introns.

RESULTS
exonic structure and the sequence evolution of exons
we considered a set  <dig> human and mouse orthologous genes containing conserved constitutively and alternatively spliced exons. from these we selected  <dig> exons that were alternative in human and mouse and  <dig> exons that were constitutive in human and mouse . for this set we found lower synonymous substitution rates   test p-value <  <dig> e-16) and higher non-synonymous substitution rates   for alternative exons compared to constitutive ones. we also found that alternative exons have higher values for omega  than constitutive ones . we tested these results by performing the comparisons in a different approach. we concatenated, for every gene, all constitutive exons into what we called a constitutive region, and all alternative exons into an alternative region, and compared the dn, ds and omega values in both regions within each gene. we found significant differences in ds  and dn  between alternative and constitutive regions. figures s <dig> and s <dig>  provided as supplementary material , show lower ds values and higher dn values for alternative regions. additionally, we found a significant difference for omega  and figure s <dig>  shows higher omega values for alternative regions compared to constitutive regions. these results are in agreement with previous reports  <cit> .

we separated the constitutive and alternative exons into four groups according to whether they were part of a transcript with an exonic structure that is conserved in mouse or not . exons in transcripts with conserved exonic structure  are called ces exons, whereas exons in transcripts with non-conserved exonic structure are called non-ces exons. a non-ces exon is such that there is a pattern of splicing of the pre-mrna, which includes this exon, and which is never the same in the orthologous mrna when the orthologous exon is included.

analysis of the sequence identity conservation of these four groups revealed statistically significant differences between the four distributions . these distributions show that alternative exons are overrepresented in the high and low conservation ranges with respect to constitutive exons . alternative ces exons are overrepresented in the range of high sequence conservation, whereas alternative non-ces are more abundant in the range of low conservation . on the other hand, constitutive non-ces exons are more frequent in the low conservation range than constitutive ces exons, which are more frequent in the high conservation range. even though the distributions are different, the average identity conservation is very similar between groups:  <dig> %  for constitutive ces exons,  <dig> %  for constitutive non-ces exons,  <dig> %  for alternative ces exons, and  <dig> %  for alternative non-ces exons. thus alternative ces exons have the highest average conservation, whereas alternative non-ces exons have an average conservation similar to constitutive exons.

this table contains the p-values for the kolmogorov-smirnov tests for the comparisons of the distributions of non-synonymous rates , synonymous rates , omega , and percent identity conservation between the four exon-groups: constitutive with conserved  and non-conserved  exonic structure, and alternative with conserved  and non-conserved  exonic structure.

we computed the sequence evolutionary rates for the four exon-groups and found statistically significant differences between them  . we found that within each set of alternative or constitutive exons, non-ces exons have in general higher non-synonymous substitution rate than ces exons. moreover, for all the exon subgroups the dn decays with the percentage identity conservation and alternative ces exons have a distribution very close to constitutive non-ces exons . on the other hand, alternative non-ces exons have the highest non-synonymous rate and constitutive ces exons have the lowest non-synonymous rate. for the synonymous substitution rate we found that alternative  exons have a significantly lower synonymous substitution rate than constitutive exons , and non-ces exons have a significantly higher synonymous substitution rate than ces exons. additionally, alternative ces exons have the lowest average synonymous rate and constitutive non-ces exons have the highest one. we also found a different distribution of omega between alternative and constitutive exons after the separation into ces and non-ces exons .

we tested further the observed correlation between the evolutionary rates and the conservation of the exonic structures by looking at the differences within genes. we grouped our exons according to the gene they belong to, and selected those groups for which all the exons were of the same type, ces or non-ces. we obtained  <dig> groups with ces exons, and  <dig> with non-ces exons, where each group represents a gene. for each group we concatenated the alternative and constitutive exons into regions and compared the dn, ds and omega values for each region within each group. for the groups with ces exons we found significantly different ds and dn distributions , whereas for groups with non-ces exons we found significant differences in the ds distributions only. interestingly, there are no significant differences in dn values between alternative and constitutive regions in groups with non-ces exons only . this can be explained by the observed higher dn values in non-ces exons  and indicates that most of the differences in dn between alternative and constitutive exons can be explained by the conservation of the exonic structure. additionally, we found significant differences for omega between the alternative and constitutive regions of the same group for both types .

this table shows p-values for the paired wilcoxon signed-rank test between alternative and constitutive regions within each group, for the groups with only ces exons and the groups with only non-ces exons. exons are grouped according to the gene they belong to.

the est-inclusion level of an alternative exon has been shown to influence the degree of cross-species conservation of the exon  <cit>  and its substitution rate  <cit> . in particular, the greater the inclusion level of alternative exons, the closer the pattern of nucleotide substitution rate to that of constitutive exons. we observe a similar pattern of variation for our data set. in figures 5a and 5b we have plotted the variation of the ds and dn with the inclusion levels for the alternative exons split into ces and non-ces exons. in this figure we have superimposed a line representing the average values of dn and ds of constitutive ces and non-ces exons for comparison. at high inclusion values, the ds values of alternative non-ces exons become indistinguishable from the ds values for constitutive exons; a ks test for the difference yielded a high p-value . however, alternative ces exons maintain lower ds values at high est-inclusion levels . indeed, comparing alternative ces exons of high est-inclusion  with the union set of all constitutive exons plus alternative non-ces of high est-inclusion , we found significantly different ds distributions . thus at high inclusion levels, the alternative ces exons can be separated from the rest of the exons by their average ds value.

on the other hand, each subgroup of alternative exons  approximates the average dn of the corresponding type in constitutive exons at high est-inclusion levels . however, ces and non-ces exons can still be separated. indeed, comparing the union set of all ces exons  with the union set of all non-ces exons  we found a different dn distribution . thus at high inclusion levels, the average dn can not separate alternative and constitutive exons, but it can separate the ces from the non-ces exons.

we tested for possible biases in our classification and whether these could influence our results. we found that genes that contain non-ces exons are more frequently long and with many exons, compared to genes that contain ces exons. using equal-sized random samples of ces and non-ces exons corresponding to the same distribution of gene lengths and exons per gene, we found the same results as reported above. thus the gene length and the number of exons per gene do not influence our results. we also verified that the difference in the number of transcripts and exons between orthologous genes does not influence our findings. details of this analysis are given as supplementary information .

evolution of exonic splicing enhancers
in order to study the evolution of the regulatory signals and its relation to the evolution of exons and exonic structures, we analyzed two sets of predicted regulatory motifs. we used  <dig> human  <cit>  and  <dig> mouse  <cit>  predicted exonic splicing enhancer  hexamers. these two sets were predicted independently, using the method rescue-ese and without input from cross-species comparison  <cit> . we located these ese hexamers in our set of conserved alternative and constitutive exons. we located the human predicted eses in the human exons and the mouse predicted eses in the mouse exons. not all the eses in exons are conserved: 51% of the  <dig>  eses located in the human exons were exactly conserved in sequence. on average 44% of hexamers in human coding exons are exactly conserved in mouse . moreover, 66% of the found eses were orthologous to a mouse predicted ese, different or identical. the search of eses yielded a set of  <dig>  regulatory regions in human exons. a regulatory region is defined as a range in an exon that is covered by one or more eses .

putative eses are found all along exon sequences  <cit> . however, we expect that relevant eses will have in general some positional conservation between orthologous exons with similar regulation  <cit> . accordingly, we defined a motif conservation score as the fraction of the total region covered by motifs that is part of a motif in both human and mouse. more specifically, this is computed as the number of nucleotides  that are in a motif in human and mouse over the total length of the alignment covered by a motif in human or mouse, or both . this score measures the equivalence between the regulatory regions in human and mouse, regardless of the sequence conservation. a conservation score of  <dig> means that all regions associated with splicing regulators in human are also splicing regulators in mouse. on the other hand, a conservation score of  <dig> means that no nucleotide associated with a regulator in human is part of a regulator in mouse. we expect orthologous exons with similar regulation to have some overlap between the regulatory regions in either exon. this overlap is not necessarily 100%, as regulators can maintain their functionality even after shifting their position. however, if this shift is too large, the functionality may be lost  <cit> . thus we expect real regulators to have a conservation score much above zero. similarly, we expect exons for which eses are relevant for splicing to have on average a higher conservation score. we measured the motif conservation score for the eses located in our exon set  and found that it is higher for constitutive exons than for alternative ones , as well as higher for ces exons than for non-ces exons . furthermore, the ese conservation score decreases with increasing ds and dn, and is higher for constitutive exons for all values of dn and ds . for comparison, we generated a set of random hexamers selected from the cds of single-exon genes that are conserved between human and mouse. the hexamers selected were such that they have a conservation frequency in mouse similar to that found for the set of eses in our exon set . figure 6a shows that predicted eses have higher motif conservation score than the random hexamers.

finally, we analyzed the conservation of introns flanking constitutive and alternative exons, performing the alignment of  <dig> bp at the donor and acceptor sites . we observed that for constitutive  exons, the donor and acceptor conservation is approximately constant for all values of the ese conservation score, whereas for alternative  exons the donor and acceptor identity conservation increases considerably with increasing values of the ese conservation score. comparing the distributions of identity conservation in introns from two groups of alternative exons, one with low ese conservation score  and the other with high conservation score , we found differences for the donor  and acceptor  sites. thus at high ese conservation score, alternative ces-exons have a significant increase in the conservation of flanking intron sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
using a large set of alternative and constitutive orthologous exons in human and mouse, we have revisited the analysis of the evolutionary rates in alternatively spliced regions. the results we found are consistent with the recent literature: a purifying selective pressure against silent mutations and a diversifying selective pressure for amino acid change in the alternatively spliced protein-coding regions of genes. after separating the exons according to the conservation of the exonic structure, we found that most of the differences in evolutionary rates can be explained by the pattern of conservation of the exonic structure. in particular, we have found that constitutive exons with non-conserved exonic structure  have greater non-synonymous  and synonymous  sequence divergence than those with conserved exonic structure . likewise, alternative non-ces exons have greater sequence divergence than alternative ces exons. these results generalize recent findings  <cit>  and indicate that a high divergence rate is in general linked to a variation of the transcript exonic structure. additionally, we have found that alternative ces exons have a sequence divergence similar to that of constitutive non-ces exons, and that alternative non-ces exons have the highest non-synonymous substitution rates, whereas constitutive ces exons have the lowest. our analyses also show that the conservation of the exonic structure is related to a constraint in synonymous divergence rate. in particular, constitutive ces exons have significantly lower synonymous rate than constitutive non-ces exons; and alternative ces exons are the most constrained in synonymous divergence, whereas constitutive non-ces exons are the least constrained. we conclude that a low ds is mainly characteristic of alternative ces-exons, and that most of the observed differences in dn between alternative and constitutive exons can be explained by the conservation of the exonic structure.

we have also observed that substitution rates in alternative  exons approximate those of constitutive exons for increasing est-inclusion levels. the non-synonymous rate of each alternative exon type  approximates the corresponding constitutive type, such that, at high inclusion levels, alternative and constitutive exons of the same type have indistinguishable dn distributions. however, at high inclusion levels, ces and non-ces exons can still be separated by their dn. on the other hand, the synonymous rate of alternative non-ces exons increases such that at high est-inclusion levels they cannot be separated from constitutive ones, whereas alternative ces exons keep a synonymous rate low enough to be separable from constitutive exons at high est-inclusion levels. these findings give further indication that the differences in non-synonymous rates can be mostly explained by the differences in the pattern of conservation of the exonic structure. furthermore, we can also conclude that a low synonymous substitution rate characterizes alternative ces exons at all inclusion levels.

the relations we have found between the evolution of sequence and exonic structure provide an explanation for the apparent contradictions between reports of a high sequence conservation of exon-skipping events  <cit>  and reports about a high non-synonymous substitution rate in alternative exons  <cit> . these discrepancies can be explained by the differences in the conservation of the exonic structures. we have found that alternative exons are overrepresented in the range of high  and low  sequence conservation. additionally, alternative ces exons have more sequence conservation than alternative non-ces exons; they have lower non-synonymous and synonymous substitution rates. the high sequence conservation low substitution rates in alternative exons reported previously in the literature are therefore explained if the analyzed alternative exons are part of conserved exonic structures.

finally, we have studied the evolutionary properties of the exonic signals regulating the splicing. we localized two independent sets of human and mouse predicted exon splicing enhancers  in our set of alternative and constitutive exons, and defined a measure of the conservation of the arrangement of regulatory signals, the motif conservation score. we have found that the motif conservation score for eses can separate constitutive exons from alternative ones: constitutive exons have on average higher motif conservation score. this indicates that the conservation of eses is important for maintaining the "constitutiveness" of an exon. for constitutive exons, ces exons have on average higher ese motif conservation score, which indicates a relation between the conservation in the arrangement of splicing regulators and the conservation of the exonic structure. we also observed that alternative exons with high ese motif conservation scores have higher sequence conservation in the flanking intron sequence. strikingly, constitutive exons maintain the same average conservation at the flanking introns, independently of the level of conservation of the ese-arrangement. this indicates that for constitutive exons, the regulation takes place mainly at the exon sequence. on the other hand, alternative exons with high sequence conservation have a pattern of ese-arrangement conservation very similar to constitutive exons and have a conservation at the flanking introns greater than average, possibly due to a higher density of conserved regulatory motifs  <cit> . this indicates that highly conserved alternative exons must be strongly regulated by intron signals, since their pattern of ese conservation is very similar to that of constitutive exons. this may also explain the high sequence conservation previously observed at the introns flanking conserved skipped exon events  <cit> . finally, our analyses show that the low conservation observed in cross species alignments of transcript exonic structures between human and mouse  <cit>  is intimately related to the evolution of the exon sequences and the regulators of splicing. we expect our results will be of help for the prediction of novel transcript structures using cross-species comparisons  <cit> .

