BACKGROUND
investigation of cell-type specific gene expression and regulation in complex tissues is hampered by the lack of accuracy of cell isolation and sensitivity of post-isolation analysis. laser-microdissection techniques have proven to be a reliable tool for selectively harvesting cell clusters or single cell profiles from stained tissue sections for mrna and protein investigation. when combined with qualitative and quantitative pcr, mrna can be successfully analysed from a few cells  <cit> . the combination of laser-microdissection and cdna arrays allows investigation of differential gene expression in a cell type specific manner for a multitude of genes in parallel  <cit> . for proteome analysis, two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  has been previously performed from  <dig>  to  <dig>  microdissected cells, followed by peptide mass finger printing of single spots  <cit> . isolation of such high cell numbers by laser-microdissection is extremely time consuming or even impracticable in complex tissues.

recently, several groups have successfully combined laser-microdissection with surface-enhanced laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry  to generate reproducible ms profiles from 200– <dig>  cells  <cit> . changes in these protein profiles resulting from different biological conditions can be employed as biomarkers. similarly, using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry , spectra could be generated from  <dig> to  <dig>  microdissected cells  <cit> . however, the definite identification of peptides/proteins underlying single biomarkers from laser-microdissected material demands substantially higher cell amounts and laborious, time-intensive procedures. to date, only one biomarker has been identified after profiling of laser-microdissected tissue. in this case, melle et al. combined 2d-page with peptide mapping and tandem mass spectrometry to identify a protein significantly higher expressed in tumour tissue and confirmed the identity by immunodepletion assay and immunhistochemistry  <cit> .

in addition to generating compartment-specific biomarker profiles, we aimed to develop alternative strategies circumventing the laborious 2d-page for definite protein identification using limited cell numbers derived from microdissected material. the strategies were evaluated at septal and vascular compartments of the complex lung tissue.

RESULTS
generation of protein profiles by seldi mass spectrometry
laser-microdissection and manipulation was used to isolate 500– <dig>  alveolar septum cells , which were then transferred into  <dig> μl of hepes/triton x- <dig> lysis buffer. approximately  <dig> intrapulmonary vessels  were microdissected from tissue sections and lysed identically. following the first isolation, the remaining cell pellet was subjected to urea/thiourea/chaps  buffer.

a) to assess the effect of different lysis buffers and different surface properties of the proteinchip® arrays, hepes/triton x- <dig> protein lysate as well as utc lysate was applied independently to sax  and wcx  proteinchip® arrays. compared to the weaker hepes lysis, utc buffer resulted in a remarkably higher yield of peaks  ≥ 3) on wcx arrays. on the other hand, hepes buffer gave more individual spectra on sax arrays.  <dig> cells were sufficient to detect more than  <dig> peaks on both sax and wcx arrays. however, immobilization of  <dig>  cells resulted in over  <dig> peaks on wcx arrays . in regard of limiting cell numbers a two step extraction procedure  was proven to be useful to display a higher amount of peaks for differential expression analysis. therefore this procedure was used for all further profiling experiments.

b) comparing alveolar septum cells to intrapulmonary vessels, the profiles differed considerably, with only few overlapping peaks. representative profiles are given in figure 2b.

c) four representative seldi tof ms spectra of alveolar septum cells from four different animals are shown in figure 3a. these data show good reproducibility of protein detection by seldi-ms in agreement with previous studies by zhukov et al.  <cit>  who also assessed reproducibility of seldi-ms after using laser-microdissected lung material. to determine the limit in protein abundance for further identification, peaks with different intensities were chosen: one high-abundant protein with molecular weight of  <dig>  kd and two low-abundant proteins of  <dig>  and  <dig>  kd, respectively. the three protein peaks with different intensities are presented in the zoomed area of figure 3b. for identification of these proteins following strategies were evaluated.

enrichment of proteins from microdissected cells by column chromatography and sds-page
protein lysate of  <dig>  to  <dig>  microdissected septum cells was extracted by utc buffer, the remaining material of the same needles was further extracted by sds sample buffer. protein samples from utc and sds extracts were separated by sds-page. although both extracts showed several colloidal coomassie brilliant blue  stained bands the sds extract revealed several proteins in the mw region between 12– <dig> kd . some of the clearly separated gel bands in the molecular weight region of the target proteins were excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion. band  <dig> represented the  <dig>  kd peak while band  <dig> corresponded to the  <dig>  kd peak as identified later by peptide mapping and ms/ms experiments.

the  <dig>  kd protein was enriched by micro-spin column chromatography using a q hyperd® spin column . the protein extract equivalent to approximately  <dig>  cells was applied to the column and  <dig> fractions were eluted according to a stepwise ph gradient and concentrated by trichloroacetic acid precipitation. aliquots of  <dig> μl  of each fraction were applied to a np <dig> proteinchip array  in order to detect the presence and enrichment of the selected proteins. in the organic fraction  all three proteins  were detected on an np <dig> proteinchip. after separation of the complete organic fraction by sds-page, proteins were stained by colloidal cbb. a protein band with estimated molecular weight between 15– <dig> kd was excised and subjected to tryptic digestion .

identification of the isolated target proteins by tryptic peptide mass fingerprinting on proteinchip® arrays and direct peptide fragmentation by tandem ms/ms
protein bands isolated from the gel were subjected to trypsin digestion. gel pieces were extracted twice and the resulting peptide fragments applied to np <dig> and h <dig> proteinchip® arrays with hydrophilic and hydrophobic chromatographic properties, respectively. peptide mass fingerprinting of the gel bands was done using the pbsiic instrument. the results are given in table  <dig>  two histone proteins  and haemoglobin beta were the first candidates in profound database search. for unambiguous identification, selected peptides were sequenced directly from the arrays by collision-induced dissociation , using a proteinchip® interface coupled to a tandem mass spectrometer  <cit> . representative ms and ms/ms spectra from band  <dig> are given in figure  <dig>  the peptide with an m/z ratio of  <dig>   was selected for sequencing by cid-ms/ms . the obtained sequence was assigned to histone proteins . it is notable that the molecular masses of the identified proteins correlated well with the results obtained from the profiling experiments . analysis of tryptic peptide fragments from band  <dig> confirmed the molecular mass from profiling experiments  and showed strong evidence for haemoglobin beta .

enrichment of the target protein markers from tissue sections by sds-page
due to the labour-intensive requirements of isolating high cell numbers by laser-microdissection, we sought to recover the target proteins in whole lung tissue sections, intending to use this material for subsequent protein identification. between 5– <dig> cryosections of lung tissue  previously known to contain the target proteins from laser-microdissection were collected and proteins were isolated following the procedure as for the laser-microdissected cells. applying an aliquot of approximately  <dig>  cells to a spot of wcx proteinchip® array, we were able to recover the target protein markers within the homogenate spectrum . using another aliquot of the section material for sds-page, we isolated single bands of expected weight, as already described for the microdissected cells. this material was subjected to tryptic digestion and peptide mass fingerprint. again, the two histone proteins and haemoglobin beta were identified.

discussion
the combination of laser-microdissection and mass spectrometry has been shown to be a reliable tool for compartment and cell type-specific biomarker profiling in complex tissues. several groups have described the successful generation of mass spectra from as few as  <dig> to  <dig>  cells after microdissection  <cit>  which was reproduced in the present investigation. such spectra may be employed to ascertain the cellular origin of microdissected samples. moreover, when showing differential expression under various biological conditions, mass spectral peaks may serve as biomarkers, independent of their identification. this fast and convenient technique thus represents a valuable tool to provide disease- or status-specific protein marker patterns to be used for diagnostic and predictive purposes  <cit> . in the present investigation we could confirm feasibility and excellent reproducibility of this approach when analyzing lung tissue compartments.

to investigate proteins on 2d-gels, high amounts of cells are required. therefore, using this approach as a starting point for protein profiling with subsequent ms identification,  <dig>  to  <dig>  microdissected cells have to be introduced per gel. our aim was to minimize this laborious procedure, being hardly compatible with microdissection of minor cellular compartments. thus, we first generated compartment specific profiles from laser-microdissected material by mass spectrometry and subsequently collected high cell numbers to identify the previously selected proteins. moreover, using an interface to a tandem ms/ms instrument, analysis of tryptic mass fingerprints can be performed from the same array without need for additional material. to reduce the demand of material on the gel, different staining techniques can be used . while advantageous in gel staining due to higher sensitivity, the problems are shifted towards ms technique: the identification may fail due to minute amounts of protein per gel spot. therefore, in our study we performed robust and easy cbb staining to be able to detect the required amount of material in ms techniques. additionally, for low abundant proteins, direct trypsin digestion of an eluted, gel-resolved protein can be performed directly on the array. marker protein isolation and enrichment of the protein peak may also be enhanced by application of suitable ph and salt conditions directly on the array.

a promising alternative for labour-intensive 2d-gel applications can be the detection of biomarker proteins from microdissected cells and their subsequent identification in tissue slices. since the exact weight of the target protein is known from preceding experiments with microdissected cells, the section homogenate can be screened for the respective peaks. as tissue sections are easy and fast to obtain, they were used to generate profiles on wcx arrays from the same lungs as from microdissection. while these spectra differed partially from those derived from microdissected alveolar septum cells, the peaks corresponding to the pre-defined target proteins were easily detected in the homogenate spectrum. in addition, corresponding bands could be detected by sds-page and subsequent tryptic mass fingerprinting confirmed the identity of histones h2b f and h2a <dig> and haemoglobin beta.

typically, high-resolution 2d techniques require several days from sample application to the final staining of protein spots. isolation of  <dig> to  <dig>  cells by laser-microdissection requires minutes to hours, depending on the targeted cell type, tissue area or organ compartment. array pre-treatment, immobilization of the lysate and washing lasts around  <dig> minutes and ms measurement is performed within few minutes. this calculation may reveal the time saved by our approach.

due to the accuracy of measurement we found that the molecular weight derived from seldi mass spectrometry corresponded very well with the exact protein mass. for the three investigated proteins, the mass accuracy was approximately  <dig> % for external calibration and is thus remarkably higher than using 2d-page. nevertheless, the exact molecular weight alone is insufficient to identify the concerning protein directly via database search.

CONCLUSIONS
combination of laser-microdissection with seldi-tof ms generates reproducible and credible biomarker profiles in a cell-type- or compartment-specific manner from complex tissues. for identification of underlying peptides/proteins, this approach may be combined with enrichment and isolation strategies, linked with mass fingerprinting by seldi-tof ms and peptide sequencing by tandem ms/ms for definite chemical characterization. these techniques allow analysis of differential protein expression of low cell numbers microdissected from complex tissues.

