BACKGROUND
proteins fulfill a wide variety of functions and are central to almost all processes in living cells. in order to improve our understanding of the complex network of protein interactions in the cell, it is of central importance to obtain information about the activities of the individual components; these are directly linked to their cellular concentrations. the fast development of genomic and proteomic methods has already revealed the basic protein inventory of a few hundred different organisms, but large scale quantitative information on protein concentrations is still largely missing. comprehensive analyses of cellular mrna levels have proven to be highly useful tools to monitor the state of a cell, but by design they are missing all influences of the vast amount of posttranscriptional regulations. one of the few organisms where direct protein concentrations are available on a nearly proteome wide level is the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae. it has been subject to large scale protein quantification using epitope tagging of virtually the whole proteome followed by quantitative western blotting  <cit>  and to single cell based quantitative proteomic analysis using flow-cell cytometry and a library of gfp-tagged yeast strains  <cit> . while both methods provided high-quality abundance data for nearly the entire proteome, their dependence on the availability of a strain library containing tagged versions of all proteins of interest presents a serious limitation. depending on the organism under study, to generate such a library may involve an immense amount of work or may even be impossible to achieve.

the proteomics field and its key technology mass spectrometry are developing rapidly from qualitative towards quantitative measurements without the need for individual tagging of proteins. these efforts, however, are mostly restricted to the comparison of relative concentrations of the same proteins in different samples. direct, non-relative abundance data of proteins, allowing a comparison of different proteins within and between samples, are still difficult to obtain on a large scale.

mass spectrometry, in combination with protein and peptide separation methods, allows the efficient qualitative identification of proteins in complex mixtures. as an alternative to two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  and mass spectrometric analysis of the resulting individual spots, shotgun approaches have been developed as suitable tools for large scale proteome analysis  <cit> . these are based on protease digestion of the sample as a whole and subsequent peptide separation and identification by multidimensional lc-ms/ms. however, in contrast to the 2-de approaches, information about protein abundances is initially unavailable in the shotgun approaches. relative quantification for abundance comparison of the same protein in different samples can be realized by incorporation of stable isotopes into the samples  <cit>  which is utilized in methods like cicat  <cit> , itraq™  <cit> , 18o-labeling  <cit>  or silac  <cit> . relative changes in concentration of the same protein between different experimental setups can be very accurately determined by these methods, but a major disadvantage is the absence of a direct measure of protein concentrations. abundance comparison of different proteins is hence not possible.

several mass spectrometric strategies have been reported to overcome this limitation. the more traditional ones utilize internal standards, e.g. spiking the complex mixture with peptides of known concentration  <cit> , and typically require calibration for each protein to be quantified. a more recently introduced method describes a new parameter to express protein concentrations without the need of introducing labels or internal standards. it is calculated from the averaged ion intensities of the three most intense tryptic peptides per protein, as extracted from the ion current chromatograms. this parameter is called 'xpai' for 'extracted ion intensity-based protein abundance index'. it has been shown to correlate well with known protein concentrations in the human rna polymerase ii complex  <cit>  and rat mitochondria  <cit> . however, xpai is limited to samples of low complexity since selection of only the three most intense peptides becomes unreliable with an increasing number of different proteins in the sample. additionally, it is difficult to apply the xpai approach to samples which were pre-fractionated at the peptide level, due to carry-over effects between the different fractions. a similar method has been described using an alternate scanning lcms method ), which is available on certain mass spectrometer instruments  <cit> . here, all peaks in the ms spectra are selected as precursor ions for subsequent ms/ms scans resulting in lower peak intensity dependence of peptide identification as is the case for conventional data-dependent ms/ms scans. if the ms device allows this kind of detection mode it is preferable to xpai, but it is still presented with the mentioned basic challenges of this approach.

other label free ways of large scale protein quantification by ms make use of correlations between the number of actually identified tryptic peptides per protein and the theoretical number of tryptic peptides  <cit> , or the molecular weight of the proteins  <cit> . these ratios have been termed 'protein abundance index' . more recently, we found empirically that pai correlates better with the logarithm of protein concentration and defined an exponentially modified pai   <cit> . although such a method of concentration determination may not be expected to be overly precise, the accuracy of empai-derived concentration measurements has been shown to lie within an error range of only a factor of maximally  <dig>  for  <dig> proteins in whole cell lysates of murine neuroblastoma  cells  <cit>  and is therefore in the same range or better than protein concentration measurements based on staining methods. a major advantage is that the empai based protein concentration is automatically and quickly available for all proteins identified by ms without the need of any additional experimental setup. a similar approach was reported recently for the membrane proteome of s. cerevisiae, where protein concentrations were estimated by using the number of obtained spectra per protein divided by the length of the protein  <cit> .

determination of empai-based direct protein abundances can also be carried out in combination with some of the more accurate relative abundance measurement methods, e.g. itraq, 18o-labeling or silac, since these do not introduce a detection bias towards certain peptides in the protease digested samples. icat, on the other hand, is dependent on the presence of a cysteine in a peptide in order for it to be detected, and cannot therefore easily be combined with the empai approach. the specificity to only a subset of all peptides renders this relative quantification method less well suited for concurrent direct protein quantification.

protein identification in whole proteome analyses by mass spectrometry is still far from reaching complete coverage. using state-of-the-art methods, up to ~50% of all expressed s. cerevisiae proteins could be identified by ms in a recent study  <cit> , and it was concluded that current ms sensitivity and speed would still need to improve about tenfold to approach a proteome identification of 100%. expected coverage should be a little higher for smaller proteomes and thus less complex samples. nevertheless, to our knowledge, reported protein identification coverage values have not yet exceeded 61% for any proteome. the highest reported value so far was achieved by lc-ms analysis of the ionizing radiation-resistant bacterium deinococcus radiodurans  <cit> . the study employed accurate mass and elution time tags to avoid time-consuming ms/ms events. the obtained coverage, however, was still far from complete, and, importantly, protein abundance information was absent. here, we describe an approach to maximize ms based proteome identification coverage in an application to the e. coli cytosol, in combination with a reliable and quick concentration estimation of the identified proteins.

e. coli is a gram-negative bacterium of the family enterobacteriacae. due to its simple cellular structure and the relative ease of its cultivation and biological modification, it has become the standard 'workhorse' of molecular biology, genetics and biotechnology. this resulted in e. coli becoming one of the most completely characterized organisms in biology. the genome of the laboratory strain e. coli k <dig> has been among the first organisms to be completely sequenced  <cit> . it has a relatively small size of ~ <dig>  mb, and is predicted to code for approximately  <dig> proteins. the genes, proteins, biochemical pathways and molecular interactions in e. coli have been subject to countless experimental studies and the growing number of available information in large scale databases like genbank and swissprot, but also in more specialized database projects like e.g. ecocyc  <cit>  or echobase  <cit>  allows easy access to a wealth of information. however, in spite of the combined efforts of the scientific community, the complex network of molecular interactions within living organisms, including e. coli, is still far from being fully understood. deciphering these interaction networks will be a major task of biology in coming years, and detailed knowledge about the concentrations of the individual parts in the system will be an important step on the way to accomplishing this goal.

pioneering studies on two-dimensional electrophoresis of the e. coli proteome  <cit>  were followed by 2-de coupled maldi-tof approaches, which led to the identification of  <dig> e. coli proteins  <cit> . the first shotgun approach towards the identification of the e. coli proteome was reported by gevaert et al.  <cit> . this study focused on methionine-containing peptides and identified approximately  <dig> proteins from an unfractionated e. coli lysate. it has, however, been suggested that such an approach may result in biased protein abundance data  <cit> . corbin et al.  <cit>  and taoka et al.  <cit>  then performed lc/lc-ms/ms approaches using multidimensional ion-exchange/reversed phase separation prior to ms/ms analysis. they reported protein expression profiling and protein abundance estimations, but based these purely on the number of identified peptides of each protein.

in order to extend the proteomic coverage of the e. coli cytosol and concurrently obtain minimally biased empai derived protein concentrations, we employed approximately  <dig> lc-ms/ms runs in combination with a variety of peptide/protein fractionation methods, different protease digestion schemes, lc-ms conditions and ms/ms fragmentation. following this shotgun approach we identified more than thousand different proteins. we also report abundance data for these proteins based on empai, thereby providing the largest protein abundance set of the e. coli cytosol available to date.

RESULTS
large scale determination of protein abundance in the escherichia coli cytosol
we performed approximately  <dig> individual lc-ms/ms runs of the e. coli mc <dig> cytosol, in combination with a variety of protein and peptide separation methods in order to maximize protein identification coverage. a summary of the methods employed in this study is given in table  <dig> and described in detail in the supplementary information . the decision to only investigate the cytosol of e. coli, rather than a whole cell lysate, was a direct consequence of our intention to provide reliable concentration estimates of all identified proteins, and avoid technical difficulties frequently arising from the quantitative proteolytic digestion of membrane proteins  <cit> .

 serial ultrafiltration
 strong anion exchange chromatograhpy
 c <dig> ion pair chromatograhpy
 psdvb with nh4oh, using stagetip
 sequential static exclusion
 different ion pair reagents in subsequent runs
 subdivided scan range
abbreviations: sds-page, sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis; psdvb, poly copolymer; tof: time-of-flight.

evaluating the efficiency of the different protein and peptide separation methods and ms approaches listed in table  <dig> , we found the following scheme to be optimal for our shotgun analysis of a cytosolic lysate of e. coli mc4100: initial sds-page of the lysate sample with subsequent slicing of the gel lanes in five fractions was followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. the resulting peptide mixtures were subjected to strong cation exchange chromatography   and threefold ion pair chromatography   which was directly coupled to lc-ms/ms for peptide identification. following this procedure with a quadrupole-tof mass spectrometer, we identified a total number of  <dig> non-redundant proteins in a single e. coli cytosolic lysate sample. including results of all previous runs during method comparison with this ms instrument type lead to the detection of a total of  <dig> unique proteins of the e. coli cytosol. note, however, that these numbers were preliminary and were based on a criterion where peptides with probability scores p <  <dig>  and rank =  <dig> were temporarily accepted, even if only a single peptide was observed per protein. this acceptance criterion was subsequently strengthened to a minimum of two peptides per protein for compilation of the final list, as described in materials and methods.

we also performed experiments with a linear ion trap  with faster scan cycles. parent ion selection with this device differed from the quadrupole-tof instrument, leading to an increased applicable m/z range . measurements with unfractionated samples of the e. coli cytosol revealed a considerably better performance of lit when compared to quadrupole-tof, as shown in supplementary figure s <dig> . combining the results from both types of ms instruments with protein and peptide pre-fractionation  further improved identification coverage and resulted in a total of  <dig> proteins of the cytosolic lysate of e. coli mc <dig>  grown in rich medium.

in order to cover a wider range of growth conditions in our measurements of the e. coli cytosolic proteome, we also applied an identical fractionation and identification scheme to cytosolic samples of mc <dig> cultured in minimal medium. this analysis resulted in identification of  <dig> unique proteins. protein abundance profiling using the empai approach  <cit>  showed a good correlation between protein concentrations in the samples from rich and minimal media, as shown in figure  <dig>  the majority of proteins exhibited concentration ratios within  <dig>  and  <dig> when measured from cells cultured in minimal and rich medium. other groups have previously reported on the abundance of certain e. coli proteins under various growth conditions, such as minimal versus rich media or from different growth phases  <cit> . the observed differences in protein abundance were within a factor of ten, with only few exceptions. considering the described error range of empai derived protein concentration determination  <cit>  and that of our particular system , we decided to combine our datasets obtained from rich and minimal media for further analysis. we furthermore applied more stringent criteria for final protein identification, as described in materials and methods, to reduce potential false positive identification.

this combined and more stringent dataset yielded a total of  <dig> proteins, quantified by empai, based on  <dig> observed peptides with unique parent ions  from  <dig> lc-ms/ms runs with less than 5% false positive rate . our measurements thus provide ~ <dig> –  <dig> % coverage of the approximately  <dig> cytosolic proteins in e. coli, depending on the exact definition of the cytosolic dataset, as defined in materials and methods.

validation of the empai-based protein abundance dataset
to test for potential biases in the peptide identification process we compared a number of physico-chemical properties of the observed peptides with all predicted peptides from the corresponding proteins. these parameters are expected to influence the peptide behavior during many of the employed fractionation and separations steps as for instance chromatography. as listed in supplementary table s <dig> , the two sets did not exhibit a significant difference in peptide length, mass, pi or hydrophobicity. peptide identification should therefore not be largely influenced by the separation and fractionation methods, which is a basic requirement for valid estimation of protein abundance by the empai approach  <cit> .

independent measurements of empai values from biological replicates revealed a good reproducibility with a pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>  . to further validate the protein abundance values based on empai and also test for potential biases introduced by the protein and peptide fractionation schemes, we compared the empai based concentrations of  <dig> proteins from our final set with independently determined concentrations. this was achieved by isotope dilution with a lysate of the e. coli k <dig> strain bw <dig>  for which accurate concentrations of these  <dig> proteins are known  <cit>  . as shown in figure  <dig>  empai correlates well with the copy numbers per cell of these proteins over a range of approximately four orders of magnitude, with a pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>  and a p-value < 10- <dig>  the achieved accuracy of empai derived protein abundance in e. coli is therefore similar to the reported values  <cit>  and the employed protein and peptide fractionation schemes did not introduce a detectable bias for the tested  <dig> proteins.

proteins of very high abundance are expected to exhibit a saturated empai signal. in order to test the impact of this effect, we examined the correlation between measured protein concentrations and their detection frequency. this new measure was defined as the average detection ratio of the observed parent ions of a given protein in all of the  <dig> lcms experiments. a high detection frequency indicates a possible saturation effect of the empai based concentrations of the affected protein. as shown in figure  <dig>  there is a good correlation between this measure and the empai derived protein concentration, yet with considerable noise in the high abundance and high detection frequency range. the measured concentrations of the reference proteins introduced in figure  <dig> correlate well with their detection frequencies, while ribosomal proteins, which are some of the most abundant proteins in the cell, scatter noticeably. the saturation effect is responsible for the deviation of some ribosomal proteins to lower than expected observed concentration values. on the other hand, in particular the very short ribosomal proteins also deviate into regions with higher than expected measured concentrations. this can be explained by the small number of observable peptides of these proteins, which leads to higher errors of the empai signal, amplified by the high abundance of these proteins. based on these observed high variations of the ribosomal protein concentrations we decided to remove all  <dig> detected ribosomal proteins from further analysis. there is a general tendency of other high abundance proteins and small proteins to exhibit empai concentrations of limited accuracy, but removal of all these proteins would inevitably lead to other artifacts in the following analysis. we therefore decided to keep these proteins and accept the noise they are introducing.

coverage of abundance measurements
in order to assess the coverage of our abundance measurements we compared the final set of  <dig> proteins with a set of e. coli proteins known or predicted to be cytosolic. as shown in table  <dig>  the ratio of uniquely detected cytosolic proteins depends on the definition of this theoretical cytosol. as described in materials and methods we combined experimental localization data  <cit>  with data from the psort database  <cit>  and computational transmembrane segment predictions. our cytosol definition – shown in the last row of table  <dig> – results in  <dig> theoretic cytosolic proteins that represent  <dig>  % of the complete e. coli proteome. applying the same strict criteria to the measured samples,  <dig> of the  <dig> identified proteins  can be safely considered cytosolic proteins. under these very conservative assumptions we cover at least 32%  of the theoretical e. coli cytosol. if, however, we extrapolate the experimental localization data we would cover ~75%  of the theoretical cytosol. although the number of detected unique proteins that we do not consider as cytosolic is relatively high –  <dig> out of  <dig>  or  <dig> % – their empai derived abundances indicate that these proteins represent only less than  <dig> % of all measured protein copies in our sample. if the ribosomal proteins were not excluded, the amount of protein copies of non-cytosolic proteins would be less than  <dig> %. this demonstrates the high specificity of our sample preparation and almost all proteins in the sample by mass can be considered cytosolic. our method is highly sensitive in identifying and quantifying proteins even if they occur only in very low copy numbers. we were able to identify many proteins which are present in low copy number and are hardly detectable by other techniques. for example, the adenylyl protein glne and members of the fts-family are known to be constitutively expressed at a very low level  <cit> . overall, the abundance measurements for  <dig> e. coli proteins presented in this work represent the most complete study of protein abundance in a bacterial cell so far, accounting for around one fourth of all e. coli gene products with a specificity of nearly 100% for the targeted cytosolic protein set.

a annotated attributes of the proteins depicted as logical statements. an ampersand  indicates that both conditions must be fulfilled , a vertical line  indicates 'or'. the following abbreviations are used:

tms – number of predicted transmembrane segments

psort – localization annotation from the psort database 

exp – experimental localization data from  <cit>  

b number of unique proteins with the given attributes annotated

c percentage of the unique proteins relative to the sum of unique proteins in the predicted e. coli proteome or in the experimental cytosolic sample, respectively

d percentage of the actual number of protein copies found in the experimental sample, i.e. fraction of the total protein copy number sum.

general characteristics of protein abundance in the e. coli cell
the main bulk of e. coli proteins in the cytosolic lysate are found in relatively small amounts, with 75% and 25% of them appearing in copy numbers below  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . at the same time, a sizeable fraction of highly abundant proteins with copy numbers of up to  <dig> and more was identified. this broad dynamic range of abundance values corresponds to protein copy numbers per cell from ~ <dig> to  <dig> and is in accordance with previously reported data on yeast in which the number of molecules per cell ranges from  <dig> to  <dig>  <cit> . both e. coli and yeast proteins show an extreme value distribution, implying that this may be a general rule for abundance distribution in any cell. due to the presence of very abundant proteins the arithmetic mean of the amount of copies per cell is around  <dig> whereas the median copy number is only  <dig>  the top 17% of abundant proteins are constituted by  <dig> proteins with more than  <dig> copies per cell. the optimal separation between low and high abundance proteins at this threshold has been established by expectation-maximization clustering.

functional and structural classes
in this section we compare whole groups of proteins with different functions and structures. omitting the highly abundant ribosomal proteins would introduce a significant bias in these comparisons, with higher impact than the one caused by their less accurate empai based concentration values. for this reason all  <dig> identified proteins, including the  <dig> ribosomal proteins, are considered. as expected, the latter are most abundant, followed by the proteins involved in metabolism . in general, highly abundant proteins are predominately involved in protein synthesis, as shown in figure  <dig>  in the high abundance protein group  more than 40% of all proteins are involved in protein synthesis whereas in the low abundance group only  <dig> %  are associated with protein synthesis processes. other abundant functional groups are energy and proteins with binding function, while proteins associated with transcription, transport and cellular organization are relatively rare. in particular, transcription factors are found in small copy numbers since they act as regulatory elements and do not need to be expressed at high levels themselves, as discussed in  <cit> . in the low abundance group proteins involved in metabolism are predominant. in general, the distribution of functional roles among proteins of high and low abundance follows the pattern characteristic for predicted strongly and weakly expressed genes in bacteria  <cit> . with respect to enzymatic functions , ligases, which play an essential role in protein synthesis, are the most abundant group, followed by isomerases. oxidoreductases are the least abundant enzymes. transferases and lyases are also not very abundant, but together they represent the majority of enzymes detected by our measurements. structural fold occurrence among highly abundant proteins is also substantially biased. the most characteristic topology is represented by the barrel-sandwich fold , as defined in the scop structural database  <cit> . the second most abundant fold is the ribonuclease h-like motif followed by the ob-fold. 55%  of proteins with the ribonuclease h-like motif belong to the actin-like atpase domain superfamily associated with many metabolic reactions. out of the  <dig> proteins with the ob-fold,  <dig>  were assigned to the scop superfamily nucleic acid-binding protein, consistent with the finding that proteins involved in synthesis processes are the most abundant. this list of most abundant folds by protein concentration, as presented in table  <dig>  is in strong contrast to the fold distribution in bacteria, based solely on the number of different proteins in each group. here, the five most common folds are the rossmann fold, p-loop containing hydrolase, flavodoxin like, tim barrel and ferredoxinlike fold  <cit> . with respect to protein concentrations in the cytosol, the tim-barrel, p-loop containing hydrolases, and the ferredoxinlike fold are found at places  <dig>  and  <dig> of the list of most abundant folds. it is remarkable that proteins with the p-loop containing hydrolase fold are on average about  <dig> times less abundant than proteins with the most abundant barrel-sandwich fold. furthermore, the widely spread tim-barrel is on average around  <dig> times less abundant than the barrel-sandwich fold. at the structural class level we found α/β proteins to be the least and α+β to be the most abundant. all-α proteins are the second most abundant proteins, followed by all-β proteins . no significant correlation was found between abundance and the presence of structurally disordered regions.

a all folds with  <dig> or more proteins were considered to avoid single outliers influencing the general trend.

protein aggregation
it has recently been shown that unfolded proteins with isoelectric points closer to neutrality and more stretches of alternating hydrophobic-hydrophilic residues with length  <dig> or more show increased aggregation rates in vivo  <cit> . additional features associated with protein aggregation are protein length and hydrophobicity. long proteins and more hydrophobic proteins are known to be more likely to aggregate  <cit> . our analysis shows that highly abundant proteins have isoelectric points further away from neutrality and slightly fewer alternating hydrophobic-hydrophilic stretches in comparison to the low abundance proteins in e. coli as defined in the materials and methods section. additionally we show that highly abundant proteins are on average shorter and less hydrophobic than proteins with low copy numbers . taken together, our data indicate that highly abundant proteins may have evolved to be less prone to aggregation. these observations are further strengthened when ribosomal proteins, known to be highly expressed, are also considered.

amino acid composition
in agreement with greenbaum et al.  <cit> , greater frequencies of small amino acids ala, gly and val were found in highly abundant proteins. additionally we determined that leu, gln, pro, ser and trp are more common in low abundance proteins whereas lys and glu is more common in the high abundance group. these compositional differences are a direct consequence of the functional bias observed in abundant and scarce proteins, as described above. amino acid preferences in proteins of different functionality have been utilized before for coarse function prediction from sequence alone .

essentiality and length
protein abundance shows a remarkable correlation to the essentiality of a protein for bacterial growth, as determined by gerdes et al.  <cit>  . low abundance gene products are overwhelmingly non-essential while highly abundant gene products tend to be predominantly essential. furthermore, abundant proteins tend to be shorter , similar to the trends reported for highly expressed genes in yeast  <cit> .

protein abundance versus gene expression
the extent to which protein abundance correlates with the level of gene expression has been the subject of intensive studies in the past, primarily based on available yeast data. early studies made on relatively small sets of abundance measurements were either inconclusive  <cit>  or reported only a weak correlation between protein and mrna abundance due to different rates of translation and protein degradation as well as various post-translational modifications  <cit> . in a more recent study beyer et al.  <cit>  hypothesized that a stronger correlation between mrna and protein abundance may exist within functional modules such as "metabolism", "energy", and "protein synthesis" and within cellular compartments.

in this work we compare protein abundance with two computationally derived measures of gene expressivity. one of them, the codon adaptation index  as originally defined by  <cit>  and refined by  <cit> , has been shown to correlate both with mrna expression levels and protein abundance in yeast  <cit> . the second expression measure is that of karlin and co-workers  <cit>  and is based on assessing codon usage difference between all genes and a subset of genes known to be highly expressed. both cai and the karlin measure show a significant correlation with the empai values , although in the latter case the variance in the high abundance range was rather high.

furthermore, the abundance variance within operons is smaller than the variance of all proteins in more than 90% of all known operons . thus a large majority of proteins within the same operon display similar abundance values. this result is in accordance with what would be expected, since mrna expression in prokaryotes mainly depends on the rate of transcriptional initiation. assuming similar mrna levels of genes within operons and comparable translation rates protein concentration mainly depends on the half-live of the proteins. the fact that in 9% of the operons the abundance variation is higher than expected shows the existence of additional mechanisms which control the level of protein expression.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we have developed a scheme to maximize the coverage of a proteomic study of the 'shotgun approach' in a reasonable timeframe and number of experimental steps. a combination of both protein and peptide separation methods before application to lc-ms/ms has proven to be the most efficient method to obtain a large and unbiased dataset. for the e. coli cytosol we found a combination of sds-page protein separation, strong cation exchange chromatography of the in-gel tryptic digest and lc-ms/ms with exchange of ion-pair reagents in subsequent runs to be most efficient. we show that our method is very sensitive to identify and quantify even proteins with extremely low copy numbers. for samples of different origin, the scheme would probably have to be slightly adapted, but it may serve as a good starting point for the experiments.

calculation of the empai values from the mass spectrometrical data allowed us to obtain concentration information for all identified proteins and we therefore achieved to generate the most complete dataset on protein abundance in e. coli to date. based on available experimental data as well as theoretical predictions of protein localization we estimate that our abundance measurements cover at least 32% of the e. coli cytosolic proteins by identity, with a contamination of non-cytosolic proteins of less than  <dig> % by mass. the  <dig> identified proteins predicted not to reside in cytosol are all very low abundance proteins representing less than 5% of the protein copies of the cell even if the most stringent criteria are applied and ribosomal proteins are excluded.

abundance of e. coli proteins strongly correlates with gene expressivity and displays a very broad dynamic range – from as high as  <dig> for molecular components of the biosynthetic machinery to a mere  <dig> typical for enzymes. there is also a marked bias in the occurrence of structural folds as a function of protein abundance. we found the barrel-sandwhich-fold as defined by the scop database to be the most characteristic topology for high-abundance proteins, while p-loop, tim barrel, and rossmann folds are associated with less copious gene products. other essential traits distinctive for highly abundant proteins are less pronounced and include aggregation propensity and significantly higher chance to be essential.

