BACKGROUND
rice is one of the most important crops for human consumption, as it feeds more than half of the world’s population. to facilitate rice improvement, wild relative species in the genus oryza have been employed as excellent genetic resources for rice breeding and genetic modification
 <cit> .

the genus oryza, comprising two cultivated and approximately  <dig> wild species, is classified into  <dig> genome types, including six diploids  and four allotetraploids 
 <cit> . to better exploit the superior wild rice genetic resources, a robust analysis of phylogeny among oryza species was performed several years ago
 <cit> . subsequently, efforts have focused on deciphering the evolutionary relationship among diploid oryza species
 <cit> .

however, within the genus oryza, almost one-third of rice species are considered to be allotetraploids, representing a large part of species diversity present in this genus
 <cit> . elucidating the evolutionary history of allotetraploids in oryza is highly important for obtaining a complete understanding of the evolution of oryza. unfortunately, the potential progenitors of only a few species with the bbcc genome type have been identified
 <cit> . of these species, o. minuta was selected as the representative species of bbcc in the oryza map alignment project 
 <cit> . comparative genomics resources are available, including a high quality bacterial artificial chromosome  library, bac end sequences and a bac-based physical map
 <cit> . the genome donors of o. minuta were identified as diploid o. punctata  and o. officinalis , although some studies suggest that an extinct asian bb genome carrier is the direct genome donor
 <cit> . several studies have deduced the molecular timing of bbcc formation, indicating that the formation of the allotetraploid occurred ~ <dig>  to  <dig>  million years ago 
 <cit> .

polyploidy and the consequences of duplicated genomes have been extensively studied in some model species
 <cit> . however, few studies have investigated microstructural variations using a comparative genomics approach
 <cit> . the evolutionary fate of duplicated genes has also been well-studied, and expression analysis has often allowed gene silencing to be detected
 <cit> . however, the genetic and epigenetic regulatory pathways of gene expression divergence are still largely unknown.

shattering <dig> , a major quantitative trait locus responsible for rice grain shattering, which encodes a transcription factor with an myb <dig> dna binding domain, plays an important role in the establishment of the abscission layer
 <cit> . an amino acid substitution in the sh <dig> coding region affects the normal development of abscission between the grain and the pedicel and further reduces grain shattering. human selection of this single substitution promoted the domestication of rice from wild species. to deepen our understanding of the evolution of o. minuta, we conducted a comparative genomic analysis of a genomic segment surrounding the sh <dig> locus among o. minuta, o. punctata and o. officinalis.

RESULTS
sequencing and annotation of the sh4-orthologous regions
we sequenced  <dig> bac clones covering the sh4-orthologous regions in o. punctata , o. minuta  and o. officinalis  . first, we refined the gene models in o. sativa ssp. japonica cv. nipponbare . after excluding eleven retrotransposon genes and nine hypothetical genes , the remaining  <dig> japonica reference genes were used to annotate genes in the other genomes using a multiple sequence comparative approach, as described in the methods. a total of  <dig> manually revised gene models in four sets of genomes  were identified, including four putative pseudogenes . comparative genomic analysis revealed that orthologous genes are well-conserved across all genomes .


o. punctata

o. punctata

o. officinalis

o. officinalis
*total length of each genome after removing overlapping sequences.

ten tandem duplicated gene clusters were identified within the sh <dig> region, and copy number changes  were found in four of these gene clusters . among these genes, two tandem gene families  lost one copy in the polyploid . we investigated the evolutionary mechanism of the gene  <dig> cluster, where three copies of gene  <dig> were present in the aa and bbcc_cc genomes, four copies were present in the bb, bbcc_bb and cc genomes and only one copy was present in the ff genome . we found that multiple rounds of segmental duplication occurred in these regions to form this tandem gene cluster and they then evolved separately . phylogenetic analysis indicated that gene 29– <dig> is the most ancient copy and was stably maintained in the ff genome and selectively deleted in the aa genome . since we have no sequence information about gene 54– <dig> in the bb and cc genome to ascertain whether this gene was deleted in bbcc_cc or duplicated in the other genomes, we searched for japonica gene  <dig> by blastn against the o. brachyantha genome 
 <cit>  and recently generated a draft sequence of o. puncata . we identified two tandem duplicates of gene  <dig> and observed conserved gene organization in these two genomes, suggesting that this tandem duplication probably occurred before oryza diversification. phylogenetic analysis supports this notion: all 54– <dig> and 54– <dig> copies are separately clustered . however, it cannot be confirmed whether one copy of gene 54– <dig> was deleted from bc_c after polyploid formation or whether it was deleted from cc before polyploid formation, since sequence information for the cc genome is lacking. we designed 54-2-specific primers to amplify this copy in the cc genome, and no product could be detected, implying that this copy was probably deleted from the cc genome before polyploid formation .

the details of repeat annotation are shown in additional file
1: table s <dig> and s <dig>  we calculated and compared the te contents for dna type, rna type and total  among o. minuta and two diploids. in bbcc_bb, the retrotransposon and total te contents have been increasing compared with bb, while the retrotransposon and total te contents have been decreasing in bbcc_cc compared with the cc genome . we compared the contents of ltrs and solo ltrs between the polyploid and diploid genomes. the number of solo ltrs was much greater than that of ltrs within all genomes, which indicates that the oryza genomes are experiencing contraction .

structural variation after allotetraploid formation
sequence comparisons revealed a ~40 kb inversion in the cc subgenome in o. minuta . we identified two identical mule elements from two sides of this inverted segment and examined whether recombination between these two elements caused the inversion. sequence comparisons revealed that the two elements shared identical tsd and tir sequences, indicating that homologous recombination has occurred between these mules, which indeed caused the elements to exchange tsd and tir sequences, and thus the genomic sequence became inverted .

transposition driven by pack-mules is another factor that contributes to genome non-collinearity. we identified four transposition events that occurred in the o. minuta genome after polyploid formation. notably, one pack-mule in the bb subgenome captured sequence fragments from several other gene loci and became integrated into a novel predicted orf. we failed to determine whether this orf is functional using rt-pcr . more interestingly, at the same region of the cc subgenomes, we identified identical type, independently inserted pack-mules with completely different captured genomic sequences , which indicates that these genome regions may contain preferentially inserted sequence sites for this mule.

duplicated gene evolution in o. minuta
to investigate duplicated gene evolution, we chose genes that were covered by bac sequencing in all of the genomes, and therefore genes before  <dig> and after  <dig> were excluded from the following analysis . the sh <dig> regions contain  <dig> sets of orthologous genes . among these genes, only one deletion of gene 29– <dig> was observed  in bbcc_cc, and both copies of the other duplicated genes were maintained. we also identified four genes that were putatively pseudogenized in the polyploid genome, which formed after polyploidy .

we estimated the molecular evolutionary rate for duplicated genes and examined whether these genes had different rates of evolution after polyploid formation . the results from the relative rate tests suggest that most genes do not exhibit obviously different rates between the polyploid and diploids. to determine which type of selection was acting upon the duplicated genes, we calculated the ratio of non-synonymous  to synonymous  substitutions of protein coding sequences. most duplicated genes were under purifying selection , indicating that these genes are still strongly controlled after polyploidy . similar patterns of ks distribution between bb-bc_b and cc-bc_c also indicate that the evolutionary rates of duplicated genes were not obviously different . we used duplicated genes to deduce the molecular timing of o. minuta divergence, and the results suggest that o. minuta was formed approximately  <dig> – <dig>  mya , which is older than a previous estimate obtained by examining the moc <dig> region 
 <cit> .

gene expression divergence of duplicated genes
since duplicated genes can exhibit significant variations in gene expression, we next examined the expression divergence of  <dig> sets of duplicated genes in o. minuta. we adopted the cdna-sscp assay to profile changes in gene expression, and considered only qualitative variations . the cdna-sscp results are shown in figure 
 <dig>  which shows that approximately 31%  of the genes have one silenced copy in bbcc. the complete results are shown in additional file
1: figure s <dig> and table s <dig> 

to investigate whether genetic or epigenetic mechanisms regulate these genes, we first examined the genomic sequences of silenced copies of these nine genes to determine whether or how the gene structures were destroyed. the silencing in only one gene  could be attributed to sequence variations . in addition, we examined the expression patterns of two other genes  that were identified as pseudogenes and found that both copies of the genes could be transcribed  . in summary, of the nine genes that exhibited expression silencing, only one was under genetic regulation. this result implies that other mechanisms, such as epigenetic regulation, may be involved in gene silencing.

dna methylation, histone modification and other epigenetic modifications can affect gene expression
 <cit> . of these regulatory mechanisms, dna methylation is one of the most common regulator of gene expression
 <cit> . dna methylation profiling of whole genomes has demonstrated that the methylation levels around the transcription start sites  of genes are quite low, indicating that there is a correlation between transcription and methylation
 <cit> . thus, we selected two sets of duplicated genes to determine whether the dna methylation levels of regulatory sequences differ between normally expressed genes and silenced genes in the polyploid. for the first gene , we did not observed differential methylation in the regulatory regions between the two homoelogous genes. however, for the second gene , we detected differential methylation profiles between the duplicated genes. a cdna-sscp test indicated that gene <dig> is normally expressed in the cc subgenome but silenced in the bb subgenome . therefore, we tested the methylation levels of approximately 2 kb upstream regions from the first exon, and detected heavy methylation near the tss region of the bb copy of the gene but almost no methylation in the cc subgenome, suggesting that this regional, heavy dna methylation probably caused the gene silencing . we also examined the orthologous regions in bb and cc. no hypermethylation was found in either genome, suggesting that dna methylation in this genomic region was not genetically inherited from the parental genomes, but it evolved after separation. we therefore examined whether the heavy methylation occurred spontaneously or whether there were other reasons for the phenomenon. when we compared the genomic sequences of this methylated region, we found that some of the sequences of bbcc_cc were completely absent from the other genomes. annotation suggested that a hat element was specifically inserted into the cc subgenome. therefore, this heavy dna methylation was probably brought about by te insertion, which is in accordance with the fact that methylation is a common approach used by genomes to defend themselves against tes
 <cit> .

discussion
although several studies on synthetic and natural polyploids have provided evidence for rapid loss and gain of genomic segments  and extensive genomic reshuffling
 <cit> , sequence comparisons in the sh <dig> genomic region, combined with the results from analysis of adh <dig> and moc <dig> <cit> , suggest that the natural oryza allotetraploid o. minuta is perhaps a relatively stable polyploid. such stabilization is supported by the presence of conserved genes, intergenic regions and even shared tes between polyploid and diploid genomes. however, confirming this notion would require additional investigations of other larger segments or even whole genomes.

the regulation of duplicated gene expression in polyploids has been well-studied in several model species, but few of these studies have correlated expression divergence with sequence variations
 <cit> . in this study, we found that two pairs of duplicated genes annotated as pseudogenes  could be coexpressed in a cdna-sscp assay. analysis of cdna sequences has indicated that transcripts from pseudogenes are non-functional. therefore, coexpression of homoelogous genes revealed by microarray analysis  does not guarantee that both gene copies are treated equally by the genome, as mrna sequence variations cannot be detected using these approaches. notably, the biological significance of pseudogenes has recently been examined, especially pseudogenes that can be transcribed
 <cit> . these findings suggest that pseudogenes can probably evolve from being buried in huge genomes to becoming new, functional elements, implying that pseudogenization can lead to neofunctionalization.

gene expression divergence was found to be more prevalent in bbcc than was previously predicted in other species
 <cit> . both genetic and epigenetic regulatory mechanisms were found to control duplicated genes in o. minuta. deletion is a robust mechanism for controlling duplicated genes, but it is not a universal approach, as observed within the sh <dig> region, and it often occurs with multiple copy genes. sequence analysis to detect gene functional deficiency caused by structural variation has revealed that only one gene is regulated genetically, implying that more genes may be regulated by epigenetic mechanisms. the example of te-driven methylation silencing illustrates a potential epigenetic gene silencing pathway, which occurs as follows: after polyploidy, the presence of a duplicated genome decreases the stress upon tes, which are then reactivated and become randomly inserted into the genome. once integrated into sensitive genome regions  and simultaneously supervised by the epigenetic network , the function  of nearby genes may be affected to various extents and may even become completely inactivated . this epigenetic regulation should be more prevalent in polyploids than diploids, since it is much more difficult for this kind of high-impact insertions to escape from selection in diploids than in polyploids.

although genome-wide experimental data are required to prove that the epigenetic pathway is the universal mechanism for gene silencing, it is currently more difficult to test epigenetic markers than genetic sequences, especially when dealing with polyploids. nonetheless, we still propose that dna methylation-controlled gene silencing is a prevalent mechanism, based on several observations. first, tes have been reported to regulate gene expression for numerous genes
 <cit> . for instance, a sine element inserted upstream of the fwa coding sequence caused this gene to be epigenetically silenced in vegetative tissues of arabidopsis <cit> . second, numerous tes are likely to be inserted adjacent to genes in the bbcc genome. tes can affect gene expression, but the effects of tes decrease with increasing distance between the tes and genes
 <cit> . we investigated the distribution of several types of dna-type tes in the japonica genome. these tes have the greatest potential to regulate nearby genes due to their preferential insertion near or within genes. three types of tes, including hat, stowaway and tourist, are all present in thousands of copies , and the mean distance of these tes to genes is within 2 kb . therefore, we postulate that a considerable number of potential epigenetic triggers have also been buried within the bbcc genome. more importantly, according to previous reports and the results of the current study, te insertion is not sufficient to initiate the silencing pathway; sirna or dna methylation is essential for initiating this program. for example, the same hat elements were found in regulatory regions of the flc gene in two arabidopsis ecotypes, landsberg erecta  and columbia . however, the roles of these two hat elements in regulating flc gene expression are quite different, as ~24-nt sirna was found at higher levels in ler than in col; this sirna can mediate dna methylation and gene silencing in the ler ecotype
 <cit> . recently, the global effects of tes on gene expression were investigated in arabidopsis and its close relative. genome-wide analysis indicated that tes can affect the expression of nearby genes, especially when the tes are epigenetically modified 
 <cit> . we also calculated the methylation rates of the above three types of tes in the japonica genome and found that methylated copies account for over 80% of these tes, providing further support for the potential role of silenced tes in gene regulation. here, we used the japonica genome to represent o. minuta. future studies should focus on comprehensive analysis of the o. minuta genome to help elucidate the epigenetic regulatory pathway on a genome-wide scale.

CONCLUSIONS
by integrating comparative genomic tools, gene expression and epigenetic analysis, our study comprehensively demonstrates how duplicated genomes and genes evolve within the sh <dig> region in o. minuta. we found that duplicated genes are under both genetic and epigenetic regulation, and dna methylation is proposed as a potentially important regulatory mechanism for gene silencing.

