BACKGROUND
it is highly desirable to profile the expression of rnas in a sensitive manner. examples include sorted cells from biopsies or embryoid bodies, which can only provide a small number of cells. even with cells from cell lines or expandable primary cultures, individual cells in cultures are known to have cell-to-cell variations, i.e., variations in cell-cycle  <cit>  or differentiation  <cit>  statuses. in addition, the stochastic expression of genes could be of biological importance  <cit> . thus, ultralow-input or single-cell profiling will unveil valuable information.

besides the well-known role of messenger rna  in determining cellular functions and fates, microrna , the noncoding rna of an approximately 22-nucleotide-long sequence, binds mrnas to regulate the level or translation of their targets  <cit> . mirnas are involved in cell-cycle control  <cit> , in cell-fate maintenance and decisions  <cit> , and in multiple physiological/pathological processes as well, such as immunity  <cit> . the understanding of their roles begins with the identification and quantification of their expression. it would be even better if the quantitative information of mrna and mirna could be collected at the same time to characterize their interactions.

although it is possible to profile mrna  <cit>  or mirna  <cit>  from individual cells, current options to profile both types of rna concurrently by high-throughput sequencing are limited by the different ways of attaching adapters for reverse transcription  and complementary dna  amplification. the 5’ capping of mrna is incompatible with the attachment of the 5’ adapter by ligation  <cit> , a procedure commonly used for mirna amplification. although it is possible to ligate a poly adapter to the 3’ end of mirna and use a template-switch  reaction  <cit>  to add the 5’ adapter to both mrna and mirna, the efficiency of ts is low and the use of the mncl <dig> enhancer  <cit>  is detrimental to the fidelity of the downstream pcr amplification.

here, we tried to address the limitations referenced above by developing a single-tube amplification  system to profile the expression of mirnas, other noncoding rnas , and mrna from  <dig> or fewer cells for high-throughput sequencing. based on human embryonic stem cell  lines and their differentiated endothelial cells, sta revealed mirnas to be differentially enriched in each cell type. the differential expression was further validated by conducting a quantitative polymerase chain reaction  with an independent human induced pluripotent stem cell  line. with hescs and 293t cells, we further demonstrated that sta-derived sequencing data correlated well with the data based on conventional methods in the literature regarding mirna and mrna expressions. finally, sta was able to profile mirna expression in as few as  <dig> cells or even in single cells at some cost of sensitivity. overall, sta was shown to be a simple, efficient, and sensitive system to profile both polyadenylated and nonpolyadenylated transcriptomes in small numbers of cells for both high-throughput sequencing and qpcr.

RESULTS
polyadenylation in an rt buffer and high dntp/mg2+ during the ts reaction enabled efficient attachment of both adapters without a buffer exchange
our goal was to maximize the sensitivity of detecting rnas by lysing cells, attaching both adapters, and amplifying cdna in a single tube without any purification or buffer exchange in between . after cell lysis, polyadenylation of the ncrnas by poly polymerase  served for the attachment of a 3’ adapter during reverse transcription. however, the conventional pap buffer contained high concentrations of nacl  and mgcl <dig> , which was suboptimal for the following rt step. thus, an rt buffer containing 75 mm kcl and 3 mm mgcl <dig> was tested as a substitute for the pap buffer for polyadenylating an oligo with a 5-ribose a tail . in contrast to the control without atp , the use of either a pap or an rt buffer resulted in the disappearance of the unextended lora <dig>  accompanied with extensive shift-up smearing . the successful polyadenylation of the lora <dig> was verified by the loss of shifting in the presence of ribonuclease  if, which degrades all types of rna dinucleotides , but not ribonuclease a, which only cuts before pyrimidines . in addition, pap could be inactivated efficiently at 65 °c for 20 min in the rt buffer . thus, the pap was active and could be effectively heat-inactivated in the rt buffer, allowing for polyadenylation and single-buffer continuation into the subsequent rt step.fig.  <dig> optimizing the conditions for single-tube amplification  of rna. a schematic representation of sta procedure. tso: template-switch oligo and primer binding site for pcriia; i7: primer binding site for fc-121-1030; p <dig> and p7: flow cell binding sites for illumina sequencing; red: ribonucleic acid bases; green: locked nucleic acid bases. b denaturing page  of lora <dig> under various conditions. one pmol of lora <dig> was polyadenylated with  <dig>  units of pap in 10 μl of reaction medium at 37 °c for 30 min followed by incubating at 65 °c for 20 min with the following variations: i: rnase if  <dig> units at 37 °c for 30 min after the 65 °c step; a: rnase a 5 μg at 37 °c for 30 min after the 65 °c step; heat: the reaction was heated at 65 °c for 20 min before adding lora <dig> for polyadenylation. papb: pap buffer; rtb: rt buffer; atp:  <dig>  mm final of atp. arrow: lora5; arrowhead: lora <dig> with trimmed ra tails by rnase if. c schematic representation of extending a looped dna oligo  with a tso. d denaturing page  demonstrating the effects of mg2+ and dntp concentrations on ts activity. one pmol of lo was incubated in 1 m betaine, 1 μm tso, 1x rt buffer, 4 mm extra of dithiothreitol,  <dig> units of superscript ii in 10 μl of reaction medium at 42 °c for 90 min followed by incubating at 70 °c for 15 min with different final concentrations of dntp and mgcl <dig>  lanes  <dig> and  <dig> served as no-lo and no-tso controls, respectively. arrow: lo with first extended tso; asterisk: lo with second extended tso. e schematic representation of detecting a dna oligo with a 20-mer a tail  without  or with  preamplification. f denaturing page  detecting decreasing numbers of mt7a <dig> using sta. various numbers of mt7a <dig> were subject to ts reaction as described in the methods section. a half  of the ts reaction was directly purified with polyethylene glycol /nacl, and all eluents underwent 50 cycles of pcr . the other half  was preamplified with 20 cycles of pcr before purification , and one-hundredth of the eluents was amplified with 40 cycles of pcr. g denaturing page  of mir-19b pcr products with decreasing cell inputs. total rna from 1000- to 1-cell lysates of 293ft was amplified based on the sta procedure . one-hundredth of the purified eluents was subject to 40 cycles of pcr. 293ft-rt: control  without reverse transcriptase; 293ft-pap: control  without pap; 0: no-cell control. h nondenaturing page  demonstrating detection limits of sta with spike-in of small-rna oligos. various numbers of 27-mer rna  oligos were spiked into 100-cell lysates of tw <dig> hesc line. one-hundredth of the purified eluents from the 20-cycle sta procedure was subject to 40 cycles of pcr




the attachment of both 5’ and 3’ adapters was based on the ts system for the purpose of profiling single-cell mrnas  <cit> . to maximize the ts efficiency, a looped dna oligo  was used as a blunt-end mimic to assay for the addition of a 5’ template-switch oligo  adapter . since nontemplate tailing of deoxyribonucleotides  was the basis of the ts reaction, the concentration of the dntp was increased to boost the extension. under the standard conditions for cdna synthesis, there was only limited extension of the looped oligo . increasing dntp substrates alone, however, failed to enhance ts activity significantly . however, the enhancement with higher dntp could be observed with accompanying increases in mg2+ , which was chelated by dntp. the maximal efficiency was observed at 2 mm dntp plus 9 mm mg2+ , under which the extension of a second adapter could be observed . thus, a high concentration of 2 mm dntp plus 9 mm mg2+ was chosen for the ts reaction.

preamplification before purification enhanced the detection sensitivity
purification of the cdna products from the ts reaction was required to remove oligos that would confound either subsequent qpcr reaction or library preparation. to assess the effects of cdna purification on the sensitivity of the samples, decreasing numbers of poly-tailed oligos  were subjected to ts reactions and detected with a primer pair specific for the adapter-attached oligo . if the cdna was purified directly after the ts reaction , the pcr products of correct size disappeared when the input was below  <dig> copies per reaction  with the accompanying presence of unspecific bands . if preamplification  <cit>  was performed before purification , the system was able to detect a few copies of mt7a <dig> in the reaction  without any unspecific products  in a quantitative manner . although the sensitivity limit of a single copy was difficult to claim due to the potential inaccuracy of either the dilution or the starting amount, direct purification clearly led to an inevitable reduction in sensitivity. preamplification before purification improved the sensitivity by ~100-fold, and the system was able to detect a few copies of the starting material. the high sensitivity of the ts reaction plus preamplification was further supported by the presence of amplified cdna smears with serial dilutions of 293ft lysates in denaturing polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  . even though the cdna smear was faint , mir-19b was detectable in the lysate equivalent to single cells only in the presence of both rt and pap . taken together, it was possible to perform cell lysis, polyadenylation, a ts reaction, and preamplification in a single tube, and the single-tube amplification  was able to detect noncoding targets in individual cells. to evaluate the absolute number of short rnas that could be detected by sta, decreasing numbers of rna oligos were spiked into  <dig> tw <dig> hescs for sta with 20 cycles of preamplification. the cdna of the spiked-in rna oligo could be detected quantitatively  when the input number was  <dig> or higher .

sta was compatible with high-throughput sequencing to quantify human pluripotent stem cell -enriched mirnas from  <dig> cells
to show if sta was able to comprehensively profile mirna expression in a few cells, two different lines of hescs, tw <dig> and ch <dig>  were sorted directly into a lysis buffer for cdna amplification. successful amplification was identified by the smearing in denaturing page compared with the no-cell control . two different band widths were collected  for library preparation and sequencing to see if the width affected the sequencing output. most of the sequencing reads were mapped to the 3’ transcriptome region , indicating that the transcripts remained intact during polyadenylation. for the  <dig> – <dig> % of reads mapped to a genome, however, trna , repeats , and intronic reads  accounted for the majority of the mapped reads . among the abundant unannotated reads , most of them  were rrna transcripts not annotated in gencode v <dig> . other unannotated reads were located on transcripts in expressed sequence tag  or human mrna databases , near the start of trna  or belonged to antisense sequences on the exons or introns of transcripts . of the  <dig> – <dig> % of the mapped reads that belonged to exon reads, around 70% of them were represented by protein-coding genes , small nucleolar rnas , and mirnas  . the low mirna read percentages  among the mapped reads compared with those  derived using conventional procedures from a large amount of samples  <cit>  could be explained by performing size selection after attaching both 5’ and 3’ adapters with sta. the combined length of ~105 bp made the libraries containing mirnas difficult to isolate from those containing rnas of similar sizes ). in addition, performing size selection after sta increased the carryover of protein-coding mrnas due to their fragmentation during rt and consequent co-amplification and co-purification, which was exemplified by the prominent 3’ gapdh peaks .fig.  <dig> high-throughput profiling of hpsc and 293-cell transcriptomes based on sta. a representative denaturing page  of the preamplified cdna from  <dig>  and  <dig>  hescs. one hundred hescs were sorted directly into 2 μl of lysis buffer and subject to sta. all 15-cycle preamplified products were purified with peg/nacl and electrophoresed. two different widths  of gel slices were cut for library preparation. the 21-cycle preamplified and purified products of lysis buffer alone served as a no-cell control. b gene body coverage chart of all aligned reads against all transcripts based on gencode v <dig>  c the distribution of reads among genomic features. strandedness was taken into account for counting in the order of exon , intron , trna , and repeat  features, and the rest was considered to be unannotated. the numbers on top of each column indicate reads successfully aligned to the grch <dig> genome assembly. the percentages in parentheses are the numbers of successfully aligned reads divided by the total reads in the respective libraries. d the rna-type summary of the exon reads in the three libraries based on gencode v <dig>  the percentages indicate the numbers of reads divided by the number of exon reads. e
upper: venn diagram showing the overlap of the mirnas identified  in tp100n and two other hesc reference sequencing data sources  in the literature. lower: scatter plot demonstrating the association of mirna quantifications between tp100n and the referenced solexa data. each value of the reference sample was multiplied by  <dig>  because only normalized data were available with the reference samples. blue, green, and red colors indicate the top  <dig> most highly expressed mirnas in tp100n, reference sample, and both, respectively. f scatter plot demonstrating the association of rlog-normalized  mirna quantifications of  <dig> cells between a library prepared with sta  and that with conventional ligation-based method . identical genome alignment  and feature assignment  were performed, and all mirnas  were used for rlog transformation  with deseq <dig>  g
upper: venn diagram showing the overlap of protein-coding rnas identified  in 293ftm and those in reference rna-seq data  from  <dig> cells. lower: scatter plot demonstrating the association of rlog-normalized  protein coding-rna quantifications of  <dig> cells between a library prepared with sta  and reference srx <dig> rna-seq data. identical genome alignment  and feature assignment  were performed, and all protein-coding rnas  were used for rlog transformation  with deseq <dig>  representative histone-coding rnas enriched in the sta-based library are highlighted in red. qpcr  and denaturing page  of the semi-quantitative pcr products  of mir-302c, mir- <dig>  mir-let7a, and mir-196b. hipsc  and 293ft cells were lysed, and 100-, 10-, and 1-cell equivalents of lysates were used for sta. preamplification of  <dig>   <dig>  and 21 cycles were used for 100-, 10-, and 1-cell lysates, respectively, and 1/ <dig> of the preamplified and purified eluents was used for qpcr. the optimal cycle numbers  for semi-quantitative pcr in i were based on the qpcr analysis in h. rnau <dig> served as a loading control




the mirna quantifications based on sta showed strong correlations between the expressions of the two hesc lines . as a comparison, the mirna sequencing data from sorted hescs based on conventional library preparation and solexa and  <dig> sequencing systems in the literature  <cit>  were employed. the mirnas identified using sta showed a significant overlap with those identified using the conventional method . the solexa data were further used to acquire correlation coefficients against sta as a result of the higher number of mirnas detected relative to those detected using  <dig>  moderate to strong correlations could be observed between the reference data and the sta data . further, significant co-occurrence of top expressers could be demonstrated irrespective of sample sources and methods .

to further validate sta, amplified 100-cell cdna from a common cell line, 293ft, was run against mock libraries prepared from 21- and 27-mer rna oligos  to refine the size selection . the percentages of mirna , trna , and snorna  were not much different from those of hescs , and protein-coding rna still accounted for the largest proportion of exon reads . the expression of mirna  based on sta showed a decent match with that  based on conventional ligation-based methods in terms of genes identified  and quantification . however, when both sequencing data were based on sta, a higher correlation was observed even if a 293 t cell line from a different source was used . although the identical culture conditions of 293ft and 293t could account for the higher correlation of sta-based data, preferential detection of individual mirnas with sta- and ligation-based methods could equally lead to the phenomenon.

besides mirna, long intergenic noncoding rna  expression based on sta also showed good correlation with results based on ligation-based methods . further, quantitation of protein-coding rna, the most abundant type of exon reads, in sta-based sequencing data also showed good correlation with that in the mrna-seq data from purified poly + mrna  <cit>  . the enrichment of histone genes  in the sta-based output demonstrated the advantage of sta in detecting nonpolyadenylated protein-coding transcripts  <cit> . finally, by comparing the differential expression of protein-coding transcriptomes of hescs and 293ft/t, nanog, sox <dig>  and pou5f <dig>  genes well known to be expressed in hescs, could be revealed .

by comparing the differential expression of mirna between hescs and 293ft/t cells , two mirnas, mir-302c and mir- <dig>  were picked to validate their enrichment in an hipsc line, df-19-9-7t, by qpcr. compared with the control 293ft cells, both mirnas demonstrated significant enrichment . conversely, mirnas known  <cit>  to be abundant in 293ft/t cells  showed reversed enrichment . further, the differential expression could be observed down to the lysate from single-cell equivalents . finally, the pcr products of mirnas and the reference rnau <dig> were located at predicted sizes through the denaturing page .

the rna expression profiles using sta clearly blindly segregated escs and endothelial cells
to demonstrate the power of sta to comprehensively compare the transcriptomes between different cell types, sequencing data from the hescs and their differentiated cd31+/cd34+ endothelial progenies  were compared . based on the expression of total rna in an unsupervised manner, the endothelial samples segregated well from the hescs according to principal component   <dig> and cluster dendrogram analyses . similar segregation of the two cell types was evident by the expression of mirna alone . by the expression of total rna, the two hpsc lines could be separated from each other using pc <dig> . consistent with the segregation, the tw <dig> cell line showed an extra group of enriched genes relative to ch <dig>  in addition to hesc- and endothelium-enriched genes .fig.  <dig> profiling the differential expression of rna between hpscs and the differentiated endothelial cells using sta. a fluorescence-activated cell sorting for cd31+/cd34+ cells. hescs  were induced for 2 days into mesoderm. the induced mesodermal cells  were replated into a vascular mixture for another 3 days before sorting. the cells in the boxed area were seeded directly into 2 μl of lysis buffer for sta. b unsupervised principal component analysis  based on the expression of total rna of  <dig> hescs and the differentiated endothelial cells. genes  with summed counts > <dig> across six samples were rlog-transformed with deseq <dig> , and the output was subject to pca with default parameters. c unsupervised heat map of the data in b. the top  <dig> variable genes of the rlog-transformed counts in b served as the input for heatmap <dig> analysis with default parameters. blue, red, and green clusters indicate genes enriched in hescs, endothelial cells, and the tw <dig> cell line, respectively. d volcano plot showing the differential expression of mirna between  <dig> hpscs and endothelial cells. mirna  with summed counts > <dig> across six samples were included for differential-expression analysis with deseq <dig>  colored dots indicate log <dig> fold change > <dig> and an adjusted p value < <dig> . mirnas for further validation and in mir-302/ <dig> cluster are highlighted with a black border. qpcr  and representative denaturing page  of the amplified products  of mir-302c, mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir- <dig>  mir-519e, mir-19b, mir-92a, mir-24- <dig>  mir-126-3p, mir-126-5p, and mir- <dig>  df19-9-7t cells and their day- <dig> differentiated mesodermal  and day- <dig> endothelial  progenies were lysed for sta  and qpcr  or semi-quantitative pcr . the differentiation procedure was performed as in a, and  <dig> cells at the mesoderm and endothelial stages were harvested directly for sta . one-hundredth of the preamplified and purified eluents was used for qpcr and pcr. the optimal cycle numbers  for semi-quantitative pcr in f were based on the qpcr analysis in e. one hundred undifferentiated df19-9-7t cells served as the reference sample. psmd <dig> served as a loading control for analyses with qpcr. g scatter plots correlating the expressions of the rna-seq data with the qpcr quantifications. y-axis represents the regressed means of the hesc data by deseq <dig> in d. x-axis  represents the relative expression of the respective mirnas normalized by the psmd <dig> of the df19-9-7t cell line in e. eff: efficiency; cpd2: threshold cycle; left panel: hpsc; right panel: differentiated endothelial cells




sta revealed mirnas specifically enriched in pscs and their differentiated endothelial cells
differential expression of the sequencing data revealed that the mirnas expressed selectively in either the hescs or endothelial cells . some of the enriched mirnas have already been documented. for example, the mir-302/ <dig> cluster  is known to be abundant in hescs in maintaining pluripotency  <cit> . in addition, mir- <dig>  a gene regulating vascular leakiness  <cit> , was found to be the most abundant  mirna in endothelial samples . in addition to the known mirnas, the sta revealed other differentially enriched mirnas, such as mir-887/mir-24- <dig> in endothelial cells and mir-519e in hpscs . the selective enrichment of mirna by sequencing was further validated by qpcr on the df19-9-7t hipsc line and its endothelial progenies . at the mesodermal stage, the intermediate between hpscs and endothelial cells, the levels of the mirnas tended to remain in between . finally, the moderate to strong correlation between the quantifications by sequencing and qpcr of different hpsc lines supported that the sta was technically solid and consistent .

at the expense of sensitivity, the sta provided quantitative transcriptome information from  <dig> cells and from a single cell
to probe the sensitivity limit of the sta, both  <dig> and single hescs or differentiated endothelial cells were sorted and subjected to sta and sequencing . although amplified cdna as smears could be consistently identified from the 10-cell input, amplified products were detected in ~50% of the wells seeded with single cells . the 50% chance of obtaining libraries was likely due to sorting, because the detection of amplified cdna was mostly all or none in individual wells after 21 cycles of preamplification. generally, the gene expression trends from low-input libraries matched those from  <dig> cells considering both total rna  and mirna . however, reduction of sensitivity was identified in the low-input samples . by comparing the mirna expression of the individual samples against the average of the other cell types, the low-input samples tended to miss enriched genes of their type . in addition, aberrant over representation of mirnas was identified in the low-input samples . the aberrant detection of these mirnas could be further demonstrated by plotting against the quantities found in other samples . nevertheless, using the principal components derived from the 100-cell inputs as a predictor , the low-input samples from the pscs and endothelial cells could still be segregated by pc <dig> , albeit with shorter distances apart for some samples . regarding individual genes, the expression of abundant mirna was detected in single cells . however, for some less abundant mirnas, loss of peaks was identified in some samples with either  <dig> cell or  <dig> cells . regarding protein-coding genes, the loss of detection was also observed with 1-cell samples, as evidenced by increased zero-count genes that were enriched in particular cell types . in addition, the wider dispersion of the detected protein-coding genes in the single-cell samples indicated reduced quantitative power with single-cell samples . nevertheless, even with these issues, the expression profiles of mature mirna in  <dig> or single cells co-segregated with those of  <dig> cells in a cell-type-dependent manner by unsupervised pca . the observation suggested that sta would be useful in sorting and comparing single-cell transcriptomes in a mixed and heterogeneous cell population.fig.  <dig> probing the detection limit with  <dig> to single cells. a representative denaturing page  of the peg/nacl-purified, amplified cdna libraries from single hpscs or sorted endothelial progeny. differentiation, sorting, and sta were performed as in fig. 3a. for single cells, only cdnas successfully amplified after 21 cycles of preamplification  were size-selected  for library construction. b the supervised heat map of total rna expression of all  <dig> psc and end samples. genes  from all  <dig> samples were used for differential-expression analysis with deseq <dig>  the rlog-transformed counts with lowest p values  were ranked by log <dig> fold changes and served as input for heatmap <dig> without rearranging column and row dendrograms. c scatter plots of rldmirna from individual samples of hescs against the averaged rldmirna of six endothelial samples. only mirnas with summed counts > <dig> across  <dig> psc and end samples were included for deseq <dig> analysis. colored dots represent mirnas enriched in hpscs  or endothelial cells  as defined in fig. 3d. the blue dots were transformed into squares when the values of /log <dig>  were less than or equal to  <dig> . the ratio of blue squares over total blue  is indicated in the upper left corner. exemplary aberrant expressers in low-input samples are highlighted with black borders. d rld of aberrantly detected mirnas  in individual low-input  vs those in the other samples of hescs  and endothelial cells . e scatter plots of rldprotein-coding from individual samples of hescs  and endothelial cells  against the averaged rldprotein-coding of the six 293t samples. colored dots represent protein-coding genes differentially expressed  in hescs , endothelial cells , and 293t cells  by deseq <dig> analysis. protein-coding genes with summed counts > <dig> across the  <dig> samples  were included for differential-expression and rlog-transformation analyses. the blue and red dots were transformed into squares when the count of a particular gene was  <dig>  the ratios of squares over  are indicated in the upper left corner. f unsupervised pca based on the mature mirna counts of all  <dig> samples. mirnas  with summed counts > <dig> across the  <dig> samples were rlog-transformed with deseq <dig> . the transformed rld served as the input for pca with default parameters. g visualization of novel  and mitochondrial  transcripts in the ucsc genome browser. each curve represents reads per million -normalized wiggle output of the libraries against the grch <dig> genome assembly. h validation of the transcripts by denaturing page  for the novel  and mitochondrial  transcripts. one-hundredth of the preamplified cdnas in figs. 1g and 3f was used for 30 cycles of pcr




although the sequencing data from wider size-selection pieces tended to cover a broader region in the 3’ transcript regions , we could not identify significant differences in the sequencing outputs regarding the percentages of aligned, exon, or mirna reads . in addition, the mirna expression levels between the outputs from two widths were still highly correlated . however, if the size selection was further refined by running libraries for longer times in higher percentage page gels  and by dividing into  <dig> different size ranges , the 293ft libraries prepared from higher size ranges contained lower percentages of mirna  and higher percentages of trna . in addition, the library from the highest positions  also contained higher proportions of lincrna  and antisense rna  compared with the other libraries . the correlation of mirna expression between 293fth and 293ftm was not as good as those between the other ranges and 293ftm . although the library from the lowest position  and 293ftm had similar percentages of mirna among exon reads  and correlated well in mirna quantification , the percentage of successfully aligned reads  of 293ftl was much lower that of 293ftm , possibly due to the abundant short reads that could not be aligned in 293ftl. the quality of the library from the 21-mer location  was similar to that from 293ftm regarding the percentage of successfully aligned reads, the mirna percentage among exon reads, rrna commination , and the correlation of mirna expression . overall, these facts indicated that the sequencing results with sta tolerated some variations during size selection. however, the use of mock rna-oligo libraries of known size could improve library quality in terms of enriching desirable rna species and reducing fail-to-align reads.

sta was capable of detecting both novel and mitochondrial transcripts
by excluding reads that aligned to features in the gencode v <dig> and repeatmasker on ucsc genome browser, sta revealed novel short transcripts and extensive mitochondrial reads . these transcripts could be detected in multiple cell lines and types, and the presence of an amplified product only in the presence of both rt and pap corroborated that they were nonpolyadenylated rna in nature .

taken together, sta bypassed the lengthy preparation of rna or the complicated buffer exchanges mandatory with conventional methods. the single-tube system made the system ultrasensitive in quantifying mirnas, as well as other noncoding and organellar rnas, down to individual cells. the validity and applicability of sta were demonstrated by qpcr with multiple independent cell types and by matching with existent databases from conventional methods.

discussion
several methods have been proposed to add adapters for amplifying small rna : sequence-specific annealing  <cit> , ligation  <cit> , ligation and ts  <cit> , polyadenylation  <cit> , and polyadenylation and ts  <cit> . the use of sequence-specific annealing is limited to rna of known sequences. adapter ligation is known to depend on the srna sequence  <cit> . in addition, methods based on ligation usually require multiple rounds of purification steps to avoid adapter carryover, which further undermines sensitivity. although adapter decapping bypasses the requirement of purification, the ligation-based method is still affected by the 5’-phosphorylation status of target rna and requires a longer time and more steps to accomplish than sta does. compared with current ts and ligation-based methods, the efficiency of the ts step of sta remained high even if the targets were 5’-nonphosphorylated , probably due to the high dntp/mg2+ level that increased nontemplate nucleotide addition by reverse transcriptase. the phosphorylation-independent nature of sta would be useful if the target rna is capped like mrna  <cit>  or nonphosphorylated. tailing the 3’ ends using polyadenylation ameliorated the formation of adapter dimers even with single cells as the input. although polyadenylation also introduces biases associated with rna sequences and structures, such as 2’-o-methylated rna at the 3’ ends  <cit> , the sta libraries show decent matches with those from conventional methods in terms of mirna expression .

the single-tube system avoids buffer exchange or in-between adapter removal and minimizes sample loss. overall, sta reduces the starting material requirement from ~ <dig> cells  to 1– <dig> cells. the improved sensitivity is of biological value because individual cells in the same culture have transcription variations that reflect cell cycles or differentiation statuses  <cit> . in addition to its high sensitivity, sta requires less than 5 h to obtain preamplified libraries for qpcr or for size selection. the simple procedure and short hands-on time also mean that multiple samples can be prepared together to minimize batch-to-batch variations. therefore, sta, with its improved sensitivity and speed, could complement or even replace conventional ligation-based methods.

in addition to profiling mirnas, sta also offers the possibility of profiling all rnas, as demonstrated by the high correlation of protein coding-rna expression between sta-based and conventional mrna-seq libraries, and by the abundant mitochondrial reads in our datasets. however, the profiling of entire transcriptomes without size selection is limited by the presence of abundant transcripts, such as rrna, trna, and snorna. although it is possible to deplete the undesirable rnas using pull-down or nuclease treatments  <cit> , there will be an accompanying loss of target rnas. it would be possible to remove these sequences by annealing and pull-down or size selection after preamplification. however, both methods still suffer from losing target rnas along with undesirable ones. the most straightforward solution would be an increase in sequencing depths. not limited to profiling cellular transcriptomes, sta could be theoretically adapted to profile eluted rna from rna immunoprecipitation, circulating or secreted rna, or prokaryotic transcriptomes.

sta depends on efficient polyadenylation of rnas at their 3’ ends. however, rnas might be buried in protein complexes or secondary rna structures that block pap access. we tried to remove protein hindrances by treating cells with proteinase k before polyadenylation. the extension of recessed or blunt ends was addressed using a stepwise increase in incubation temperature during polyadenylation. it might be possible to further expose the refractory ends with low concentrations of denaturants, such as guanidium thiocyanate, that also help the rt reaction by loosening second structures during cdna synthesis  <cit> . for circular rnas or rnas with blocking modifications at the 3’ ends, such as piwi-interacting rna   <cit> , limited fragmentation might be required for pap access. for mature rnas with blocked 3’ ends, the ability of sta to detect their precursors will still make it possible to obtain quantitative information. however, sta is unable to discern isoforms of rna when the only difference among them is one or more a bases at their ends  <cit> . in this case, libraries based on ligation or sta based on poly polymerase would work around the limitation.

the quality of the libraries from a single cell or from  <dig> cells was as not good as that from  <dig> cells. the loss of detection power could have been caused by deteriorated rna quality during staining and sorting. the lengthy sorting and staining processes could be avoided by direct lysis of single cells using a limiting dilution. the successful amplification of cdna could be identified by running part of the library with denaturing page, and the identity of each library could then be verified by the expression of cell-type-specific genes. since < <dig> copies of dna could be amplified , the bottleneck for assaying diluted rnas  could be the loss of targets during heat inactivation of pap or rna degradation from either endogenous or exogenous rnase. the pap-inactivation step could be bypassed by replacing the 3’-oh with unextendable -h at the 3’ end of tso. the problems of rnases might be addressed by including tiny amounts of bacterial rrna or other decoy rna that could be simply filtered during subsequent alignment or during the size-selection step.

even if the quality of low-input sequencing data cannot be improved, the sequencing data from single cells will still be able to reflect their cell of origin . the counts from multiple single-cell libraries could be analyzed collectively based on the expression of signature genes. the digital-to-quantitative transformation makes it possible to filter out aberrant expressions  and to generate the genuine expression profiles of each cell type. compared with the ligation-based, single-cell sequencing of srna developed recently  <cit> , sta has the advantages of a simple procedure, immunity to the 5’-phosphorylation status, and the capability of detecting both noncoding and polyadenylated rna concurrently. the concurrent detection allows for correlating surface markers with the expression of ncrnas. the correlation allows for identifying novel cell types and for enrichment by sorting for further characterization.

as a proof of the effectiveness of the methodology, sta revealed the changes in mirna expression during the transition from hpscs to endothelial cells across three different hpsc lines. some mirnas known to be highly enriched in hpscs, e.g., mir-302/ <dig>  <cit> , or endothelial cells, e.g., mir- <dig>  <cit> , were clearly identified with sta. several others could still be of biological or clinical interest. for example, mir- <dig> has been shown to be associated with aortic aneurysms  <cit>  and to be essential for embryonic hematopoiesis  <cit> . the refinement of mir- <dig> expression specifically in endothelium pinpoints the central role of endothelial cells in mediating aortic inflammation. together with the requirement of mir- <dig> for embryonic hematopoiesis, its specific enrichment in endothelial cells also suggests that mir- <dig> is critical for the identity or hemogenic potential of embryonic endothelium. further, the identification of hpsc-enriched mir, such as the mir-498/515/519e cluster, also provides an interesting target for roles in pluripotency or differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, sta is a simple, sensitive, and efficient way to profile total rna expression with the potential to complement conventional ligation-based methods. with minor modifications, sta can be applied to amplify and detect minute amounts of rna from different sources. its ability to detect and quantify both mrna and ncrna expressions currently allows for characterizing the interaction of the rna species in a way not achievable in the past. finally, the application value of sta was verified by providing rnas selectively enriched in either pscs or endothelial cells, which serve as a good resource for further investigation.

