BACKGROUND
many agriculturally and horticulturally important crops are polyploid  <cit> . polyploids have multiple sets of chromosomes and have arisen by extensive genomic alteration and genome duplication  <cit> . diploidization, the differentiation of duplicated loci, converts most polyploids back to diploids on the long term  <cit> . the phenomenon of polyploidy results in complex genomic architecture in many flowering plants thus complicates genomics-based breeding  <cit> . research in polyploids is also limited by the available methods and technologies  <cit> . most bioinformatic tools have been developed for diploids and cannot be applied to higher ploidy levels. recently, several methods have been developed to overcome this limitation, but most of them are restricted to tetraploids  <cit> . association studies aim to determine a genetic origin for a phenotypic trait  <cit> . while phenotyping is independent of the ploidy level, genotyping has been identified as a bottleneck in breeding of polyploid crops  <cit> . genotyping describes the process of determining an organism’s genotype  <cit>  and is known to be erroneous  <cit> . it involves the extraction of genetic material, molecular biological processes and the assignment of genotypic classes.

the latter one is also referred to as genotype calling and is a challenging task for polyploids. while there are many methods available for diploids  <cit> , only three open access tools have been developed for polyploids, namely fittetra, beadarraymsv and supermassa  <cit> . the former two are restricted to tetraploids and optimized for data sets originating from illumina goldengate™ and illumina beadarray™, respectively. subsequently, they underperform for data originating from other technologies  <cit> . supermassa is a web tool that requires upload of individual data files for each snp resulting in a poor performance. further, the source code is not available and the algorithm cannot be validated. density-based spatial clustering algorithms like optics and dbscan  <cit> , were successfully applied in hexaploid wheat  <cit> . preliminary analysis showed that they did not succeed for our genotypes, because the data points do not segregate into clusters, which can be distinguished based on density .
fig.  <dig> example probe. example of genotype values for a hexaploid probe and  <dig> samples. the x-axis shows the difference between the signals of the two alleles. the y-axis shows the average signal strength per sample. the left and right sides show simulated and real data, respectively. a the simulation demonstrates how the seven genotype classes cluster into groups. b the real data shows the full segregation over the whole spectrum, but no clustering into seven genotype classes



generally, determination of genotype classes  reduces noise and leads to better associations. in polyploids, this task is not as straightforward and the advantage of noise reduction is reversed by the high risk of misclassification, i.e. assignment of wrong genotypes to samples. therefore, we skipped genotype calling and used the continuous genotypic values  directly. the aim of this study was to use these continuous values to detect probes associating to three traits in hexaploid chrysanthemum and compare the results to genotype classes to evaluate the advantage of our approach. the traits have been selected to represent distinctive types  and heritabilities . we applied linear regression , bayz   <cit>  partial least squares regression   <cit>  and compared the results to avoid methodological bias. we showed that the assignment of genotype classes would not improve our findings, but lead to misclassification. in this article we demonstrate that we are able to use continuous genotype values to detect associations with three different traits in hexaploid chrysanthemum.

RESULTS
we applied lr, bayz and plsr to identify significant probes associated with the disease, flower and growth traits . later, we compared sets of significant probes identified by the above mentioned methods. figure  <dig> gives an overview about total numbers of associated probes per method and overlap between them. we repeated the lr analysis with genotype calls by supermassa and compared the results. further, we simulated datasets with the same properties of our real dataset to determine the expected number of significant markers.
fig.  <dig> result comparison. venn diagrams of significant probes for the disease , flowering  and growth  trait. the significance thresholds for lr, bayz  and pls were ≤ <dig> , ≥ <dig> and ≥ <dig>  respectively



disease trait
lr detected ten significant probes  when we used the continuous values. we called the genotype classes with supermassa and repeated the lr analysis leading to  <dig> significant probes. we compared the results to see which approach worked better. an example is shown in fig.  <dig>  the axes in a represent the raw values of the two alleles. three genotypes  were identified and assigned to the samples. the three lines represent the expected angles for each cluster center. the clusters identified by supermassa  do not match the groups that are indicated by the shape of the scatter plot. we consider the genotype calling as failed in that case. the blue cluster ranges over two groups, while the green cluster consists of outliers of the blue cluster. lr of the genotype class values with the phenotypes results in a p-value of  <dig>  . hence, the probe would be classified as non-significant, although it has not been corrected for multiple testing. the p- and q-values of the lr of the continuous genotypes for the same probe were  <dig> ×10− <dig> and  <dig> , respectively .
fig.  <dig> comparison of genotype calls and continuous genotypes. comparison of continuous values and genotype calls for three selected probes. a-c, d-f and g-i are the disease, flowering and growth trait, respectively. a, d and g were generated by supermassa, based on the signal intensity values of the two alleles. the shapes and colors represent genotype clusters. the expected cluster centers are indicated by solid lines. b, e and h show the correlation of the raw genotype values with the corresponding ebvs. the solid lines represent the lr. c, f and i show the correlation of the genotype classes with the ebvs. the solid lines represent the lr



additional file  <dig> shows a comparison of the significance values by supermassa and the continuous values. taken together, genotype calling distorted genotypic information for some markers and the prevented their correctassociation. the desired noise reduction, which improves associations, could not be achieved. plsr detected  <dig> probes with variance importance  scores ≥ <dig>  three of them overlap with the lr results. bayz did not find any significant probes with a bayes factor  threshold over  <dig>  even with a less-strict threshold of  <dig> there were no findings .

flowering trait
lr detected  <dig> significant probes for the flowering trait with the continuous values. supermassa genotype calls led to  <dig> significant probes . again, the continuous genotypes generally lead to lower q-values than the genotype calls . we simulated the experiment with varying numbers of significant probes   <dig> times each. that way, we could observe how many significant probes we would detect if the true genotypes are known. the simulation results are shown in additional file  <dig> and show that we expect around 100- <dig> significant probes. hence, our association results are in the correct magnitude. for our dataset continuous genotype values are advantageous over genotype classes because we obtain more significant probes and are less likely to miss trait related probes. however, our method is not too insensitive and does not result in thousands of false positive markers. in fact, the simulation study detected even more false positives. it reduces the number of potential candidate probes from  <dig>  to  <dig> 

an example probe for the flowering trait is shown in fig. 3d-f. supermassa identified three different genotype classes. continuous genotype values indicate four genotype classes, roughly centered at  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  . in contrast, the genotype classes by supermassa combine the first two clusters . the blue one contains samples of the first and third cluster, which leads to its spread over the whole debv range . this leads to a lower p-value, but the probe is still highly significant. nevertheless, in other cases this difference might determine whether the null hypothesis can be rejected or not.
fig.  <dig> overview of contigs and probes for the flowering trait. probe and contig distribution of the significant markers of the flowering trait. the five bars represent the number of markers that lay in the same contig. the colors distinguish between markers where both or only one of the probes were significant and are more reliable. multiple markers from the same contig indicate its association to the trait



the probes were selected so that not more than three snps  lay on one contig. thus, it is unlikely to detect two or more significant snps from the same contig by chance. the fact that we found up to three snps from the same contig is a good indicator for real association. we detected  <dig> probes from one contig, coding for three different snps. the white area in the second bar in fig.  <dig> shows  <dig> single probes, which code for different markers, but are located on the same contig. accordingly, the missing second probe is not required to proof association.

the plsr and bayz associations detected  <dig> and  <dig> significant probes, respectively. the four probes, detected by bayz overlap with the lr and plsr results. in addition there is an overlap of  <dig> probes between plsr and lr. however, the associating probes have low r <dig> values and explain only parts of the phenotypic variance. table  <dig> shows the four probes, which have been identified by all three methods. the scores do not correlate because the methods base on different approaches. the r <dig> values are obtained from the lr association.
r
2


growth trait
lr did not result in any significant probes for the growth trait. growth is known to be a polygenic trait  <cit> . hence, we did not expect single probes to show strong association. the association with the supermassa genotype calls did not output any significant probes, either . an example probe is shown in fig. 3g. all but five samples were assigned the same genotype class. we expect monomorphic probes, but in fig. 3h we see that the genotype values span a large portion of the negative θ range. thus, we expect multiple genotype classes within that cloud of data points. however, they could neither be determined manually nor computationally. bayz did not detect any significant probes, either. in contrast, the plsr association detected  <dig> significant probes. it includes low effect markers as well and is not limited to single loci. for polygenic traits plsr is therefore advantageous.

general
we could have applied sparse partial least squares  regression to deal with very high-dimensional data. the expected number of associating probes would be even higher than. we decided against it because the number of false positives and low impact probes  would have increased significantly. plsr is less restrictive in the growing and disease trait but not in the flowering trait.

ebvs are established metrics in breeding, but have been criticized for genome-wide association studies  because their naïve usage reduces power, increases the false positive rate and misestimates effect sized of quantitative trait loci   <cit> . hence, we used deregressed ebvs to account for fixed effects and repeated measurements, as described by garrick et al.  <cit> .

supermassa misclassifies genotypes in some cases because it assumes clusters of equal distance at fixed positions. instead, the data does not necessarily segregate into clusters . if clusters can be identified, they are not always at fixed positions, as assumed by supermassa . further, it does not account for outliers and assigns genotype classes to every sample. this results in clusters of only one sample in some cases and does not represent the genotype. taken together, supermassa does not cluster the data points properly for all probes. it seems to be optimized for data produced with two technologies and therefore performs less well on other data sets. the same situation was described by voorips et al.  <cit> , when they compared fittetra and beadarraymsv. thus, genotype calling has no advantage for polyploid data generated with the affymetrix axiom™ technology, as long as no method works properly. this underpins our preliminary analyis, which showed that the resolution of the signal intensities is not large enough to distiguish between the increased number of genotype classes expected in hexaploids . to this end, association of the continuous genotypes is currently the best method.

genotyping by sequencing  results in similar datasets, where the continuous genotypes are replaced by read counts. in general, our approach can be applied to this kind of data, but it is limited to bi-allelic snps and requires an extension to account for multi-allelic snps. assuming an additive genetic effect  <cit>  and a multi-allelic snp, θ needs to be upgraded to θi: 
  <dig> θi=log2−∑j= <dig> j≠i4log <dig> 

where g is the set of alleles and gi is the read count of allele i. alternatives to the log-transformations might be more effective and need to be investigated  <cit> .

the higher the ploidy level, the smaller is the advantage of genotype classes over the continuous values. with increasing numbers of genotype classes, the effect of noise reduction declines. for instance, in a diploid we expect the clusters aa, ab and bb at around  <dig>   <dig> and − <dig>  respectively. a value of  <dig>  would be assigned to cluster aa, so we correct for a large proportion of the signal. for any ploidy level n we expect up to 2n+ <dig> clusters on a similar range, because the overall signal strength is limited by the used technology . consequently the distances between clusters decrease and the correction accounts for smaller proportions of the signal. in addition, the risk of misclassifications increases, because there is less tolerance for variation in the signal intensity or clusters overlap. further, the distribution of genotype values approximates a continuous distribution with increasing ploidy levels. figure  <dig> shows an example of a simulated hexaploid marker and one from the real data set. we were not able to identify the genotype classes for all samples in that case, because the clusters are indistinguishable. nevertheless, the data points spread over the whole range of θ and provide genotypic information. from a biological perspective, continuous genotypes are difficult to interpret, because the number of alleles is discrete and should fall in one of the genotype classes. one explanation are tri- and tetra-allelic snps, where more than two nucleotides are present at the same position  <cit> . if they are measured with bi-allelic technology , the sum of the two allele counts does not necessarily add up to the expected number . alternatively, we might observe fractionation, the deletions in sub-genomes of allopolyploids  <cit> . both result in data points outside of the expected clusters. for the association we mean-centered the genotype values.

skipping genotype calling leads to further challenges with current linkage mapping and haplotype phasing methods, because they require genotype classes. nevertheless, the choice of tools that work for polyploids is very limited anyways and new solutions need to be developed. further, low-coverage sequencing and imputations of genotypes add more difficulties  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that continuous genotype data can be used successfully in an association study of a polyploid crop and validated our findings in a simulation study. application of different regression tools show that our approach is not limited to a specific method, but the results vary to a large extend.

genotype calling leads to misclassification and false association results in some cases, where significant markers could not be detected. however, the majority of markers lead to similar results with genotype classes and continuous values, indicating that genotype calling is not adversely in general. in this study genotype calling has no advantage and can be skipped unless better methods are developed. instead, use of continuous genotypes simplifies the analysis, saves computational time and results more potential markers. nevertheless, the overlapping clusters of the given data set remain a challenge and the use of continuous genotypes is a successful solution to that problem.

