BACKGROUND
physical interactions between proteins, commonly referred to as protein-protein interactions , occur at every level of cell function to elaborate the organism's phenotype. the study of ppis is therefore of great interest and is helping to reveal basic molecular mechanisms of many diseases. high-throughput screening methods have given insight into hundreds of thousands of potential ppis in several organisms. however, a major disadvantage of high-throughput approaches is their high rate of false-positive ppis, i.e. erroneously reported ppis that do not occur in vivo  <cit> .

the development and implementation of computational methods for the validation of experimentally determined ppis is therefore an important goal in bioinformatics today. common approaches include determining intersections between different high-throughput ppi data sets  <cit> , incorporating protein annotation data  <cit> , analyzing expression profiles  <cit> , investigating topological criteria of ppi networks  <cit> , and inspecting patterns of co-evolution  <cit> .

another, well established in silico technique to validate an experimentally determined ppi is to check if homologs of the interacting proteins also interact; if so, the confidence of this ppi is increased. the original interolog concept suggests to examine ppis among functionally conserved orthologs, i.e. functionally conserved proteins in other species that evolved from a common ancestor  <cit> . however, large-scale application of this method for ppi validation is strongly hampered by limited coverage of most interactomes and by low numbers of known bona fide orthologs  <cit> . a first practical approach involved the inspection of ppis among paralogous proteins, i.e. homologous proteins that evolved by gene duplication and are found within the same species  <cit> . nevertheless, sensitivity remains a problem because in most organisms assured paralogs with known interactions are scarce. the strategy illustrated in figure  <dig>  which is followed in this paper, searches for homologous ppis independent of species boundaries or functional constraints, which significantly increases the amount of ppi data usable for validation purposes . several papers applied this 'all-inclusive' approach to homology-based ppi validation  <cit> . also techniques developed for ppi prediction, a relatively more well-studied bioinformatics problem, successfully utilized this idea, for example brown et al.  <cit>  or jonsson et al.  <cit> . however, the focus of the present paper is not ppi prediction but the computational validation of experimentally determined ppis.

firstly, we draw the reader's attention to the duplication-divergence hypothesis of ppi evolution, i.e. the idea that extant ppis primarily originate from gene duplications, the homologs diverging over time. if ppis share common evolutionary ancestry, which is what this hypothesis suggests, then this ancestry reaches far into the evolutionary past. consequently, homology-based ppi validation should investigate also diverged homologs and not only similar proteins.

secondly, motivated by this idea, we propose an improved, sequence-based procedure for homology-based ppi validation. unlike previously published, mostly binary validation schemes that deem a questioned ppi as biologically relevant as soon as a single homologous ppi is found, we follow a similar approach as jonsson et al.  <cit>  and compute a confidence score that takes into account both the quality and quantity of all identified homologous ppis. the assignment of higher scores to high-quality hits and of lower scores to low-quality hits allows us to extend the search for homologous ppis from reliable homologs to highly putative paralogs and orthologs with e-values up to  <dig>  in addition to similar scoring schemes proposed before, we normalize and combine scores obtained from different homology search strategies.

thirdly, we demonstrate the high efficacy of homology-based validation when carried out on large ppi data sets. a comprehensive data set of known physical binary ppis from six ppi source databases is compiled, comprising  <dig>  ppis from  <dig> different organisms. this is, to the best of our knowledge, the largest collection of ppis that has been used so far in this kind of analysis. based on receiver operating characteristic  curves it is shown that the new approach improves over previous methods for homology-based ppi validation.

RESULTS
duplication-divergence hypothesis of ppi evolution
gene duplication is a ubiquitous mechanism in molecular evolution and the principal source of biological innovation, producing new proteins and novel functional domains  <cit> . here, we follow the idea that the duplication of genetic material coupled with subsequent divergence is also the dominant mechanism for the development of novel ppis  <cit> . this hypothesis is supported by both theoretical models  <cit>  and empirical evidence  <cit> . a brief review of papers supporting the duplication-divergence hypothesis can be found in additional file  <dig> 

duplication-divergence models of ppi evolution propose a simple and yet plausible idea of how evolution might have formed ppi networks over millions of years – by repeated duplication of interacting genes followed by their divergence. figure  <dig> illustrates this idea.

implications of the duplication-divergence model for homology-based ppi validation
the duplication-divergence model of ppi evolution as shown in figure  <dig> suggests that most biologically relevant ppis descend from a common ancestral ppi, i.e. the ppis are homologous to each other. this allows assessing the plausibility of an experimentally determined ppi as follows: for a true-positive ppi, one expects to see many homologous ppis, whereas for a false-positive ppi this should be less likely. a sensitive search for homologous ppis should thus, in principle, be able to filter out large numbers of false-positive ppis from experimental ppi data sets while retaining the bulk of true-positive ppis. however, both the incompleteness of today's ppi data sets and the fact that common ancestry is often elusive represent major practical obstacles along the way.

for assessing the validity of an experimentally predetermined ppi, also 'weak' homologous ppis can be informative . their incidence might support or contradict the idea that a questioned ppi evolved by duplication-divergence, which in turn can strengthen or weaken the position that a ppi is biologically relevant. however, the value of weak homologous ppis for ppi prediction is limited: one cannot infer from a given pair of interacting proteins that very distant homologs interact as well. in the majority of cases this prediction would be simply wrong, because due to divergence most duplicated ppis are eventually lost. ppis inferred by homology are thus only trustworthy if protein similarity is high  <cit>  or if these ppis are supported by complementary data  <cit> .

weak homologous interactions – signal or noise?
if the duplication-divergence model of ppi evolution is correct, the existence of weak homologous ppis should be an observable characteristic of biologically relevant ppis. we set out to test this hypothesis. for both gold standard positive  and gold standard negative  data sets, psi-blast was used to search for homologous ppis, and their distribution was determined within different e-value windows. figure  <dig> shows the results. it reveals two important differences between gsp ppis and gsn ppis. firstly, there is an increased probability for gsp ppis to have at least one paralogous or orthologous ppi. secondly, significantly more gsp ppis than gsn ppis have large numbers of paralogous and orthologous ppis . most interestingly, both differences are observed up to high e-value windows.

not surprisingly, the first characteristic, the existence of at least one homologous ppi, is a highly reliable signal for gsp ppis when sequence similarity is high. for example, almost every fifth ppi taken out of the gsp data set  has a homologous ppi with an e-value lower than 10- <dig> . by contrast, the existence of such high-quality homologs is extremely unlikely for a gsn ppi . the signal remains intact with very low levels of sequence similarity: within the last e-value window  the probability of observing a homologous ppi for a gsp ppi remains still twice as high  as for a gsn ppi .

the distribution of homologous ppis reveals the second interesting characteristic of gsp ppis: they tend to accumulate large numbers of homologous ppis. according to figure 3a, in all windows with e-values greater than 10- <dig>  about 25% of gsp ppis have more than  <dig> homologous ppis; for gsn ppis, this percentage never exceeds 8%. thus, for many ppis the existence of a large number of homologous ppis is more conclusive than the existence of at least one homologous ppi, especially when sequence similarity is low: whereas about twice as many gsp ppis than gsn ppis have at least one homologous ppi within the last e-value window, almost four times as many gsp ppis  than gsn ppis  have between  <dig> and  <dig> homologs, and more than five times as many gsp ppis  than gsn ppis  have more than  <dig> homologs.

both characteristics are observed independently of the fact whether only paralogous  or only orthologous ppis  are investigated. for lower numbers of homologous ppis, stronger signals on the paralogous data set are obtained than on the orthologous data set, which is consistent with the finding that ppis seem to be more conserved within species than across species  <cit> . interestingly, very large numbers  of homologous ppis are observed within the orthologous data set, most likely due to an increased number of gene duplications in higher eukaryotes.

we conclude that weak homologous ppis are indeed an observable and distinguishing characteristic of biologically relevant ppis, especially if they are observed in increased numbers. consequently, weak homologous ppis should be considered by homology-based ppi validation schemes.

overall performance
we devised a scoring scheme that incorporates the findings from figure  <dig> . the receiver operating characteristic  curves in figure  <dig> illustrate the overall performance of this scoring scheme for the mips, the small scale and the multiple evidence gold standard data sets. the y-axis shows the true-positive rate , i.e. the percentage of gsp ppis that were correctly confirmed as biologically relevant. the x-axis represents the false-positive rate , i.e. the percentage of gsn ppis that were erroneously confirmed as biologically relevant. by varying the threshold of the score above which a ppi is confirmed as biologically relevant, different fprs and tprs are observed . for example, on the mips and the multiple evidence data sets, a tpr of more than 70% at an fpr of 10% is observed. an increased threshold results in a tpr of 80% at an fpr of 20% for the same two data sets. these values compare well to tprs and fprs reported by other, non-homology-based ppi validation techniques  <cit> . this underscores the high efficacy of homology-based ppi validation, especially when carried out on rich ppi data sets.

the small scale gold standard performs worst, which might reflect differences in the quality of the data sets. the multiple evidence gold standard can be considered of highest quality, because detection of a ppi with different experimental methods is a very reliable indicator of its existence  <cit> . indeed, this data set achieves the best performance up to a tpr of 70%. the mips gold standard contains ppis audited by human experts and is thus very trustworthy as well, although a slightly poorer performance is seen on this data set. ppis of the small scale gold standard are not reviewed manually and thus its reliability might to a large degree reflect the quality of the automated text mining tools that are frequently used to extract them from the scientific literature. because these tools are error-prone  <cit> , the small scale gold standard might contain more spurious ppis than the other two data sets.

note that although the class distribution in the gold standard data sets is skewed, i.e. the random gsn data set is about  <dig> times larger than each gsp data set, this does not affect the overall roc curve  <cit> . in fact, we observed the same overall roc curve on a balanced data set where the number of randomly chosen gsns roughly equals the number of gsps . roc curves as shown in figure  <dig> are ideal to illustrate the overall performance of a classifier, but do not make suggestions about which specific score threshold should be applied to classify a ppi as true or false. this decision depends on the tpr and fpr one is willing to accept. supplementary figure  <dig> shows selected score thresholds and their associated tprs and fprs.

comparison of homology-based validation schemes
previous homology-based ppi validation methods involve simpler, binary selection processes in which a ppi is deemed to be biologically relevant as soon as a single homologous ppi is found  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows a performance comparison with two of these methods. note that this comparison does not include homology-based ppi prediction techniques, although these techniques are widely used. the reason is that these techniques have a different focus and generally incorporate also non-homology-based criteria, which makes a direct comparison difficult.

the fasta-based binary validation scheme shows remarkably high specificity, even at high e-values. for example, inclusion of homologous ppis with e-values between 10- <dig> and  <dig> results in an increase of the tpr of almost 25% , whereas the fpr grows only by  <dig> % within the same interval, remaining below 16%. considering the low sequence similarity and the probable existence of many spurious hits at e-values up to  <dig>  this find is remarkable. by contrast, the psi-blast-based binary validation scheme is less specific , but much more sensitive: almost 87% of the gsp ppis have at least one homologous ppi identified by psi-blast . in addition to fasta and psi-blast, also blast was evaluated for homology detection . in comparison to fasta, no noticeable difference in performance was observed except for a slight decrease in maximum sensitivity . our scoring scheme, represented by the blue curve , combines evidence from homologous ppis found by fasta and psi-blast and clearly outperforms both individual binary validation schemes. for example, at a tpr of 70% it produces 4% fewer false-positives than the fasta-based binary approach, and about 6% fewer false-positives than the psi-blast-based binary validation scheme.

previous homology-based validation schemes suggested different parameter settings. saeed and deane  <cit>  used blast with an e-value up to 10- <dig> to identify homologous ppis and evaluated a tpr of 63% at an fpr of 7%. if this setting is transferred to fasta and applied on our data sets, a tpr of  <dig> % at an fpr of  <dig> % is observed. our scoring scheme, by contrast, produces only  <dig> % false-positives at the same level of sensitivity . the difference in fpr increases for higher levels of sensitivity, illustrating the additional value from incorporation of multiple methods for homology detection and from consideration of weak homologs. patil and nakamura  <cit>  used psi-blast with an e-value up to 10- <dig> and reported a tpr of  <dig> % at an fpr of  <dig> % for their gold standards. on our data set the same parameter setting results in a significantly worse tpr of  <dig> % at an fpr of  <dig> %. again, the scoring scheme outperforms and achieves a reduced fpr of 10% at the same level of sensitivity . it is noteworthy that our exclusively sequence-based scoring scheme produces a superior roc curve than patil and nakamura's bayesian network approach, which incorporates three genomic features instead of one . this underscores again the potential efficacy of homology-based methods. no published psi-blast parameters were found in the paper from deane et al.  <cit> , and thus the performance of this method was not assessed.

contribution of weak homologs
is it actually beneficial to include homologous ppis with high e-values  for ppi validation, i.e. do weak homologs indeed contribute positively in terms of increased sensitivity and/or increased specificity? to answer this question, the classification performance of the scoring scheme with and without the inclusion of weak homologs was determined. figure  <dig> shows the results.

the inclusion of weak homologous ppis contributes positively to the overall classification performance. for example, the restriction of the analysis to homologous ppis with an e-value below 10- <dig> results in a maximum tpr of 69% at an fpr of  <dig> %. when homologs with e-values up to  <dig> are considered, the same sensitivity is achieved at a significantly reduced fpr of 10%. another increase of the e-value threshold up to  <dig> leads to a further reduction of the fpr by 1%.

note that a similar effect cannot be observed for the classic, binary validation schemes, where less stringent e-value thresholds increase sensitivity but decrease specificity . this emphasizes the value of the scoring approach: it finds evidence for biologically relevant ppis among weaker homologs without the compromise of an increased rate of false-positives.

although the additional benefit resulting from the inclusion of weak homologs with an e-value above  <dig> is rather low on this data set, we expect it to increase for data sets where high-quality homologs are not at hand. yeast is comparably well investigated, with approximately 50% of its estimated  <dig>  to  <dig>  ppis known  <cit> . as a consequence, most of its biologically relevant ppis have homologous ppis among high-quality paralogs, and matches among weak homologs add little extra value to the overall score. this situation is different from most other organisms where interactome coverage is far below 50% and where weak paralogs and orthologs are often the only possibility to validate a questioned ppi.

CONCLUSIONS
knowledge of ppis is key to understanding cell function. although experimental high-throughput ppi detection techniques are now making it possible to catalogue all ppis of a cell, the notoriously high error rates of these methods are a major obstacle to achieving this ambitious goal. computational methods that can efficiently separate the ppi wheat from the chaff are therefore highly desirable.

we think that recent insights into the evolution of ppis, in particular the duplication-divergence hypothesis, might be crucial to this endeavor. nature is a tinkerer, not an inventor  <cit> . for ppis this means that new ppis are primarily derived from preexisting ppis rather than invented de novo. consequently, most true-positive ppis must have homologous ppis, not only among highly similar proteins, but also among distantly related proteins. this important characteristic of biologically relevant ppis should, in principle, allow successful discrimination between true and false ppis.

in light of this consideration, homology-based validation techniques seem promising, but have not gained much attention so far. literature searches revealed only five papers that proposed a homology-based technique to validate experimental ppis on a large scale, only three of which presented a critical performance assessment. presumably this reflects the fact that homology-based validation requires having at hand a set of ppis among homologous proteins, when few such ppis have been known. however, with more and more ppis now being reported from high-throughput experiments, this limitation is no longer factor.

in this paper, we assembled a large ppi data set to reassess the performance of homology-based ppi validation. it was shown that the classic, binary validation technique is efficient on such data sets, but can be further improved by using multiple methods for homology detection and more remote homologs to complement close homologs.

we expect the findings to be most relevant in situations where interactions among assured paralogs or orthologs are not at hand and thus traditional homology-based validation is not an option. existing ppi databases could use the proposed method to reduce their number of false-positives without losing too many true-positives, especially within well explored model organisms. other prospective applications include the elucidation of physically interacting proteins from known protein complexes, or the validation of in silico predicted ppis in cases where homology was not used as a criterion for prediction in advance. prospective improvements may involve more sophisticated methods for homology detection , identification of ppi-mediating protein features  prior to homology detection to refine the selection of homologs, and an assessment of the statistical significance  of computed scores to obtain an intuitive measure of a ppi's validity.

