BACKGROUND
campylobacter jejuni is a gram-negative, spiral-shaped, motile bacterium and is a leading cause of bacterial food-borne enteritis in humans  <cit> . most human c. jejuni infections are acquired by consuming or handling contaminated poultry, milk or water. clinical symptoms of campylobacteriosis can range from mild diarrhea to fever, headache, abdominal cramping, vomiting and bloody diarrhea. studies also demonstrated that campylobacter infection is associated with guillain-barré syndrome as a post-infection complication  <cit> .

although most campylobacteriosis cases are self-limiting, antibiotic therapy may be necessary for severe or persistent illness  <cit> . macrolide, such as erythromycin , is the drug of choice for treating campylobacteriosis, but the frequency of resistance to this class of antibiotic is rising  <cit> . as an inhibitor of protein translation in bacterial cells, ery and other macrolide antibiotics interfere with aminoacyl translocation, preventing the transfer of the trna bound at the a site to the p site of the rrna complex. without this translocation, the a site remains occupied and thus precludes the incoming trna from attaching its amino acid to the nascent polypeptide  <cit> . the molecular mechanism of resistance to ery in c. jejuni has been extensively studied and is conferred largely by target modification   <cit>  and antibiotic efflux pumps  <cit> . although the genetic basis of ery resistance in c. jejuni has been well characterized, there is very little knowledge of the initial response and adaptive mechanism of c. jejuni to ery exposure.

transcriptomic analysis has been used to assess bacterial adaptive responses to antibiotic treatments. three previous studies reported global gene expression patterns of streptococcus pneumonia <cit> , escherichia coli <cit> , and haemophilus influenzae <cit>  to sub-inhibitory doses of translation-inhibiting antibiotics. these reports demonstrated that exposure to these bacteriostatic antibiotics triggered the synthesis of a number of ribosomal proteins  <cit> . other studies analyzed the transcriptional profiles of staphlococcus aureus, e. coli, and yersinia pestis under inhibitory doses of chloramphenicol, mupirocin, ampicillin, or ofloxacin  <cit> , and a common observation of these studies was the repression of energy metabolism genes by these antibiotics. although the transcriptomic response of c. jejuni to a fluoroquinolone antibiotic has been reported  <cit> , it remains unknown how this organism responds to macrolide treatment.

in this study, the genome-wide transcriptional response of c. jejuni following exposure to both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory doses of ery was assessed. furthermore, contribution of several differentially expressed genes to antibiotic resistance, stress resistance, and host colonization was determined using isogenic gene knock-out mutants.

RESULTS
transcriptional responses of nctc  <dig> to an inhibitory dose of ery
to identify the adaptive response of campylobacter to ery treatment, microarray was used to analyze the transcriptional changes in c. jejuni nctc  <dig> following exposure to ery. after nctc  <dig> was exposed to an inhibitory dose of ery  for 30 min, a total of  <dig> genes were shown to be differentially expressed, among which  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated . cluster of orthologous groups   analysis revealed changes in multiple functional categories . among the up-regulated genes, the “cell motility” category showed the highest percentage  of changes. for the down-regulated genes, the “energy production and conversion” category showed the highest percentage  of changes. additionally, a number  of the differentially expressed genes were in the categories of “poorly characterized”/“function unknown”/”general function prediction only” .

* this percentage was calculated based on the number of the up or down regulated genes in a category to the total number of the genes in that particular category.

within the up-regulated genes, several belong to putative transcriptional units  including cj0061c-cj0062c, cj0309c-cj0310c, cj0345-cj <dig>  cj0423-cj <dig>  cj0951c-cj0952c, and cj1173-cj <dig>  cj0061c encodes a flagellar biosynthesis sigma factor and cj0062c encodes a putative integral membrane protein. each of the cj0309c-cj0310c and cj1173-cj <dig> operons encodes a putative multidrug efflux system in c. jejuni. genes cj0345-cj <dig> are predicted to encode subunits of anthranilate synthase and tryptophan synthase. cj0423-cj <dig> encode putative integral membrane/periplasmic proteins whose functions remain unknown. cj0951c-cj0952c encode proteins forming a putative chemoreceptor, which was demonstrated to be associated with host cell invasion, motility and chemotaxis towards formic acid  <cit> .

many of the down-regulated genes belonged to the “energy production and conversion” category . approximately  <dig> %  of the genes classified in “energy production and conversion” were down-regulated in response to the inhibitory ery treatment. included in this category were several putative operons, such as cj0073c-cj0076c, cj0107-cj <dig>  cj0437-cj <dig>  cj0531-cj <dig>  cj0781-cj <dig>  cj1184c-cj1185c, cj1265c-cj1266c, and cj1566-cj <dig>  several orfs in other cogs also showed a substantial level of down-regulation and these included cj0662c-cj0663c, which encode an atp-dependent protease atp-binding subunit hslu and an atp-dependent protease peptidase subunit; cj1427c-cj1428c, which encode two proteins belonging to carbohydrate transport and metabolism; and cj1598-cj <dig>  which encode two amino acid transport and metabolism proteins.

transcriptional responses of nctc  <dig> to a sub-inhibitory dose of ery
to identify differentially expressed genes in response to a sub-inhibitory concentration of ery, microarray was performed on wild-type c. jejuni nctc  <dig>  in total, the expression of  <dig> genes was altered by the sub-inhibitory dose  of ery treatment, of which  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated . more than half  of the differentially expressed genes encoded hypothetical proteins . several differentially expressed genes were in the functional category of “amino acid transport and metabolism”  . the up-regulated genes in this category included trpb, trpd, trpa, trpe  encoding tryptophan synthase and anthranilate synthase subunits, two genes  encoding a branched-chain amino-acid abc transport system permease and a periplasmic binding proteins. down-regulated genes in this category included argb , cyse , cj <dig>  cj1582c, and cj1583c. fewer than  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in other categories . different from the inhibitory treatment, the sub-inhibitory treatment resulted in much fewer differentially expressed genes in the “transcription” and “translation” categories .

* this percentage was calculated based on the number of the up or down regulated genes in a category to the total number of the genes in that particular category.

notably, several genes demonstrated consistent changes in expression under both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory treatments with ery and are listed in table  <dig>  these genes are involved in motility/chemotaxis, tryptophan synthesis, branched-chain amino acid transport, and protein phosphorylation . a two-component sensor kinase  was down-regulated under both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory treatments . to confirm differential expression detected by microarray, qrt-pcr was conducted on selected genes. the result confirmed most of the examined genes .

* p values smaller than  <dig>  are shown as  <dig> .

** fc denotes fold-change.

transcriptional responses of eryrc. jejuni jl <dig> to ery treatment
jl <dig> is an eryr derivative of nctc  <dig> and was isolated from a chicken fed tylosin-containing feed  <cit> . this strain bears a a2074g mutation in its 23s rrna gene, which confers a high-level erythromycin resistance   <cit> . the transcriptional profile of this strain was assessed after treatment with 4 mg/l of ery, the same concentration used for the inhibitory treatment of the wild-type strain. interestingly, only a total of three genes were up-regulated, while a single gene was down-regulated. the up-regulated genes were cj0862c, cj1006c and cj1706c, which encode para-aminobenzoate synthase component i, a hypothetical protein and 50s ribosomal subunit protein rpld, respectively. the down-regulated gene, cj <dig>  encodes a hypothetical protein. the small number of affected genes in the eryr strain suggests that little stress is imposed to jl <dig> by 4 mg/l of ery.

characterization of cj0309c-cj0310c and cj1173-cj1174
two of the operons up-regulated by ery treatment were cj0309c-cj0310c and cj1173-cj <dig>  which encode putative small multidrug resistance  efflux transporters. however, their functions have not been determined. the smr family of transporters are characterized by their short length , four trans-membrane α-helical motifs, and the use of the proton motive force to export a broad range of antiseptics and drugs out of the cell  <cit> . the paired small multidrug resistance  protein family is one of the smr sub-classes, which requires co-expression of two homologues including a typical smr length protein and a protein with longer hydrophilic loops  <cit> .

cj0309c-cj0310c and cj1173-cj <dig> belong to the psmr family. in the microarray experiment, both pairs were up-regulated in response to the inhibitory dose of ery treatment . to determine the role of the psmr genes in adaptive response to ery exposure, c. jejuni nctc  <dig> mutants carrying a mutation in either  or both  psmr operons were constructed . none of the mutant strains had any substantial in vitro growth defect compared to the wild-type strain in mh broth after 48 hours of incubation under microaerobic conditions . mutation of the psmr transporter genes, either individually or in combination, did not substantially change the mic toward  <dig> compounds tested, including ery .

*atcc: american type culture collection .

**ampr: ampicillin resistance, kanr: kanamycin resistance, tetr: tetracycline resistance.

the involvement of the psmr efflux systems in aerobic and oxidative stress survival in c. jejuni was tested next. in this experiment, the ability of bacterial cells to grow on mh agar was assessed under different oxygen levels . the psmr mutants and their wild-type strain grew comparably under microaerobic environment  . however, under aerobic conditions , all mutants showed declined growth compared with the wild-type strain  and the decline was more prominent with ko73q and dko01q . to confirm the phenotype associated with the mutant strains, a partial complementation of the double knock-out mutant with the wild-type copy of cj1173-cj <dig> was constructed as described in material and methods. as shown in figure 2b, the complementation partly restored the mutant’s ability to grow under high oxygen tension. these results indicated that the two pmsr systems facilitate c. jejuni adaptation to aerobic environment. additionally, we performed disk diffusion assay using hydrogen peroxide, cumene, and menadione, which did not show any significant differences  in bacterial growth inhibition between the wild-type and psmr mutant strains , suggesting that the two putative efflux systems are not directly involved in the resistance to the examined oxidants.

since the psmr mutants demonstrated enhanced susceptibility to the high-level oxygen concentration, we further examined their contribution to colonization of chickens. both the wild-type and the mutant strains were equally motile as determined by swarming on semi-solid agar. when chickens were mono-inoculated individually with each mutant strain , there was no significant difference in the level of colonization among the wild-type and mutant strains for the duration of study, i.e., 15 days after inoculation . additionally, a co-mingling chicken experiment using the double knockout mutant and wild-type strain was performed in order to determine the role of the psmr genes in horizontal transmission in birds. in the comingling group with seeder birds inoculated with the double knockout mutant, 67% of the naive chickens were positive for dko01q at 3 days after initiation of co-mingling, and all the birds became positive at  <dig> and 9 days after initiation of co-mingling . for the comingling group with seeder birds inoculated with the wild-type strain, 90% of the naive birds were colonized with nctc  <dig> at 3 days after initiation of comingling, and all colonized at  <dig> and 9 days after initiation of comingling . the colonization levels in the non-inoculated, but comingled birds also showed no significant differences between the two groups . together, the chicken experiments indicated that the two psmr efflux systems, individually or in combination, are dispensable for c. jejuni colonization and horizontal spread in the chicken host.

characterization of the cj0423-cj <dig> operon
cj0423-cj <dig> encode a putative integral membrane protein, a putative acidic periplasmic protein and a putative periplasmic protein, respectively. microarray showed that this operon was up-regulated under treatment with an inhibitory dose of ery . additionally, qrt-pcr results demonstrated that cj <dig> was up-regulated under both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory ery treatments in nctc  <dig> . amplification of cj0423-cj <dig> by a conventional rt-pcr  confirmed that cj0423-cj <dig> were co-transcribed , suggesting an operon-like structure. to characterize the function of this operon, all three genes were deleted to generate mutant ko423q as described in materials and methods. the mutation did not affect the transcript abundance of the downstream gene  as qrt-pcr revealed no significant difference in the transcript quantity of cj <dig> between the wild-type and the mutant strain . when the wild-type strain and ko423q were compared for in vitro growth in mh broth, there were no significant growth rate differences at 24 h and 48 h . in addition, ery mic of ko423q was the same as that of the wild-type strain . moreover, no appreciable difference was evident for oxidative stress resistance  between the wild-type and the mutant strains .

*underlined sequences indicate recognition site for the corresponding restriction endonuclease, which is shown in parenthesis.

characterization of cj1169c-cj1170c operon
the microarray and qrt-pcr results demonstrated that cj1169c and cj1170c were up-regulated in both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory treatments with ery . cj1169c and cj1170c encode a putative periplasmic protein and a 50 kda outer membrane protein precursor, respectively  <cit> . recently, cj1170c was characterized as an outer-membrane tyrosine kinase, phosphorylating a number of membrane proteins  <cit> . to identify the role of the two genes in adaptation to ery treatment, both genes were deleted to produce the mutant strain kop50q. the mutation did not affect the transcript abundance of the downstream gene, cj1168c, as determined by qrt-pcr . the mutant was complemented to produce strain comp50q.

the wild-type and mutant strains demonstrated comparable growth rates in mh broth without or with sub-inhibitory  concentrations of ery . additionally, no significant difference in motility was observed between the mutant and wild-type strains. furthermore, the mic test revealed no significant differences between the wild type strain and kop50q in susceptibility to a number of antimicrobials including ampicillin, erythromycin, tylosin, ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, phosphonomycin, cetylpyridinium chloride, chloramphenicol, nalidixic acid, novobiocin, ethidium bromide and crystal violet . likewise, as shown by the disk diffusion assay, no significant differences were revealed between the mutant and wild-type strains in sensitivity to oxidative stress agents including h2o <dig> and cumene hydroperoxide . however, the aerobic stress experiments indicated that the mutant was more susceptible than the wild-type strain to higher levels of oxygen, although they showed comparable growth under microaerobic conditions . complementation of the mutant  partially restored the phenotype to the wild-type level .

to determine the role of cj1169c-cj1170c in colonization of and horizontal transmission between birds, a co-mingling chicken experiment was performed with wild-type, mutant  and complement strains . all  <dig> seeder birds in each group became campylobacter-positive for the respectively inoculated strain at 3 days after inoculation  as determined by cloacal swabbing and culturing on selective plates. the three kop50q-inoculated seeder birds showed attenuated colonization levels compared with those inoculated with the wild-type strain , while the complement strain resulted in comparable colonization level to that of the wild-type strain  as determined by culturing cecal contents collected at necropsy on  <dig> or  <dig> dai . the co-mingling experiment showed that 3 days after the initiation of co-mingling, 90% and 50% of the naive  chickens were colonized by the wild-type and complement strains, respectively, while none of the naive chickens in the kop50q group was campylobacter positive on the same day . this difference was statistically significant . at 6 days after initiation of co-mingling, all of the naive birds in the wild-type group were positive, while 67% of the naive birds were positive in the kop50q group and 90% were positive in the complement group. the differences were not statistically significant. at 9 days after initiation of co-mingling, all the naive birds were positive in all three groups as determined by culturing cloacal swabs . in addition to the cloacal swabs, cecal contents were collected from the naive birds necropsied on  <dig> and 12 days after initiation of co-mingling to determine colonization levels. at 9 days after initiation of co-mingling, the naive birds colonized by kop50q or by comp50q had fewer c. jejuni than the naive birds colonized by the wild-type strain  and the difference was statistically significant . at 12 days after initiation of co-mingling, naive birds were colonized by kop50q or comp50q at similar levels to the wild-type group .

discussion
in this study, we determined the transcriptomic changes in c. jejuni in response to ery treatment in an attempt to identify initial molecular mechanisms involved in adaptation to macrolide challenge and resistance development. wild-type ery-susceptible c. jejuni nctc  <dig> was exposed to different doses of ery to reveal the adaptive responses to inhibitory and sub-inhibitory antibiotic challenges. in addition to nctc  <dig>  its eryr derivative jl <dig> strain was also exposed to ery at a concentration considered inhibitory for the wild-type . a relatively short treatment period  was chosen in order to minimize possible collateral effects that might occur from prolonged drug treatment. transcriptomic analyses revealed a number of genes with altered expression levels in response to ery treatment, of which the most obvious changes are up-regulation of genes involved in cell motility and down-regulation of genes involved in energy production .

ery and other macrolide antibiotics block the ribosome elongation tunnel to prevent movement and release of the nascent peptide during bacterial protein synthesis. previous studies have demonstrated that treatment of e. coli and h. influenza with translation inhibitors  increased the relative synthesis rate of a number of ribosomal proteins and translation factors as a possible compensating mechanism  <cit> . consistent with the findings in other bacteria, treatment of c. jejuni with an inhibitory dose of ery increased the transcription of ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factor  and transcription elongation factor  . this finding suggests that c. jejuni increases transcription of these genes in order to help recover halted peptide elongation and resume translation as its immediate response against the antibiotic exposure. interestingly, treatment of an eryr strain  with a dose of ery inhibitory for its wild-type ancestor did not trigger noticeable transcriptomic responses. this observation suggests that the 23s rna mutation in jl <dig> prevented the interaction of ery with its target and consequently prohibited the induction of a transcriptomic response in c. jejuni.

of note, several functional gene categories were significantly affected in the wild-type c. jejuni by an inhibitory dose of ery , suggesting that c. jejuni alters multiple pathways to cope with ery stress. most of the differentially expressed genes in the cog category “energy production and conversion” were down-regulated , suggesting that reduced energy metabolism occurred as an adaptive response to inhibitory treatment with ery. this result is consistent with findings in other bacteria such as staphlococcus aureus, e. coli, and y. pestis, which demonstrated significant down-regulation of “energy metabolism” genes under treatment with different classes of antibiotics  <cit> . taken together, these observations suggest that reduced energy metabolism may be a general transcriptional response to antibiotic-induced stress in both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. other cog categories with a noticeably high proportion of down-regulated genes  included “cell wall/membrane biogenesis”, “carbohydrate transport and metabolism”, and “nucleotide transport and metabolism” . these changes suggest that c. jejuni decreased the general metabolic rates to prolong the survival time under ery challenge.

genes involved in “transcription” and “translation” was noticeably up-regulated. in the cog category of “transcription”, up-regulated genes included flagellar biosynthesis sigma factor , putative transcriptional regulator , transcription elongation factor nusa  and heat-inducible transcription repressor  . among the up-regulated genes in the “translation” category included 50s ribosomal protein l <dig> , l <dig> , 30s ribosomal protein s <dig> , and translation initiation factor if- <dig>  . since ery targets 50s ribosomal proteins and block the ribosome elongation tunnel, this finding suggests that c. jejuni increases transcription of these genes in order to help recover the halted peptide elongation and resume translation as its immediate response against the antibiotic exposure. in the “defense mechanism” category, two genes were up-regulated after inhibitory treatment, which encode putative mate family transport protein  and abc-type transmembrane transport protein . the role of these genes in the adaptation to ery treatment remains undetermined.

the “cell motility” category comprised the largest proportion of up-regulated genes in response to an inhibitory dose of ery in wild-type c. jejuni , suggesting that enhanced motility might be campylobacter’s initial escape response to this noxious stress. cj0061c, which encodes the σ <dig> transcription factor flia and is essential for normal flagellar biosynthesis  <cit> , is up-regulated in nctc  <dig> when treated with inhibitory and sub-inhibitory doses of ery . this gene induction was independently confirmed by qrt-pcr . previous research indicated that σ <dig> regulates the major flagellin gene  and other late genes of the flagellar regulon as well as some non-flagellar genes in c. jejuni <cit> . also, it has been demonstrated that the flaa promoter can be activated by the intestinal environment and c. jejuni chemotactic effectors, such as bovine bile, deoxycholate, l-fucose, osmolarity, aspartate, glutamate, organic acids citrate, fumarate, α-ketoglutarate and succinate  <cit> . the microarray and qrt-pcr results presented here revealed that ery induced expression of this regulatory gene , which might explain why multiple motility genes were up-regulated in c. jejuni under ery treatment.

compared with the inhibitory-dose ery treatment, sub-inhibitory dose ery triggered a much smaller response in the overall transcription in c. jejuni . there were no or limited changes in most cog categories, except for “poorly characterized” and “amino acid transport and metabolism”. for example, no differentially expressed genes were found in the “energy production and conversion” category under sub-inhibitory ery treatment , while a large portion of genes in this category were down-regulated under the treatment of an inhibitory does of ery . in the “cell motility” category, only two genes were up-regulated under the sub-inhibitory ery treatment, but a number of genes in this category were up-regulated in response to an inhibitory dose of ery . additionally, no genes in the “translation” category were altered in expression under the sub-inhibitory dose, but multiple genes in this category were up-regulated when treated with an inhibitory dose. these differences suggest that the sub-inhibitory dose of ery did not significantly affect the fundamental metabolism of c. jejuni. despite these major differences, there were  <dig> genes that showed consistent trends of differential expression under both inhibitory and sub-inhibitory treatments . among the  <dig> genes include a two-component sensor kinase , omp <dig> , and flia . interestingly, several cog categories did not show any appreciable gene expression changes regardless of the doses of ery exposure. these categories include cell “cycle control, mitosis and meiosis”, “intracellular trafficking and secretion” as well as those involved in transport and metabolism of lipids and nucleic acids . together, these findings suggest that ery exposure invokes transcriptional responses that are more prominent in certain metabolic pathways and are influenced by the doses of the antibiotic.

several differentially expressed genes were selected for detailed studies by generating insertional mutants in the study. the selection was based on their predicted or known functions  or the magnitude of differential expression . interestingly, mutation of these selected genes did not affect the susceptibility of c. jejuni to ery, although their expression was up-regulated in the presence of this antibiotic. this finding suggests that these genes are involved in the response to ery treatment, but may not contribute directly to macrolide resistance. alternatively, these genes may contribute to ery resistance when they are over expressed. this possibility is not examined in this study and remains to be evaluated. additionally, functional redundancy of genes may compensate for the inactivation of the selected genes, preventing an obvious change in the susceptibility to ery.

psmr transporters in other bacteria have been demonstrated to confer resistance to numerous toxic compounds including quaternary ammonium compounds, toxic lipophilic compounds, potentially toxic metabolites and polyamine compounds  <cit> . not all psmr proteins are associated with an antibiotic resistance phenotype  <cit> , highlighting the diversity in substrate recognition by psmr transporters. in c. jejuni, the substrates recognized and exported by cj0309c-cj0310c and cj1173-cj <dig> remain unknown. however, their mutants showed reduced survival compared to the wild-type strain at  <dig> % o <dig> , suggesting that the psmr proteins may contribute to campylobacter survival under high-level oxygen tension such as the conditions encountered outside of the host during transmission. however, the chicken experiments demonstrated that the mutant strains were comparable to the wild-type strain in the ability to colonize and spread among birds , suggesting that the campylobacter psmr transporters are not essential for in vivo colonization and transmission. one potential caveat of the chicken experiment is the short-term nature of the study and the continuous shedding of fresh campylobacter  that were available for the naïve birds, which may not allow evaluation of the role of the psmr genes in long-term survival and transmission. this possibility requires further examination in future studies.

cj <dig> was identified as up-regulated  by microarray when c. jejuni was treated with an inhibitory dose of ery , and qrt-pcr confirmed this change . in this study, we provided empirical evidence that cj0423-cj <dig> are co-transcribed from the same operon . little is known about the function of this operon. previously, it was demonstrated that cj <dig>  was down-regulated under low oxygen conditions and is considered to be involved in oxidative-tolerance phenotype of c. jejuni <cit> . however, it is shown in this study that c. jejuni wild-type nctc  <dig> and its Δcj <dig> isogenic mutant strain  had comparable level of resistance to the oxidative stress generating compounds tested in this study , suggesting that it is not directly involved in oxidative stress resistance.

omp <dig>  of c. jejuni was previously characterized to belong to the monomeric group of porins which is typical of the ompa-like family  <cit> . omp <dig> was also found to be species-specific and present only in c. jejuni and c. lari, but not in c. coli <cit> . previous studies showed that the temperature regulated omp <dig> maybe an alternative porin to the major outer membrane protein , contributing to decreased membrane permeability while still allowing nutrient uptake  <cit> . however, a recent study identified omp <dig> as an outer-membrane phosphotyrosine kinase that modulates phosphorylation of multiple outer membrane proteins and carbohydrate biosynthesis in c. jejuni <cit> . specifically, omp <dig> positively regulates udp-glcnac/glc 4-epimerase, which is required for n-glycosylation, capsule production and virulence. in this study, it was found that expression of omp <dig> and the downstream gene cj1169c was up-regulated in response to both high and low doses of ery treatment . this up-regulation could be an adaptive response as increasing expression of surface polysaccharides is expected to reduce cell permeability to ery, which is a hydrophobic antibiotic. additionally, it was shown in this study that the omp <dig> mutant  was less tolerant than the wild-type to high levels of oxygen , showed reduced colonization in chickens, and delayed transmission between seeder birds and non-inoculated birds . these phenotypic changes could be explained by the role of omp <dig> in protecting campylobacter against reactive oxygen species produced by host intestinal epithelium  <cit>  and against high oxygen tension encountered during fecal-oral transmission. together, these findings suggest that the cj1169c-cj1170c operon contributes to campylobacter adaptation in vitro and in animal hosts.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, the findings from this study indicate that ery treatment of c. jejuni elicits a transcriptomic response that affects a wide range of functional categories. the most notable changes are up-regulation of motility genes and down-regulation of genes involved in energy production and conversion. the transcriptomic response is influenced by the doses of ery and is prevented by the resistance-conferring mutation in the 23s rna. inactivation of several selected genes did not affect the susceptibility of c. jejuni to ery, but some of the mutant strains showed reduced tolerance to oxygen in vitro and decreased colonization in chickens. together, these results suggest the adaptive responses may contribute to the survival of c. jejuni under antibiotic stress and facilitate the development of ery-tolerant/resistant variants.

