BACKGROUND
over the past several years there has been a surge of studies applying the rrna approach  <cit>  to discover and inventory microbial eukaryotes in many environments . these studies have documented an unprecedented diversity of novel protists at all levels of taxonomic hierarchy, and made an important contribution to the study of microeukaryotic richness, biogeography, and evolution. the cultivation-independent approach that employs cloning and sequencing of 18s rrna gene fragments that are pcr-amplified from environmental genomic dna will most likely continue to play a unique role in microbial discovery, especially since metagenomics approaches, so successful in bacterial and archaeal research  <cit> , are less practical for microbial eukaryotes owing to their large genome size. it is therefore important to know if such approach misses some eukaryotes, and if so, how many, and how to minimize the bias.

it is well known that pcr primers discriminate for and against certain sequences, and that the distribution of rrna gene amplification products is markedly different from that in the original dna extract   <cit> . it is also known that rrna gene libraries of typical size  overlap little in their species lists, and that the multiple pcr primer approach appears to detect greater protistan diversity than the use of a single primer set  <cit> . what is not known is whether different clone libraries made from a single dna source recover species from the same diversity pool, or from a smaller, pcr primers-specific pool of species uniquely amplifiable with these primers. in the former scenario, sequencing such clone libraries to saturation would result in the same species lists , which would be a faithful representation of the target community composition. this possibility is interesting because massive sequencing is quickly becoming practical with the advance of high-throughput pyrosequencing technology  <cit> . an alternative scenario is that the pcr primer biases are so powerful that complete coverage of sample diversity is impossible using any of the developed general eukaryotic primers, a situation that needs to be considered when assessing protistan richness in a sample, community, or biosphere. here we address this possibility by analyzing  <dig> reported 18s rrna gene clone libraries  <cit>  obtained by applying  <dig> different general eukaryotic primer sets to a single extract of genomic dna from a stratified water column in the cariaco basin off the coast of venezuela. we apply a combined, multifaceted statistical approach that we developed to estimate microbial richness on the basis of a small sample of this richness  <cit> , and we compare the pools of diversity recoverable with each of the four single pcr primer sets to the diversity recoverable from the pooled data.

RESULTS
several aspects of the rrna approach are widely recognized as biased, most notably the pcr primer bias leading to preferential amplification of some, but not the other, gene sequences  <cit> . the degree of selectivity is not known, and cannot be readily assessed by simply comparing the composition of clone libraries obtained using different primer sets. this is because protistan communities appear to be very diverse and rich in species, and no study has even come close to sequencing rrna gene clone libraries to saturation. each reported inventory is therefore only a subset of the target community's complete species list.

while the low overlap between inventories obtained using different primers suggests a strong primer bias  <cit> , it is also possible that it is due to significant undersampling. considering that there may be hundreds of protistan species in a typical aquatic sample  <cit> , it has been difficult to differentiate between the two explanations. here we extend a statistical strategy we developed earlier  <cit>  to resolve this problem. the test data are four previously published inventories of protistan species, which were obtained by applying four different eukaryotic primer sets to the same source of community genomic dna. we statistically estimate the sizes of the four diversity pools as they appear from the four individual inventories, and compare those with the fifth estimate obtained from the pooled data. our logic is simple: if the only difference among these five inventories  is the species frequency distribution, such that what is detected in one library is also in principle detectable in the other library, then all five estimates of total protistan richness should converge on a single value. if on the other hand these estimates are statistically different, it will mean that pcr primer biases are so substantial that some species' dna is simply not amplified, and such species will be practically undetectable, with some – but not the other – primer sets. in this case, the pooled data should produce an estimate of total richness significantly exceeding any estimate obtained from individual clone libraries.

the test clone libraries were obtained as part of our long-term study of protistan diversity in the stratified water column in the cariaco basin in the caribbean, off the coast of venezuela  <cit> . these studies used a single water sample which served as a source of genomic dna. this dna was amplified using separate pcr reactions employing four different eukaryotic primer sets. here we aligned the overlapping portions of all the sequenced rrna gene fragments, calculated the all-to-all identity values, and clustered the sequences into operational taxonomic units  at different levels of sequence identity . the numbers of otus per library and pcr primer sets are given in figure  <dig>  we note that the overlap of otu lists between the clone libraries was very small: e.g., at 99% sequence identity, no single otu was shared among all four libraries; between  <dig> and  <dig> otus were shared among any given  <dig> libraries; and between  <dig> and  <dig> otus between pairs of libraries .

the statistical analysis proceeded in three stages. first, we estimated total otu richness  separately for each primer set, plus pooled, at each % similarity cutoff. for comparison we computed both parametric and nonparametric estimates of total richness; the former are probably more reliable for high-diversity microbial data, while the latter are typically biased downward  <cit>  in this setting, but the final results from both methods were in reasonable agreement. for example, for the pooled data at the 99% similarity level, the parametric estimate of total richness  was  <dig> , and the corresponding nonparametric estimate  was  <dig> .

second, we developed a single, combined model for the total otu richness estimates from all primer sets, plus pooled, at all % similarity levels. we know from substantial empirical experience  that total otu richness increases exponentially as a function of % similarity cutoff, or equivalently that log increases linearly as a function of % similarity. we therefore introduce a linear  function for each of the four samples, plus pooled, i.e., for each sample we represent the  total otu richness as a linear function of % similarity. for large samples this linear increase can be characterized with considerable statistical refinement, and model is clear and consistent across a range of  datasets. here our samples are limited in size , which leads not only to statistical sampling variation around the regression line, but also to non-statistical error. the latter is due to the fact that in some cases a 1% increase in the similarity  level for a small sample did not change the collection of otus , and consequently the corresponding total richness estimates were identical at both similarity levels. we examined a range of statistical approaches  to correct for both sources of error, concluding finally that the model displayed in figure  <dig> represents the best analysis of these data for the purpose of distinguishing between the primer sets.

third, we considered the differences between the total richness recoverable using each of the four primer sets vs. that recoverable using the pooled data. in terms of the linear model, this is expressed by the differences in the elevations  of the parallel  lines. using the linear  analysis, we estimated these differences, converted them back to the original scale , and calculated confidence intervals for the differences. these intervals represent plausible ranges for the total otu richness in principle recoverable by each of the four primer sets, expressed as a proportion  of the total richness recoverable by pooling the data from all four. the results are shown in figure  <dig>  note that the percentages are generally higher for the analyses based on nonparametric richness estimates, reflecting the compression of the lines mentioned above. however, the 95% confidence intervals overlap for each primer set, indicating reasonably good agreement of the analyses. the most optimistic possible conclusion from figure  <dig> comes from considering the upper confidence bound for the nonparametric analysis of primer set iv: about 73% of the total richness recoverable by the pooled approach may be recoverable using primer set iv alone.

to overcome some of the statistical uncertainties inherent in analyzing all four primer sets vs. the pooled data, we also aggregated the four separate datasets and compared this aggregate to the pooled data. . the results are shown in figure  <dig>  again the nonparametric version gives higher results, but the confidence intervals overlap considerably. the most optimistic interpretation of figure  <dig> is that, on average, the four primer sets can be expected to recover at most 60% of the total microbial diversity recoverable using the pooled approach.

the above statistical analyses showed that estimates of the protistan richness of the sample based on single pcr primer data sets do not significantly differ, and varied between  <dig>  and  <dig>  species  . these analyses also showed that once the four clone libraries' data are pooled, and the new species frequency distribution is modeled, the estimate of the sample's richness grows to  <dig>  . by modeling all of the estimates across all % similarity levels , we obtained sufficient statistical precision to conclude that each of the pcr-specific primer sets recovers a specific set of species, does not recover other species, and cannot in principle detect all the species in the sample. each clone library would thus undersample the community even if sequenced to saturation, and the degree of such undersampling varies among the primer sets from 83%  to 51% . this means that the pooled data set is richer than individual libraries not because it is a larger collection of sequences but because it is less biased. one practical implication of this is that the microbial richness of a sample is better assessed by two clone libraries  sequenced with x effort each rather than by one clone library sequenced with 2x effort. increasing the diversity of the primers used on each dna extract will lead to a more complete inventory of the extract, whereas even an unlimited amount of sequencing applied to a single clone library will only recover a portion of the dna extract's richness.

an in silico investigation of primer specificity points to the importance of primer mismatch in determining the overall recovery. for example, the 528f primer set has at least one mismatch with 39% of 18s rrna gene sequences in silva 18s rrna gene sequence database, and at least two mismatches with 27% of such sequences. the figures for the 1391r primer are 30% and and 25%, respectively. assuming that any mismatch prevents an efficient primer binding, and the overall efficiency is the product of individual primer efficiencies, then the 528f/1391r pcr primer set would only amplify 61% * 70% = 43% of silva sequences, explaining one half of what our analyses predict this primer set will miss in environmental studies.

we were surprised to see that the same holds at other levels of otu grouping. it is presently impossible to determine whether a specific value of 18s rrna gene sequence similarity could point to the organism's position within the α-taxonomy hierarchy. in other words, there is no clear correspondence between the degree of molecular divergence of the otu and its taxonomic rank. however, since identity above 98–99% most likely indicates a very close relationship, and at 70% the protistan diversity addressed here collapses into one otu, values in between must cover life forms differing at kingdom-, class-, family, and genus levels. interestingly, at 80% gene sequence identity, the lowest threshold tested at which the sequences in question fell into more than one otu, the pooled data still appeared qualitatively richer than individual clone libraries. this means that the single pcr primer approach is not only unlikely to recover all species in a sample, but it misses a substantial number of higher taxa as well.

we note that some pcr primer sets appear to be better than others in recovering target diversity. both parametric and nonparametric modeling suggest that, out of the four combinations tested, the primer set iv  recovers the most, and the primer set i  the least part of the sample's richness . the use of multiple sets to amplify the sample's rrna gene is clearly advantageous because this minimizes the pcr bias. because the latter may only be reduced but not completely eliminated, the multiple pcr primer approach would still sample sequences from a portion of community diversity. combined with high throughput sequencing technologies, this approach may detect all recoverable taxa, but still miss species that escape amplification with the given pcr primer sets. we note that the degree of biases we estimated is characteristic of the target  communities. these likely comprise less known species, increasing the probability of primer mismatches. it is possible that the biases in question are less pronounced for aerobic  protists.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that standard rrna inventories of protistan diversity, which typically employ a single pcr primer set to amplify protistan rrna genes, are not samples from the entire community, but only from a fraction thereof. this seems to be the case at all taxonomic levels, from species to the highest taxonomic ranks. increasing sequencing effort alone is unlikely to increase this fraction as it is grounded in pcr primer selectivity. here we advocate coupling an increase in sequence coverage with the use of multiple pcr primer sets, because four such sets used here allow access in principle to larger diversity than a single set. the pooled data predicts that there were  <dig> species in the test sample. this estimate, while significantly larger than those obtained using individual clone libraries, may still be an underestimate because the use of multiple pcr primers is likely to minimize – rather then eliminate – the sampling biases.

