BACKGROUND
in the oral cavity, bacteria encounter many different stress factors. shear-forces and high flow rates of saliva dominate on exposed surfaces, while bacteria colonizing the gingival crevices and/or subgingival pockets have to contend and withstand with the host’s immune response. as in most other environments, bacteria form biofilms as protection from these harsh conditions  <cit> .

the bacterial community colonizing the oral cavity is highly complex and varies considerably between different individuals. according to current reports,  <dig> to  <dig> established species and likely several thousand only partially cultivable taxa can be detected  <cit> . however, this consortium does not pose a threat to a healthy individual. it even has a protective function by preventing the establishment or predominance of harmful organisms  <cit> . several factors like imbalanced nutrition, smoking, diabetes, emotional stress, or genetic predisposition  <cit>  can lead to changes in the composition of this subgingival community, leading to a loss of the natural ecological balance. potentially pathogenic species may increase in numbers, starting to cause persistent infections of host tissues that are capable to cause not only tooth loss and bone resorption but also can spread out to extra-oral sites and become systemic  <cit> . physical removal of the biofilms, possibly followed by an antibiotic treatment in refractory cases, is used to re-establish a biofilm community compatible with clinical stability. however, treatment will never and should not remove all organisms, since this could lead to settlement of even more harmful organisms. it is an almost impossible task to identify and selectively target only the actual pathogens among the hundreds of different species present  <cit> .

out of the potentially thousands of species found in the oral cavity, about  <dig> can be detected in periodontal pockets. this number is reduced to a range of  <dig> to  <dig> species in one patient  <cit> . the enormous diversity makes subgingival biofilms difficult to study and it seems impossible to fully understand all the interactions between the species. to investigate and better understand the role of individual species, models reflecting subgingival colonization are needed. regarding the sophisticated structure of these biofilms  <cit> , it is obvious that biofilms consisting of only one or two organisms do not sufficiently mirror the in vivo situation. some investigators solved this problem by using inocula taken from diseased sites of patients  <cit> . major problems in such model systems are both the restricted possibilities for analysis of all species involved and the composition of the inoculum, which inevitably varies substantially between donor patients.

an in vitro model system for subgingival biofilms should not only be functional in terms of pathogenic potential, it should also have a defined structure and a quantitative relationship between the species that resemble to some extent the in vivo situation. the aim of this study was therefore to further develop our 10-species model system  <cit>  by 1) incorporating treponemes and balancing the growth medium to optimize their growth and 2) defining the structure of the produced biofilms. the incorporation of treponema denticola, replacing treponema lecithinolyticum used in our previous study, along with the variation of the growth medium allowed the treponemes to firmly establish in the biofilms. further, f. nucleatum subsp. vincentii kp-f <dig> , campylobacter rectus , streptococcus intermedius atcc  <dig>  were replaced by better growing strains .

the described modified model provides the possibility to examine the impact of variable growth conditions as well as the role of individual species. the high complexity of our 10-species model provides biofilms that are much closer to the in vivo situation than other models using just one or two species.

RESULTS
development of biofilms
three different growth media were compared regarding bacterial abundances and biofilm stability: sal , mfum <dig> , and ihs  plates at  <dig> time points during the incubation time. the final structure, as well as the thickness of the biofilms at  <dig> time points during the incubation time, was determined by confocal laser scanning microscopy . the experiments confirmed and extended our previous finding  <cit>  that the composition of the growth medium has a major effect on the development, stability and composition of the biofilms.

the ihs medium delayed biofilm formation by  <dig> h compared to mfum <dig> .  <dig> h after inoculation in mfum <dig>  the discs were densely colonized by cocci. based on the observation that most of these cocci appeared as chains, they can be assumed to be streptococci. however, after  <dig> h of incubation in ihs, cocci were observed to appear almost exclusively as dense microcolonies, while rods  in low abundance colonized the majority of the disc. incubation in sal medium led to a similar observation as in mfum4: the disc was colonized mainly by cocci .

the high concentration of human serum in ihs improved biofilm stability in terms of firm attachment to the disc , and further the average thickness of the biofilms was significantly increased after  <dig>  h when compared to biofilms grown in mfum <dig>  or sal respectively . however, the total counts of bacteria per biofilm did not show significant differences between the three growth media . 

in mfum <dig>  biofilms showed a rapid increase in biofilm thickness and total counts right after inoculation and reached their highest cell numbers after  <dig> h. while stable until then, they tended to partially detach from the discs during the dip-washes at later time points. in contrast, major parts of biofilms grown in ihs detached during the dip-washes in the first  <dig> h of incubation. this observation is in accordance with the strong decrease in total counts along with a high variability between different experiments and replicates. during further incubation, however, the remaining parts had stabilized and the biofilms showed a rapid increase in thickness and total counts. biofilms cultivated in sal medium showed a constant increase of total counts and thickness and were not prone to detachment during the incubation time .

quantitative representation of species in biofilms
we determined the cell numbers of all organisms in biofilms grown either in sal, mfum <dig>  and ihs medium. enumeration of cells was performed by microscopical counting following staining the bacteria by fluorescence in situ hybridisation  or immunofluorescence . the data are summarized in figure  <dig>  treponema denticola showed significantly higher cell numbers in ihs compared to sal and mfum <dig> and was among the most abundant organisms in the biofilm. in mfum <dig>  treponema denticola hardly proliferated and only appeared in abundances close to the detection limit. streptococcus anginosus and veillonella dispar showed significantly reduced growth in sal medium compared to the other two media, while actinomyces oris showed significantly reduced growth in ihs compared to mfum <dig> 

the abundances of streptococcus oralis, f. nucleatum, campylobacter rectus, p. intermedia, porphyromonas gingivalis, and t. forsythia were not affected by the growth medium.

structure of mature biofilms
the quantitative representation of the used species was most convincing when biofilms were grown in ihs medium. t. denticola established in high numbers and the biofilms showed the best stability during the following staining procedures. therefore, structural analysis was focused on these biofilms. clsm analyses of fish stained biofilms enabled us to determine all  <dig> species used in the model and locate their position in the biofilms. the top layer  and basal layer  of the biofilms showed clear structural differences and a fluent transition between these layers was observed. biofilms grown in mfum <dig> showed a dominance of f. nucleatum and streptococci in the basal layer . in biofilms grown in ihs, however, f. nucleatum was detectable by fish only in the top layer as dispersed cells, while streptococci were very abundant throughout the whole biofilm . aggregations of streptococci were often mixed with v. dispar in the whole biofilm except in the top layer, where v. dispar occurred as compact microcolonies . in biofilms grown in mfum <dig>  which had a lower thickness, this growth pattern of v. dispar was observed throughout the biofilm . p. intermedia was found predominantly in the lower half of the biofilms forming microcolonies with diameters of about  <dig> μm on average . t. forsythia was found mainly in the top layer of the biofilm, while none were detected in the lower half of the biofilms . t. denticola grew loosely in the top layer alongside with p. gingivalis, which displayed the highest density in close proximity to t. denticola accumulations . a. oris appeared as loose eps-embedded microcolonies located in the upper half of the biofilms . campylobacter rectus was dispersed throughout the biofilm and did not form own microcolonies, but showed higher density in the top layer of the biofilm .

discussion
this study focused on the importance of the nutritional conditions and the structure of subgingival biofilms generated on ha discs in vitro. the alteration of the growth medium by eliminating saliva and increasing the concentration of heat-inactivated human serum affected the biofilms positively as they developed to higher thickness, were more stable and enabled the extensive proliferation of t. denticola, which were observed only in small numbers using media with low or no heat-inactivated human serum. we were able to locate all the  <dig> organisms by multiplex fish in combination with clsm. the biofilms displayed a stratified structure reminiscent of in vivo subgingival biofilms  <cit> . however, in contrast to the in vivo situation, f. nucleatum was predominant in the basal layer along with streptococci of the biofilms grown in mfum <dig>  in biofilms cultured in ihs, f. nucleatum was detected as dispersed cells in the top layer. earlier experiments showed that f. nucleatum has a strong dependency on streptococci, and is only able to establish along with them . this observation is in accordance with the finding of co-aggregation studies that identified the ability of streptococci to attach to components of the pellicle, while f. nucleatum was shown to bind to the streptococci and act as a “bridging organism” for other species to colonize the biofilm  <cit> . the observed difference that f. nucleatum establishes in the basal layer might very well be due to the fact, that all strains were inoculated simultaneously. if no streptococci were added to the inoculum, but added to the biofilms at a later time point, f. nucleatum did not establish in the basal layer but rather after the addition of the streptococci, forming an intermediate layer. in this case, mainly a. oris was detected as an early colonizer . possibly, it would make sense to add the various strains sequentially, simulating the shift from health to disease.

the growth medium affected not only the biofilm composition; it had a strong influence on the rate of biofilm formation as well. the observed delay of biofilm formation in ihs medium could be explained possibly by the blocking of adhesion receptors on the saliva pellicle. it was shown for streptococcus pneumonia and escherichia coli that albumin inhibits biofilm formation on various surfaces  <cit> . it is very likely that this effect also occurs in our model during colonization of the discs. however, even though the initial attachment of the bacteria is prevented to a certain degree, all ten organisms were able to persist on the discs and were not washed away during dip-washing. independent of the used medium, the biofilms showed a phase with a pronounced increase in thickness and bacterial abundance. this phase took about  <dig> h regardless of the used medium, however, the medium does affect its onset. concluding this, it seems that a certain number of bacteria attached to the disc is required to promote “exponential” biofilm formation. our experimental setup did not allow defining the reason behind this phenomenon. possibly, it is triggered by quorum sensing, as it was shown for several oral species that ai- <dig> or csp signalling is involved in biofilm formation  <cit> . alternatively, it could be that early biofilm formation under different nutritional conditions leads to different degrees of biofilm rigidity and therefore to different levels of sensitivity to shear-forces applied during biofilm dip-washing.

the ihs medium produced significantly higher cell numbers of t. denticola per biofilm compared to mfum <dig> or sal medium. however, p. gingivalis and t. forsythia were not affected by the higher serum concentration. this is surprising, since p. gingivalis was reported to profit from gingival crevicular fluid as well as from menaquinone secreted by veillonellae  <cit> , and since one of the main growth factors of t. forsythia, n-acetyl-muramic acid  <cit> , should be plenty available in thicker biofilms with probably increased proportions of lysing cells. on the other hand both species are known to be quite fastidious and our data indicate that it will be necessary to optimize further media components to increase their growth rates. s. anginosus, a. oris, and v. dispar showed mathematically significant reactions to the different growth media as well. however, in neither case the differences were greater than one log, which can hardly be considered as “biologically significant”.

the biofilms proliferating in ihs medium showed a consistent structure throughout the replicates and the organisms showed interactions as they could be expected according to literature. zjinge et al. described three different layers in in vivo subgingival samples  <cit> . our model biofilms showed differences between top- and basal layers as well, however, it was not possible to clearly define an intermediate layer. it rather seems that there is a fluent transition between top- and basal layer of the biofilms. the two layers show distinct characteristics. in the basal layer, biofilms were very compact and contained mainly streptococci, some veillonellae and large amounts of f. nucleatum and p. intermedia. the presence of p. intermedia was unexpected as it is in contrast to the in vivo situation where coccoid prevotella species preferentially colonize the top layer in form of compact microcolonies  <cit> . the top layer of the model biofilms showed a rather loose structure with a lot of eps. v. dispar and other cocci were embedded as compact microcolonies in their matrix, while a. oris appeared as loose microcolonies, with eps surrounding each cell. in some preliminary diffusion experiments, similar to these described by thunheer et al. for in vitro built supragingival biofilms  <cit> , it seemed that these loose regions might work as diffusion channels, allowing large molecules to reach the basal layer in less than two minutes .

the high abundance of t. denticola along with p. gingivalis and t. forsythia in the top layer was remarkable. the location, combined with the known high pathogenic potential of these species, might indicate a high inflammatory potential of our model biofilms. particularly striking was to find t. denticola and p. gingivalis to colonize in close proximity, indicating some sort of metabolic dependency. this observation corresponds well with several previous studies. for example, it has been shown in a murine abscess model that the pathogenicity of p. gingivalis was significantly increased in presence of t. denticola <cit> . the result was recently confirmed in a murine alveolar bone loss model, where co-inoculation showed a strong response not only for bone loss, but also for p. gingivalis specific t cell proliferation and interferon-γ production  <cit> . and in yet two other studies p. gingivalis and t. denticola had shown metabolic synergies by exchanging iso-butyric- and succinic acid  <cit>  and an ability to co-aggregate with the hgp <dig> domains of rgpa, kgp and haga acting as the key adhesins  <cit> . other organisms found in this study in highest density in the top layer but without a specific focal distribution were c. rectus, f. nucleatum and t. forsythia. in the case of c. rectus, a highly motile microaerophilic organism, this meets the expectation. in biofilms grown in ihs medium, it was not possible to detect dense colonies of f. nucleatum in the basal layer by fish, as it was the case in thin mfum <dig> biofilms. there are several factors that could explain this finding. on the one hand, sharma et al. made the same observation in two species biofilms of f. nucleatum and t. forsythia. using a live-dead staining, they found mainly non-viable f. nucleatum attached to the substratum, while the bacteria in the upper layer of the biofilms showed a high viability  <cit> . further, they observed synergistic growth of these organisms, which could explain the occurrence of t. forsythia together with the active f. nucleatum in the top layer of our biofilms. on the other hand, the effect could be explained by known problems of fish staining procedure: the probes or the fixative possibly were not able to diffuse through the whole biofilm, or cells had strongly reduced number of ribosomes, leading to an extremely weak, non-detectable fluorescence. it is known that the obtained fluorescence intensity, with a few exceptions, is directly correlated with the growth rate of the target bacteria. the accessibility of the targets is controlled mainly by cell wall properties, which again require to get permeabilized by either the fixative or, in case of gram positive cells, lysozyme  <cit> . as p. intermedia and streptococci were readily stained at the base of the biofilms, a hindered diffusion of the probes or fixatives through the biofilms does not seem to be the problem. the accessibility of the cells can be sorted out as well, as the signal is very clear in the top layer of the biofilm. careful examination of the images, by enhancing the contrast settings for the general dna staining in our samples, revealed structures at the base of the biofilms that very much resembles the well-stained colonies of f. nucleatum observed in less thick biofilms. combined with the high abundance detected by if, it seems that f. nucleatum was in fact present in at the base of the biofilms, however, either in a non-viable- or at least non-active state. for future experiments, it might be worth investigating new methods to increase fluorescent signals, in order to obtain a bright staining throughout the whole biofilm. catalysed reporter deposition -fish  <cit> , the use of helper oligonucleotides  <cit> , or designing probes targeting the 23s rrna  <cit>  might be solutions. due to the large size of the horseradish peroxidase used with card-fish, it seems unlikely that this method would be appropriate, and the use of helper oligonucleotides or probes targeting the 23s rrna seem more promising to reach stronger signals.

one of the major differences to the in vivo situation is that the model biofilms grew without the presence of an epithelial cell layer. some of the observed differences will be caused by the lack of interactions that occur in vivo. a future project will address this circumstance and aims to incorporate an epithelial cell layer into the model system. the main difficulty in maintaining such a co-culture system is that different growth conditions that are needed to cultivate either epithelial cells or biofilms. while the strict anaerobes in the consortium of the biofilms are very sensitive to oxygen, the epithelial cells do require oxygen for growth. further, biofilms and epithelial cells do have very different nutritional requirements. in our co-culture experiments performed so far, cells and biofilms were cultured separately and incubated as co-culture after the development of both biofilms and epithelial cells  <cit> . current experiments showed, that the biofilm consortium is still able to grow on agar plates after  <dig> h of co-culture, however, the viability of the bacteria was greatly reduced .

CONCLUSIONS
we were able to locate all  <dig> species by clsm and reconstruct the three-dimensional structure of our model biofilms . the structural analysis revealed a close proximity of t. denticola and p. gingivalis in the top layer of the biofilms, which might indicate a high pathogenic potential of these in vitro formed subgingival model biofilms. v. dispar appeared in the top layer as well, forming tight microcolonies.

the use of 50% heat-inactivated human serum in the growth medium improved the stability of the biofilms, resulting in significantly thicker biofilms. under these conditions the fastidious t. denticola was able to establish in significantly higher densities compared to the media with 10% or no human serum. surprisingly, neither p. gingivalis nor t. forsythia were affected by the concentration of human serum, and neither by the addition of saliva.

