BACKGROUND
current patterns of genetic diversity in north american species were shaped to a large degree by quaternary glacial cycles  <cit> , but effects of the last  glaciation and current interglacial have been difficult to assess because very recent genetic divergence is easily overlooked by limited sampling, and molecular clock estimates are vitiated by coalescent stochasticity and retained ancestral polymorphism  <cit> . for this reason, fossil paleoecological data, which usually document relatively recent climate-induced habitat change, have been difficult to incorporate into genetic studies. integrating paleoecology and genetics has, therefore, remained an elusive goal  <cit> .

in the southwestern usa and northern mexico, a detailed history of the last  <dig>  years of habitat change has been reconstructed from fossilized plant material preserved in packrat  middens  <cit> . according to these data, most of the southwestern usa and northern mexico was connected by woodland at the last glacial maximum , approximately  <dig>  years ago and probably until  <dig> to  <dig> years ago . since then, warming has driven woodlands to higher elevations, culminating sometime in the middle holocene when grassland and desert displaced woodland in lowland basins. resulting 'sky islands' provide a natural laboratory of habitat replicates for the study of recent genetic divergence  <cit>  and a geographical setting in which to test the paleoecological hypothesis of postglacial habitat fragmentation.

despite their obvious appeal as a study system, little is known about genetic differentiation among sky islands. a few studies have suggested an effect of postglacial habitat fragmentation on current genetic structure  <cit> , but other studies have failed to detect evidence for recent divergence  <cit> . furthermore, some genetic estimates of divergence times between sky islands point to ancient dates more than  <dig> million years ago , orders of magnitude older than those predicted by the midden data  <cit> .

with this study, we attempt to reconcile paleoecological and genetic estimates of the timing of postglacial habitat fragmentation for this region using as our model the mexican jay , a sedentary bird species found in pine-oak woodlands in the sky islands. replication is rare in large-scale biogeographic studies, leading to the widespread use of comparative phylogeography of multiple codistributed species  <cit> . an alternative approach, which we use here, is to compare natural biogeographical replicates, in this case two independent sky-island archipelagos, that, according to the midden data, have experienced similar postglacial histories. this approach has the benefit of controlling for interspecific sources of variation due to climate and habitat change.

we predicted that populations from two sky-island archipelagos, one in arizona and the other in the trans-pecos region of western texas and northern coahuila, mexico, would show concordant evidence of postglacial genetic divergence . to test this prediction, we assessed genetic diversity in mitochondrial dna  and nuclear  dna. we constructed minimum-spanning networks of mtdna haplotypes to help clarify recent genealogies where ancestral and derived haplotypes often coexist, making inferences based on traditional bifurcating trees difficult  <cit> . using observed patterns of shared and private haplotypes from the networks, we tested the postglacial fragmentation hypothesis against other plausible divergence scenarios such as ancient fragmentation and demographic expansion during the last glaciation . in addition, we estimated divergence times between sky islands with corrected genetic distance and a non-equilibrium coalescence model  <cit> , using a joint data set, including both mtdna and microsatellites. we show that patterns of unique and shared genes from mtdna and nuclear microsatellites as well as divergence times corroborate the paleoecological hypothesis of postglacial fragmentation for the sky-island region, providing explicit genetic validation for one of the world's best fossil paleoecological records.

RESULTS
evidence for postglacial genetic divergence
our results validate the idea that the two archipelagos can be considered independent replicates for the purpose of investigating postglacial divergence. sequences from  <dig> base pairs  of the mtdna control region of  <dig> mexican jays from  <dig> different sky islands contained no missing data  and revealed  <dig> variable sites, identifying  <dig> unique haplotypes in the arizona archipelago and  <dig> in the trans-pecos archipelago . all sky islands contained some proportion of haplotypes shared with at least one other sky island, and eight out of nine contained unique haplotypes . the two archipelagos shared no haplotypes and averaged  <dig> % sequence divergence indicating a lack of recent gene flow, a pattern confirmed by a larger-scale study using both mtdna and nuclear markers  <cit> . paleoecological data suggest that continuous woodland connected the two archipelagos at the lgm ; yet, the amount of sequence divergence and lack of haplotype sharing shown here and in another study  <cit>  suggest a historical barrier to gene flow, perhaps indicating that populations in the two archipelagos have acquired sufficient reproductive isolation to keep them distinct despite the potential for mixing at glacial maxima.

sample size , number of control region haplotypes , number of private control region haplotypes , and number of private microsatellite alleles  for each sky island. numbers after locations correspond to sampling sites in figure  <dig> 

results from within each archipelago provide multiple lines of evidence to support the paleoecological hypothesis of postglacial sky-island fragmentation set forth by the fossil midden data. we first discuss patterns found in mtdna haplotype networks and then divergence times estimated from corrected genetic distance and a coalescence model. the predicted mtdna pattern for postglacial divergence, a 'star-shaped' haplotype network with rare, peripheral haplotypes unique to individual sky islands , was evident in both archipelagos , although in the arizona archipelago this pattern was nested within a more extensive genetic structure . high-frequency, widespread haplotypes often occur in the interior of haplotype networks, which can indicate that they are ancestral to haplotypes found on the network's periphery  <cit> . in our networks, these interior haplotypes suggest the persisting genetic signature of a panmictic gene pool that existed during the last glaciation. by the same token, rare, private haplotypes located peripherally suggest in situ postglacial mutation within sky islands and limited gene flow among sky islands, in agreement with the natural history of the mexican jay  <cit> . alternatively, these rare haplotypes could have arrived in the region due to gene flow or from postglacial recolonization. however, this is unlikely because potential source populations in the northern sierra madre occidental  and sierra madre oriental  do not share rare haplotypes with populations in our study  <cit> . furthermore, pleistocene niche models predict that mexican jays remained in their same latitudinal distribution throughout the last glaciation  <cit> . stability of geographic range through the last glaciation also makes our 'star-shaped' patterns unlikely to be caused by a recent demographic expansion resulting from recolonization, as has been shown for other passerine species  <cit> . it should be noted that unlike many species, the habitable area for mexican jays actually decreased following the lgm as woodland habitat fragmented and retreated to high elevations.

private haplotypes could also represent haplotypes that went undetected in other sky islands due to limited sampling, but we believe this is unlikely because in most cases sample sizes were high relative to the number of haplotypes. for example, one sky island with a large sample size  did not contain even relatively high-frequency, private haplotypes from nearby sky islands . another possible explanation for our pattern is that genetic drift in small, shrinking populations resulted in the loss of existing rare haplotypes during postglacial forest fragmentation. however, this scenario, involving multiple, independent instances of haplotype loss in all sky islands but one, is less parsimonious than a scenario involving new mutation; thus we believe it is less likely to account for our pattern.

stochastic processes, such as mutational variance and gene-sorting, can play a relatively large role in the generation and structuring of genetic diversity, making inferences based on networks or trees of a single locus inadvisable, especially for recent timescales  <cit> . to address this, we also assessed variation in another mtdna marker  and nuclear microsatellites. the large-scale genetic structure seen in our data is largely corroborated by a smaller data set from nd <dig> , suggesting that mutational variance is not driving the pattern. furthermore, we found that, similar to results from mtdna, most microsatellite alleles were shared among two or more sky islands, but nearly all sky islands  contained a small percentage of private alleles . bayesian analysis of population structure from microsatellite data also validates large-scale patterns seen in mtdna, with east-west separation in the arizona archipelago and assignment of some sky islands in the trans-pecos archipelago to separate genetic clusters . taken as a whole, these results indicate that patterns of genetic diversity found in this study reflect the actual population history of mexican jays and not stochastic factors peculiar to a single locus.

divergence times based on corrected genetic distance, which used a conservative range of mutation rates, generally post-date the lgm , except for comparisons between eastern and western sky islands in the arizona archipelago, for which divergence estimates were older . a coalescence-based approach  <cit>  provides an independent and potentially powerful way to corroborate these dates because divergence times can be estimated from one or multiple loci in a coalescent  framework that considers many possible gene trees consistent with the data and model, weights them according to their likelihood and, therefore, incorporates stochastic factors that limit the applicability of summary-statistic approaches  <cit> . divergence times under an isolation model  were highly consistent among sky-island pairs and across multiple runs , indicating postglacial divergence to the exclusion of later dates . the inclusion of microsatellite data in the isolation model resulted in tighter likelihood curves and slightly earlier peak divergence times, with confidence intervals from several sky-island pairs overlapping values that were effectively zero.

corrected genetic distance  shown above the diagonal. range of time since divergence  using varying estimates for divergence rate  appears below diagonal. numbers of sky islands correspond to figure  <dig> 

corrected genetic distance  shown above the diagonal. range of time since divergence  using varying estimates for divergence rate  appears below diagonal. numbers after sky islands correspond to figure  <dig> 

estimates of the t parameter from im and conversion to years since divergence  using a range of mutation rates . peak values  are given. parameters were not sampled at zero; therefore, the highest probability densities overlapping  <dig>  are effectively zero. numbers after sky islands correspond to figure  <dig> 

until now, evidence for postglacial fragmentation of sky islands has eluded intraspecific studies of poorly dispersing sky-island organisms. in a study of sky-island jumping spiders , masta  <cit>  found evidence for genetic differentiation among sky islands, but timing estimates were relatively old . no evidence was found for differentiation among sky-island populations of the insect herbivore grape phylloxera   <cit> . of the studies reporting similar results to ours, one is from a different sky-island system in the rocky mountains, where populations of a flightless grasshopper  show evidence for recent divergence and in situ generation of unique haplotypes  <cit> . quite recently, a study on rattlesnakes from three sky islands that form part of our arizona archipelago  indicated holocene divergence  <cit> . our results provide corroboration for this conclusion with multiple timing estimates throughout the region.

importance of sampling and mutation rate in studies of recent genetic divergence
there are various reasons why previous studies might have failed to detect genetic divergence among sky islands. reconstructing genetic histories for recently diverged lineages is hindered by stochasticity in the coalescent process and the confounding influences of migration and incomplete lineage sorting  <cit> . thorough sampling from throughout the region of interest  <cit>  and large sample sizes  <cit>  are often necessary to overcome these difficulties . for example, if only one individual was sampled from each sky island in the arizona archipelago, we might have uncovered only haplotypes from the three genetic groups . in doing so, we would have overlooked recent divergence and come to the spurious conclusion that divergence among sky islands was older .

uncovering recent divergence also depends critically on the use of genetic markers with mutation rates fast enough to record the history of population splitting. substitution rates for the non-coding mtdna control region are usually higher than those for protein-coding regions like nd <dig>  especially over short timescales where saturation is not an important factor  <cit> . a qualitative assessment of the effect of mutation rate can be seen by comparing control region and nd <dig> haplotype networks for the trans-pecos archipelago . in multiple instances, several unique control region haplotypes are collapsed into a single nd <dig> haplotype, suggesting a slower substitution rate for nd <dig> over recent timescales and reduced capacity to record information on recent population splitting events in the genetic code.

the 'multilocus approach' to phylogeographic studies is gaining traction as more studies demonstrate that results from one gene often do not reflect the population history of organisms  <cit> . our results, however, caution that to test hypotheses concerning recent genetic divergence, choosing a locus with a high mutation rate is also important, and thus, for many organisms, the mtdna control region will still offer the best tool for this purpose. multiple loci, if they do not mutate fast enough to record evidence of recent vicariance, will not provide informative data, no matter how many are marshaled to the task.

evidence for differing glacial histories between archipelagos
despite similarities in their postglacial genetic histories, differences in the broader genetic structure between the two archipelagos suggest contrasting glacial or pre-wisconsin histories. the arizona archipelago has much more genetic structure with three main genetic groups divergent from one another by four or five mutational steps . haplotype frequencies shift dramatically from east to west within this archipelago. estimates of divergence time across this divide range from  <dig>  to  <dig>  years ago  and thus, generally date back to the last glaciation. this timing is corroborated by the fact that haplotypes from the different genetic groups mix in some sky islands, an event much more likely to have occurred when gene flow was facilitated by continuous woodland . still, population mixing was not complete, indicating a hindrance to gene flow in the arizona archipelago during the last glaciation. jays in the trans-pecos archipelago, on the other hand, were probably panmictic during the lgm as evidenced by the relatively homogenous pool of shared haplotypes found in each sky island.

studies on other organisms have shown large genetic  <cit> , and in at least one case, phenotypic  <cit>  breaks across an east-west gradient in the sky islands of arizona, leading to speculation that woodland might have been discontinuous during the last glaciation. another possibility that has not been previously considered is that montane conifer forest, currently associated with steller's jays , which replace mexican jays at high elevation throughout most of their distribution, provided a barrier to east-west dispersal of mexican jays  in arizona during the last glaciation. hypothetical maps of habitat at the lgm inferred from the midden data support this idea and suggest two glacial refugia, one in southwestern arizona and another in southwestern new mexico and northern chihuahua, with connections between the two interrupted by large expanses of montane conifer forest . this habitat arrangement over a period of about  <dig>  years during the last glaciation might have resulted in two largely independent populations connected by limited gene flow. this possibility, and comparisons of the glacial histories of the two archipelagos, could be investigated further by combining fossil paleoecological data with niche-modeling  <cit> , to produce finer-scale reconstructions of glacial habitat.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the most robust genetic support to date for the paleoecological hypothesis of postglacial fragmentation of sky islands. previous studies might have been unable to detect postglacial divergence due either to small sample sizes or limited geographic coverage. this study and others demonstrate that sky islands can act as generators of genetic diversity over both recent and historical timescales  <cit> . in some cases, sky islands have also facilitated rapid phenotypic differentiation  <cit>  and incipient speciation, for example, in jumping spiders  <cit> . further studies incorporating genetic and phenotypic diversity of sky islands with their paleohistory promise to shed light on the evolutionary processes responsible for diversification in these systems. human-caused climate change is radically altering the sky islands of the southwestern usa and northern mexico by exacerbating droughts, fire and outbreaks of invasive insects  <cit> . models and empirical data show that temperature increases of as little as a few degrees could lead to widespread extirpation of high-elevation species  <cit> . it is especially urgent to understand the evolutionary processes at work in sky islands and incorporate them into the conservation agenda for this dynamic region where their role in generating diversity is so evident.

