BACKGROUND
animals from a broad variety of taxa show sex differences in lifespan, yet a general biological explanation for this phenomenon is lacking  <cit> . which sex suffers higher mortality varies across species and populations, and is for some species also context-dependent. nevertheless, some general patterns emerge: in mammals and insects, females commonly live longer than males  , while males outlive females in most bird taxa .

the sex-specific mortality patterns observed in different taxa have motivated two hypotheses based on genetic asymmetries found between the sexes. the first of these hypotheses, 'the unguarded x' , posits that the heterogametic sex should suffer higher mortality rates, since only one copy of the x-  chromosome is present there. x-  linked recessive deleterious mutations will therefore be unconditionally expressed in the heterogametic sex and cause an overall higher mortality rate. this hypothesis has, as far as we are aware, never been experimentally tested, but is consistent with the reversal of sex-specific mortality rates seen across mammals  and birds . the second hypothesis is based on the asymmetrical inheritance pattern of the mitochondria and other cytoplasmic genomes. since these genomes commonly are only transmitted through females they are consequently only selected in that sex. they may therefore function sub-optimally when expressed in males, which could result in male-biased mortality rates  <cit> . the fact that several recent studies have indicated that the mitochondria plays an active role in determining lifespan and mortality rates  <cit> , coupled with the growing body of research showing that the genome of many species is under different selection pressures in males and females  makes this hypothesis interesting, although it cannot account for the reversal of sex-specific mortality rates seen across taxa.

another potential explanation for sexual dimorphism in lifespan and mortality rates, is sex-specific selection  <cit>  on resources allocated into current and future reproduction  <cit> . sexually divergent selection on resource allocation may be relatively common, since males and females, in many species, have rather different routes to successful reproduction. tentative support for this hypothesis comes from comparative studies where sex biases in longevity were attributed to differential investment in reproduction among males and females  <cit> , and studies indicating that males from polyandrous species age relatively faster than females compared to males from monandrous species, as predicted by the more intense male-male competition in polyandrous taxa  <cit> .

distinguishing between the various hypotheses for sex differences in lifespan has proven difficult, since comparative and experimental approaches often have given results compatible with several explanatory models  <cit> . here we use inbreeding as a tool to investigate sex-specific differences in the genetic architecture of lifespan and mortality rates in the sexually dimorphic seed beetle c. maculatus – an emerging model species for studies of quantitative genetics of longevity and ageing  <cit> .

RESULTS
longevity assay i
by pairing  <dig> distinct isogenic lines we constructed ten experimental genotypes that each formed the basis for three 'sub-genotypes' that varied in level of inbreeding  . longevity of virgin males and females, from all these genotypes, were then scored in separate assays . sexual dimorphism for lifespan was pronounced across all levels of inbreeding, but no main effect of inbreeding was detected across the sexes for this trait . the lack of an overall effect of inbreeding was explained by a strong sex × inbreeding interaction , indicating that inbreeding had opposing effects on lifespan in males and females . contrast analyses between different inbreeding levels within the sexes did however only show a significant difference between outbred  and extensively inbred  females .

data was analysed with a general linear mixed model with a reml estimation procedure. degrees of freedom , f-ratios and p-values are provided for fixed effects ; variance components, standard errors, z-values and p-values are provided for the random factor .

to estimate the effect of inbreeding on mortality rates in each sex we fitted different models to the mortality data. the best fit for both sexes was provided by the logistic model , which describes age-specific mortality as a function of three different parameters, baseline mortality , rate-of-senescence  and late-life deceleration in mortality . the values for the model parameters and their statistical comparison between different levels of inbreeding are presented in table  <dig>  age-specific mortality curves are presented in figure  <dig>  outbred females had lower baseline mortality and faster late-life deceleration in mortality but higher rate-of-senescence, compared to fully inbred  and intermediately inbred  females. in contrast, outbred males had higher baseline mortality rate than inbred and intermediately inbred males. outbred males showed lower rate-of-senescence than fully inbred males, while intermediately inbred males had an intermediate rate-of-senescence, which was not significantly different from the two extremes. there was no effect of inbreeding level on deceleration in late-life mortality in males.

the effect of three levels of inbreeding on mortality and ageing rates in male and female c. maculatus beetles. the maximum likelihood estimates of mortality rates  were obtained by fitting the data to a logistic model and are based on pooled data for each sex and treatment. letters indicate significant differences in mortality rates between levels of inbreeding within each sex using log-likelihood ratio tests .

longevity assay ii
to test the robustness of the patterns seen in longevity assay i, we conducted a second experiment contrasting outbred  and inbred  genotypes from an independent set of inbred lines, where each level of inbreeding was replicated  <dig> times. also this time we found an effect of sex, no main effect of inbreeding and a strong sex × inbreeding interaction . there was also a similar trend towards inbred females living shorter and inbred males living longer, as seen in the first assay .

data was analysed with a general linear mixed model with a reml estimation procedure. degrees of freedom , f-ratios and p-values are provided for fixed effects ; variance components, standard errors, z-values and p-values are provided for the random factor . the analysis of mortality rates is presented separately for males  and females  .

as in the previous assay, there was a difference in the effect of inbreeding on mortality rates estimated from the logistic model . outbred females again had lower baseline mortality and faster late-life deceleration than inbred females , while there in this assay was no difference in the rate-of-senescence between inbred and outbred females. outbred males again had higher baseline mortality rate than inbred males, but there was no difference in the two other model parameters between outbred and inbred males.  age-specific mortality curves are presented in figure  <dig> 

the effect of two levels of inbreeding on mortality rates in male and female c. maculatus beetles. the maximum likelihood estimates of mortality rates  were obtained by fitting the data to a logistic model and are based on pooled data for each sex and treatment. letters indicate significant differences in mortality rates between levels of inbreeding within each sex using log-likelihood ratio tests .

combining the longevity data
to conduct a more powerful test of the similar trends we found in the two longevity assays we combined the data from the two assays , and treated the two assays as independent blocks. this analysis also showed an effect of sex, no general inbreeding effect and a strong sex × inbreeding interaction . contrasts from this analysis confirmed the trend seen in the two assays, and show that inbred females lived significantly shorter than outbred females and that inbred males lived significantly longer then outbred males .

data was analysed with a general linear mixed model with a reml estimation procedure. degrees of freedom , f-ratios and p-values are provided for fixed effects ; variance components, standard errors, z-values and p-values are provided for the random factor .

fitness assay
we tested if inbreeding was associated with a reduction in fitness for both males and females by conducting fitness assays, where lifetime offspring production were recorded independently for each sex using the genotypes from the second longevity assay . as expected, we found that inbreeding depressed fitness significantly in both sexes .

fitness assays of male and female c. maculatus beetles, data show lifetime adult offspring production  and the relative value of inbred to outbred reproductive success in %.

discussion
our finding that outbred females lived longer than outbred males is consistent with results from previous studies of c. maculatus  <cit> , as is the finding that inbred females live shorter than outbred females  <cit> . in contrast, the results showing that inbred males live longer than outbred males is noteworthy and has no prior empirical parallel. below we first address how this result relates to earlier studies on the genetic architecture of lifespan, and then discuss our findings in relation to theories for sexual dimorphism in lifespan.

in a previous study, using this species and strain, fox et al.   <cit>  found that male lifespan did not change when males were inbred to a moderate level . our data, on the other hand, suggest that there is a positive linear relationship between inbreeding level and male lifespan, and show that male lifespan is extended by inbreeding when comparing outbred and extensively inbred  males across assays. however, we could not detect a significant difference in lifespan between males that were outbred and those that were intermediately inbred , and to that extent our results are not inconsistent with the ones obtained previously. one possible explanation as to why inbreeding had no positive effect on lifespan in the study by fox et al.   <cit>  is that they used a different experimental protocol. in our experiments, virgin beetles were kept in same-sex groups, while virgin beetles were kept in isolation in the study by fox et al. . virgin males live considerably longer when kept in isolation, compared to when kept in same-sex groups or when males are kept with females , indicating that that male behaviour is context-dependent. males of this species normally spend much of their time chasing potential mates and trying to copulate with them, which they are not stimulated to do when kept alone. they do however perform these behaviours when kept in same-sex groups. the intrinsic difference in how inbred and outbred males spend their energy may not be realized if they do not meet conspecifics, which may explain why inbred males did not have prolonged lifespan in the study by fox et al.   <cit> . another difference in the experimental approaches is that fox et al.  <dig>  <cit>  used one generation of full-sib matings whereas we used ten, which could have resulted in more opportunity for purging of deleterious mutations in our lines. an indication that this did affect our results is that we could not detect a significant difference in lifespan between outbred and intermediately inbred  females, while fox et al.  found such difference when comparing outbred and less inbred females . it is not obvious how purging could have accounted for the increased male lifespan with inbreeding observed in our study, given that the potential effect of purging did not prevent fitness of inbred individuals of both sexes to be severely reduced.

asymmetric inheritance
as outlined in the introduction, sex-biased mortality rates can theoretically be caused by unconditional expression of recessive deleterious mutations on the x/z chromosome in the heterogametic sex, and by cytoplasmic genomes that not are optimized for functioning in males. a distinct prediction made by 'the unguarded x'-hypothesis is that the heterogametic sex  should suffer less from inbreeding compared to the homogametic sex , since the heterogametic sex will not suffer from increased expression of x/z-linked recessive deleterious mutations  <cit> . in our assays males did suffer less than females, in terms of reduced lifespan, in accordance with this theory. however, given that we noted a significant shift towards longer male lifespan with inbreeding, we conclude that this model cannot adequately explain the observed patterns. likewise we conclude that the observed responses to inbreeding can not be explained by the mitochondrial, or any other cytoplasmic genome, since these always are haploid and therefore are unaffected by inbreeding. a cytoplasmic effect was also ruled out in a previous experiment with this species, using inter-population crosses  <cit> . we do note however that our results do not exclude the possibility that the magnitude of sexual dimorphism for lifespan in c. maculatus could be influenced by the x-chromosome or cytoplasmic genomes.

sex-specific selection
sex-specific selection offers an alternative explanation as to why the sexes display differences in mortality rates and longevity, and presents a range of possible mechanisms through which prolonged lifespan of inbred males can occur. these arguments are all based on the assumption that the optimal reproductive strategies of males and females differ, which involves sex-specific investments in current and future reproduction  <cit> . below we discuss several possible scenarios of how sex-specific selection on the genetic architecture of lifespan could have caused our results.

many types of behaviour required for successful male reproduction  are associated with costs. for males of c. maculatus, these costs of reproduction cause reduced longevity  <cit> . it has further been shown that the cost of living in same-sex groups is equal to the cost of reproduction for males of this species , which indicates that males exhibit a similar behavioural repertoire in same-sex groups, as when exposed to females. if inbred males are less likely to engage in energy-demanding reproductive behaviours, either because their impaired phenotypic condition prevents them or because of condition-based strategic decisions  <cit> , the result could be both prolonged lifespan and reduced fitness, as observed here. hence, males should adopt a 'live fast, die young' strategy  <cit> . in contrast, females do not engage in many of the costly male behaviours and are instead predicted to optimize their reproductive output by conserving energy for oviposition, provisioning of offspring, foraging and predator avoidance. inbred females might therefore be expected to experience reduction in both fitness and lifespan consistent with the observed data. this explanation may be particularly relevant to the species studied here, since adult c. maculatus normally have no access to food and water  <cit> , which causes used resources to be inversely related to resources left to consume.

when a trait is under sex-specific selection, it is constrained to evolve to its sex-specific optima, because the sexes share the same genome. eventually, such intra-locus sexual conflicts are thought to be resolved by genes evolving to become sex-limited in expression  <cit> . this process is however inherently slow  <cit> , which is why many sexually dimorphic traits currently should experience opposing directional selection in the two sexes. directional selection typically results in directional dominance   <cit>  and sex-limited genes coding for traits under sexually divergent selection are therefore predicted to show directional dominance in opposite directions in males and females. hence, if resource allocation into current and future reproduction is under opposing directional selection in males and females, and a subset of the genes coding for this trait is sex-limited in expression, inbreeding could decrease female lifespan while increasing male lifespan. this possibility is also partially supported by a previous study on this species, where it was shown in population crosses that genes coding for prolonged lifespan were generally dominant in females, while this pattern was much weaker in males  <cit> .

finally, there is also the possibility that substantial autosomal intra-locus sexually antagonistic genetic variation exists for allocation of resources into current versus future reproduction. although theory have shown that such variation is not easily maintained on the autosomes  <cit> , the possibility that the dominance/recessive patterns are reversed in the sexes have yet not been explored. intuitively, stable polymorphisms could be maintained on the autosomes if male beneficial allelic versions were dominant in males and recessive in females, while female beneficial allelic variants were dominant in females and recessive in males. inbreeding would then increase the homozygosity of such genes and move the trait value in the opposite, and non-preferred, direction in both sexes.

CONCLUSIONS
we tested how inbreeding affects lifespan in c. maculatus, a seed beetle which is sexually dimorphic for this trait. our results show that extensive inbreeding shortens female lifespan, while it extends male lifespan. fitness was however substantially, and similarly, depressed by inbreeding in both sexes. these results show that the genetic architecture of lifespan is different in males and females, but the data are not consistent with the predictions made by any model based on asymmetrical inheritance patterns. our results are consistent with models based on sex-specific selection on reproductive strategies, such that males, in contrast to females, maximize fitness by early and intense investment in reproduction traded off against shorter lifespan  <cit> .

