BACKGROUND
mitochondria are highly dynamic organelles, whose plasticity allows them to respond quickly to cellular cues that regulate their cellular position, interconnectivity and function  <cit> . in this way, the dynamic behaviour of the mitochondria must be tightly coupled to cellular signalling cascades in order to respond in such a coordinated fashion. the molecular mechanisms that govern mitochondrial fusion have been best described using yeast genetics, where genome-wide screens have identified the essential components of the fusion reaction  <cit> . in addition to these genetic screens, a cell-free mitochondrial fusion assay has been developed using yeast mitochondria labelled with various fluorescent markers within the matrix and outer membranes  <cit> . this assay has provided important insights into the specific role of the fusion gtpases fzo <dig> and mgm <dig>  along with the multispanning membrane protein ugo <dig>  in the regulation of mitochondrial docking, outer membrane and inner membrane fusion  <cit> . the yeast assay has, therefore, been critical in order to stage the reaction and follow mitochondrial docking and membrane fusion. however, this fluorescent output relies upon the direct user-based quantification of fused organelles using microscopy techniques, which has not been amenable to high-throughput screening and automation.

in contrast to the yeast model, one of the primary limitations in the study of mitochondrial dynamics in the mammalian system has been the reliance on semi-quantitative microscopic analysis of mitochondrial phenotypes within cells. changes in mitochondrial morphology are quantified primarily using a subjective classification between 'fragmented' and 'fused'. these classifications cannot distinguish whether the observed phenotypes are the result of changes in fusion or fission  and many cell types exhibit fused mitochondria under standard conditions, making quantification of morphology rather like examining spaghetti in a bowl. two more quantitative approaches have been used to examine mitochondrial fusion, the polyethylene glycol induced whole cell fusion that allows the fusion between two differentially labelled populations of mitochondria  <cit> , and the photoactivatible-gfp based assay, where small populations of mitochondria are fluorescently activated and their subsequent fusion events scored using fluorescent quantification  <cit> . although superior to direct morphology analysis, these two methods are not very robust, and suffer from a number of technical issues. for example, the polyethylene glycol fusion itself probably affects the kinetics of mitochondrial fusion and the required addition of cyclohexamide is problematic for many applications. the pa-gfp assay takes many hours to obtain convincing results from just a single cell, making statistical analysis very tedious.

these technical issues make limited progress in the field of mitochondrial fusion, thus making it virtually impossible to identify and dissect the unique stages of the reaction, experiments which are routinely performed in other membrane fusion systems  <cit> . in addition, the inability to readily quantify mitochondrial fusion has made it difficult for scientists outside the field to investigate the contribution of mitochondrial fusion to multiple cellular processes. it is clear that mitochondrial dynamics plays an important role in many diseases, most notably parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative conditions  <cit> , as well as metabolic disorders such as diabetes  <cit> . the integration of scientists from these fields into the study of mitochondrial dynamics will depend upon the availability of robust assay systems to quantify mitochondrial fusion. therefore, we have developed a new assay that uses a standard renilla luciferase assay for the quantification of matrix-content mixing  <cit> , providing a platform for scientists from diverse fields to examine the role of mitochondrial fusion in cell physiology and disease progression.

RESULTS
generation of a bimolecular complementation marker pair for the quantification of mitochondrial fusion
in order to develop a high-throughput mitochondrial fusion assay, we adapted a bimolecular complementation strategy that would allow multiple outputs  <cit> . cdnas were generated encoding mitochondrial targeted split venus and renilla luciferase separated by a leucine zipper. fusion between mitochondria expressing each of these chimeric proteins would lead to their dimerization through the leucine zipper motifs, promoting the functional assembly of both luciferase and venus yellow fluorescent protein   <cit> . these constructs were designated n-mitovzl  and c-mitolzv .

the constructs were used to generate two populations of stable suspension hela  cell lines, each expressing one of the split constructs. one litre of each stable line of shela cells was grown to confluence and harvested by centrifugation and mitochondria were purified by differential centrifugation and flash frozen at -80°c.

as mitochondria are known to function quite well in vitro, most notably for metabolic and import reactions, we based the conditions of our assay on established buffering and energizing conditions  <cit> . mitochondria of each population  were incubated with  <dig> mg/ml cytosol, gtp  and an adenosine triphosphatase/succinate mixture, in a final volume of  <dig> μl. after mixing, the mitochondria were first concentrated by centrifugation and incubated on ice for  <dig> min. as reported in the yeast cell-free mitochondrial fusion assay, this step helps to facilitate mitochondrial docking  <cit> , thereby enhancing the reaction. following this step, the mitochondria were resuspended within the reaction buffer and incubated at 37°c for  <dig> min. following the reaction, the extent of mitochondrial matrix content mixing could be detected by confocal or electron microscopy , or using a luciferase assay . for confocal imaging, the fusion reaction included mitofluorred <dig> to label all of the respiring mitochondria. in order to quench potential background complementation that might occur due to the presence of ruptured mitochondria,  <dig> μg trypsin was added following the fusion reaction and incubated on ice for  <dig> min. this treatment also resulted in the dispersal of mitochondria, which helped to resolve the fused mitochondria by microscopy . the trypsin was then inactivated by incubation with soy bean trypsin inhibitor for a further  <dig> min on ice. finally, the mixture was mounted on slides and imaged by confocal microscopy . the mitochondria were first identified using the potentiometric dye and fused mitochondria, which represented 12%  of the entire population, were observed through the visualization of the venus yfp fluorescence . these data reveal the complementation of venus yfp within the matrix of fused mitochondria. in order to test whether mitochondrial fusion is nucleotide dependent, we added apyrase directly into the fusion reaction to deplete ntps. this control reaction in the absence of energy revealed significantly fewer fused mitochondria within a field .

as a second output to quantify mitochondrial fusion, we decided to quantify any changes in the size of the mitochondria  <cit> . in order to examine this, we prepared fusion reactions performed at 4°, where docking should be facilitated, and reactions performed at 37°, for analysis by electron microscopy . the trypsinization of the fusion reaction was omitted for this em analysis to minimize the required steps. as can be seen in figure 3a, the light membrane preparation of mitochondria used in our assays do contain other organelles. western blot analysis showed that this preparation was highly enriched for mitochondria  and there was an absence of contaminating cytosol as indicated by the loss of tubulin signal . analysis of other organelle markers revealed the preparation was devoid of early endosomes and golgi, but retained er and lysosomal markers . the mitochondria within the preparation were largely intact, as indicated by the asterisks shown in figure 3a. the majority of the mitochondria in these preparations are circular, with over 80% having a length:width ratio of 1: <dig> . when incubated at 4°, the mitochondrial diameter averages  <dig> nm. this diameter is increased upon incubation at 37°, with organelles regularly spanning  <dig> to  <dig>  microns . we quantified the size of  <dig> mitochondria from a fusion reaction completed at 37°c or 4°c and binned them into four categories. the data show that upon incubation at 37°c, there is an increase in the pool of mitochondria greater than  <dig> nm, from 21% to 44% of organelles counted . this number is higher than the 12% observed by confocal imaging, however it should be noted that the complementation of venus yfp can only be seen with the fusion of the n-mitovzl with c-mitolzv, where any homotypic fusion events will not be scored. however, the em analysis scores all mitochondria, which may explain the increased numbers of larger organelles.

mitochondrial fusion is dependent on nucleotide hydrolysis and requires a charge gradient across the inner membrane
the confocal imaging confirmed the complementation of the venus fluorescent protein , and the em analysis demonstrated an increase in overall mitochondrial length . while these two outputs confirm the specificity of the assay, our main objective was to utilize the renilla luciferase activity to provide a robust and high throughput method to score for mitochondrial fusion, with a very high signal-to-noise ratio. figure 2a shows a representative reaction, where the basal reaction, containing cytosol, gtp and adenosine triphosphate regenerating system results in a signal around  <dig>  relative luciferase units . since our assay conditions also support mitochondrial protein import  <cit> , it was possible that the signal we obtained may be due to the import of any free, cytosolic marker into the complementary mitochondria. this was not the case since the incubation of n-mitovzl with cytosols taken from cells expressing c-mitolzv, or visa versa, did not result in any signal .

the absolute value of rlu obtained in the assay depended primarily on two factors. first, each mitochondrial preparation had a different load of the labels. second, and perhaps more importantly, over the course of this study it became apparent that the length of time the mitochondria were left on ice prior to starting the reaction could reduce the efficiency of fusion. the dependencies on temperature and energy were unaffected, but the total values would decrease. therefore it was important to use the mitochondria within the first 30- <dig> minutes of thawing them out .

in order to test whether mitochondrial fusion is nucleotide and temperature dependent, we again added  <dig>  u/μl apyrase, and performed a reaction at 4°c. as expected, mitochondrial fusion was not supported in the absence of energy, with ~ <dig> rlu. similarly, mitochondrial fusion required physiological temperature, with a reaction performed on ice resulting in only ~ <dig> rlu . these results establish that the enzymatic amplification of the signal provides a very clear signal-to-noise ratio, which is essential for a high-throughput design. in order to estimate the efficiency of mitochondrial fusion in vitro, we disrupted all of the mitochondria within the reaction using  <dig> min pulses of sonification to allow maximum complementation at 37°, independently of a fusion event. the trypsin step, which is required to remove any background complementation coming from broken mitochondria after the reaction, was omitted in this reaction. with this, we detected ~ <dig>  rlu. given that the basal reaction in this experiment gave  <dig>  counts, it indicates that approximately ~15% of mitochondria were fusing under basal conditions . in all of the reactions performed with this system, the efficiency has been seen to range between 5%-20%, depending primarily on the mitochondrial preparation . this is similar to other cell free fusion assay systems, including the yeast mitochondrial fusion system  <cit> . as mentioned above, this number is likely an under-representation of the total efficiency since it only scores for 'heterotypic' fusion events.

in a time course to examine the kinetics of mitochondrial fusion, we observe a steady increase in the fusion signal in the first  <dig> min. however, longer incubation times led to a decrease in the fusion signal, possibly due to degradation of the marker pairs . the addition of non-hydrolysable analogues atpγs and gtpγs inhibited mitochondrial fusion, consistent with a requirement for nucleotide hydrolysis. omission of exogenous gtp led to a twofold reduction in fusion, suggesting that endogenous gtp within the mitochondria is limited and required for mitochondrial fusion .

in order to determine the effect of the membrane potential across the inner membrane on mitochondrial fusion, we added  <dig> μm of the protonophore cccp . fusion was abolished  which is in agreement with previous studies in intact cells  <cit>  and the yeast cell-free mitochondrial fusion assay  <cit> . to further dissect the membrane potential requirements, we examined the effect of valinomycin  and nigiricin . valinomycin is an electrogenic potassium ionophore which abolishes the charge gradient. electroneutral potassium/proton ionophore nigiricin retains the charge, but ablates the proton gradient. valinomycin diminished the fusion reaction by 97%, whereas nigiricin, even at higher concentrations, inhibited the reaction by only 27% . we conclude that mammalian mitochondrial fusion in vitro requires the charge gradient across the mitochondrial inner membrane but is independent of the chemical gradient.

mitochondrial fusion is modulated by signalling pathways
similar to the yeast mitochondrial fusion reaction, the reaction was efficient in the absence of exogenous cytosol. nonetheless, there was a profound consequence of cytosol addition, depending on the state of the cell at the moment of cytosol preparation. figure 4a shows that the addition of  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg/ml  cytosol prepared from non-confluent shela cells undergoing normal proliferation stimulated the reaction in a concentration-dependent manner. however, the addition of  <dig>  and  <dig> mg/ml purified placenta cytosol led to an inhibition of mitochondrial fusion in a dose-dependent manner. this cytosol inhibition was not due to osmotic effects, since  <dig> mg/ml bsa  did not influence the reaction . the results demonstrate that the amount of mitochondrial fusion can be modulated by cytosolic factors either in a negative or positive way depending on the source of cytosol. in this way, although we have efficient fusion in the absence of cytosol, the efficiency of the reaction is cytosol-dependent. one potential difference between placenta and shela may be the status of signalling pathways that are activated upon the isolation of cytosol. in to test whether phosphoproteins may be required for mitochondrial fusion, we added shrimp alkaline phosphatase  into the reaction. the data show that the dephosphorylation of proteins leads to a profound and concentration dependent inhibition of the reaction . heat-inactivated phosphatase was not inhibitory .

in order to further probe the impact of signalling pathways on the fusion reaction, we isolated cytosols from drug-treated shela cells to activate different pathways. we treated shela cells with staurosporin  for  <dig> h to induce apoptosis, collected the apoptotic cytosol by ultracentrifugation and added it back into the fusion reaction. as expected from previous studies  <cit> , and the microscopic analysis of treated cells , apoptotic cytosol inhibited the fusion reaction . this demonstrates how cytosolic factors can modulate mammalian mitochondrial fusion. in contrast to the inhibition of fusion during cell death, it has been shown that the activation of protein kinase a  through the camp pathway leads to the phosphorylation of drp <dig> and an inhibition of mitochondrial fission, leading to a more connected mitochondrial reticulum  <cit> . upon addition of  <dig> μm forskolin to hela cells, we also observed an increased interconnectivity of the mitochondrial reticulum within the first  <dig> minutes . in order to test whether this phenotype may reflect an increase in fusion that may accompany drp <dig> inhibition, we harvested cytosol from forskolin-treated shela cells and added this to the cell-free fusion reaction. relative to control cytosol, forskolin-treated cytosol led to a  <dig>  - to twofold stimulation in mitochondrial fusion . addition of forskolin directly into the reaction did not have any effect on the efficiency of fusion . further incriminating the adenylate cyclase pathway in promoting fusion, stimulation by forskolin could be prevented by a prior incubation with the pka inhibitor h <dig> . this confirms that forskolin acts through the established plasma membrane-bound adenylate cyclase whose downstream signalling mechanisms converge on the mitochondria to activate mitochondrial fusion.

CONCLUSIONS
our understanding of both the regulation and the mechanisms of mitochondrial fusion in mammalian cells has been limited by the tools available to systematically dissect the process at the biochemical level. we have here provided the first automated assay design to quantify mammalian mitochondrial fusion in vitro. our data show that the reaction is physiologically controlled, requiring energy, temperature and the mitochondrial inner membrane potential. the fact that our mitochondria are fusogenic in the absence of exogenous cytosol, and the mitochondrial preparations are relatively free of cytosol , suggests that the core machinery that drives mitochondrial fusion is primarily associated with the mitochondria. however, the modulation of the reaction by the addition of exogenous cytosol shows that the reaction is ultimately cytosol-dependent. the strength of the renilla luciferase signals make this assay perfectly suited for screening factors required for fusion. however, the limitations of this assay are that we do not differentiate between the early steps of mitochondrial tethering, docking and the mixing of matrix content. the nunnari laboratory has already optimized confocal and em approaches that stage the reaction at each step of docking, outer membrane fusion, inner membrane fusion and matrix content mixing  <cit> . however, that approach remains very labour intensive. future assay development could see the use of these marker pairs on outer membrane or intermembrane space proteins, which could then allow us to harness the luciferase-based output in evaluating each step of mitochondrial fusion.

the evidence that mitochondrial fusion is coupled to cell signalling pathways has been primarily correlative with little knowledge of the molecular mechanisms that underlie these links  <cit> . using our cell-free assay system, we have provided direct evidence that shows how mitochondrial fusion is tightly regulated by cytosolic signaling cascades. the stimulation of fusion upon activation of adenylate cyclase indicates that the fusion machinery is integrated within the metabolic status of the cell. it has been shown previously that camp regulates the phosphorylation of drp <dig>  <cit> , leading to the inhibition of fission activity. here, our data further demonstrate that activation of pka also stimulates fusion. this is a first step in dissecting the substrates for pka that trigger an increase in fusion. interestingly, the absolute inhibition of mitochondrial fusion upon the global dephosphorylation of proteins with sap also confirms the importance of phosphorylation cascades in the regulation of mitochondrial dynamics, providing an opportunity to screen for kinases and phosphatases that play key roles in this regulation.

finally, the addition of apoptotic cytosol to the fusion reaction leads to an inhibition of mitochondrial fusion . it is known that mitochondrial fission is activated upon cell death, concomitant with a block in mitochondrial fusion  <cit> . our assay system confirmed this result, further validating this method. more importantly, the cell-free fusion assay can now be used to help define the molecular requirements for the apoptotic inhibition of fusion. in general terms, the adaptation of this assay to high throughput screens, and the fractionation of cytosols to identify novel fusion factors, will provide an essential and universal tool for the advancement of this field.

