BACKGROUND
with increasing industrial production of engineered nano and microparticles, questions have been raised on their effects on humans and animals  <cit> . engineered particles enter the body by inhalation  <cit> , ingestion  <cit>  and by corrosion of implants  <cit> , while possibilities of injection of engineered nanoparticles for imaging and therapeutic purposes are being explored  <cit> . in order to protect ourselves from their  harmful effects and use them beneficially, their interactions with living beings should be well studied and the underlying biochemical and biophysical mechanisms which take place on the mesoscopic and nanoscopic level  <cit>  should be better understood.

it was observed that engineered nanoparticles can cross the plasma membrane to be internalized in cells where they may cause apoptosis  <cit>  and interact with proteins  <cit> . it is therefore indicated that studying the interaction of engineered nanoparticles with membranes  <cit>  is important for the benefit of human and animals. these studies do not require experiments on laboratory animals or materials derived from them. engineered nanoparticle-membrane interactions can be studied by focusing on nonspecific biophysical mechanisms that are common in different types of biological membranes, i.e. on uni- and multilamelar lipid vesicles or selected cell models  <cit> . giant unilamelar phospholipid vesicles larger than  <dig> μm   <cit>  are a convenient model system as they can be observed in motion under a light microscope and enable studies of biological membrane structure  <cit> , phase behaviour  <cit> , permeability  <cit>  and elasticity  <cit> , as well as of their interaction with macromolecules  <cit> . another suitable model is represented by mammalian erythrocytes. since these cells lack internal structure, the membrane properties and interactions are revealed in the change of cell shape which can be observed under a microscope. there are reports in the literature that nanoparticles can interact with erythrocytes resulting in shape transformations  <cit>  and lysis  <cit> . some types of nanoparticles cause formation of reactive oxygen species  <cit> , induce platelet activation, aggregation and adhesion  <cit> , and increase the risk of thromboembolic disorders  <cit> .

in this work we studied the interactions of agglomerated engineered nanoparticles  with populations of blood cells and with populations of guvs. we selected two different types of eps that are commonly present in the environment and have the potential to enter the body and the circulation system, namely tio <dig> and zno eps.

RESULTS
figures  <dig> and  <dig> show tio <dig> and zno eps imaged with scanning and transmission electron microscopes and their size distributions, respectively. the populations of tio <dig> and zno eps in glucose solution as measured with dynamic light scattering  method were heterogeneous in size , with large aggregates present in both suspensions tested. dls measurements of tio <dig> and zno ep suspensions in pbs citrate could not be performed due to strong agglomeration and consequently fast sedimentation of the eps.

the dls measurements of tio <dig> and zno ep suspensions in glucose could be performed, but the dls measurements of tio <dig> and zno ep suspensions in pbs citrate could not be performed due to fast sedimentation.

when dissolved in pbs or glucose, tio <dig> eps and zno eps were found to be mildly negatively charged as they displayed negative zeta potentials . measurements of tested suspensions indicated incipient instability. zno eps in pbs are the least prone to coalesce which is in agreement with the measured size of the eps .

figures  <dig> and  <dig> show the interaction between eps and washed human erythrocytes as observed by scanning electron microscopy . tio <dig> and zno eps adhered to the membrane . singular echinocytes could be observed in samples treated with eps , but not in control samples .

in experiments with guvs, a given volume of suspension containing guvs was placed on glass slide under the microscope. after certain time, guvs in the focal plane at the bottom of the observation chamber were counted. if guvs keep their integrity their number at the bottom of the chamber increases with time. namely, since they contain heavier sugar molecules than the surrounding solution they sediment in the gravitation field. but if nanoparticles are present in the suspension, some vesicles are expected to burst. therefore the test sample would contain less guvs than the control sample. table  <dig> shows the average number of guvs per micrograph in test samples and in control samples as observed after  <dig> and  <dig> minutes of incubation. as expected, in the test and in the control samples the number of detected guvs increased with time due to sedimentation of guvs. incubation with tio <dig> eps caused no significant effect on vesicle number after  <dig> or  <dig> minutes, i.e. the increase of the number of guvs in the test and in the control samples was not statistically significantly different after  <dig> minutes and after  <dig> minutes. in the samples exposed to zno eps, a considerable  and statistically significant  decrease of the number of guvs with respect to the control was observed already after  <dig> minutes indicating that some guvs had bursted. the effect became stronger after  <dig> minutes. the difference in number  was statistically very significant  .

the table shows the time of incubation , the average number of guvs per micrograph of the test and of the control suspensions  with their standard deviations , the number of harvested micrographs of the test and of the control suspensions , the difference between the number of guvs in the test and in the control suspensions, the statistical significance  of the t-test subject to the difference between the test and the control suspensions, and the corresponding statistical power p at α =  <dig> . asterisks denote that the difference is statistically significant and of sufficient power.

discussion
we studied the effect of tio <dig> and zno eps on washed human and canine erythrocytes, platelet-rich plasma and on guvs. we found that both tio <dig> and zno eps caused coalescence of erythrocytes and activation of platelets, while zno eps also caused bursting of guvs. we found the effect of both kinds of eps on the shape of washed erythrocytes in man and in the dog to be minor; in humans, eps induced a change of shape towards echinocytes in only a small number of erythrocytes , while in the dog, echinocytosis was also present in samples of washed erythrocytes incubated with buffer and was therefore not ascribed to the effect of eps .

the effects of eps on washed human and canine erythrocytes and platelet-rich plasma were qualitatively the same but quantitative differences could be observed. in the dog, activation of platelets took place after only  <dig> hour of incubation of platelet-rich plasma with zno eps, while in man, this effect was observed after  <dig> hours. activation of platelets was also observed in samples incubated with tio <dig> eps . in the dog, we did not incubate blood for more than one hour, which could be the reason why no effect of tio <dig> eps on canine platelets was observed. as some effects of engineered nanoparticles are different in different species it is indicated that experiments on other species cannot give information relevant for humans as regards quantitative limits. in vitro methods are suitable for testing the potentially harmful effects of new materials such as engineered nanoparticles since they address basic mechanisms underlying these effects  <cit> .

experiments with artificial membranes and selected cell types such as blood cells reveal general mechanisms that take place in all cells, it is however yet unclear how likely the studied situation will occur in a cell. suspensions of guvs are relatively well controlled but the biological relevance of the conclusions is limited due to the simplicity of the system. on the other hand, platelet-rich plasma better represents the natural system in blood where complex interactions between engineered nanoparticles and plasma constituents take place.

alterations in the nanoparticles' environment lead to their assembly into aggregates and agglomerates. this could significantly change their biological impact, so the appropriate characterization of nanoparticles is vital for correct interpretation of the toxicological results. therefore in studies of the biological reactivity of nanoparticles, their primary characteristics  and their secondary characteristics  should be taken into account  <cit> .

larger eps were observed to interact with the membranes of washed erythrocytes . if the same particle interacts with the membranes of two cells it can mediate attractive interaction between the erythrocytes by a bridging interaction. however, besides very large eps , the solution contains eps with a heterogeneous size distribution. smaller eps may induce attractive interaction between membranes even without strong binding to the membrane. a possible mechanism of mediating attractive interaction between membranes derives from the spatial distribution of charge within the mediating particles. plasma proteins bind to eps  <cit>  which may affect the interaction of eps with cells. also ep-protein complexes may have an internal charge distribution which differs considerably from the distribution within bare eps. in general, the structure of phospholipid headgroups is multipolar, so the headgroup interface is a source of electric field. rearrangement of ions in solution in the vicinity of the interface screens the field and creates a gradient  <cit>  in which particles with internal distribution of charge are free to distribute so as to minimize their free energy  <cit> . this effect is especially energetically favourable when the mediating particles are orientationally ordered between two interacting membranes separated by a small distance  while it is stronger if the charges within the particles are separated by a larger distance  <cit> . the equilibrium configuration of membranes and mediating molecules appears as adhesion between membranes.

plasma contains proteins that mediate attractive interaction between membranes  <cit> . eps may enhance the mediating effect of proteins by forming protein-ep complexes with extended charge distribution and exposure of positively charged domains that favour interaction with the negatively charged glycolipid coat of the erythrocyte membrane.

we did not observe adhesion of eps on platelets, even though the effect of engineered nanoparticles on platelets induced an activation which is functionally important. it is possible that eps undergo changes during the incubation period such as decaying into smaller particles and releasing ions into the solution. this influences the osmotic equilibrium, ph equilibrium, screening of the electric field created by charged species and induces chemical changes such as formation of deleterious oxidised species. divalent ions were found to activate platelet aggregation as the addition of their chelators edta and citrate inhibits their effect  <cit> . ions of transition elements  cause even faster platelet aggregation than ions of alkaline earth metals   <cit> . zn ions can activate protein kinase c and enhance fibrinogen receptor exposure on the surface of platelets stimulated by adp  <cit> .

on interaction of eps with the erythrocyte membrane, we observed no perturbation of the membrane curvature due to the adhesion of eps . however, we observed defects  in the membrane of untreated canine erythrocytes  and platelets  which seem large enough to facilitate transmembrane transport of nano-sized  eps. this is in agreement with previous results  <cit>  where it was reported that agglomerates larger than  <dig>  μm were found attached to the erythrocyte membrane, whereas smaller aggregates and single particles were found within cells. it was suggested that neither endocytosis which is based on vesicle formation, nor any actin-based mechanisms are likely to account for nanoparticle translocation into the cell  <cit>  but that smaller eps probably cross the membrane through pores or ion channels  <cit> . this is in agreement with our observations that no ghosts or haemoglobin-depleted erythrocytes were seen in the erythrocyte samples.

the effects of eps on guvs are important for understanding the potential effects of eps on biological membranes as phospholipid bilayer is a backbone of the biological membrane. limited biological relevance of the results of experiments with guvs  does not mean that these results have no value for understanding effects on biological membranes. it is indicated that zno  can cause rupture of the membrane if it can get close to the phospholipid bilayer . in biological membrane such situations can be created for example in membrane budding where lateral redistribution of membrane constituents takes place  <cit> . molecules in the outer membrane layer that act as spacers and prevent adhesion of cells to each other may be depleted in the neck that forms between the mother cell and the bud. namely in the neck the curvature of the membrane is negative which is unfavorable for molecules with substantial parts protruding into the external solution.

the basic paradigm of toxicology indicates that the effect of the substance is dose dependent. however, this paradigm is only partly relevant for nanoparticles. instead, nanoparticles follow a nano-specific mode of action which is not yet completely understood. the behaviour of nanoparticles in liquid media is poorly predicted due to the fact that they aggregate and agglomerate already in exposure to media as well as when they enter a biological system. some authors report that suspensions of nanoparticles with higher concentrations contain larger aggregates and thus exhibit lower toxic potential . in addition, aggregates adhere to surfaces outside or inside organisms and may therefore cause effects without even entering cells. up to now, no unified directions exist how to test the effects of nanoparticles and how to use the data in human or environmental risk assessment. it is generally accepted that the toxicological tests that are used to assess the toxicity of non-nanosized substances should be modified.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that addition of tio <dig> and zno eps to erythrocytes suspended in pbs-citrate caused adhesion of eps to the membranes of erythrocytes and erythrocyte coalescence. addition of tio <dig> and zno eps induced activation of platelets. this indicates that eps could be potentially prothrombogenic. zno  eps suspended in glucose solution caused a significant decrease of guvs indicating that zno eps  could cause membrane rupture. blood cells and phospholipid vesicles are convenient systems for the study of membrane properties and their interactions with various substances. as knowledge on the relevant mechanisms is as yet rudimentary, we suggest that further studies using these systems should be performed.

