BACKGROUND
several researchers have suggested the emergence of a new neonatal diarrhoeal syndrome  <cit> . the present study is the second in a series from our research group studying this new syndrome. all studies were carried out in the same four herds having a long history of unexplained neonatal diarrhoea. running parallel to the current study, a microbiological study was carried out. the results of the microbiological study suggested that neither etec, c. perfringens type a/c, c. difficile, rotavirus a, coronavirus, cystoisospora suis, strongyloides ransomi, giardia spp nor cryptosporidium spp were associated with the syndrome  <cit> .

previous studies on the effect of diarrhoea in suckling pigs estimated reductions in adg of 8–14 g per day  <cit> . various studies have estimated significant associations between suckling pig diarrhoea and mortality  <cit>  or diagnosed enteritis as an important cause of death in the suckling period  <cit> .

the primary objective of the current study was to evaluate the effect of nnpds on average daily gain  and mortality in relation to timing and duration of clinical symptoms in individual piglets. effects were estimated with respect to individual symptoms as well as symptoms at litter level.

the secondary objective was to describe the course of disease in herds suffering from nnpds.

RESULTS
in total,  <dig> piglets were ear tagged at birth. during the study period,  <dig> piglets were euthanized for diagnostic purposes  and five were excluded due to hermaphroditism or missing data. this left  <dig> piglets  for the study on mortality.

during the study period  <dig> piglets died, hence could not be included in the study on adg. furthermore, for this part of the study a critical limit on five piglets per litter was set resulting in exclusion of  <dig> piglets . in total,  <dig> piglets  were evaluated in the study on adg.

apart from diarrhoea, only a few disease problems were recognised during the daily examinations of the herds. however, arthritis was rather prevalent in herd  <dig> . skin abrasions were the only extra-intestinal clinical symptoms sufficiently prevalent and evenly distributed between herds to be included in the statistical evaluations.

on the day of birth, approximately 20% of the piglets did not have any faeces in rectum at the time of examination. on the other days of the study absence of faeces was observed in 10% of the piglets. in both the diarrhoeic and the non-diarrhoeic piglets the colour of faeces was most often  yellow. neither debris nor blood was evident.

table  <dig> presents the daily prevalence of diarrhoea within each herd. the prevalence of diarrhoea in herd  <dig> was high  on each day of the study. in the other herds, the prevalence was high on the first day of life, but otherwise markedly lower than in herd  <dig>  a total of  <dig> piglets  were diarrhoeic on the day of birth. within this group, 50% were diarrhoeic on the day of birth exclusively .

1
2
1refers to the number of piglets alive at the day in question. 2diarrhoeic piglets .

table  <dig> presents a descriptive summary of the diarrhoea seen in the four herds with respect to prevalence, adg, and mortality. in herd  <dig>  nearly half the piglets were diarrhoeic for more than one day, and the mortality among piglets being diarrhoeic  was approximately 25% vs. 6% among the non-diarrhoeic piglets. in the other herds, similar mortalities were seen in non-diarrhoeic piglets and piglets being diarrhoeic for one day. however, additional days of diarrhoea seemed to be associated with a higher mortality in herd  <dig> and herd  <dig>  the duration of diarrhoea differed according to the parity of the sow. one third of the piglets born by first parity sows were diarrhoeic for >1 day, whereas this was observed for one fifth of the piglets born by mature sows only .

1
1this number refers to the number of piglets at day  <dig> of the study. adg has only been calculated for the ones surviving until day  <dig> of life .

on the fifth day of life, a total of  <dig> piglets were alive and examined for clinical signs of failure to thrive. results are presented in table  <dig>  signs of dehydration were only found in diarrhoeic piglets. hollow flanks, protruding ribs, dull hair coat were more common in diarrhoeic piglets, than in pigs without diarrhoea. all clinical signs were more prevalent in pigs experiencing diarrhoea for more than one day. the general clinical picture of piglets suffering from diarrhoea was that of failure to thrive and wasting.

clinical finding
1
1definitions used: hollow flanks: the area behind the ribs deviated inwards; protruding ribs: ribs and spine were visible; dull hair coat: hair coat appeared dull and longer than normal; dehydration: sunken eye-balls and lack of skin-elasticity.

in total,  <dig> piglets  died within the first ten days of life. mortality within herds  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> reached  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the majority of deaths in herds 2– <dig> occurred during the first five days of life. in herd  <dig>  deaths were evenly distributed throughout the first ten days of life. figure  <dig> shows the primary diagnoses assigned at necropsy. within herds  <dig> and  <dig>  a few cases of enteritis  exhibited fibrino-necrotic gross lesions. the remaining cases exhibited less pronounced lesions. in addition to the diagnoses of starvation shown in figure  <dig>  starvation was recorded as a secondary diagnosis in a total of five piglets.

weight gain
results of the mixed linear model are presented in table  <dig>  as shown, both diarrhoea-associated variables ) had significant  effects on adg. being part of a severely affected litter had a markedly larger effect  than the individual status of the piglet . piglets that were only diarrhoeic on the day of birth were not negatively affected on adg compared to the non-diarrhoeic ones. no confounding effects were recognised. the icc estimated for the litter random effect was 42%, indicating a very large influence on weight gain by litter of origin. in pairwise comparisons, adg in non-diarrhoeic piglets was significantly different from adg in piglets having diarrhoea for >1 day. also, adg in piglets only being diarrhoeic at the day of birth was significantly different from adg in piglets having diarrhoea for >1 day. data were insufficient to show other statistically significant differences.

1parity was kept in the model due to its biological importance.

2levels of diarrhoea with different letters as superscript are significantly different  when compared pairwise.

3the random effect of litter is displayed as the intraclass correlation coefficient .

mortality
results of the generalized linear mixed model are presented in table  <dig>  none of the diarrhoea-associated variables  were kept in the final model, indicating that diarrhoea was not a significant risk factor with respect to mortality, when other variables and random litter effects were taken into account. herd of origin was the most important risk factor in the model. in herd  <dig>  odds for dying were significantly higher than in the other herds and almost twelve times as high as in herd  <dig>  which had the lowest odds for dying. no confounding effects were recognised. in pairwise comparisons, herd  <dig> was the only herd significantly different from the others.

1
1the or presented is the population average or, and relates to an average piglet in any litter of the study.

2herds with different letters as superscript are significantly different  when compared pairwise.

3parity was kept in the model due to its biological significance.

4the random effect of litter is displayed as the intraclass correlation coefficient .

discussion
the study monitored the daily faecal consistency in individual neonatal piglets, and therefore offered an opportunity to thoroughly evaluate prevalence, timing and duration of nnpds, and its effect on piglets. the observational character of the study was, however, affected by the removal of  <dig> piglets for diagnostic purposes. this interference, which potentially increased adg and decreased mortality in litters supplying piglets for diagnostic purposes, was addressed by inserting a random effect of litter in the statistical models. altogether, we considered that taking out piglets for laboratory examination during the course of the study was the best way to obtain a microbiological diagnosis of the existing clinical problems.

the procedure of adjusting litters to only  <dig> or  <dig> piglets and excluding the smallest piglets aimed at avoiding insufficiency of colostrum and milk. milk-filled stomachs at necropsy generally confirmed, that diarrhoea due to starvation was rare during the period of investigation. under normal field conditions, starvation is likely to be more prevalent and to interfere with the clinical picture of the syndrome to a higher extent.

antibiotic treatment was allowed due to ethical concerns but potentially influenced the results of the study. however, since the syndrome seems to be characterised by non-responsiveness to antibiotics  the beneficial effects of antibiotics on adg and mortality were probably relatively small.

a relatively large group of piglets  did not have faeces in rectum at the daily examinations and consequently were recorded as non-diarrhoeic. therefore the daily prevalence of diarrhoea  might have been underestimated. for the analysis, this was not considered a major problem since diarrhoeal status of each piglet was evaluated for the total study period.

clinical signs of failure to thrive were overt in piglets being diarrhoeic for >1 day, and in some cases even 1 day of diarrhoea resulted in hollow flanks, protruding ribs and signs of dehydration. these findings match experiences from swine practitioners, that nnpds is a debilitating syndrome, significantly affecting the well-being of piglets .

the negative effects of diarrhoea estimated in this study were comparable to the -8 g per day estimated in a previous study involving the whole suckling period  <cit> . in the current study, even piglets only being diarrhoeic for a single day  had a reduced adg of 9 g compared to non-diarrhoeic piglets. the measurable  effect of a single day with diarrhoea underlines the severity of the syndrome.

interestingly, many piglets  were diarrhoeic on the day of birth and those  that were only diarrhoeic on the day of birth were not negatively affected on adg. apparently, many cases of diarrhoea on the day of birth were unrelated to disease.

the large effect of dsl pointed out that the diarrhoea seen on the level of litters was the most important kind of diarrhoea in terms of disease. adg was not affected by herd of origin, but was heavily influenced by litter of origin . a large litter effect was not surprising since it comprised both issues related to the study design  and all factors related to the performance of the individual sows. lack of herd effect on adg was in accordance with the study by johansen et al.  <cit> .

compared to the study by svensmark et al.  <cit> , which estimated the effect of diarrhoea at the litter level to be -14 g per day, the litter-related estimate of -38 g in this study was more pronounced. possibly, nnpds affected the piglets more violently than the diarrhoea seen in the previous study. however, the estimates from the two studies were not directly comparable, since the former included the whole suckling period and relied on farmers registrations of diarrhoea.

regarding mortality, herd was the most important risk factor, with odds for dying in herd  <dig> being 5– <dig> times higher than in the other herds. descriptive data indicated that the excess mortality seen in this herd was caused by diarrhoea, since the mortality among diarrhoeic piglets, irrespective of the duration of diarrhoea, was four times higher than the mortality among non-diarrhoeic ones. in the other herds, mortalities were lower at all levels of diarrhoea, and any association between diarrhoea and mortality was less obvious.

suckling piglet diarrhoea has often been associated with mortality. in a previous study involving  <dig> piglets from a single herd, neonatal diarrhoea was estimated to increase odds of dying by  <dig>   <cit> . another study involving piglets from  <dig> herds showed that diarrhoeic litters had increased losses during the suckling period of  <dig>  piglets  <cit> . furthermore, different studies have diagnosed enteritis as the primary cause of death in 4-14% cases of suckling pig mortality  <cit> .

in the current study, we did not find an effect of nnpds on mortality when herd of origin and other risk factors were taken into account. the underlying aetiology of diarrhoea in the study by gardner et al.  <cit>  was not investigated, and discrepancies could perhaps be explained by differences in aetiology. herd effects were not considered in the results presented by lingaas et al.  <cit> , however, may have explained some of the losses attributed to diarrhoea. overall, it is important to notice that the generally low mortality in the current study was probably partly due to study design issues. despite these limitations, the study indicated that nnpds was generally not associated with high mortality. this finding matched herd experiences as reported by swine practitioners  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the diarrhoeas observed within herds suffering from nnpds were yellow with no evidence of blood or debris. three of the four herds had similar courses of nnpds. in these herds the daily prevalence of diarrhoea was approximately 15%, deaths occurred within the first five days of life, and the mortality was generally low. the most prevalent diagnoses assigned at necropsy were miscellaneous and starvation. in the last herd , diarrhoea affected more piglets, and many piglets were affected for a longer period of time. in this herd, a high mortality was seen during the whole study period, and enteritis was the most prevalent diagnosis at necropsy.

overall, the study showed that nnpds severely affected the well-being in piglets and reduced the adg. data were not sufficient to estimate a significant effect of diarrhoea for a single day, however, a tendency was clear, and this finding underlines the severity of the condition. diarrhoea restricted to the day of birth was common and did not affect adg. thus, the study suggested this phenomenon to be unrelated to the syndrome.

since the diarrhoeal status of the litter had important effects on adg, future research on nnpds should probably focus on piglets in severely affected litters.

overall, the study demonstrated that nnpds was not associated with mortality. in the herd associated with the highest odds for mortality, however, the increased mortality appeared to be due to diarrhoea.

