BACKGROUND
detection of sequence or fold similarity is often used to infer the function of uncharacterized proteins. by this approach one can tentatively assign a function to approximately 45–80% of the proteins identified by the genomic projects  <cit> . however, function is mostly determined by the physical, chemical and geometric properties of the protein surfaces  <cit> , and cases have been described where the same local spatial distribution of residues important for function is achieved with apparently unrelated structures and/or sequences  <cit> . one of the best known examples is represented by the shd catalytic triad of serine proteinases  <cit> . furthermore, surface similarities have been detected in unrelated atp/gtp binding proteins  <cit>  and in the guanine binding sites of p21ras family gtpases or in the rna binding site of bacterial ribonucleases  <cit> . by local structural comparison hwang et al.  <cit>  were able to infer correctly the nucleotide binding ability of an uncharacterized methanococcus jannaschii protein.

on the other hand, similar folds can have different functions if their active sites have diverged  <cit> . as a consequence, methods purely relying on sequence and global structure comparison may lead to inaccurate function-related annotations in cases in which few residues are responsible for the specificity of substrate interaction.

the vast majority of well-studied functions  are encoded by a relatively small set of residues, often not contiguous in the protein sequence but organized in a conserved geometry on the protein surface that may be used as a marker for reliable functional annotation. although exposed to the solvent, these function-related residues are often located in surface clefts or cavities  <cit> . such residues define functional modules conserved in some proteins sharing a molecular function even if differing in sequence and structure. several tools for discovering conserved three-dimensional patterns in protein structures have already been proposed  <cit> . schmitt et al.  <cit>  developed a clique-based method to detect functional relationships among proteins. this approach does not rely on detection of sequence or fold homology and highlights a number of non-obvious similarities among protein cavities. the algorithm, however, is computationally intensive and cannot be applied to an all-against-all analysis of protein surface regions. binkowski and co-workers  <cit>  recently described an approach for detecting sequence and spatial patterns of protein surfaces: the underlying algorithm is fast, but cannot identify similarities that are independent of the residue order in the compared proteins. two related papers  <cit>  describe a method for local structural similarity detection, which is of great relevance since it is able to evaluate the statistical significance of each match. this method  has been then used to analyze protein structures from structural genomics projects  <cit> . other recent papers present algorithms able to find structural motifs possibly related to a function and to use them to scan protein structure libraries  <cit> .

in a previous work  <cit>  we described the construction of a non redundant library of surface annotated functional sites and a fast comparison algorithm able to find structural similarities independently on the residue sequence order. we report here the analysis of the results of the first all-versus-all comparison of the protein functional sites, the validation of the comparison procedure in a test dataset and its application for annotating a dataset composed of proteins solved in structural genomics projects. the results are available for experimental test at the address .

RESULTS
functional sites comparison
we used the compendium of protein surface regions associated to molecular functional sites stored in the surface database  <cit> . this is a collection of  <dig> annotated functional regions obtained following the procedure described in figure  <dig> and in the methods section. each patch has at least a function-related annotation, that may be the ability to bind a certain ligand, or a match with a prosite or elm pattern  <cit> . ligand-binding abilities are included among gene ontology  molecular functions  <cit> , as well as many prosite patterns and elm motifs. some other prosite patterns correspond to short motifs that are conserved in all members of certain protein families, which not necessarily are associated to known function-related residues. we chose to include this class of patterns in our annotation system, since they offer a quick way to verify the reliability of a match, and in many cases these motifs do contain functional residues. hence, our annotations can be classified either as molecular functions or protein signatures. it is worth noticing that the annotation is extended to the whole patch but is also assigned to a subset of specific annotated functional residues.

in  <cit>  the structural matches obtained from the comparison of he surface library against the entire collection of surface clefts  were evaluated by means of the z-score of each match length against the distribution of the match lengths for any given annotated patch. here we perform an exhaustive analysis in order to find conditions for which a structural similarity also suggests a function-related similarity. first, only those matches which include annotated functional residues are considered, therefore each structural similarity match is likely to hold a functional meaning. this step is crucial since many matches may be obtained because of general fold similarity, without an underlying functional relationship. finding a functional match induces an annotation of at least some of the residues, and suggests reasonable hypotheses as to function .

from the comparison of the surface library against the entire collection of surface clefts, we collected a grand total of  <dig> stringent matches among patch pairs, about  <dig> % of which involve  <dig> or more residues and  <dig> % involve  <dig> or more residues. a not negligible amount of these matches involve residue pairs whose relative distance is not conserved in the corresponding protein sequences. more interestingly, some of the matches involve residues whose sequence order and/or sequence spacing is different in the two proteins: some of these cases, that may be examples of convergent evolution, are currently under investigation. as an example, metals can interact with proteins by means of similar arrangements of residues that can be found across different folds  <cit> . scanning our dataset with zinc-binding patches leads to the finding of significant matches to proteins belonging to  <dig> different folds and  <dig> different classes as defined by scop  <cit> . different metal-binding patches lead to similar findings, even though less dramatic. further analysis would suggest how many of these cases are associated with functional similarities as well.

the fraction of matches validated  sensibly increases with the z-score . at lower z-scores, the go terms and swiss-prot keywords validation methods are more represented, while, for more significant matches, ability to bind the same ligands, fold similarity and co-presence of prosite motifs become more relevant.

the matches that cannot be structurally or functionally justified by these methods and that are characterized by a high z-score are relatively few .  <dig> matches out of  <dig>  having a z-score higher than  <dig> are not validated following the above mentioned criteria . of these  <dig> matches,  <dig> can be considered as true positive matches, confirmed by literature and information derived from different sources and databases. the remaining  <dig> matches  are not confirmed and should be tested experimentally. about 2% of the highly significant matches can be considered as possible false positive hits or new annotations. some of these cases are shown and discussed in figure  <dig> 

from this validation procedure the emerging result is that, using stringent parameters in the comparison step and using the z-score as a threshold, our algorithm is reliable and able to spot local structural similarities related to functional relationships with only few non confirmed hits, which can be considered as false positives or as testable hypotheses.

an estimation of false negative matches  is not immediate, for the reason that the same or similar molecular function may be achieved in different ways using a different three-dimensional residue arrangement. we estimated the occurrence of false negatives for prosite annotated patches, using the list of known true positives  for each pattern that is provided by prosite. the procedure is done as follows: for all the patches annotated with a given prosite pattern, we collect all matches obtained scanning with these patches the entire patches dataset, selecting only those matches having z-score higher than a fixed threshold. the fraction of known true positives that are not found using the pattern-annotated patches as queries , when retrieving only those matches having z-score higher than  <dig>  is  <dig>  , and it raises to  <dig>  setting the z-score threshold to  <dig> 

benchmark cases
to further test the ability of the procedure in finding known cases of functional similarities among proteins for which sequence and/or structure similarity is not significant, a number of benchmark cases were investigated :

i) the s. cerevisiae and the e. coli chorismate mutase , despite the very low sequence identity, share a similar fold and a similar main functional site  <cit> . the 1ecm largest patch is annotated for the oxy-bridged prephenic acid binding ability. using this patch as a query, the highest z-score match is found with the 4csm largest patch .

ii) the glyoxalase/bleomycin resistance protein/dihydroxybiphenyl dioxygenase fold is common to several unrelated metal ion binding proteins sharing similar catalytic mechanisms, including the bleomycin resistance protein, glyoxalase i, and a family of extradiol dioxygenases  <cit> . we detected a significant similarity among p. fluorescens 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase , b. cepacia  <dig> -dihydroxybiphenyl  <dig> -dioxygenase , p. putida catechol  <dig> -dioxygenase  and p. shermanii methylmalonyl-coa epimerase . the comparison algorithm correctly identifies the residues involved in fe binding . 1han second largest patch is annotated for the iron binding ability. structural matches with 1mpy, 1cjx and 1jc <dig> functional sites are found at high z-score .

iii) metal ions can be coordinated by histidine clusters. we identified a similarity between the human tumor necrosis factor-alpha-converting enzyme  zn binding site and the e. coli peptide deformylase  ni binding site, despite their sequence and fold diversity . the zinc-binding patch of 1bkc shares eight residues in the same structural conformation with the nickel-binding patch of 1icj, with a z-score of  <dig> .

iv) nucleotide binding abilities can be associated with several unrelated proteins; we detected a high-scoring match between the gtp-binding annotated patch of the human p <dig> ras protein  and the l. casei hpr kinase  that aligns eight residues with a z-score of  <dig>  . these two proteins do not share any significant sequence or fold similarities.

as a further test, we analyzed the flavin-adenine dinucleotide  binding pockets, known to share structural similarities with other adenine-containing nucleotide binding pockets, despite sequence and fold differences  <cit> . fad consists of an adenosine monophosphate  linked to a flavin mononucleotide  through a pyrophosphate bond and is involved as a cofactor in many biological processes. using the fad-binding patch of the zea mays polyamine oxidase  as a bait, we selected  <dig> prey patches with z-score higher than 12:  <dig> preys are annotated as being able to bind a fad molecule and belongs to the same scop fold -binding domain). the remaining trapped patch is the biggest patch of the trimethylamine dehydrogenase from methylophilus methylotrophus , an iron-sulfur flavoprotein, and it is annotated as adp-binding. 1djn is co-crystallized also with a fmn, which is very similar to fad, but this ligand is associated to the second largest patch of the 1djn structure. the residues, which were associated by the alignment program, are shown in figure 3e. these proteins share a very low sequence similarity, which cannot be revealed using blast <dig>  <cit> . the adp binding patch of the 1djn structure is nicely superposed to the other patches in the binding pocket , but shares no evident fold similarity with the other ones, and belongs to a different scop fold . when the selected structures in figure 3f are physically superposed , also the ligands bound to these structures turn out to be nicely superposed. the procedure could therefore highlight the ability to bind a subset of the fad molecule, namely an adp molecule in the 1djn major patch, even with very low levels of sequence and structure similarity. using each fad binding patch to scan the dataset, we selected only proteins for which known functional properties are consistent with the fad or nucleotide binding ability.

structural genomics proteins analysis
with the stringent parameters described above, we were able to detect only matches linked to function-related similarities, even in cases of non-homologous proteins. for that reason, once proved to be reliable, the procedure can be applied as a predictive tool to obtain clues concerning the function of uncharacterized proteins.

we selected  <dig> protein structures from the pdb, corresponding to  <dig> chains that are marked as being of unknown function, or for being a hypothetical protein or for having been solved within a structural genomics project. we analyzed these structures by looking for reliable similarities to our functional sites library and were able to suggest one or more molecular functions to  <dig> of these chains, for a total of  <dig> similarity matches. for each match, we checked if the previously described criteria hold . if not, a literature search has been done to verify the functional relationship. by means of this analysis of the likelihood of each single match, we found that  <dig>  of these hits are validated by experimental analysis that have already characterized many of these proteins, while only  <dig> matches  are not found confirmed in previous findings;  <dig>  hits involve proteins for which the functions are still unknown;  <dig> hits  involve proteins for which a hypothetical function has been assigned by means of sequence or structure global similarity. in this latter case, the function-related annotation obtained from our method can be considered as a new functional annotation that corrects or improves the actual function assignment. hence, we were able to propose a function by similarity using the annotated patch database  <dig> times, to  <dig> different chains . 56% of these new functional annotations are about a prosite pattern, the remaining 44% about a ligand binding ability; this is somewhat surprising, since the majority of the patches annotations in the surface library regards binding abilities. a selection of the proposed functional regions is shown in figure  <dig>  while the complete list can be found at . for each match we tested the blast <dig> pair-wise sequence similarity between the sequence of the protein to which the query patch belongs and the target protein sequence, the psiblast sequence similarity matches obtained by running the target sequence versus the non-redundant swissprot+trembl sequence database, the global structural similarities of the target structure in the pdb using ssm, and the local similarity using pints  <cit> . the match with the highest z-score  is between the b. subtilis yqvk protein , and the wolinella succinogenes fumarate reductase cytochrome b subunit major patch , annotated with the heme group binding ability; the structural similarity involves  <dig> residues. the two proteins do not share any sequence or structural similarity, as checked using blast and the structural comparison algorithm ssm  <cit> . a psiblast run of the yqvk sequence against the non-redundant swissprot+trembl shows a significant similarity  with the mouse cobalamin adenosyltransferase , while the ssm comparison against the whole pdb leads to only one significant similarity, with another uncharacterized protein, the conserved protein  <dig> from thermoplasma acidophilum . a pints comparison  <cit>  of yqvk, against pre-compiled libraries of structural patterns, retrieves as most significant matches one with the human small nuclear ribonucleoprotein sm d <dig> , aligning  <dig> pairs of residues with r.m.s.d  <dig>  and e-value  <dig> , and another with the pig dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase 1htx . the heme binding ability thus may be a new functional annotation of this poorly known protein. the second highest z-score match  occurs between hi <dig> protein from haemophilus influenzae  and the bovine cytochrome bc <dig> heme-binding patch . no significant sequence similarity is found in the swissprot+trembl , as well as no significant matches are found using ssm. pints matches involving three residues are found with the virus influenzae bha/lsta protein  and the candida tropicalis enoyl thioester reductase  <dig> , whose e-values are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. another high-score match  is found between the b. subtilis protein yqeu  and the e. coli grea transcript cleavage factor major patch , which is annotated with the greab_ <dig> prosite pattern, a signature of this class of cleavage factors. yqeu share ssm-detected structural similarities with another unknown-function protein  and significant sequence similarity with a list of hypothetical and uncharacterized bacterial proteins. pints reports a local structural similarity with the zinc-binding site of the e. coli ctp-ligated t state aspartate transcarbamoylase .

in some cases we found a structural similarity between a protein with unknown function and two patches annotated with the same function, giving strength to the hypothesis of function-related similarity. the conserved hypothetical protein  from thermotoga maritima  shows a structural similarity with surface patches of e. coli nucleotidyltransferase  and desulfovibrio gigas rubredoxin:oxygen oxidoreductase , both annotated with the iron binding ability. the e. coli lysozyme inhibitor , whose function is still uncharacterized, may bind atp given the similarity to the rattus norvegicus 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/ fructose- <dig> -bisphosphatase major patch  and the mouse aaa atpase p <dig> ).

for each described match we propose that the detected structural similarity reveals a function-related similarity. for each match we checked whether the similarity could have been detected by means of sequence similarity, as checked using blast and psiblast, or structural comparison, as checked by means of ssm and pints. our approach, that is based on comparison of local functional surface residues, independently on their sequence order, may overcome the limitations of current methods possibly due to our incomplete knowledge of the sequence/structure/function relationship or to convergent evolution. even using pints, which is a tool similar in philosophy to our approach, the findings are different, suggesting that different tools may be complementary in the difficult task of protein functional annotation; on the other hand, this may also highlight the difficulty in evaluating the significance of local similarities that in many cases are restricted to a very small number of residues.

CONCLUSIONS
the expected burst in the number of protein structures that are not associated to a biological function, stimulated by the structure genomics programs, has emphasized the need for tools to reveal structural regularities even in proteins that do not share sequence or fold similarity  <cit> . protein structures selected in structural genomics projects usually share very little sequence similarity with the dataset of already characterized proteins  <cit> . sequence analysis tools are therefore unsuitable for inferring their functions. moreover, cases are known where active site residues are not conserved in proteins sharing a common structural fold; therefore, "traditional" structure comparison tools are also not always able to help in function-related annotation.

using a fully automated procedure, we obtained a reliable library of protein annotated functional sites. a fast structural comparison algorithm allows the rapid scanning of one or more protein structures with the library looking for local structural similarities. this method is designed to help in functional annotation in difficult cases. our annotated surface patches determination and comparison method offers a new and powerful resource for detecting related function among unrelated proteins, for proteins solved in structural genomics projects or for identifying new function-related sites on the surface of already characterized proteins. we have been able to provide one or more functional clues to a large set of novel proteins, and, where functional evidences are already known, our findings confirm them. moreover, just as proteins with different sequence and fold can share a similar functional site, proteins with similar sequence and/or fold can have small local differences leading to a completely different function  <cit> . our method, which is focused on a detailed analysis of functional sites, is able to successfully predict protein functions in these difficult cases. therefore, it can be used in analyzing the complex evolutionary relationships among protein sequence, structure and function  <cit> . the complete list of the functional predictions that we obtained is accessible at url ; the structurally similar residues are shown for each match, and the structural superposition can be viewed through the browser plug-in chime or rasmol. a novel publicly available web server, pdbfun  <cit> , has been developed to allow the on-line structural comparison of user-defined subsets of residues of protein chains, and pre-defined subsets, like the surface library of annotated functional sites, will be provided.

