BACKGROUND
both dominance and imprinting play an important role in mammalian biology and development  <cit> . though one may naturally assume that dominance and imprinting effects affect economically important traits in plants and animals, it remains controversial how much phenotypic variation can be attributed to these non-additive effects, how many quantitative trait loci  follow non-additive inheritance, and whether incorporating non-additive genetic effects will benefit genomic prediction . generally, contribution of non-additive genetic effects varies for different types of traits. for example, genetic variation associated with fitness-related traits is due mostly to low frequency, deleterious variants, so these traits typically show relatively high non-additive variance out of the total genetic variation  <cit> .

several studies have been conducted to decompose dominance genetic effects from the total genetic variance of complex traits, theoretically  and empirically . a few recent studies have tried to add imprinting effects into the decomposition of total genetic variation . these studies indicated that non-additive effects have a significant contribution to the total genetic variance, but it is still questionable whether or not this contribution can be robustly translated into more accurate genomic prediction in real populations. more recently, it was shown that mating programs increased rates of genetic gain when non-additive genetic effects were included . further understanding of the contribution of non-additive effects to the genomic prediction and mating allocation programs will benefit livestock production in the long term.

gene mapping studies have primarily focused on genetic variants with additive effects. although many empirical studies have reported non-negligible contributions from non-additive effects to complex traits, qtls with non-additive effects are still difficult to identify in animal and human gene mapping studies, largely due to the low statistical power in the testing for non-additive effects of individual loci  <cit> . the large dairy genomics database maintained by the council on dairy cattle breeding  and the usda animal genomics and improvement laboratory  represents a powerful dataset for mapping qtls with non-additive effects.

to empirically address questions related to dominance and imprinting effects of complex traits, we analyzed a large cattle dataset that consisted of more than 40 k holstein cows with snp genotypes, pedigree information, and eight yield deviation  phenotypes . both parents of these cows were also genotyped to phase the parental inheritance of snps of the cows. the aims of this study were to estimate the relative contribution of additive, dominance, and imprinting effects to dairy production and reproduction traits, to identify qtls with dominance or imprinting effects, and to investigate whether adding these non-additive genetic components improves the prediction accuracy of genomic selection in real data.

RESULTS
variance decomposition of additive, dominance, and imprinting effects
using  <dig>  holstein cows with yd phenotypes, snp genotypes, and two genotyped parents, we decomposed the total genetic value of eight dairy traits into additive, dominance, and imprinting effects, estimating corresponding variance components . for the eight traits analyzed, the number of animals with yd phenotype ranged from  <dig>   to  <dig>  . overall, production traits  exhibited a different pattern from reproduction traits . as shown in table  <dig>  the broad-sense heritability  was  <dig> – <dig> % for production traits and  <dig> – <dig> % for reproduction traits, respectively. the narrow-sense heritability  was  <dig> – <dig> % for production traits and only  <dig> – <dig> % for reproduction traits, respectively. proportions of dominance variance in phenotypic variance were significantly higher  for production traits  than for reproduction traits , but the proportions in total genetic variance are higher for reproduction traits. the variance explained by imprinting effect was very low for all eight traits, <1% of the phenotypic variance for production traits and 1–2% for reproduction traits. however, these imprinting effects were significantly larger than zero for most production and reproduction traits . moreover, for reproduction traits that have a low heritability, imprinting effects explained a relatively large portion of the total genetic variance , which were significantly higher than those for production traits .table  <dig> variance decomposition of genotypic additive, dominance, and imprinting values for eight dairy traits

n
h
2

my milk yield, fy fat yield, py protein yield, scs somatic cell score, stpl standardized productive life, dpr daughter pregnancy rate, ccr cow conception rate, hcr heifer conception rate, n sample size, a additive effect, d dominance effect, i imprinting effect, se standard error, h
 <dig> broad-sense heritability




for comparison purposes, the total genetic variance was decomposed into the genotypic imprinting value plus either breeding value and dominance deviation using a classical model that considered allele frequencies  <cit>  or additive and dominance effects that did not consider allele frequencies . as shown in additional file 1: table s <dig>  results from these two decomposition models were consistent. it is worth noting that estimated h
 <dig> from the two models was exactly the same for all eight traits. in addition, the proportion of variance explained by imprinting effects was the same for the two models. these results were consistent with theoretical expectations  <cit> . in theory, the two variance decomposition models are equivalent to each other with the same predicted phenotypic values and residuals. first, the sum of additive and dominance genetic variances is equal to the sum of the variances of breeding value and dominance deviation, under a few common assumptions . with a stronger condition, the sum of individual breeding value and dominance deviation will be equal to the sum of individual genotypic additive and dominance values. second, individual genotypic imprinting values of the two models are the same, asserting an equivalence of imprinting variance components. we observed all of these results across all eight traits, as shown in fig.  <dig> for milk and additional file 2: figure s <dig> for other traits. additionally, we confirmed that individual residual estimates of the two models are the same .fig.  <dig> individual estimates of variance components with two decomposition models for milk. each point indicates the component estimate for each individual. blue line indicates y = x. the x-axis shows the components from the model decomposing genetic effect to breeding value, dominance deviation and genotypic imprinting value, while y-axis shows the components from the model decomposing genetic effect to genotypic additive, dominance and imprinting values




genomic relationship matrix  based variance decomposition is highly dependent on the assumption of polygenic genetic architecture, as genome-wide snp genotypes are used with equal weights. existing gwas have provided evidence of a polygenic architecture of additive effects in most complex traits  <cit> . however, we have no such knowledge for dominance and imprinting effects. to investigate the influence of this polygenic assumption on variance components estimation, we performed simulations to determine if our models have biases when there are only a few dominance or imprinting qtls. simulation results showed that greml could accurately estimate variances for genotypic dominance and imprinting values for a moderate-heritability trait like milk yield, even when only  <dig> dominance and imprinting qtls were simulated for a trait with polygenic additive effects, respectively . for a low-heritability trait like daughter pregnancy rate, greml also performed well for both lowly and highly polygenic architectures of dominance and imprinting effects . using simulation, we demonstrated the robustness of our approach to the assumption of polygenic genetic architecture.fig.  <dig> variance decomposition using simulated datasets. the dash line indicates expected value of corresponding variance component. a variance estimates of  <dig> simulated data sets for mimicking milk. b variance estimates of  <dig> simulated data sets for mimicking dpr




genome-wide association study of dominance and imprinting effects
we performed a whole-genome single-marker scan for additive, dominance, and imprinting effects on all eight traits. to increase computational efficiency, we used a two-step approach to remove polygenic effects from the data: 1) a mixed model with genomic relationship matrices to generate residuals; followed by, 2) a gwas scan using residuals from the mixed model as the phenotype. although our two-step strategy has slightly lower power than a single-step mixed model, we identified a novel dominance signal on chromosome  <dig> that was associated with milk yield . we then used a single-step mixed model to re-analyze the snps near the dominance signal, generating appropriate results for the associated snps . the top  <dig> snps, hapmap48809-bta- <dig> and bovinehd <dig>  showed a strong dominance association with milk yield with p =  <dig>  × 10− <dig> and p =  <dig>  × 10− <dig>  respectively. bovinehd <dig> is 71 kb upstream of the runx <dig> gene. the runx <dig> gene has been previously reported to be a novel regulator of mammary epithelial cell fate in development and breast cancer, and it has also been shown that exogenous transgenic expression of runx <dig> in mammary epithelial cells blocked milk production  <cit> .fig.  <dig> manhattan plots for associations of snp effects with milk yield



chr chromosome, maf minor allele frequency, β regression coefficient, se standard error




we further used an independent validation data set consisting of ~ <dig> younger cows with both genotypes and milk yield phenotypes, which were collected after the initial analysis, to validate the dominance signal associated with milk yield. a mixed-model based method was used to test the association between milk yield and  <dig> snps around the peak signal. this validation analysis provided clear statistical evidence for the dominance association at bovinehd <dig> with milk yield . additionally, we found that the dominance effect was slightly larger than the additive effect at bovinehd <dig> in both the discovery and validation data sets, suggesting complete dominance or even over-dominance inheritance of the underlying qtl.fig.  <dig> mixed-model based association analysis between milk yield and  <dig> snps around runx <dig> in the validation data set. the two vertical dash lines indicate snps hapmap48809-bta- <dig> and bovinehd <dig>  respectively




we found no other significant non-additive effects for any trait using a genome-wide significance level of 1 × 10− <dig> . nevertheless, there were a few nominally significant peaks for dominance or imprinting effects shown in the manhattan plots, such as the peak for imprinting effect on chromosome  <dig> for somatic cell score  and the one at the end of chromosome  <dig> for cow conception rate . since a one-step mixed model is more powerful than a two-step scan, we selected  <dig> nominally significant non-additive association signals and used a one-step mixed-model to test the associations for the top three snps within each peak. this one-step re-analysis found a genome-wide significant dominance association on chromosome  <dig> with both fat and protein yields . however, this dominance signal was not confirmed in the validation data set .

fine-mapping of the dominance gwas peak near runx2
from our gwas and validation analyses, we selected bovinehd <dig>  as our target region for fine-mapping using sequence-based imputation. based on the ld decay pattern between bovinehd <dig> and nearby variants derived from the sequences of  <dig> holstein bulls from the  <dig> bull genomes project   <cit> , we chose the region of ±500 kb from the targeted snp for fine mapping to cover all the variants with a ld level of r
2 >  <dig>  with bovinehd <dig> . using the  <dig> holstein sequences as reference, we then imputed sequence-level snps in the targeted region for  <dig>  cows. after post-imputation quality control , a total of  <dig> variants were included in a two-step association analysis for milk yield.fig.  <dig> fine-mapping of the dominance association with milk yield near runx <dig>  a ld between bovinehd <dig> and adjacent variants. b association results of additive and dominance effects. the red dash line indicates the target snp , while the two blue solid lines indicate the two variants with the smallest p-value. c the influence of imputation reliability measured by ar <dig> on association p-values. the black lines indicate the regression line of –log <dig> on ar <dig>  and at the right-upper corner are the p-values for model fitting of the regression




the fine-mapping study identified  <dig> imputed variants with a stronger association than bovinehd <dig> . the smallest p-value for dominance effect  was found at two variants, one in the first intron of runx <dig>  and the other between supt3h and runx <dig> . although the  <dig> variants were all modifiers , the fine mapping analysis provided more evidence that the qtl is close to the runx <dig> gene. additionally, most of the variants had a larger dominance effect than additive effect, which was consistent with our original results supporting a dominant or over-dominant mode of inheritance. to investigate whether or not the significant associations were resulted from a single signal, we conducted a conditional analysis by adding the top variant  as a covariate into the association test of each of the remaining  <dig> variants. this analysis revealed that the significant additive associations disappeared while the dominance signals remained . conditioning on both the additive and the dominance effects eliminated all of the significant additive and dominance associations, indicating a single underlying qtl responsible for the association .

since we imputed relatively low-density genotypes to sequence genotypes, imputation accuracy was a concern because poor imputation may result in smaller p-values in our fine-mapping analysis. we examined the impact of imputation accuracy  on association p-values and found that poorly imputed variants tended to have a larger association p-value . this trend reduced the chance of getting false positives from low-quality imputation and provided additional support for the dominance association signal at runx <dig> with milk yield.

genomic prediction incorporating dominance and imprinting effects
we compared prediction performance of three models: 1) additive effect only , 2) additive and dominance effects , and 3) additive, dominance, and imprinting effects . overall, the three models showed similar prediction accuracy and unbiasedness for all the eight traits , even though non-additive effects explained >30% of total genetic variance for the three reproduction traits . a small increase of prediction accuracy for three production traits  was observed with the models add + dom and add + dom + imp compared to the model add. paired t-tests showed that the increases were significant . however, there was no significant difference in prediction accuracy between the models add + dom and add + dom + imp for the three traits.fig.  <dig> prediction performance of three models for eight dairy traits. a prediction accuracy in 10-fold cross validation. b regression coefficient of yd on gebv in 10-fold cross validation




discussion
this study provided a systematic view of dominance and imprinting effects through a comprehensive analysis of a large cattle data set, including variance decomposition, gwas, and genomic prediction. the study of imprinting effects benefited from the large size of the cattle data which included complete pedigree, representing one of the largest pedigrees available in a mammalian species, to infer parent-of-origin of alleles. the current study provided another demonstration of the power of dairy industry-oriented data to facilitate biological research  <cit> .

in general, our results are consistent with previous studies regarding the proportion of phenotypic variance explained by dominance effects for complex traits in cattle  <cit>  and the low heritability of reproduction traits  <cit> . the u.s. national evaluation includes a regression on inbreeding to account for the effect of dominance on the mean, not just the variance and covariance. sun et al.  found a large advantage in predicting progeny performance by multiplying this regression on inbreeding by estimated genomic inbreeding of the calf, but found only small additional advantage by including dominance variance matrix. however, imprinting effects have been rarely evaluated in livestock studies, and our analysis provided useful information on the contribution of imprinting effects to dairy traits. first, despite their small proportion relative to the total variance, imprinting effects had a significant, non-zero contribution to the phenotypic variation for most of the traits investigated, including all the three production traits and three reproduction traits. second, imprinting effects explained a much larger proportion of the total genetic variance for reproduction traits than for production traits. these results raised two important questions: does imprinting universally contribute to complex traits, and why are reproduction traits more affected by imprinting? it is worth mentioning that the reproduction traits considered here model pregnancy as a trait of the dam, whereas pregnancy as a trait of the embryo might have a stronger connection to dominance and imprinting.

in this study, we didn’t observe much improvement of prediction accuracy by including dominance and imprinting effects in genomic selection models. this observation can be attributable to a few things: 1) low heritability of non-additive effects; and 2) lacking of full-sib pairs between reference and prediction populations because full-sibs are the primary source of non-additive relationships but dairy data consist of mostly half-sibs.

using a gwas approach, we found a dominance association signal and validated it in independent samples. the fine-mapping analysis further confirmed the dominance qtl to be near runx <dig>  but it was difficult to distinguish causal variants from linked markers. due to a very small effective population size and a limited number of haplotypes in the dairy cattle population, our imputation works well, even from 50 k or less snp data to sequence-level variants, in our fine-mapping association analysis.

our study demonstrated the possibility of identifying non-additive effects in gwas using a large dataset. additionally, the power of the two-step gwas approach was comparable to a full mixed-model based method . the two-step method used in this study was an efficient alternative to identify non-additive effects when fast implementations of full mixed-models are not available. for genomic prediction, we observed a very small but significant increase of prediction accuracy for production traits, but no difference for reproduction traits, when non-additive effects were included. due to possible sparseness of dominance and imprinting effects, greml may underperform for prediction and bayesian models assuming a few large qtls may perform better. future studies are needed to develop more accurate prediction models for non-additive effects.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we comprehensively evaluated the contribution of dominance and imprinting effects to complex traits in dairy cattle. we reported significant, non-zero contributions from dominance and imprinting effects for both production and reproduction traits. the imprinting effects contribute a larger proportion to reproduction traits that production traits. using gwas, we identified and validated a dominance association signal with milk yield near runx <dig>  however, we observed minor increases in prediction accuracy when including non-additive effects in the genomic selection models.

