BACKGROUND
it has been shown that the majority of the human genome is transcribed but that most of the resulting rna products do not encode for proteins  <cit> . notably, some of the long non-coding rnas , defined as non-coding transcripts longer than  <dig> base pairs, are known to play important biological roles . moreover, it has been shown that an important source of lncrna sequences are transposable elements , which make up about 50% of the human genome  <cit> . specifically, it was reported that many lncrnas are initiated in tes and that about 75% of them have at least one exon overlapping a te  <cit> . actually, it has also been proposed that te-derived sequences in lncrnas may provide pre-formed functions to these transcripts  <cit> .

one example of a te-derived lncrna is lnc-ror, a transcript implicated in the modulation of reprogramming of human ipscs  <cit> , which initiates in the human endogenous retrovirus subtype h   <cit> . hervh is one of the most abundant human endogenous retroviral families in the human genome with about  <dig> copies  <cit>  and recent studies have found that hervh instances are highly and specifically expressed in human embryonic stem cells   <cit> . moreover, it was shown that the expression of these te-derived lncrna transcripts helps define the naive stem-cell state  <cit>  and knockdown experiments confirmed that this expression is essential for the maintenance of pluripotency in human stem cells  <cit> . hervh-derived lncrnas are probably not the only te-derived transcripts involved in stem cell pluripotency, as knockdowns of several lncrnas result in exit from the pluripotent state  <cit> .

te sequences are repeated throughout the genome because of their ability to replicate and insert into genomic dna. there are several mechanisms through which this replication can occur, which defines the broadest classification of tes: dna, erv/ltr, line and sine  <cit> . tes have freqently been ignored in genomic studies because of their repetitive nature, which makes them more difficult to deal with computationally, but their impact has gained recognition as many of them have been shown to be involved in the formation of new transcripts  <cit>  and regulatory innovations . although some tes have a well characterized function in their host, such as in pluripotency  <cit>  and x-chromosome dosage compensation  <cit> , the majority of them have no known function. comparative genomic studies have been shown to be a powerful way to identify functional elements in the genome  <cit> . an early study of this type looking at tes noted that conserved repeats were preferentially located near genes that were associated with development and transcription regulation  <cit> . more recent studies focusing on lncrnas found that these transcripts were expressed in a highly tissue specific manner  <cit>  and even more so than protein coding genes  <cit> . research examining cross-species lncrna expression found that this high level of tissue specificity was well conserved in primates, but not in more distant species  <cit> ; and that about 30% of lncrnas were primate specific  <cit> .

while a number of studies have examined the expression and evolution of non-coding rnas in mammals  <cit> , none have focused on primate non-coding rnas and on the link between tes and lncrnas. to identify te-derived non-coding rnas with important genomic functions, such as hervh, we posited that cross-species expression data would be informative. in this context, and because of the rapid evolution of the lncrna repertoire, we generated rna-seq data from induced pluripotent stem cells  of several primate species: human , chimpanzee , gorilla , and rhesus . using this resource, we looked for te-derived non-coding transcripts with conserved expression profiles.

using the same rna-seq data, we also developed an ipsc-specific lncrna catalogue for human, chimpanzee, gorilla, and rhesus. with this catalogue, we were able to identify repeat families that have contributed the most dna to primate ipscs lncrnas. we were also able to identify several te-derived lncrnas, such as hervh, that are well conserved in terms of having a large number of orthologous instances that are expressed in human and in some of the non-human primate  species. several of these well conserved te-derived lncrnas have not been characterized before and could be novel functional transcripts.

RESULTS
conservation of te instances in primate genomes
we first wanted to examine the conservation of te instances between human and nhp species before looking at any expression data. by conservation here we mean te instances occurring at orthologous locations in the different primate species and not having been lost in one of the genomes. to do so, we performed various pairwise comparisons to determine how many tes occur in corresponding genomic locations. first, te annotations were generated for human, chimpanzee, gorilla, and rhesus using the repeatmasker software  <cit>  . as expected, the repeat catalogues were found to be comparable in size, with each species having between  <dig> - <dig>  million te instances . next, conserved tes were identified by determining if they existed at orthologous genomic locations using the ucsc liftover tool  <cit> . tes were labeled as putatively conserved if they could successfully liftover between species . we restricted the analysis to tes which did not overlap coding regions, as we are interested in the contribution of tes to non-coding transcripts.

overall we found that more than 90% of repeat instances across all major repeat families were conserved between human and chimpanzee or gorilla, about 85% were conserved in rhesus and over 80% were conserved across all analyzed primate species . this high conservation between human and nhps can be explained by their relatively recent divergence. we note that repetitive sequences are sometimes missing from assemblies of lower quality, such as the ones we are using here for the nhp, and so these estimates should be taken as lower bounds.
fig.  <dig> 
a percent of all human tes which are conserved in nhp grouped by te class. c_g_r indicates tes conserved in all  <dig> nhp species. b the proportion of instances in each te family that are conserved in chimpanzee  relative to the average sequence identity score of the family . sequence similarity to the family’s consensus sequence is shown as a scaled smith-waterman  score. this is used as a surrogate for the age of the te family. older tes are on the left, and newer insertions are to the right. te families which inserted more recently are less conserved than older tes. te families were filtered for those with more than  <dig> expressed instances in human. trna-asn-acc in red, aluya <dig> in blue. c the same in gorilla  the same in rhesus




we can verify our approach to identify conserved te instances by using the well-characterized hervh repeat family. using the above annotation strategy, human, chimpanzee, and gorilla were found to have  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hervh instances, respectively. this is consistent with recent estimates that indicated that approximately  <dig> insertions occurred in higher primates  <cit> . rhesus has fewer hervh instances , which can by explained by the fact that this family expanded after the divergence from rhesus. we can also examine the regions of the hervh consensus sequence that are being attributed to these insertions . the patterns observed are consistent with the known evolutionary history of hervh, with a large expansion that took place after the split from rhesus and that contain a deletion in what used to correspond to the env gene  <cit> . to verify that liftover is identifying orthologous sequences accurately, we examined the te annotation of conserved human hervh instances in nhps. we found that of the human hervh instances that successfully lift to chimpanzee and gorilla over 90% were independently annotated as hervh in that species , which further supports the accuracy of the methodology.

next, we were interested in te conservation at the level of families. using a method previously described to estimate the age of each family  <cit>  , we observed that the older te families were more conserved than recent ones . this is to be expected given that the younger families tend to be associated with more recent expansions whose instances can be absent from the other genomes. this downward trend was most prominent in rhesus, the most distant analyzed species. in this analysis, one outlier te family appears to be conserved more than expected based on its family age . this te family is trna-asn-aac, a repetitive non-coding gene which produces a trna. it is classified as a te due to its repetitive nature, but because it is a functional trna conserved across all mammalian cells, its high level of conservation can be explained. this te family has  <dig> instances in the human genome, not overlapping annotated coding regions,  <dig> of which are conserved in the nhps we studied. in contrast, aluya <dig>  is a very recent family which is poorly conserved between human and rhesus. the aluy family is still active in the human genome  <cit> . aluya <dig> has  <dig> instances not overlapping coding regions, only  <dig>  of which are annotated as putatively conserved in rhesus.

te expression is conserved between human and non-human primates
next, we wanted to examine te instances with conserved expression profiles in primate ipscs. we generated rna-seq data from four primate ipsc cell lines:  <dig> human,  <dig> chimpanzee,  <dig> gorilla, and  <dig> rhesus . we found that te instances that had an expression level of at least  <dig> rpkm in human and did not overlap protein coding genes were conserved, in terms of having an orthologous locus in nhp, at slightly lower levels than tes in general . this is probably because expressed tes tend to be younger than non-expressed tes . still, over 70% of expressed human tes were found to have an orthologous sequence in all nhp species studied. next, when we looked to see which of these conserved te instances were also expressed in the other species, we observed that about 33% of them had orthologous expression in chimpanzee and slightly less in gorilla . this type of expression conservation dropped dramatically when rhesus was taken into account. clearly although many te instances have been retained in both human and rhesus, they are also under different expression controls in the two species. in this context, tes that do exhibit expression conservation between human and rhesus are especially interesting since expression has been conserved over a long evolutionary time period.
fig.  <dig> 
a percent of all tes expressed in human which are conserved in nhps, grouped by class. c_g_r indicates tes conserved in all  <dig> nhp species. b percent of human expressed tes which are conserved in terms of sequence and expressed in nhps. c te families plotted by average sequence identity and proportion conserved in nhps. y axis specifies the proportion of human expressed tes which are also expressed in nhps. average sequence divergence is used as a surrogate for age, with older tes on the left. this plot shows only families with  <dig> or more expressed tes and  <dig> or more conserved in the target species. d top  <dig> most conserved families  when their conservation is summed across all  <dig> nhp species




to further examine the statistical significance of the conservation of expression at the level of individual repeat families, we performed a hypergeometric test . we removed small repeat families, simple repeats, and low complexity repeats from this analysis since they are more prone to biases  <cit> . looking at expression conservation based on the level of sequence conservation of the family did not reveal any unusual patterns . the te families that had the highest proportion of instances with conserved expression between human and chimpanzee are shown in table  <dig> . in particular, the mer <dig> repeat family had the largest percentage of tes with such conserved expression . notably, this te family has previously been shown to be the source of a placental-specific family of mirnas  <cit> , the mir- <dig> family, and to be expressed in human embryonic stem cells  <cit> . the instances of mer <dig> that are highly expressed and conserved among primates do not overlap with annotated mir- <dig> transcripts, however the annotated transcripts are only ones that have been experimentally validated. the fact that the expression of the mer <dig> instances is highly conserved suggest a potential role for this family in both human and chimpanzee ipscs.
here we examine only large families  from the main repeat classes . the table is sorted by the proportion of human expressed tes which are conserved in chimpanzee. only repeat families with at least  <dig> expressed instances in human are shown




another well characterized example that appears in table  <dig> is hervh with  <dig> instances expressed in human, which is comparable to what was found in previous studies  <cit> . notably, we found  <dig> orthologous instances also expressed in chimpanzee, which makes it one of the families with the highest expression conservation. the combined expression conservation of human expressed tes in nhp also revealed hervh as one of the top conserved te families . we observed similar numbers of hervh instances expressed in human, chimpanzee, and gorilla  and very few instance expressed in rhesus . the differences we observe between human, chimpanzee, and gorilla hervh expression are fairly small considering the size of the family and the number of instances expressed, which are both fairly high compared to most te families. the low number of expressed hervh in rhesus is expected since rhesus has fewer copies of this repeat family. the high conservation of expression of hervh suggest that the hervh-lncrna function revealed in human  <cit>  arose before the divergence of gorilla.

finally, it has been noted that some alu repeats exhibits mobilization in ipscs  <cit>  and a few alu families are found to have high expression conservation . however, most of the other tes on this list have limited literature describing them, so further validation would be needed to determine if they play a role in primate ipscs.

ipsc-specific lncrnas in primates frequently overlap transposable elements
several studies have shown that a large portion of lncrna sequence is made up of tes  <cit> . since we were able to identify a number of te families with significant conservation of expression between primate species we were interested to see if some of these tes also contributed to lncrna transcripts with conserved expression. publicly available lncrna catalogues for non-human primates are not nearly as complete as the human lncrna catalogues. for this reason we created ipsc-specific lncrna annotations for each species based on our ipsc rna-seq data using the feelnc pipeline  <cit>  . briefly, using the transcripts assembled from the rna-seq data, we filtered the transcriptome for protein coding genes, mono-exonic transcripts, and any transcripts with protein coding potential. we chose to remove mono-exonic transcripts from this analysis because it was not possible to avoid systematic false positives in that category without extensive manual curation.

we validated this automated method for annotating lncrnas using rna-seq data by comparing it against gencode. our human annotation contains  <dig>  lncrnas,  <dig> % of which overlapped the gencode catalog . after performing expression analysis on gencode lncrnas with our ipsc data we noted that about half of the ipsc expressed gencode lncrnas did not appear in our annotation . however, the majority of these missing transcripts are either overlapping protein coding genes or are mono-exonic transcripts, which is consistent with our selection criteria.
fig.  <dig> 
a the intersection of  <dig> lncrna annotations: ipsc with guide annotations, ipsc without guide, and gencode lncrnas expressed in ipscs. over 90% of feelnc human lncrnas overlap with gencode lncrnas. b the proportions in each primate lncrna annotation compared to the genomic te proportion. only lncrnas that overlap tes are included in these proportions. c the proportion of human lncrna sequence made up by te families normalized by proportion of the genomic sequence made up by each family. the top  <dig> families from each of the  <dig> main classes are shown. d tes that occur most frequently in human ipsc lncrnas normalized by the size of each te family. only families with more than  <dig> members are shown. red represents lncrnas which are conserved in all  <dig> primate species. green are those conserved in  <dig> or  <dig> other nhps. blue are human specific lncrnas




the feelnc method for identifying lncrnas that uses gene annotation as a guide for transcriptome assembly with cufflinks will perform differently depending on the quality of that annotation. the smaller size of our lncrnas catalogs in nhp  is likely due to having fewer replicates but also a reflection of the more limited annotation in those species. when we applied the feelnc method without such guide annotation we obtained approximately the same number of lncrnas in human, chimpanzee, and gorilla . such de novo lncrna annotation for rhesus resulted in very few lncrnas detected. this seems to be due to a number of factors including: poor genome assembly and fewer aligned reads for rhesus. since removing the guide annotation during the transcriptome assembly reduces the number of human lncrna transcripts to a number comparable to chimpanzee and gorilla, we suspect the quality of the annotation to be the main cause of discrepancy in the lncrna catalogue size for the different primate species.

finally, for each lncrna catalogue, we examined the proportion of the lncrnas which had at least 10% of one exon overlapping a te . in human we found that about 73% of the lncrnas overlapped a te , which is consistent with previous studies which examined human lncrna catalogs  <cit> . we found this proportion to be fairly consistent across all primate species, and also in the de novo lncrnas cataglogues.

some te-derived lncrnas have conserved expression
finally, we were interested in the expression conservation of the primate ipsc lncrnas. this analysis was done in conjunction with the te annotations to identify te-derived lncrnas whose expression is conserved. using liftover to convert human lncrna coordinates to nhp, we found that the majority of lncrnas were conserved between human and nhps . for instance, of the  <dig>  ipsc-specific lncrnas in human,  <dig>  have orthologous positions in chimpanzee. next, we looked at which of these conserved lncrnas were also expressed in the other species . we found, in chimpanzee, that of the human lncrnas that liftover, 40% were also expressed in chimpanzee.
column 2: the number of human lncrnas which lift to each nhp . column 3: the number of lifted lncrnas which overlap tes in the target species. column 4: lifted human lncrnas that are expressed in the target species. column 5: lifted and expressed lncrnas that overlap tes




next, we labeled each lncrna transcript with the te it overlapped the most, whenever such an overlap corresponded to at least 10% of one of its exons . with such an annotation, we found no difference in the proportion of tes contributing to all human lncrnas and human lncrnas with an orthologous nhp lncrnas . in the human lncrnas, we observe a clear enrichment of ltrs and lines and a depletion of sine elements as compared to the genomic proportion of these tes . these patterns of enrichment and depletion of te classes in lncrnas are consistent with what has been observed in other studies  <cit> . notably, we are now also able to observe the same patterns in nhp lncrna catalogues .

when we investigated which te families contributed the most sequence to lncrna transcripts in human we noted that hervh was one of the top contributors from the ltr class . we also found that mlt1j was the member of the ltr family which contributed the most absolute sequence to human lncrnas. previous studies have shown that mlt1j harbors transcription factor binding sites for yy <dig>  <cit>  and yy <dig> is known for repressing and activating a number of different promoters. in this way, the transposon mlt1j may have contributed yy <dig> binding sites to the genome, like the oct <dig> binding sites in the promoter sequences of hervh  <cit> , thus allowing the expression of its internal sequence to be maintained. when the amount of lncrna sequence contributed by tes is normalized by the genomic size of each family, it becomes clear that some dna and ltr families contributed more than expected by chance .

in the final part of this analysis we determined human lncrnas that are conserved in nhps, and used this information to determine which te families contribute the most sequence to these conserved transcripts. this analysis revealed te families that overlap most frequently with human lncrnas and how many of these transcripts are conserved in all, some, or none of the nhps . we identified several subfamilies of mlt <dig> that contributed large amounts of sequence to these conserved transcripts , even when we took into account the genomic size of these subfamilies . for instance, two mlt <dig> subfamilies contribute the most to conserved lncrna: mlt1n <dig> and mlt1f <dig>  the mirb family overlapped most frequently with human lncrnas and is very well conserved in nhps. while this te family has been associated with non-coding variants of the chrm <dig> gene  <cit> , which is involved in neuron function, it is not widely recognized as contributing to lncrnas.

discussion
in this work, we utilized rna-seq data from primate ipscs to identify tes producing potentially functional non-coding transcripts. we were able to characterize a number of te families that are well conserved among human, chimpanzee, gorilla, and rhesus. in particular, we were able to identify a number of te families with conserved expression . the conservation of te expression across several primate species is an indicator of potential function and some of the te families that we identified in this way, most notably hervh  <cit> , have an already well-characterized biological function. others, like mer <dig>  are potentially interesting due to their conserved expression profile  and the fact that they are the source of a placental-specific family of mirnas  <cit> . the family tigger4a, from the dna repeat class, also had high expression conservation when summed across all primate species  and highly significant p-value when tested for enrichment of expressed instances in conserved tes between human and chimpanzee . tiggers are part of the mariner/tc <dig> family originally discovered in drosophila  <cit> , but not much is known about the potential function of tiggers in human.

in this study, we also utilized the rna-seq data to create ipsc-specific lncrna annotations for these four primate species. using these catalogues we identified te families which contributed the most lncrna sequence in human and non-human primates. we also noted te families that most frequently occur in conserved lncrna transcripts. some of the te families that appeared several times in our analysis are mlt1-type families . previous studies have shown that at least one of these families, mlt1j, harbors transcription factor binding sites for yy <dig>  <cit> , which could explain why its expression has been maintained. we also noted that several tigger families appear to have also contributed a significant amount of sequence to human lncrnas . large-scale cdna studies  <cit>  have identified several putative, tigger-derived proteins, but based on these results we believe some members of the tigger family may have also contributed important sequences to the primate lncrna repertoire. these examples are just a few of the te families that were highlighted in this study and potentially play important roles as non-coding transcripts in primate stem cells.

CONCLUSIONS
our study focused on conserved expression of te-derived lncrnas, but many of the conserved tes that were identified do not overlap lncrnas. it is possible that tes with conserved primate expression are being transcribed as by-products of an exapted enhancer or promoter, or as other transcripts like mirnas. in a way, our list of potentially interesting tes could be useful to explore the impact of tes on other genomic functions. several of the conserved te families that were discussed here are not well characterized and would be good candidates for further experimental validation. in particular, experiments such as knockdowns and subcellular localization could be used to better determine their biological function.

