BACKGROUND
rodents as well as many mammals are characterized by the presence of vibrissae or whiskers located on both sides of the muzzle  <cit> . during exploration, rats actively sweep their vibrissae in a rhythmic forward and backward motion  <cit> . it has been stated that rats, due to their poor vision, use this behavior to explore their environment  <cit> .

each vibrissa sits in a follicle innervated by a deep vibrissal nerve arising from the infraorbital branch of the trigeminal nerve  <cit> . mechanoreceptors, such as merkel cells, lanceolate terminals and free nerve endings  <cit> , are activated during the vibrissae movements and this information travels along the trigeminal pathway. the signals enter the brain stem through trigeminal nerve cells, and progress, through the trigeminal complex and thalamus, to the barrel cortex.

small muscles are associated with vibrissal follicles and have the form of a sling connecting two adjacent follicles of the same row  <cit> . two branches of the facial nerve, the buccal branch and the upper division of the marginal mandibular branch  <cit> , innervate follicular muscles and the contraction of these muscles produces the forward vibrissal movement.

studies in tactile discriminative behavior agree that rats are able to learn a rough-smooth discrimination task by actively palpating the discriminanda   <cit> . this capability to detect small differences in roughness was compared with that of humans using their fingertips. carvell and simons  <cit>  also demonstrated that when all but one whisker was removed, the discrimination ability was still present for subjects distinguishing a finely textured surface  from a smooth one.

classical studies in trigeminal ganglion neurons involved head-fixed animals, controlled whisker deflection  and recordings of the evoked response  <cit> . these studies distinguished rapidly  and slowly  adapting responses and demonstrated that cells respond differently to different whisker shaft directions and have different velocity sensitivities.

zucker and welker  <cit>  investigated the trigeminal cell response in a more naturalistic situation. they artificially stimulated facial muscles to evoke a whisker-like movement in anesthetized rats. they showed that the number of responsive neurons increased when the whisker touched an object. szwed et al.  <cit> , more recently, used a similar stimulation method for investigating the neuronal response patterns during active touch. they showed that neurons present a large variety of responses to different contact situations .

a transduction mechanism was recently proposed for texture coding considering the mechanical characteristics of the vibrissae and their location in the whisker pad. the whiskers resonate at different vibration frequencies because of their different lengths  <cit> . furthermore, mitchinson et al  <cit>  constructed a simulated electro-mechanical model, based on the anatomical and physiological characteristics of the vibrissae system.

during the course of our study an alternative model for texture coding was purposed by arabzadeh et al  <cit> . they reported that each sandpaper surface was characterized by a temporal profile of whisker velocity and that this information could be transmitted to the follicle receptors and to the central circuits. they measured whisker vibration during active – artificial – whisking across surfaces and then reproduced the whisker movement by a stimulus playback method for recording the trigeminal and cortex neuronal activity.

the purpose of the present paper was to explore two aspects of texture discrimination. first, we wanted to establish if the primary afferent fiber activity of one vibrissa  contains information for discriminating textures during active touch. we analyzed the neuronal population response evoked by vibrissa sweeping different materials, and these signals were compared with the control. the active whisking was induced by electrical stimulation of branches of the motor nerve. wood, metal, acrylic and sandpaper  were used as the swept surfaces. we polished these surfaces with sandpaper  to obtain different textures with similar roughness.

our second objective was to explore the effects of vibrissa pressure on the afferent nerve activity. it was reported that rats use different behavioral strategies to obtain tactile sensory information from objects in the environment. during "exploratory whisking" -the dominant pattern when the animal palpates objects- the frequency ranges between 5– <dig> hz but values change between bouts of whisking  <cit> . when the vibrissa contacts objects that are present only on one side, the movements on the side that make contact have greater amplitudes  <cit> . carvell and simons  <cit>  reported that when the animal palpated a surface, the hair shafts -generally the most caudal whiskers- were continuously bent but to varying degrees. in this paper we test the hypothesis that the rats could use a "optimum" vibrissae pressure for texture discrimination.

we used rms values to analyze the data in order to relate the amplitude of the afferent nerve discharges to the mechanoreceptor activation. afferent activity was analyzed in the frequency domain with the power spectrum density . the psd was estimated using a parametric model that is an alternative to the discrete fourier transform. in all cases we used anova analysis for comparison.

our results suggest that the physical properties of the different materials could be transduced during active touch, and varying the pressure against the vibrissae could improve the information acquisition.

RESULTS
in this study we recorded the multifiber activity from the deep vibrissal nerve of one vibrissa when the hair swept different textures. the whisker movement was induced by electrical stimulation of the facial motor nerve. a diagram of the experimental design is shown in figure  <dig>  the materials selected for the experiments correspond to surfaces of different texture . we measured only one texture parameter, the roughness, using a hommel tester . these measurements showed that sandpaper  had the highest value  followed by wood . metal had the lowest roughness value , followed by acrylic  .

mean control values remained constant and with low deviation in all situations but the materials showed an increased variability . this is particularly clear for sandpaper and wood.

the comparison among treatments  for pressure level  <dig>  showed significant differences in all cases except one . at pressure level  <dig>  a generalized increment of the average rms values in all situations was observed. three comparisons did not show significant differences   but sandpaper vs. control showed one of the highest differences .

the best differenciation was obtained for pressure level  <dig> . only metal and acrylic showed similar rms values and the comparison between them have the lowest value  . however in all other cases the comparisons showed higher values and the highest was observed between control and sandpaper .

the average psd of the  <dig> recordings for each surface-pressure combination is shown in figure  <dig>  each psd was represented by fmax, calculated within the range of  <dig> hz to  <dig> hz. thus, each surface-pressure situation was represented by the average and standard deviation of the  <dig> fmax values. figure  <dig> provides a comprehensive overview of fmax changes for each case, and table  <dig> shows the statistical results of the comparison.

the most important differences among average psd's are observed in pressure level  <dig> . the curves show similar psd for control, wood and metal, considering their maximum frequency component, and these differ from the average for acrylic and sandpaper. figure  <dig> shows that when pressure level increases, fmax of the signal is clearly affected by the variance of the fmax values. significant differences in the maximum frequency of the signals, are observed at pressure levels  <dig> and  <dig> . the comparison at wood vs. acrylic and wood vs. sandpaper had the highest values  for pressure level  <dig>  metal vs. sandpaper also had a high value . the values decreased for the remaining pressure levels, except wood vs. sandpaper, which increased slightly . however, these results couldn t be associated with the roughness of the materials.

discussion
previous studies showed that the rats distinguish surfaces with different roughness  <cit> . arabzadeh et al.  <cit>  recently described the neural coding properties underlying roughness discrimination by rats. they hypothesized that the kinetics signatures of palpated surfaces define the neuronal firing patterns of first-order and cortex neurons.

in the present work we analyzed the multifiber afferent discharge during active whisking to study texture sensations. multifiber recordings allowed us to characterize this sensory system considering all neurons activated during a discrimination protocol.

it is known that rats employ strategies to optimize the acquisition of information and these strategies are related to the coordination of motor patterns   <cit> . therefore we studied texture discrimination by considering pressure levels as a possible behavioral strategy. a platform with different materials was situated in parallel to the animal axis and perpendicular to the whisker length. to obtain different degrees of pressure, the platform was moved closer to the tip of the whisker   and maintained in this position during the recordings.

the materials used in the present work could be activating the follicle receptors in different ways. our results suggest that the quantification of the afferent nerve activity  could be related to the physical properties of the surfaces, specifically, to the roughness. as roughness increased, the rms values also increased in almost all cases, suggesting a direct relation . the similar roughness measured for metal and acrylic  could explain the results observed for pressure level  <dig>  the analysis with rms values suggests that pressure level  <dig> could be the most effective for improving tactile information acquisition of different textures.

the frequency analysis of the afferent discharge only showed significant differences at pressure level  <dig> with an important difference observed between wood and sandpaper. this could be due to the differences in their physical characteristics such as spacing between peaks and valleys  .

methodological considerations
the vibrissa sweeping was produced by an electrical stimulation of the facial nerve. we used square-wave pulse to simulate the vibrissal whisking at its natural frequency . whisking movements during artificial whisking may differ from those produced during natural whisking in some details. the vibrissa displacement angle observed in our experiments could differ from that of a behaving rat, as was previously described  <cit> . however, our stimulus protocol allowed us to record the afferent discharges simultaneously with the muscular activation. in this way we also include the additional information due to active muscle contractions- that could affect sensory receptors during whisking- in our analysis. this was not considered in previous reports about neural coding in texture discrimination.

one important distinction between previous work done using the frequency analysis and the present study is our use of the parametric model for psd analysis.

the parametric model is an alternative to discrete fourier transforms. these avoid problems such as the phenomenon of frequency leakage, frequency resolution, large estimation variance in the case of random signals, implicit assumption of either signal periodicity  or signal equal to zero outside the interval of interest .

CONCLUSIONS
this study investigated the peripheral afferent response of the vibrissal system to tactile stimulation. our results suggest that physical properties of different materials could be transduced by the trigeminal sensory system of the rats, as are shown by amplitude and frequency component changes.

the relationship between rms values and material roughness reveal that this physical parameter is better transduced than others. the information in frequency is extremely limited as the pressure level increases and wouldn t be related to the physical properties of the materials used.

the vibrissal pressure variation induced neural activity changes in all cases. our results reveal that pressure level  <dig> would be the "optimum" pressure to detect texture differences suggesting a behavioral strategy that improves the information acquisition.

