BACKGROUND
the three-dimensional  structures of proteins provide valuable insights into their biochemical activities and biological functions. the most widely used experimental methods for determining 3d structures, x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance , have limitations in both time and tractability. for x-ray crystallography sufficient quantities of purified proteins may be difficult to produce and to crystallize when obtained  <cit> . for nmr, proteins are often too large or insufficiently soluble to be tractable  <cit> . nevertheless, genome sequencing projects create a continuing need to translate sequence information into structure  <cit> .

where experimental methods are problematic, theoretical models can often provide valuable information about the structure of interest. methods that use physical and chemical properties of amino acids together with information about small fragments of already solved structures have had success with smaller proteins but are still limited in accuracy and reliability  <cit> . however, knowledge-based methods, such as comparative modelling, which exploit information about amino acid substitutions that accumulate during divergent evolution and are compatible with preserving folded state and function  <cit> , have been the most successful in producing good quality models. comparative modelling approaches, which can be broadly classified as fragment-based, for example composer  <cit> , 3d-jigsaw  <cit>  and swiss-model  <cit> , or restraint-based, for example modeller  <cit>  continue to improve  <cit> . the latest approaches, for example tasser, use a combination of threading and restraint optimisation by sampling conformational restraints using monte carlo methods  <cit> . other protocols use monte carlo searches in a reduced space determined by restraints from multiple templates and fragments generated from a consensus of results from a number of modelling programs  <cit> . nevertheless, recent casp exercises  <cit>  have demonstrated little significant improvement and have identified empirical limits for knowledge-based protein structure prediction, even when the problem of incorrect alignment has been eliminated  <cit> .

we have previously applied the restraint based conformational search engine rapper  <cit>  to a number of protein modelling problems where partial structural information was available, including ab initio loop modelling  <cit> , cα tracing  <cit>  and modelling into electron density from x-ray crystallographic experiments  <cit> . here we develop the approach for comparative modelling, focusing on sampling ϕ/ψ torsion angles under spatial restraints derived from knowledge of homologous structures. we assess the limitations of the method by comparing the use of spatial restraints derived from the homologous template structures with that using restraints derived from experimentally defined structures of targets. we show that significant improvements in model accuracy can be achieved by incorporating additional restraints from main chain curvature and torsion and as side chain χ angle conservation derived from the structures of homologues. by generating an ensemble of solutions consistent with both the target sequence and template structures we provide a more appropriate representation of the structure. by formulating homologous structural information as sets of restraints we can begin to consider how comparative models might be used to inform conformer generation from sparse experimental data  <cit> .

RESULTS
we explored a number of different modes of modelling using rapper. the principal differences between these modes lie in the information used from the templates to derive the restraints. in order to minimise problems arising from inaccuracy of sequence alignment, we used structure-based alignments from the homstrad database  <cit> . for each of  <dig> targets, models were generated for one member of the family using four homologues, constructing fifteen models using all possible combinations of four, three, two and one homologue as templates. for comparison, models were also built using the standard modelling mode in modeller. this combinatorial approach allowed rapper to be parameterised and the performance assessed against a variety of templates of varying sequence identity. in order to assess the usefulness of different restraints described below, models were generated for a greater number of targets using a more limited subset of templates based on percentage sequence identity of target and template. again, for comparison purposes, models were also generated using modeller .

members of the homologous families  used to model the target are shown with the target and its pdb code in the first column. the percentage sequence identity and the pdb code of the four templates used to model on is given in the subsequent columns. the four families used to parameterise are indicated by *, while the ten families that were used to explore the effect of pid are indicated by §.

to explore the effect of the number and diversity of templates on rapper building using the standard mode of conformer generation, fifteen combinations as shown in the table where used. template  <dig> was closest by pid to the target with template  <dig> the most remote.

the all-atom rmsd in Ångstrom's for rapper models built in the standard mode for ten families. the combinations of template to target are as indicated in table  <dig> . to provide a fair comparison the percentage of residues used in the rmsd calculation is given in parentheses.

the all-atom rmsd given in Ångstrom's for rapper models built using a. cα-trace mode; b. using optimal spatial restraints mode using based on all templates; c. stranded restraint derivation using just the closest template by pid; d. stranded restraint derivation using all templates; e. restraints predicted by choral and andante using all templates; f. using restraints based on the pid of the templates using all templates; g. using modeller based on just the closest templates and h. using modeller based on all the templates.

the statistical significance of the differences in all-atom rmsd between the modelling methods as reported in table  <dig> . the differences are assessed using a t-test of a paired sample between two means. the truth logic given is for p values of  <dig>  and  <dig> .

deriving theoretically optimal restraints
as a control, we also modelled the target structure based on the experimental cα positions using rapper ; this provides an upper bound on the quality of the models obtainable using cα coordinates alone from the homologous templates. the root-mean-square deviations  of these models from the corresponding experimentally determined structures are similar in magnitude to the experimental variation in solution structures determined by nmr. for example, the solution structure of α-parvalbumin has an all-atom rmsd of  <dig>  ±  <dig> Å   <cit> . models built using the cα trace mode of rapper – guided by cα atom coordinates derived from experimental structures – have loop regions with up to 1Å rmsd and organised secondary structural elements with up to  <dig> – <dig> Å rmsd from the parent structure. a significant proportion of the difference may result from different crystal packing in the target structure and that of the homologues used in the modelling.  <cit> . the remainder probably represents errors introduced by  restraints from homologous structures.

we calculated the rmsd at each residue in order to identify large local errors which can have an undue influence on the overall rmsd  <cit> . we calculated other measures such as tm  <cit> , gdt  <cit>  and maxsub  <cit>  scores as well as the overall rmsd but all failed to identify local regions of inaccuracy in the model. this is illustrated by models for the glycosyl hydrolase family  <dig>  protein family; figure  <dig> shows that the last three residues contribute most to the overall rmsd and this is due to a hook-like conformation of the three c-terminal residues in all available templates, which is not present in the experimental target structure, perhaps due to crystal packing.

next, we generated the best possible comparative models but now using optimal spatial restraints for each residue. these target structures were superimposed on those of the templates in order to ascertain, for each residue, which template cα atom is closest to the target. the coordinates of these atoms were then used as the centres for the restraint spheres in an analogous way to the cα trace mode of rapper previously developed for x-ray refinement  <cit> .

models based on restraints derived from the closest available template  are often close in accuracy to those defined by the cα-trace model based on the actual structure . in many cases, the models show a lower all-atom rmsd than the equivalent models produced by modeller, but there are the notable exceptions of phospholipase a <dig>  and the response regulator receiver domain . in the case of phospholipase a <dig> this is due to an insertion of a small section of alpha helical secondary structure flanked by two short loop regions not present in any of the templates. with the lack of any other restraint rapper tends to generate expanded loops, while modeller's molecular dynamics energy function tends to generate a more compact loop. in the response regulator receiver domain, a section of alpha-helical secondary structure has an incorrect orientation due to a slight extension in one of the flanking loop regions. as with phospholipase a <dig> rapper minimises the contacts in the flanking loop region which pushes the extension out, resulting in an incorrect orientation of the secondary structural element. for regions which have few short range contacts, rapper is provided with few restraints and builds poor models. this might be improved by using secondary structure predictions as restraints to provide a more directed search of the available conformational space.

improving on the naïve use of restraints
we explored whether model accuracy can be improved by using multiple templates  <cit> . we did this by deriving the restraints in three different ways. first, templates were weighted according to their percentage amino acid sequence identity. the size of the restraint sphere derived from each template was varied in size in order to influence the frequency of sampling. this provided a significant improvement in the accuracy .

the rmsd for models of each of the family targets generated using rapper with restraints derived from pdf's, rapper with the standard restraint derivation procedure and modeller. the rmsd's for modller and standard rapper differ from the equivalent rmsd's in tables  <dig> and  <dig> as they are calculated over the equivalent number of residues for all models in each family. the two families with difficulties in pdf generation are indicated by ‡.

secondly, we incorporated information from two newly developed prediction programs as restraints. the first program, choral  <cit> , calculates the curvature and torsion of the main chain residues for each template. sequences of residues with similar patterns of curvature and torsion are clustered together and scored against the target sequence using environmentally-constrained substitution tables. choral constructs a set of non-overlapping, structurally conserved clusters, which best represent the main chain of the target. weighting sections of templates by the choral prediction in this way reduces the influence from inappropriate templates on main chain restraints. the second prediction program, andante  <cit> , predicts the side chain χ angles from likely conservation of those in structures of homologues. these predictions can be used to limit the rotamer search space by rapper. the predictions from choral and andante are presented to rapper as possibilities for each template residue defined by ellipsoidal restraints for cα and side chain centroids. if no prediction is made, then all of the templates are used to generate the restraint ellipsoids. rapper models generated using choral/andante predictions showed significant improvements in the modelling by rapper .

third, we defined restraints from homologues of known structure as 3-d probability density functions, using a local percentage sequence identity calculated over a window of  <dig> residues. while testing this approach it quickly became obvious that using the standard deviation of the pdf to define the radius of the ellipsoid for the side chain centroid was too restrictive as it prevented effective exploration of a range of rotamer states. thus the side chain restraint sphere size was set as a default value. a significant improvement in modelling was seen by using restraints generated with a pdf, with p  values using a paired means t-test. no overall significant improvement was made compared to modeller . there were a few cases where the pdf-derived restraints led to inaccuracies. for example, when building targets in the flavodoxins  family, a significant increase in all-atom rmsd comes from the pdf being overly influenced by templates with similar local pid's but significantly different structures . a similar problem is also observed for the globins . we had already chosen templates in the relevant functional state, so it was not due to an injudicious choice of templates. for both the flavodoxins and globins arises from differences in conformations, particularly of loops, due to different environments in the crystals.

comparing nmr and comparative ensembles
although nmr methods have led to the generation of ensembles, x-ray and comparative models have usually been presented as single conformers, though often multiple models are generated during the experimental or modelling process. an ensemble of multiple conformers captures more information, as it allows regions to be identified that are structurally variable, representing the intrinsic dynamics of the target structure or uncertainties in the modelling process. in order to examine this, we compared the ensemble generated by rapper for 1pvaa as target, using other structures from the α-parvalbumin family , to the experimentally determined nmr ensemble of the same protein.

the rapper and nmr ensembles, superimposed on the crystallographic model, are shown in figure 3a. it can be seen that the two ensembles have similar features with respect to compactness and diversity in different regions of the polypeptide chain, with the comparative modelling ensemble closer to the crystal model than the nmr ensemble. in order to gain more insight into this observation, the mode of the distribution of rmsd for the two ensembles was calculated for each residue. the two curves  are very similar as shown by a correlation coefficient of  <dig>  when comparing the first derivative for each curve . the fact that the rapper ensemble is more similar to the crystallographic model than the nmr ensemble can be seen when the all-atom rmsd is calculated for each of the models in the ensemble . if the all-atom rmsds are calculated for the two ensemble representative models, the rapper representative model is closer to the crystal structure than the equivalent representative model from the nmr ensemble. the representative model is, in the case of rapper, the geometric average of the ensemble, while in the case of nmr it is that chosen by the nmr spectroscopist on deposition to the pdb. furthermore the rapper representative model is always much closer to the crystal structure than any of the individual models that make up the ensemble. the wider variability seen in the nmr ensemble may be due to compaction by crystal packing. also the crystallographic model is a single time and space averaged representation of the protein in question. this representation may be inadequate in fully explaining the experimental data, especially at medium and lower resolutions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the differences between the comparative modelling protocol of rapper, the cα-trace models, and most importantly modes that use an optimal restraint network based on knowledge of the target structure demonstrate that there is a limit to which we could hope to build a reliable model based solely on homologous templates using rapper. nevertheless, the restraint networks based on differential geometry, pattern recognition and χ angle conservation described here are all shown to be useful approaches to introducing further structural information.

the application of rapper to comparative modelling provides an effective means of exploring the conformational space available to a target sequence. the use of different methods for defining restraints from homologous templates shows that better methods for generating positional restraints can greatly improve structure prediction. generation of an ensemble of solutions that are consistent with both target sequence and knowledge derived from the template structures provides a more appropriate representation of a structural prediction than a single model.

as we have already demonstrated in generating conformers using low resolution x-ray data <cit> , rapper allows the testing of weak hypotheses and speculations about structures where the ratio of observations to parameters is low. for comparative modelling, where restraints derived from distant homologues or regions of divergent structure are often inaccurate, we have now shown that rapper can explore conformational space defined by restraints from varying combinations of templates or secondary structure predictions. this suggests that there might be advantage in integrating restraints derived from knowledge of homologous structures with restraints provided by sparse or low resolution experimental data. thus information from structures of homologues could be of particular use in generating conformers consistent with low resolution x-ray electron density and electron microscopy density, nmr where there are insufficient observations and small angle x-ray scattering . we are now investigating such applications, not only with rapper but also with rapper-tk  <cit> , which can be used to model not only proteins but also other macromolecules and their complexes.

