BACKGROUND
one general functional characteristic of a gene is essentiality - whether that gene is required for cellular viability and growth. in haploid  genomes, this characteristic can be assessed by attempting to delete a specific gene from a genome. when such a deletion is not possible, this gene is frequently termed “essential”  <cit> , implying that the gene is necessary for cell growth and viability. gene disruption, although less precise, is more commonly used to infer essentiality using a similar criterion. for example, genes that cannot be disrupted by transposon insertion have been inferred as being essential .

one important question is how quickly essential functions change over evolutionary time. if orthologous protein coding genes in two bacterial strains differ in their essentiality classification, this suggests that either the biochemical nature of the protein has changed, or that the cellular context in which the protein acts has changed  <cit> . it has been experimentally established that such transitions can occur . here we examine how frequently proteins go from being essential to non-essential and vice versa in nature.

a recent study used tn-seq to quantify changes in the essentiality classifications of protein coding genes between three alpha-proteobacteria: caulobacter crescentus, brevundimonas subvibrioides, and agrobacterium tumefaciens  <cit> . the analysis showed that although orthologous cell components are well conserved, the essentiality of such components  had changed considerably, with only  <dig> orthologous genes being essential in all three organisms, despite their relatively close evolutionary relationship . this surprising result contrasts with those of canals et al.  <cit> , who performed a comparative tn-seq analysis in the more closely related bacteria salmonella typhimurium and salmonella typhi, and found  <dig> genes in which transposon density differed substantially between the two strains.

in this study we combine dense transposon mutagenesis with high-throughput sequencing  to quantify gene essentiality in shigella flexneri 2a 2457t . we compare the essentiality classifications of protein coding genes in shigella with a gold-standard assessment of essentiality in the closely related strain escherichia coli k <dig> bw <dig>   <cit> . these two stains are  <dig>  % identical in their 16s rna genes and share approximately 70 % of their genomic content.

this proximity in evolutionary distance, and the use of a gold-standard data set, brings two unique advantages that have not been available in other studies that have used tn-seq or similar methods to quantify gene essentiality . first, by relying on the null hypothesis that protein coding genes do maintain their essentiality characteristics, we can objectively assess which quantitative features in the shigella tn-seq data best predict essentiality or non-essentiality of their orthologous counterparts in e. coli; such a comparison to a gold-standard has not yet been used to assess the quality and sensitivity of tn-seq data  <cit> , although several studies have validated a small number of tn-seq-inferred growth defects using clean deletion methods . second, the fact that these two taxa are very closely related taxa allows us to quantify on a short time scale the fraction of the essential gene complement that has changed, and thus the rate with which orthologues change in their essential functions.

the data presented here suggest that the essential gene complement of shigella and e. coli overlap considerably. indeed, we find no strong evidence that there are any protein-coding genes that are essential in e. coli but not shigella. conversely, we do find a small number of genes that play critical roles for shigella growth, but which have dispensable roles in e. coli, or which are absent entirely from e. coli. this implies that the functional correspondence, in terms of essentiality, has changed for only a small number of protein-coding genes.

however, our analysis also suggests that some protein-coding genes that we observe as undisrupted by transposon insertions are in fact not essential for cell growth. instead, they are either essential for transposon insertion to occur successfully, or their disruption  is detrimental to cell growth. this result emphasizes that in high throughput transposon mutagenesis studies, false positive inferences of essentiality may be common, and that simply increasing the resolution or precision of a dataset cannot necessarily solve this problem.

taken together, our data suggests that the essential gene complement is relatively static over short time scales. however, when protein-coding genes do change from being non-essential to being essential, this appears more likely to occur in pathogenic organisms. one reason might be that the nutrient-rich host environment absolves the organism from manufacturing its own nutrients, leading to the loss of many catabolic functions  <cit> . if some of these functions are redundant, their loss will cause non-essential genes to become essential. it is also possible that such organisms have smaller population sizes and are prone to the accumulation of deleterious mutations. it would be interesting to see if this pattern is observed when comparing other pathogens to their free-living sister taxa. if antibiotics can be directed against the function or expression of such differentially essential genes, this may allow targeting such treatments toward specific bacterial strains.

RESULTS
a transposon mutagenesis library provides fine-scale resolution of gene essentiality
we generated a transposon insertion library by conjugating a shigella icsa mutant  <cit>  with a strain containing a plasmid with an inducible mini-tn <dig> transposase  <cit>  that has decreased hotspot activity . after overnight growth of the library on tryptic soy broth  agar plates, we harvested and pooled the colonies. on three separate days, aliquots of this pool were grown overnight in 2 ml of tsb, then diluted 1: <dig> and grown to an od of  <dig>  . the resulting cells were harvested, the replicates were bar coded and sequencing libraries were prepared. we sequenced all replicates on a single illumina hiseq lane. for all the analyses presented in this study, we have pooled all data from these three replicates.fig.  <dig> histograms of distances between inserts for  shigella chromosome and  shigella virulence plasmid. the median distance between inserts is indicated by the dotted line. a plurality of inserts are separated by only a single bp for both in both the chromosome and the plasmid. the insets in  and  indicate the slight but detectable biases in transposon insert location using a weight matrix motif. the reverse cumulative plots show the observed fractions of distances between inserts for the chromosome  and the plasmid . in blue, the observed frequencies are plotted. in black, the expected frequencies are plotted, given a geometric distribution  of inter-insert distances . for both the chromosome and the plasmid, there are considerably more large regions uninterrupted by transposons than one would expect given the geometric null model, observed as a shift of the curve to the right



from this pooled data, we mapped insertions at  <dig>  unique positions on the shigella chromosome , and  <dig>  unique positions on the large shigella virulence plasmid . the median distance between inserts on the chromosome was  <dig> base pairs ; on the plasmid this distance was 9 bp. a plurality of inserts were separated by only a single bp , and 95 % of all inter-insert distances on the chromosome were less than 117 bp; the corresponding figure for the plasmid was 61 bp. mapping these insertions also allowed us to infer snp positions on the shigella chromosome that have accrued during laboratory passaging, and snp positions on the plasmid that differentiate the shigella flexneri 2a 2457t plasmid and the shigella flexneri 2a str.  <dig> plasmid pcp <dig> .

although the distribution of transposon inserts was relatively even across both the chromosome , at smaller scales we found many regions in which few or no insertions occurred . quantitative analyses showed that regions containing no transposon insertions for 100 bp or more were considerably enriched in the chromosome and to some extent, the plasmid, compared to a null model with geometrically distributed distances . it is likely that many of these regions are critical for cellular growth in shigella, or for maintenance of the plasmid. indeed, we found that for many of the protein-coding genes in these regions, the orthologous e. coli genes are known to be essential .fig.  <dig> orthologous genes known to be essential in e. coli are depleted for transposon insertions in shigella. a region of the shigella chromosome is shown, with genes whose orthologues are known to be essential for growth in e. coli   <cit> , or non-essential . the unique locations of transposon insertions are plotted as vertical black segments. in the genome region shown here, none of the genes essential in e. coli have orthologues that are interrupted in shigella


fig.  <dig> differences in essentiality classification between e. coli k <dig> and shigella.
a cumulative distributions showing the mean distances between inserts for orfs depending on whether their orthologues are known to be non-essential  or essential  in e. coli. all orfs that are completely uninterrupted by transposons have been plotted at the very right end of the x-axis. the dotted vertical line indicates the cut-off that we used to delineate essentiality in shigella . the  <dig> blue points to the left of the dotted vertical line indicate orfs that are essential in e. coli but not shigella by our metric. these are likely to be false negatives , as all have inter-insert distances greater than 100 bp . black points to the right of the dotted vertical line indicate orfs that we classify as essential in shigella but not in e. coli. many of these orfs have e. coli orthologues whose deletion genotypes exhibit robust growth, suggesting that their essentiality status has changed. b a venn diagram showing the overlap between essential orthologous orfs in e. coli and shigella




in total, eight out of  <dig> plasmid orfs had no transposon insertions. five relate to plasmid maintenance: three are replication related proteins , and two  are located within the plasmid stabilisation region. the absence of inserts in these regions is explained by the fact that if such insertions did occur, the plasmid would be lost; such insertions would thus never be sequenced. one orf, acp, is only 234 bp in length, and has a lower likelihood of harbouring insertions due to its small size. the two remaining orfs lacking transposon insertions were mxih  and spas , and both relate to antigen presentation. indeed, we found that many of the orfs most depleted for transposon insertions relate to the mxi and spa operons , but currently have no explanation as to why this was so.

taken in conjunction, our data is largely consistent with the fact that the shigella plasmid contains no essential genes  <cit> , or genes whose deletion is detrimental for growth. thus, our transposon library likely provides a fine-scale assessment of which shigella chromosomal orfs provide critical cellular functions.

average distance between inserts clearly delineates essential and non-essential orfs
we next quantified which transposon insertion patterns in the chromosome were good predictors of the essentiality of open reading frames. to do so, we first identified  <dig>  orthologous open reading frames present in both e. coli and shigella for which we also had data on essentiality from both the keio  <cit>  and the profiling of the escherichia coli chromosome   <cit>  studies . we considered this combined gene set as a gold-standard of essentiality for two reasons: it is not subject to artefacts that might exist in tn-seq dataset, such as insertion biases or biases arising during sequencing library preparation ; and combining both the keio and pec datasets should result in few false positive or false negative essentiality characterizations. this set consisted of  <dig> orthologues considered essential by both studies  <cit> ,  <dig>  genes considered non-essential by both studies, and  <dig> genes for which the two studies disagree.

these disagreements include ten genes considered essential by the pec study alone and  <dig> considered essential by the keio study alone. some of these discrepancies may be due to genetic differences in the strains used for the two studies   <cit> . some of the other differences are likely due to methodology . for example, at least one gene that could not be deleted in the keio set is an anti-toxin gene .

other differences may be due to duplications or other unforeseen genetic changes that occurred during the genetic manipulations, as has been noted previously  <cit> . three pieces of evidence give some insight into how to resolve these discrepancies, and all suggest that the keio data may be more prone to having both more false positives and false negatives. considering gene conservation in gamma-proteobacteria: 90 %  of the genes considered essential by the pec study but not the keio study have orthologues in more than two thirds of all surveyed gamma-proteobacteria  <cit> ; only 40 %  of the genes considered essential by keio but not the pec are similarly conserved . similarly, 80 % of the pec-specific genes have zero or one transposon insertion, while only 40 % of the keio-specific genes are as depleted for insertions. finally, for all variables we use here to predict essentiality , the pec data score better than the keio data 

we next quantified several characteristics for each protein-coding gene in our tn-seq data set, including the total number of inserts per orf, the mean distance between inserts, the density of inserts, the length of the 5’ fraction of the orf upstream of the first insertion, the largest uninterrupted region in the orf, and others . we took as a null hypothesis that generally, genes have maintained their essentiality characteristics since the divergence of e. coli and shigella. we then tested which of these characteristics best predicted the essentiality status of their orthologous counterparts in the gold-standard dataset of open reading frame essentiality in e. coli .

we found that the best predictor of essentiality status in e. coli was the mean distance between transposon insertions in their shigella orthologues , with l being the orf length and nt being the total number of transposon insertions; materials and methods; additional file 4: figure s3). this metric is the inverse of the insertion index used by langridge et al. , and as such, retains information on gene length when there are no insertions. for the shigella orthologues of the  <dig> e. coli essential genes, only two had a mean distance between inserts of less than 150 bp.  <dig>  had a mean inter-insert distance less than 260 bp. in contrast, only  <dig>  % of the orthologues of non-essential e. coli genes had a mean distance between inserts of greater than 260 bp . we selected this mean inter-insert distance of 260 bp as a cut-off for classifying shigella orfs as essential, as it provided a reasonable balance between protein coding genes classified as essential in e. coli but non-essential in shigella  versus non-essential in e. coli and essential in shigella . by extension, genes that are less than 260 bp in length and in which we do not observe insertions were inferred as essential . we note, importantly, that almost all of the predictors we tested performed extremely well .

we also mapped insertions in  <dig> out of  <dig> trnas.  <dig> of these harboured only one or two insertions, and all had three or fewer except the trna for selenocysteine, which contained seven transposon insertions . however, as neither the keio nor the pec dataset analyse the essentiality of trna genes, we did not analyse this data further.

we next investigated in greater detail the disagreements in essentiality classification between e. coli and shigella . of the  <dig> e. coli-essential genes that this metric identified as non-essential in shigella, all are likely to be false negatives . nine have a mean distance between inserts of greater than 150 bp . four contain only a single insertion, and all eleven contain six or fewer insertions. this suggests, surprisingly, that there are no genes that are essential in e. coli but whose shigella orthologues are non-essential. this similarity in essentiality is not due to the fact that we use a characteristic that most closely predicts essentiality in the gold standard dataset – this result is robustly corroborated by any meaningful metric that we used ). overall, this data gives us a strong reason to believe that genes will have maintained their essentiality status  since the divergence of e. coli and shigella.

many non-essential e. coli orthologues of essential shigella genes exhibit impaired growth
the above evidence for the rarity of changes in gene essentiality classification suggests that many of the discrepancies in essentiality between e. coli and shigella are false positives due simply to the shigella mutants being non-essential, but having significantly impaired growth. indeed, of the  <dig> discrepant genes classified as non-essential in e. coli but essential in shigella, 32 % of the orthologous e. coli deletion genotypes exhibit low growth yields . this contrasts strongly with the  <dig> orfs we classified as non-essential in shigella: only  <dig>  % of the orthologous e. coli deletion genotypes had low growth yields . similar but less striking patterns were observed for growth in glucose minimal mops media .fig.  <dig> growth yields of orthologous gene pairs. orthologous gene pairs that are non-essential in e. coli but inferred as essential in shigella  tend to exhibit low growth yields in e. coli. orfs that we infer to be uniquely essential in shigella consistently have e. coli orthologues with low growth phenotypes in lb media after 22 h . for genes inferred as uniquely essential in shigella, 32 % of the orthologous e. coli deletion genotypes exhibit low growth yields . for genes we classified as non-essential in shigella and e. coli only  <dig>  % exhibit low growth yields. thus, some genes we infer as essential in shigella may not be strictly essential, but instead be required for robust growth. despite this enrichment for low-growth phenotypes, there are many genes which we infer as essential in shigella, but which have e. coli orthologues whose deletion genotypes exhibit robust growth 



it is important to note that tn-seq assays have only limited power to differentiate essential genes from those whose deletion results in severe growth deficiencies. during the course of preparing the library for sequencing, we estimate that at least  <dig> generations of growth occurred. if a mutant has a growth rate even 40 % that of the wild type, we would expect it to undergo only six doublings in contrast to the  <dig> of the wild type. this would result in a greater than 500-fold underrepresentation of such a mutant . in addition, this calculation does not take into account any effects that the mutations have on the length of the lag time, which might also have significant effects on the relative frequency of some mutants. if, in contrast, transposon insertion affect only the growth yield, then this will have much less of an effect.

in light of this limited resolution power; given that our prior expectation is that essentiality status changes only rarely; and because we are specifically interested in genes that may have changed in essentiality status, from this point on we focus our analysis on essential shigella genes whose orthologous e. coli deletion genotype exhibits robust growth yields ). for these genes, we have relatively high confidence that while their deletion in e. coli has few effects on growth, their disruption in shigella is lethal or results in a severe growth deficiency.

artefacts of the transposon screen explain some false positive discrepancies
forty-two essential shigella genes have orthologous e. coli deletion genotypes with growth yields higher than  <dig>  od <dig> after 22 h growth in lb  <cit>  . careful inspection suggested that some genes were present in this set due to differences in the growth conditions between e. coli keio and pec collections and our own. for example, fhuacd, and tonb all appeared in this set of genes . all four are involved in iron acquisition, and it is likely that iron was limiting in the solid agar media  <cit>  used during the preparation of the tn-seq library, as compared to the liquid lb used to measure growth in the keio study.table  <dig> genes artefactually inferred as essential in shigella



acrab, tolc, ybab, ksga, yebc, smpb  a


prib

fhuacd, tonb

rpst

miaa

ompa

pita

potb

sapb

ptsh, yeac, ydhr

agene deletions of orthologous e. coli genes with growth levels less than od <dig>  <dig>  have these levels in parentheses



listed here are those genes that were likely inferred as essential largely due to the gene disruptions having direct effects on  antibiotic resistance,  successful transposition events,  differences between the growth conditions of the e. coli and shigella essentiality studies, or  systematically different effects of gene disruption versus gene deletion.

for a second set of genes, the discrepancies are likely due to the differences in methodology between the e. coli  and shigella  studies . we inferred acrab and tolc as essential. these genes act together as an efflux pump, and mutations in these genes result in hypersensitivity to antibiotics  <cit> . thus, clones with transposon insertions in these genes are unlikely to survive during library growth under kanamycin selection. a similar explanation likely underlies the fact that we inferred ybab, ksga, yebc, and smpb as essential: these four play role in aminoglycoside resistance .

we also inferred prib, dnaq, hold, xsea, and recd as being essential in shigella, although the e. coli deletion genotypes exhibit robust growth. all of these are involved in dna replication, recombination, and double strand break repair, all of which are essential processes in the completion of the transposition process  <cit> . the related genes recbc and ruvabc contained a single insert between the five of them, while the e. coli deletion genotypes all exhibit only slightly impaired growth of  <dig>  od <dig> or more . certain recbc mutants can have considerable effects on the rate of tn <dig> excision  <cit>  and we speculate that this may be one reason why we rarely observed insertions in these loci. it has also been speculated that ruv mutants inhibit transposition  <cit> . we propose that after transposition occurs, in order for the event to be successfully resolved, transcription of these genes is often required, and the transposition itself precludes the formation of a proper transcript.

thus, the dispensability of these ten genes in e. coli, and the similarity in their function, suggests that they all affect successful transposon insertion rather than having critical effects on growth. notably, prib, dnaq, hold, ruva, and ruvb were also inferred as essential in the closely related bacterium salmonella typhimurium via a high-throughput transposon assay. in the same study ruvc, recb, recc, and ybab, were inferred as extremely important for growth while ksga and yebc were inferred as significantly impairing growth  <cit> . again, the majority of these knockouts in e. coli exhibit very robust growth . given the roles that these genes are known to play in transposition and antibiotic resistance, this suggests that the inference of essentiality may be due to artefacts of the transposon screen.

for a third set of genes, the literature presents conflicting information on the growth phenotypes, with studies that have individually assessed growth rates suggesting poor growth. these include rpst  <cit> , miaa  <cit> , and ompa  <cit>  .

there were also three open reading frames that we inferred as differentially essential, as they were completely uninterrupted in our data. however, these open reading frames, ydhr, yeac, and ptsh, are small and thus less likely to be disrupted, being 306 bp, 270 bp, and 258 bp long, respectively. under our theoretical geometric distribution fit , one in  <dig>  gaps will be longer than 150 bp and one in  <dig>  will be longer than 250 bp . insertion biases  will increase these frequencies. given that we observe over  <dig>  insertion sites , it is probable, but not certain, that this discrepancy is not driven by different physiological roles that they play in e. coli as compared to shigella.

finally, we tested for other possible artefactual patterns in the data based on gene function. we asked whether there were specific functional categories in which genes were more likely to be inferred as essential using the transposon mutagenesis screen in shigella as opposed to clean deletions in e. coli. we found two functional categories of genes that showed clear enrichment: genes involved in substrate transport and / or active transport, which were  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold enriched, respectively . we hypothesize that one reason for this enrichment is that truncated versions of these proteins disturb the operation of the sec machinery, thereby decreasing or stopping growth. thus, we propose that the four active transporters we infer as essential in shigella but not e. coli  are artefacts due to the transposition process resulting in truncated proteins.fig.  <dig> functional categorization of transposon disrupted genes. transposon disruption of shigella genes with transport-related functions are more likely to be inferred as essential compared to clean deletions of similarly functioning genes in e. coli. we classified genes according to function using the multifun functional classification system  <cit> . for any category containing more than ten essential e. coli genes, we also calculated the number of shigella-essential genes. as expected, most categories show a relative excess of shigella-essential genes, as we inferred approximately 50 % more genes as being essential in shigella versus e. coli . however, two functional categories show a clear excess above this level: substrate transport and active transport, showing a  <dig> - and  <dig> -fold increased probability of inferring a gene as being essential in shigella as opposed to e. coli. this provides evidence that genes in these functional categories are more likely to be inferred as artefactually essential. this artefactual effect has not been noted previously. for each functional category , we show the number of genes in that category ; the number of genes found to be essential in e. coli ; and the level of enrichment of essential genes in shigella 

fig.  <dig> three genes involved in proline biosynthesis  appear uniquely essential in shigella. the orthologous e. coli deletion strains exhibit robust growth , but are essential by our criteria. proa and proc completely lack transposon insertions, while prob contains only two insertions near the 3′end, which leaves approximately 70 % of the gene intact, including the entire kinase and substrate-binding domain



genes uniquely essential in shigella flexneri
while many differences in essentiality classification between shigella and e. coli are likely due to  severe growth defects present in both e. coli and shigella rather than strict essentiality; and  differences in environmental conditions  between the e. coli and shigella assays; and  artefacts of the shigella transposon screen that do not occur in the e. coli knockout screen, we do find a number of genes which we infer to be uniquely essential or important for growth solely in shigella. we expect that the physiological differences between e. coli and shigella drive these differences in gene essentiality .table  <dig> genes inferred as uniquely essential in shigella



lyss

proabc

acka


pta


aceef


pykf
phosphotransacetylase
pyruvate dehydrogenase

rfba, rfbf, rfbg, rfc, and rfbi

cysm

tufb

lepa

spr

rsxb
these genes were inferred as essential in shigella, but have orthologous e. coli deletion genotypes that exhibit robust growth . the genes in the rfb operon have no orthologues in e. coli k <dig> 



among the set of genes essential in shigella but dispensable in e. coli is lyss: this orf has a functional homologue in e. coli , while in shigella flexneri there is no homologue. also in this set of genes are proa, prob, and proc . these genes act in proline biosynthesis. given the rich media the cells were grown in, it is surprising that they would be essential. in addition, as prob is involved in the first committed step of proline synthesis, its disruption should not cause accumulation of toxic intermediates. however, the data provide strong evidence that the disruption of any these three genes is either lethal or causes severe growth defects . interestingly, the active proline transporter putp is absent from shigella  <cit> . it is also known that in salmonella, the cryptic proline transporter proy is silent  <cit> , and we hypothesize that this may also be true of this transporter in shigella. thus, inefficient proline transport from the media might necessitate biosynthesis.

a suite of genes involved in acetate utilization  were all inferred as essential in shigella but dispensable in e. coli. the significantly detrimental effect on growth that such mutants have has been noted previously using a completely different approach  <cit> . the difference in essentiality between these two organisms is most likely due to the absence of acetyl coa synthetase from shigella, and confirms the sensitivity and relevance of our transposon mutagenesis assay for assaying differences between e. coli and shigella biology.

we found one gene involved in cysteine biosynthesis, cysm , which was essential in shigella but not e. coli. notably, cysk and cyse, which code for cysteine synthase a, have relatively large inter-insert distances , despite having fairly robust growth in e. coli. this suggests that cysteine availability may limit growth in shigella. further supporting this hypothesis is that orfs involved in cysteine import have fewer than expected inserts: of the five sulfate / thiosulfate abc transporters, three  have either zero or one insert; a fourth  has only five inserts. all of these have growth yields of od <dig>  <dig>  or greater in e. coli. it is also possible, however, that the low number of inserts in these genes is due to the disproportionately deleterious effects that transposon insertions seem to have in membrane transport proteins, as suggested above.

for only four other orthologous gene pairs is there strong evidence of discrepant essentiality status: tufb , lepa , rsxb , and spr . both tufb and lepa are involved in translation elongation, and interestingly, we also found very few transposon insertions in the only other non-essential gene involved in elongation, tufa . this suggests that genes involved in translation elongation are important for shigella growth despite their relative dispensability in e. coli . we note that tufa and tufb are nearly identical in their sequence, which can create ambiguities in mapping some reads. however, this does not explain the absence of reads mapping to either of them. understanding the molecular mechanisms driving these apparent disparities in growth phenotypes between shigella and e. coli is an important topic for future research. at this point we have no convincing functional connections for the remaining two differentially essential orfs, rsxb and spr.

finally, the transposon insertion data indicated that within a single large operon, containing the orfs rfbacefgi / rfc, four genes completely lacked insertions  . only rfba and rfbc in this operon have e. coli orthologues. the remaining genes lie within a commonly laterally transferred region of the e. coli chromosome containing wbbhijkl, wzxb , and glf. these were all laterally transferred into the k <dig> lineage  <cit> , replacing the shigella-like rfb operon. the genes in this operon all play a role in sugar nucleotide biosynthesis necessary for o-antigen synthesis and production of the lipopolysaccharide component of the outer membrane  <cit> . the functionally related proteins with e. coli orthologues, waaj  and waad , are also depleted for transposon insertions, having one and two inserts, respectively. this provides evidence that specific aspects of this process have become essential in shigella, despite these genes having been replaced by a laterally transferred set in e. coli k <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
by exploiting the extremely close evolutionary relationship of shigella flexneri with e. coli k <dig>  the bacterial strain that has been the most extensively and carefully characterized for its essential gene complement  <cit> , we were able to develop an objective metric to precisely quantify how the results of the tn-seq data relate to essentiality.

a superficial analysis of our tn-seq data suggested that a total of  <dig> orfs in shigella were essential for cellular growth in rich media. this is very much in line with what other tn-seq studies have found, with numbers ranging from  <dig> in caulobacter crescentus  <cit>  to  <dig> in b. subvibrioides to  <dig> in agrobacterium tumefaciens  <cit> . however, it is considerably more than the number found in e. coli using precise in-frame gene knockouts  <cit>  or in bacillus subtilis using targeted knockdowns  <cit> , which is on the order of  <dig> essential genes. in addition, we found that close to 100 % of the reading frames that were classified as essential in e. coli k <dig> were also essential in s. flexneri, giving us a strong prior expectation that the essentiality classifications should match between these two taxa.

a more nuanced analysis suggested four explanations for artefactual discrepancies in essentiality between e. coli and shigella:  many shigella genes were not strictly essential but instead gene disruption caused severe growth impairment;  differences in experimental conditions ;  many of the genes we inferred as essential were important for antibiotic resistance or successful transposition, and are in fact dispensable for growth; and  transposon disruption of specific functional classes of genes may result in systematically different effects as compared to gene deletions, for example due to the production of truncated protein products. by carefully dissecting the functions of discrepant genes that do not appear to be artefactual, we were able to pinpoint several genes for which there is evidence of differential physiological roles in e. coli and shigella. among others, these included lyss, three genes involved in proline biosynthesis, and a suite of genes involved in acetate utilization . in addition to these, we found one large operon which appears to have an essential role in shigella growth but which is missing completely in e. coli. there is also some evidence that cysteine biosynthesis or transport is limiting in shigella, or under the conditions we imposed during the experiment, as several genes relating to these process have fewer transposons than would be expected.

even after attempting to decrease false positive inferences of gene essentiality in shigella, it appears to be considerably more common for genes to be dispensable for growth in e. coli, but critical for growth in shigella. we suggests that one reason shigella more may have a larger complement of essential genes than e. coli is that it frequently lives as an intracellular pathogen, and may have lost some of the functional redundancy that is present in e. coli. this may occur because host environments provide an abundance of nutrients, or because pathogens requiring a small infectious dose, such as shigella  <cit> , have inherently smaller population sizes and are more subject to genetic drift. a third possibility is that changes in gene function or redundancy may have occurred through selection for increased virulence, which has resulted in the inactivation of certain genes being selectively advantageous. finally, we note that the discrepancies in essentiality between these two bacteria may be exploited to develop antibiotics that have strain-specific effects  <cit> .

