BACKGROUND
the repository of biomedical literature available from the ncbi's pubmed database  <cit>  is used by researchers to find references related to particular topics or authors. this resource contains a wealth of biological data but it is vast  and therefore multiple tools have been generated to search it . on the one hand, thematic analysis within biomedical text has been used to arrange bibliography according to topics in clusters  <cit>  or categories  <cit> , or to find literature relevant to genes  <cit> . on the other hand, pubmed is a formidable resource for information extraction tools, for example to obtain references to genes  <cit> , relations between genes  <cit> , functional gene annotations  <cit>  or gene associated bibliographic profiles  <cit> .

a particularly valuable task in information extraction is the identification of biomolecular interactions from biomedical text data where the interactors and the type of interaction are identified  <cit> , for example, a protein-protein interaction  between neuroserpin and abeta. some web tools such as ihop  <cit> , string  <cit>  or alibaba  <cit> , can generate networks that include biomolecular interactions extracted from the literature.

however, current text mining tools for biomolecular interactions are not flexible enough to filter interactions extracted from a thematic pubmed query  according to concepts considered significant for the query. for example, finding ppis related to protein aggregation, as in "bri <dig> inhibits abeta aggregation", or relevant to disease as in "neuroserpin binds abeta and is a neuroprotective component of amyloid plaques in alzheimer disease."

the laitor tool  <cit>  was developed to fill this gap as an original text-mining strategy that allows user-defined biological concepts to be searched along the co-occurring bioentities. however, the method was implemented as a mysql-dependent php command-line script, which makes it difficult to biologists lacking computer skills to use the system as it requires the installation of software and specialized term dictionaries, lacks tools to explore and display the evidence behind the extracted information, and does not include mechanisms to share and annotate data relevant for a given user.

to expand the applicability and functionality of the text-mining method implemented in the laitor tool, we have developed pescador , an online tool that allows users to input their own selections of abstracts and protein interaction related concepts, to extract interactions between pairs of biomolecules, select them by type or interacting partners, and visualize them graphically as a network. pescador uses pre-compiled dictionaries of terms  for every organism with deposited genes  and dictionaries of biological concepts . therefore, biologists need to simply load  their literature of interest  to launch the text-mining analysis.

contrary to other web tools mentioned above that represent literature-derived biomolecular interactions, pescador focuses on flexible inputs and outputs and in the representation of the network of interactions and related concepts. such a resource is different from ihop, which does not generate a network view, from string, which does not use pubmed abstracts as input, and from alibaba, which does not allow the user to input selections of pubmed abstracts or concepts. in this respect, pescador constitutes a resource that is complementary to these other tools.

 <dig>  implementation
 <dig> . system architecture
pescador is an online resource developed using the php programming language . a user query is uploaded by an html form. this query is composed of a list of pmids to be scanned for gene/protein co-occurrences and, optionally, of a list of words  to be found in the co-occurrence analysis. the list of pmids can be either typed, provided in a file, or obtained by a query to ncbi's pubmed  <cit> , medlineranker  <cit>   or xplormed  <cit>  . next, the query is assigned a process id and loaded on a job list. a launch agent reads the job list every two seconds and selects queuing processes to be executed. finally, the selected process is subject to text mining analysis , which includes tagging the requested pubmed abstracts. tagged abstracts are stored in a local database to save time for future searches. when finished, a script adds the id of the finished process on a list of completed jobs, whose results can be browsed or downloaded by users within  <dig> days from the run.

 <dig> . text mining using laitor
pescador uses laitor  <cit>  as text-mining engine to extract sentences with co-occurring bioentities  from the text of the pubmed abstracts requested. first, laitor uses the nlprot program as information extraction tool  <cit>  to tag the abstracts for bioentities using a species-specific dictionary composed of symbols and synonyms for the genes/proteins of the organism selected by the user, which includes non-redundant names and alternative names from the corresponding uniprotkb records  <cit> . next, laitor identifies biointeraction terms in the text of the abstracts according to a dictionary of biointeraction terms. finally, co-occurrences between the previously identified bioentities are classified in four types : two bioentities co-occur in abstract , they co-occur in sentence , they co-occur in a sentence with a biointeraction term  anywhere in the sentence  or co-occur in a sentence with a biointeraction term in between the bioentity names . in the current implementation of pescador, sentences containing four or more bioentities are excluded from the analysis since they tend to be too complex to automatically extract interactions.

laitor does not handle negations, e.g. a sentence such as "protein a does not bind b". one possibility is to try to recognize these sentences in order to just avoid them as it is difficult to identify if the negation refers to the information being extracted . however, the number of sentences negating a biological fact found in abstracts is small and a pragmatic approach is to deal with them as with any other sentence under the assumption that this produces a small number of false positives .

a detailed description of laitor, including a standard benchmarking against the biocreative ii ias dataset, can be found in the original publication  <cit> .

 <dig> . definition of concept dependencies
if the user provides a list of concepts , those will be used to evaluate co-occurrence between those concepts and the previously extracted bioentities. first, the text of the abstract is scanned for occurrences of the phrases present in the list of concepts. then, bioentity co-occurrences within a sentence  are associated to concepts found in the sentence, and anywhere-in-the-abstract bioentity co-occurrences  are associated to all concepts found in the abstract.

 <dig> . website structure
the pescador website is organized as an input html form and subsequent pages that permit users to navigate on completed analyses. these pages are described below.

home page: in this page users can load a pmid list from a file, type it manually, or obtain it from a query to pubmed, medlineranker or xplormed as explained above. in addition, a list of concepts of interest  can be optionally loaded. alternatively, previously analyzed projects can be retrieved from our system by their process id.

status page: in this page, the status of the abstracts' retrieval, tagging and co-occurrence analysis are shown. once all processes are finished, a link to the summary page is exhibited. otherwise, a progress message is displayed.

summary page: this session displays the results available and is composed of two sub-sessions: browse and download results.

terms page: shows a list with all terms identified in the co-occurrence analysis represented with a variable font size that increases with the number of abstracts where the term was found. once a term is selected, it is displayed in a table with the gene id mapped to that term, and the uniprotkb terms mapped to this gene. duplicated tables are shown for ambiguous terms. furthermore, a table with the co-occurrences for the selected term is also displayed, where it is possible to verify the pair, biointeractions list, types of co-occurrences  and abstract's sentences and pmids from which the pair has been extracted.

concepts page: shows the list of concepts found from the list that was loaded, with their respective co-occurring pairs, pointers to the source abstract , and a network of biointeractions from co-occurrences of genes with the selected concept .

abstracts page: shows the list with the loaded pmids. once selected, an abstract text is displayed with the target sentence highlighted in green with violet for co-occurring bioentities, orange for biointeraction terms and blue for concepts. a table displays the entire set of co-occurring pairs extracted from the abstract. these pairs can be validated by the user by clicking in the button in the column "validate pairs". this action will validate all instances of the pair associated to the given abstract and can be reverted.

network page: shows a network generated by medusa  <cit>  inferred from the laitor co-occurrence analysis . terms are mapped by default to official gene symbols but the user can switch the display to raw terms. this page also shows a list with the terms and concepts present in the network, which can be linked to their respective report webpage. there is a control at the top, where users can select different parameters to be used to build the graph. we note that the applet displaying the network might be slow if many elements have to be displayed, depending on the capacity of the computer used. users can solve this problem by reducing the representation to higher confidence type connections.

validations page: displays a table with the pairs of interacting entities and corresponding abstract that have been already validated by the user. it permits the validation table to be saved so that validations can be loaded in other projects and shared with other users.

 <dig>  
RESULTS
pescador, distinctly from other co-occurrence-based text mining tools, allows selecting gene/protein co-occurrence pairs based on their relatedness to biological concepts and therefore, brings together under a common perspective protein interactions that have not been studied under the same research focus. this property can be graphically observed on the behavior of edges displayed on the global network at the pescador web site. in the following paragraphs we exemplify this with two case studies.

 <dig> . case study #1: role of protein aggregation and processing in neural disease
we analyzed a thematic selection of literature consisting of  <dig> abstracts related to alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases in the context of protein processing and aggregation surrounding the protein-protein interactions of two human proteins associated to alzheimer's and parkinson's disease: the amyloid beta precursor protein   <cit>  and alpha-synuclein   <cit> , respectively. alzheimer's and parkinson's diseases share some phenotypical and clinical characteristics; formation of plaques of protein aggregates in the brain of patients is one of those common features. the question we wanted to address with this analysis is whether the abeta and alpha-synuclein proteins are interconnected through common genes, proteins and processes relevant in the context of protein processing and aggregation. as we will discuss later, such a query cannot be easily handled with current tools for extraction of biomolecular interactions from the literature. this analysis is accessible, among other illustrative cases, from the current pescador home page.

after abstract tagging, a total of  <dig> gene/protein terms were identified in the selected  <dig> abstracts. this is the most computationally demanding step typically requiring one second per abstract. however, tagged abstracts are stored making re-analysis almost instantaneous.

a total of  <dig> biointeraction sentences were identified,  <dig> of them of type- <dig>  with  <dig> and  <dig> for the amyloid beta precursor protein  and for alpha-synuclein , respectively, and one more between two other proteins. when these terms and interactions are displayed graphically two large hubs appear centered on the two proteins focus of our study with one connection between them . it must be noted that the structure of this network has no biological relevance but just reflects that the query focused on the two proteins at the center of each hub.

by adding a selection of concepts we can relate parts of the interaction network to molecular processes and disease names. in particular, we can observe that the terms "cleavage" and  "alzheimer" appear to be related to the app hub, whereas "aggregation" is attached to both the app and the snca hubs . examination of the type  <dig> interactions related to aggregation points out that abeta  promotes alpha-synuclein  aggregation  <cit> .

to search for other indicators of this possible association between abeta and alpha-synuclein, we examined the type- <dig> interactions. one extra connection appears that connects abeta to alpha-synuclein. the evidence behind this connection is linked from the term list and corresponds to the sentence "deposits of amyloid proteins, including abeta and alpha-synuclein coexist in the brains of patients with dementia with lewy bodies; however, it is not known how either of them interacts with tau to provoke neurofibrillary tangle formation across the tauopathies"  <cit>  . both protein names appear in the same sentence and a biointeraction term is recognized  but it is not between them as it refers to another protein. however, the sentence does relate the two proteins as forming part of protein deposits in a neurodegenerative disease.

in this example, pescador offers an overview of terms associated to the ppi network and of their relation to disease; a user can visualize the proteins associated to those terms and eventually revisit the bibliography from which the connections were derived. biological concept usage on literature mining could also be explored to filter large networks and display nodes connected only to desired concepts, a feature that can be used at the "concept report" page of pescador.

 <dig> . case study #2: literature-supported enrichment of a kegg pathway
the annotation of pathways requires manual selection and examination of literature and extraction of relevant interactions between genes and proteins. if the pathway is large this can be time consuming, especially if active research in the topic requires constant updates. pescador is especially indicated for such a task. here we illustrate how pescador can be used to expand a pre-existing already large  kegg pathway: homo sapiens pathway "colorectal cancer" .

first, we selected pubmed abstracts related to the pathway's topic with the web-server medlineranker  <cit> , which uses a bayesian classifier to find literature relevant to a topic of choice based on the difference in word usage in pubmed abstracts between a training dataset and the complete medline database. we defined the training dataset by the pubmed query "colorectal and ", resulting in more than  <dig>  abstracts. the resulting list was ranked by medlineranker and the top  <dig> pmids were used as input query list on pescador.

we set the gene dictionary to homo sapiens, and, finally, added the terms "carcinoma", "colorectal cancer", "hnpcc"  and "tumour" as biological concepts in the search. this analysis is accessible, among other illustrative cases, from the current pescador home page.

the resulting network of interactions indicates the prominent focus of research on the role of beta-catenin  <dig>  and their interacting partners in colon cancer. beta-catenin  <dig> is part of the adherens junction protein complex, which regulates cell growth and adhesion in epithelium and is an important component of the wnt signaling pathway. mutations in the ctnnb <dig> gene or in the genes encoding proteins that interact with its protein product can result in the pathological activation of the wnt signaling pathway, which seems to be a cause of colorectal cancer and other cancers  <cit> .

manual inspection of pescador text-mining results allowed us to define  <dig> new colorectal cancer pathway members qualified by  <dig> biointeractions documented by their corresponding pmid . these new members and interactions were manually drawn to fit in the kegg chart representing the pathway .

the new members added to the pathway include critical genes and their roles in colorectal cancer development have been recently established, such as the tumor suppressor e-cadherin . cdh <dig> is responsible for downregulating beta-catenin and consequently diminishing cellular growth; recent studies indicate that the loss of cdh <dig> could therefore contribute to this pathway in human cancers  <cit> . another tumor suppressor that regulates beta-catenin <dig> transcriptional activity is sox7; it appears that most colorectal cancers require sox <dig> inactivation in order to develop  <cit> . the pathways activated by mutated beta-catenin <dig> lead to the upregulation of several genes through the binding of tcf/lef to specific activation sites on the dna called tbes. this is shown in the kegg colorectal cancer pathway and genes such as c-myc and cyclin-d <dig> are activated in this manner. other genes were added to the pathway as a result of this tcf dependent activation, such as mmp <dig>  tcf <dig>  <cit> , akt <dig> and many others. akt <dig> overexpression was recently demonstrated to be an early event in colorectal carcinogenesis and is a result of the presence of the mutated beta-catenin <dig> gene  <cit> . on the other hand, the tgfbeta pathway needs to be suppressed in order for the cancer cells to develop and not undergo apoptosis. several proteins are directly involved in this repression and a new addition to the pathway with that particular function is smad <dig>  the overexpression of smad <dig> was shown recently to block tgfbeta pathway and the function of the tumor suppressor smad proteins   <cit> . blockage of the tgfbeta pathway results in cell cycle progression and growth induction. smad <dig> also interacts with akt <dig> and leads to induction of ask <dig>  increasing cell survival and blocking apoptotic pathways, respectively. smad <dig> also cooperates with activated ras and induces tumorigenicity  <cit> .

thus, by using abstracts selected from pubmed through a thematic query of interest, pescador provides a tool for the extraction of known regulations associated to a specific process, unlike other currently available text-mining tools.

 <dig> . evaluation of pescador on an instance level
in order to evaluate the efficiency of pescador in recognizing individual ppis we have used a ppi dataset extracted from the aimed corpus  <cit> . this dataset contains  <dig> human ppis manually extracted from  <dig> pubmed abstracts. these  <dig> abstracts were analysed by pescador. then, the ppis from aimed and pescador  were pooled and the resulting set was manually evaluated .

the number of aimed interactions used for the comparison was reduced from  <dig> to  <dig>  to exclude those that pescador is not expected to detect by definition: self-interactions  and interactions where one of the partners is defined by a symbol that does not correspond to a protein or a gene .

surprisingly, we could manually confirm the correctness of only  <dig> of the  <dig> instances of the aimed dataset upon reading the corresponding abstracts. indeed, pescador identified  <dig> true ppis that were not considered in the aimed data. these were pooled with the  <dig> true positives from aimed and the recall and precision of aimed and pescador were then computed with respect to this pooled set of  <dig> true positive ppis . the results indicate that type  <dig> interactions from pescador offer high precision  for a low recall , whereas less restrictive interaction types permit better recall for lower precision.

the relatively low figures of recall were mostly due to problems in the entity recognition machinery of pescador. for example, many gene and protein names in the abstracts were absent from the dictionary used by pescador making their detection by pescador impossible. the fact that the aimed dataset regards abstracts from the years 1998- <dig> made this an important factor; since then gene names are better normalized. in addition, the engine used by pescador to recognize bioentity names, nlprot, would sometimes fail to identify correct names. finally, exclusion of sentences with four or more names was a further reason for missing a ppi. considering only sentences favorable to name detection by pescador at these three levels increased recall up to 95% , suggesting that enhancing name detection is a possibility to improve the efficiency of pescador.

 <dig>  
CONCLUSIONS
pescador is available at http://cbdm.mdc-berlin.de/tools/pescador/. the system is platform independent and can be accessed from every common web-browser running the java runtime environment  plug-in. pescador was developed with an emphasis in the graphical representation of biointeractions extracted from the literature and in their association to user-defined concepts.

three commonly used platforms that, like pescador, perform text mining analysis based on co-occurrence of protein terms and provide a graphical view of such relations are string  <cit> , ihop  <cit>  and alibaba  <cit> . however, we must note that comparing these systems with pescador is relatively difficult considering that they have been designed with very different goals. most importantly, these platforms differ in the types of inputs and outputs, provide different querying mechanisms, and have different information extraction mechanisms. these and other important differences are summarized in table  <dig>  shortly, ihop navigates the co-occurrence network among terms in the literature but it does not display it. both string and ihop use text mining of the whole pubmed database. pescador instead uses pre-selected abstracts to infer networks; each edge of the network  can be manually validated. alibaba has an advanced graphical interface and, like pescador, uses pubmed abstracts as input, can extract biointeractions with confidence degrees, and allows editing the graph of co-occurrences. however, according to the help information of the current version ) it is running on a pubmed version from  <dig>  which might limit its usefulness as a discovery tool. in summary, these tools allow analyses that have certain similarities but, among them, pescador is unique in its focus on revealing the processes related to the interaction network.

biointeraction term;
co-occurring pair;
confidence;
confidence;
in the near future we plan to implement the text-mining methods used by pescador server as a set of web services, permitting the integration of our pipeline on other pipelines aiming at literature analysis. another future goal is to permit the simultaneous use of dictionaries of gene/protein names from multiple organisms; by doing that, we expect to filter from the literature important co-occurrences of gene/proteins from interacting organisms under a determined concept, such as host-pathogen molecular interactions under the course of a determined infection/disease.

finally, the benchmark of pescador on the aimed dataset suggested that a large number of missed ppis are due to the failure to recognize entity names , which is dependent on laitor, the text-mining engine of pescador. to approach this problem, we intend to take advantage of recent developments in the field of information retrieval to improve laitor. we could try banner  <cit>  for the recognition of genes, metamap for concepts  <cit> , or kernel methods for relation extraction  <cit> . any improvements in laitor should result in an ensuing improvement of pescador.

 <dig>  competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

 <dig>  availability and requirements
project name: pescador

project home page: http://cbdm.mdc-berlin.de/tools/pescador/

operating system: platform independent

programming language: php

other requirements: none

license: none

any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

 <dig>  authors' contributions
abs developed pescador. abs and maa designed the functionality of pescador. jff, erd, fs and mo tested pescador and prepared examples of its application. abs and maa wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
table s1: pairs of genes/proteins , biointeractions, and the literature  used as evidence to add  <dig> new members to the kegg pathway: homo sapiens pathway "colorectal cancer" .

click here for file

 additional file 2
table s2: detailed benchmark of pescador on an instance level using the aimed dataset. the data is arranged in rows for each ppi and by pmid. columns are term <dig> from aimed and term <dig> from aimed for aimed ppis, why filtered out from aimed, for aimed ppis that would not be included in the analysis , term  <dig> from pescador and term  <dig> from pescador for pescador terms for ppis, found in aimed for whether the ppi was detected by aimed, pescador type  <dig>  type  <dig>  and type  <dig> for whether the ppi was detected by pescador in one of these levels , found by manual curation, indicating if the ppi is real according to our evaluation, evidence sentence indicates the sentence where the ppi could be found, note indicates extra explanations of our analysis, and cause of pescador failure gives one of three reasons of why a true ppi detected by aimed was not found by pescador: nlprot fail, name not in dictionary, or sentence too complex.

click here for file

  <dig>  acknowledgments and funding
we are grateful to matthew r. huska  for technical support during pescador development and to carolina perez-iratxeta  for adding to xplormed an option to send its output to pescador. maa, abs and jf acknowledge funding from the medical genome research programme ngfn-plus by the german ministry of education and research  and the helmholtz alliance in systems biology .
