BACKGROUND
mapping transcription information  onto the genomic dna is an essential part of the gene annotation process. however, many transcripts appear to have frame disruptions in them, which would interfere with the formation of a stable protein product  <cit> . such frame disruptions have generally been considered symptoms of decay into a pseudogene  <cit> .

previously, we have analysed the distribution of a special case of such frame-disrupted transcripts, the 'transcribed processed pseudogene' or 'transcribed retropseudogene'  <cit> . retropseudogenes are copies of messenger rnas that have been reverse-transcribed and re-integrated into the genome, probably as a by-product of line- <dig> retrotransposition  <cit> . these intronless copies of genes usually decay and are deleted from the genomic dna  <cit> . however, some retropseudogenes are transcribed, perhaps through co-option of local promoter elements, as supported by their increased density near genes  <cit> .

many mammalians genes  make alternatively-spliced transcripts  <cit> . it has previously been noted that many such alternatively spliced exons  harbour premature stop codons  <cit> , and thus may be considered 'pseudogenic' alternative transcripts. other studies have demonstrated that several hundred human transcripts can be considered to harbour alternative reading frames, offset from each other by one or more frameshifts, which can be preserved for millions of years of evolution  <cit> . frith, et al., found that about one-tenth of mouse cdnas have apparent frame disruptions  <cit> . sorek, et al., showed that ~7% of human genes generate an alternative transcript with an alu, with the vast majority of these insertions yielding frame-disrupted mrnas  <cit> .

how frequent is genuine frame disruption in human mrnas? is it significantly associated with the positions of protein structures and exons in coding sequences? here, to answer these and other questions, we analyze a data set of high-quality human mrnas, using an annotation pipeline which insures that spurious frame disruptions  are discarded. we perform statistical calculations which demonstrate non-random distribution of the initial frame disruptions in these sequences with respect to:  protein domain annotations,  alternative exons and  rules for nonsense-mediated decay . messenger rna transcripts that have premature stop codons greater than fifty nucleotides 5' to the last intron-exon junction of a gene are degraded by the nonsense-mediated decay  pathway  <cit> . some nmd substrates have been shown to produce functional proteins in yeast and mammalian cells  <cit> . in addition, using our pipeline, we find no evidence for a role of frameshift in protein domain evolution.

RESULTS
overall statistics
using stringent thresholds, we verified  <dig>  high-quality mrnas from the ncbi refseq and unigene consensus collections, through mapping onto human genomic dna. a small subpopulation of these  mrnas harbour significant frame disruptions  , which is of a similar order to previous analyses of such disruptions in sets of transcripts  <cit> . most of these are disrupted by frameshifts , rather than premature stop codons. using a small modification to the basic annotation pipeline, we defined a small minority of these frameshifted transcripts  that harbour compensating frameshifts, resulting in movement back into frame. previous analysis of mouse cdnas also indicated that a small fraction of them  may have such compensatory frameshifts  <cit> . three examples of dmrnas are illustrated in figure  <dig>  there are two multiply-disrupted examples , and a frameshifted alternative mrna transcript, from the gene c20orf <dig>  which appears to be a transmembrane sugar transporter.

in general, the dmrnas demonstrate functional prevalences that are typical of the population of human transcripts in general, as judged from counting up gene ontology functional category annotations . the duplication behaviour of the genes from which the disrupted mrnas arise is also typical of the whole human gene complement . however, dmrnas have significantly fewer exons than mrnas in general . such shorter lengths are expected from the truncating effect of frame-shifts and stop codons. a large fraction  of the dmrnas have multiple frame disruptions, with the frequencies of numbers of frame disruptions exhibiting a power-law relationship, as observed for processed pseudogenes  <cit>  . the vast majority of frameshifts in dmrnas ) result in truncation from premature stop codons.

we examined the etiology of the frame disruptions in dmrnas in more detail. some dmrnas have apparent frame disruptions from 5' and 3' insertions of retrotransposons , or from an overlapping antisense gene . interestingly, also, a large proportion of dmrnas arise from antisense homologies to other distal genes . such antisense fragments are of potential importance in transcription regulation. a functional pseudogene with antisense homology to the nitric oxide synthase gene downregulates this gene the snail lymnea stagnalis  <cit> . these three categories of dmrna  comprise a subset of dmrnas arising from 'probable utr  features'. another possible source of dmrnas are unassigned selenoproteins  <cit> . we have filtered for known selenoproteins  <cit> , but it is possible there are further cases. however, we found no indication of this, since there is no significant over-representation  of the opal stop codon  that is used for selenocysteine .

exon lengths
exons harbouring frame disruptions make up only a small fraction  of the coding exons in their transcripts. frame-disrupted exons are, on average, significantly longer . although, both frame-disrupted and non-frame-disrupted exons show a tendency for very short exon lengths , there is a greater proportion of long exons  in the frame-disrupted set . to analyze exon lengths we disregarded the 'probable utr features', but their inclusion does not change the trend observed; also, the exon length trend is maintained when exons are split into subsets of constitutive and alternatively-spliced exons. we examined the exons > <dig> nucleotides in detail, and found that a significant fraction of them come from zn-finger -containing transcription factors  with >1/ <dig> of their sequences composed of zinc finger motifs. zinc-finger -containing transcription factors have dynamic evolution patterns in mammals, with expansions of family sizes specific to primates and rodents  <cit> ; large numbers of dmrnas are a signature of other dynamically evolving mammalian gene families, such as olfactory receptors and immune system genes  <cit> . a significantly greater proportion of disrupted exons are at the 3' terminus of mrnas , even if the zinc-finger -containing genes are excluded. such 3' exons have a general tendency to be longer  . this greater length has been suggested to be because of a greater amount of important conserved sequences in 3' utrs, compared to 5' ones  <cit> .

positions of frame disruptions in dmrnas
we analysed the distribution of the initial frame disruptions in the disrupted mrnas with respect to the positioning of:  structural protein domains,  alternatively-spliced exons, and  the areas of the transcripts not susceptible to nmd . in all of these analyses, we examine trends for the whole data set of dmrnas, and the subset of these mrnas for which the matching proteins have a verifying alignment in a divergent mammal or vertebrate . the significant tendencies listed in tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for the whole data set  remain significant or become more significant if those examples labelled 'probable utr features' are removed from the data .

* for the last row, those with frameshifts and stop codons are pooled together.

** verifiying alignments are significant alignments to a rodent or non-mammalian vertebrate protein, as detailed in methods.

*** the ratio stands for 'the number of frame disruptions not disrupting a protein structure domain assignment versus the number that do'. a margin for ascertaining overlap with a protein domain assignment of  <dig> nucleotides was used in the calculations. the expectations for the statistical tests  are calculated by adding up the total amount of coding sequence that can be assigned to a scop protein structure domain for the sample of transcripts analysed in each row of the table. † stands for p <  <dig> , †† for p <  <dig>  and ††† for p <  <dig> . the significant results remain significant to at least p <  <dig>  when margins for calculating overlap with protein domains of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> nucleotides are also used.

* the format of this table is as for tables 2– <dig>  the overlap margin is the number of residues that are ignored at either end of the zinc-finger domain .

* ratios are for numbers expected or observed in constitutive exons versus alternative ones. expectations and test are performed as for table  <dig> 

* ratios are for numbers expected or observed in nmd regions versus non-nmd ones. expectations and tests are performed as for table  <dig> 

protein structure disruption
do the frame disruptions in these mrnas avoid disruption of protein structure domains? to answer this question, we analysed the distribution of initial frame disruptions in sequences relative to the placement of protein structure domains from the scop data . for both frameshifts and premature stop codons, we find significant underrepresentation within protein domains . this non-random distribution of frame disruptions is observed for a wide range of margins for definition of overlap with protein domains  . this avoidance of protein structure domains is evidence for selection pressures to avoid protein structure disruption and supports a significantly negative role for frame disruption in the evolution of protein structures.

because of the proportion of dmrnas that contain large arrays of zn finger domains, we also checked specifically for avoidance of disruption of zn finger motifs. zn finger motif assignments were taken from the feature table records of the uniprot database  <cit> . we find significant avoidance of disruption of zn finger motifs only for overlap margins of between  <dig> and  <dig> residues inclusive .

alternative splicing
we examined whether there is a relationship between the position of initial frame disruptions in mrnas and the location of alternatively spliced exons . we find a highly significant two-fold overrepresentation of initial frame disruptions in alternatively-spliced exons . these correspond to almost half  of the dmrnas. this may arise because the selection pressure on alternative splicings that are not transcribed at high levels will be considerably less, leading to increased likelihood of frame disruption as evolution progresses  <cit> . it is possible that many of these frame-disrupted alternative splicings have a regulatory role  <cit> . small numbers of the alternatively-spliced frameshifted dmrnas arise from exon skipping , and exon insertion . this approximately two-fold over-representation is maintained  in the subset of alternative splicings that contain scop  <cit>  protein domain assignments within them.

transcripts not susceptible to nonsense-mediate decay
messenger rna transcripts that have premature stop codons greater than fifty nucleotides 5' to the last intron-exon junction of a gene are degraded by nonsense-mediated decay   <cit> . we analyzed the distribution of initial frame disruptions relative to this nmd rule . there are significantly more transcripts with frame disruptions in the 'non-nmd' region , as would be expected logically . however, this over-representation of initial frame disruptions in the 'non-nmd' region also arises for the subsets of transcripts in which the frame disruptions disrupt a scop protein structure domain , and which are thus unlikely to form a stable functional protein product. such unstable protein products are more likely for shorter truncations, and thus nmd provides an evolutionary guard against excessive expression of unstable proteins  <cit> .

checking for gene evolution through frame-shift formation
it is possible that through analysis of this comprehensive data set of dmrnas, that we can find evidence for a positive role for such protein-coding frame disruptions in gene evolution. specifically, is there evidence that such frame-shifts can produce significant structural novelties? to check this, we derived a modification for the initial pipeline , with matches to scop protein structure domains replacing those for whole protein sequences from the swissprot database, finding  <dig> cases  which produce a significant alignment for both subsequences delimited by the initial frameshift . however, none of these  overlap another protein domain assignment in a different frame, yielding no evidence for generation of protein structure novelties through single frameshifts. nonetheless, a more thorough analysis of multiple vertebrates would be required to provide a more conclusive perspective on the role of frameshift in protein structure evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
we analyzed human mrnas for both frameshift and stop codon frame disruptions, using a pipeline that was designed to discard spurious frame disruptions arising from alignment error. we performed statistical calculations and found non-random distributions of frame disruptions with respect to protein structures, alternatively-spliced exons, and 'non-nmd' regions. the significant avoidance of protein structure disruption and highly significant placement in alternatively-spliced exons , together with the observation of a lack of protein structure generation through frameshift, support largely negative selection pressures related to frame disruption during gene evolution.

data from this analysis is available on request from the author.

