BACKGROUND
function and 3d structure of the proteins are said to be related to each other  <cit> . however, prediction of function on the basis of structure and vice versa still remains a partially solved problem, and is largely in the domain of biophysics and biochemistry  <cit> . this underlines the need for computational and bioinformatics methods to establish relationships between functions and structures of proteins. previous attempts have been largely limited to examining a single protein and predicting structure and function based on its size, charge, sequence, and other physical attributes  <cit> . further, content knowledge of protein classification has also been used to predict structure and function using data mining techniques  <cit> . large protein classification schemes  are available in public domain in the form of protein classification databases. arguably, this latent knowledge has not been sufficiently used to relate structure and function by establishing relationships between the various schemes. various classifiers are built using data mining techniques using the above latent knowledge to designate a given protein to a structural or a functional class. we propose that probabilistic linking of these classification databases could be used to establish relation between function and structure of proteins. in addition, individual classes in widely used protein databases could be linked together to further consolidate the large amount of classification data on proteins.

growing proteomics data have motivated the design of many schemes to classify proteins. proteins can be classified according to a variety of classification schemes based on features like proteins domains  <cit> , structure  <cit> , phylogeny  <cit> , ligand binding sites  <cit> , subcellular localization  <cit>  etc. in addition to the schemes based on biologically defined features, many schemes are based on abstractions that are expected to correlate with biological families . intuitively, in all these schemes there would exist a semantic overlap. in other words, different schemes of classification may not be completely independent of each other, and relationships may exist between classes of different taxonomies. for instance, proteins sharing a certain motif may also belong to a common phylogenetic family.

protein classification is performed by either manual annotation  <cit> , or automatic classification based on defined feature sets  <cit> . common classifiers like support vector machines   <cit> , bayesian classifiers  <cit>  and others have been used to classify proteins using attributes like primary sequences, size, localization  <cit>  etc. existing methods for protein classification include profiles for protein families  <cit> , pairwise sequence alignment  <cit> , consensus patterns using motifs  <cit>  and hidden markov models  <cit> . though discriminative classifiers  in general have higher accuracy, generative models  have been preferred over discriminative models since variable length of protein sequence data renders it difficult to use discriminative classifiers  <cit> . svms have been shown to outperform other basic classifiers like naive bayes  <cit>  in accuracy. further, no assumption of the domain knowledge is required to train svm  <cit> . if the domain knowledge is correctly known, it can be incorporated to improve accuracy like in fischer-svms  <cit>  and svm-mismatch kernels  <cit> , or even in non-linear svm  <cit> .

with protein databases being populated at an astonishing pace, it has become essential to consolidate the knowledge latent in the existing and emerging databases. presently these relationships can only be established by manual annotations using static accession numbers. these numbers  link protein entries in different classification databases, without linking the classes in the databases  <cit> . this underlines the need for computational methodologies to identify relationships between various schemes, even if it is probabilistic. in this paper we present a novel method to establish these relationships between classes of taxonomies in a probabilistic manner between two widely used and independent classification schemes: prosite and scop. we demonstrate that this method could be effectively used to establish probabilistic relations between functional and structural classes of proteins. prosite  <cit>  and scop  <cit>  are well annotated taxonomies based on functional motif and structure of proteins respectively. the relationships between prosite and scop are not understood and completed and have never been explored systemically before. there has been no attempt to cross learn using existing two classifications and identify relationships between the two. it would be, therefore, instructive to look at relationships between the two classifying schemes and assess if there is a semantic overlap between the two independent classification systems.

we have modified previously reported cross-training algorithm by introducing a hierarchy based approach  <cit>  to apply to biological databases. the method involves simultaneous training of two different sets of classification schemes using a classifier iteratively, till semantic overlaps cannot be utilized for further enhancement in accuracy. we used the existing taxonomies of prosite and scop and mutually trained them using hierarchical cross training. svm was used as a classifier employing a variety of attributes including a few that have been designed for this special purpose. the motivation is to classify protein into a known functional taxonomy, prosite, when the placement in a known structural taxonomy, scop, is known.

RESULTS
partial taxonomies from scop and prosite were used for hierarchical cross training using the features and procedures described in methods section. swissprot  <cit>  database was taken for feature extraction.  <dig> proteins common to both prosite and scop were used to train the respective svms.  <dig> most populated classes in prosite, each class being a domain  <cit> , and  <dig> most populated classes in scop, each class being a superfamily  <cit> , were used in experiments. the most populated class in prosite contained  <dig> proteins while the least populated amongst the used  <dig> classes contained  <dig> proteins. out of the  <dig> proteins considered, randomly half were used for training of the svm classifier for prosite and the other half for scop .

in our experimentations, linear support vector machine  was used as the classifier. svms have been shown to outperform other basic classifiers like naive bayes  <cit>  in accuracy, are discriminative classifiers and require no assumption regarding domain knowledge. the chief advantage of using svm is that it is easily scalable and inclusion of new dimensions does not affect the accuracy of the classifier. this property is very useful when large numbers of features are used for training, as in our experimentations. further, hierarchical cross training requires introduction of new dimensions in the classifier , easily achievable in svm. for all the above reasons, svm was chosen as the classifier.

the training of svm is a bit expensive, of the order nk  but the testing is still linear and the high accuracy advantage overrides the disadvantage of higher training time  <cit> .

metrics
performance evaluation for most of the functional classes using structural classes as features resulted in high recall  and precision  values. these two quantities were unified into a single quantity called f-measure  for analysis . f-measure is the weighted harmonic mean between recall and precision, both being evenly weighted. for a given class a, f-measure was defined as follows:

comparison of f-measure using k-length overlapping subsequences of length  equal to  <dig> and blocks as features. in the case of using blocks as features, f-measure was found to be only slightly lower for all the classes, while the size of feature set was many times smaller.

performance evaluation while trying to classify functional classes using structural classes as the features. the high f-measure values  indicate that the function is strongly dependent on the structure that the protein has. f-measure was calculated as the harmonic mean between recall and precision. class-name refers to domain in prosite database. highly significant f-measure values are shown in bold.

performance evaluation while trying to classify structural classes using functional classes as the features. the low f-measure values indicate that though structure is dependent on function of the protein, the present features are incapable in distinguishing them completely. f-measure was calculated as the harmonic mean between recall and precision. presented table lists classes which showed significant f-measure values. class-name refers to superfamily in scop database. highly significant f-measure values are shown in bold.

  f−measure=2∗recall∗precisionrecall+precision 

  recalla=proteins correctly found in atotal proteins in a 

  precisiona=proteins predicted correctly in atotal proteins predicted in a 

employing novel features for training resulted in reduced time complexity without compromising performance
blocks and 2d elastic profile were used as novel features to train the svm classifiers for scop and prosite. as detailed in the methods section, blocks were preferred over k-length subsequences as features for training classifiers . using the value of k as  <dig> in overlapping k-length subsequences resulted in more than  <dig> unique features. to reduce the number of above features, principle component analysis   <cit>  was used to discover principle components that define most of the data variability. application of pca resulted in reduction of unique features to  <dig>  k-length subsequences are subsequences of optimal size that are able to capture most information represented in the sequence of the protein. in addition, the k-length subsequence as a feature does not give additional weight to subsequences that occur commonly and are conserved amongst polypeptides. hence, we employed a novel feature for classifiers called blocks  <cit> . blocks are multiple aligned ungapped segments corresponding to the most highly conserved regions of proteins. in blocks  <cit>  database, for each query protein a 'distance' is calculated against the corresponding most conserved homologous block. nearly  <dig>  unique blocks were generated for prosite dataset, and pca application reduced it to  <dig>  for nearly all classes, f-measure  obtained using blocks as features were similar or slightly lower than the case when k-length subsequence were used as features . statistically speaking, a classifier using blocks as features will have lower chances of "over-fitting" as the features are fewer in number. due to all the above advantages without significant reduction in the f-measure, blocks were used as features instead of k-length subsequence in our experimentations.

hierarchical cross training indicates semantic overlap between scop and prosite
supervised cross training as a concept was introduced in chakrabarti et al  <cit> . if we have two taxonomies a and b with strong semantic overlap, then information from a can be used to train b and vice-versa . the approach not only helps in improving accuracy but can also be used to learn relationships between classes belonging to different taxonomies. to establish a baseline, we trained taxonomies of scop and prosite using linear svm classifiers with the set of features described earlier. hierarchical cross training of the taxonomies of scop and prosite resulted in an average increase of  <dig> % in f-measure for classes in the two taxonomies. this improvement in accuracy obtained by cross training prosite and scop classifiers demonstrates that a semantic overlap exists between the classes of the two taxonomies. further, it establishes that using information across taxonomies improves learning, particularly in the case of functional and structural classification schemes. it was found that a cross-trained svm outperforms standard svm and is specially effective in the case when baseline accuracy levels are low. this was found to be true for the structural classifiers which have low accuracy levels. results are summarized in additional file  <dig> 

f-measure obtained for classes in functional classifier using structural classes as features were high, and exhibited low false positive rates . for a few classes like cytochrome c family, heme-binding site signature and phospholipase a <dig> active site signature, the f-measure was close to  <dig>  on a  <dig>  point scale with  <dig> false positives indicating high confidence in establishing relationships from scop to prosite. this indicates that the position of a given protein in a functional class in prosite is strongly dependent on the position of the protein in a scop class.

on the other hand, f-measure for classes in structural classifier using functional classes as features were found to be low . most of the classes, with the exception of all alpha protein.globin-like superfamily, showed f-measure less than  <dig>  on a  <dig>  scale. similarly, the false positives were higher than encountered in the cross training product of prosite signature classes. this suggests that either the structural properties are not highly dependent on the function of the proteins, or the present features are incapable in distinguishing them completely. intuitively, it seems correct, that it is with a greater confidence that the function of the protein is predicted given the structure, while it is not easy to predict the structure of a protein given the function.

decision trees for scop and prosite relate two taxonomies in a probabilistic manner
hierarchical cross training produced a complex mapping  between classes of scop and prosite. decision trees were constructed to provide human visualization between structural and functional classes of proteins, and to extract probabilistic relationships between them . if membership of a given protein in prosite  is known, it can be used to find its class in scop . a probabilistic weighted score was generated based on the decision tree.

decision trees were obtained for both prosite  and scop . dt-prosite had scop classes as features and dt-scop had prosite classes as features. dt-prosite showed low false positive rates  and high f-measure lending credibility to the decision tree and the rules  to be generated from it.

simplification of the rules has generated direct relationships from classes in scop to prosite and vice versa with a probabilistic weighted score. a few significant relationships are shown in table  <dig>  rules like all alpha proteins. globin-like → globins family profile showed a high score  suggesting strong relationships between the two classes. significantly, a reverse relationship was also found with a high score from prosite to scop. it is noteworthy that the colloquial names for both classes also implied that they were related. a similar case was found in the rule all beta proteins.cupredoxin-like → type- <dig> copper blue proteins signature with a high score. all alpha proteins.globin-like superfamily in scop also suggested a strong relationship to the legume lectin signature in prosite, a rule also found in dt-scop with a high score. similarly, rules were obtained relating classes scop to classes in prosite like α &β proteins. thioredoxin fold → pyridine nucleotide-disulphide oxidoreductases class-i active site with a score of  <dig> , all β proteins.nucleoplasmin-like vp viral coat & capsid proteins → dead & deah box families atp-dependent helicases signatures with score of  <dig> .

selected prediction rules found as a by-product of cross-training scop and prosite. top panel shows rules probabilistically predicting the prosite domain/signature given the scop superfamily, while the bottom panel shows rules predicting scop superfamily given the prosite domains. dot  links parent class to child class in scop hierarchy. the bold value following each rule is the probabilistic weighted score found using cross training.

in addition, we found that two prosite classes, zinc finger ring-type signature and profile and zinc finger c2h2-type domain signature and profile, occurred together in most of the rules. this leads us to project that these signatures are highly related signatures and are commonly found in the proteins in which they occur. it is noteworthy that these classes occur commonly, and presence of these signatures together in proteins may have potential biological significance.

a few inferences can be drawn from the generated rules listed in table  <dig>  structural classes, as properties, have a higher bearing on the functional classification for proteins than vice versa. few classes in scop and prosite were obtained that were related in the form class-in-scop → class-in-prosite and class-in-prosite → class-in-scop simultaneously with high probabilistic scores. further, a few classes like c-type lectin domain signature and profile and zinc finger ring-type signature and profile in prosite occur more commonly than others as the rhs  of rules with high scores. statistically it means that proteins having a structural property  were found to contain features commonly found in proteins belonging to the said classes in prosite.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we describe a methodology to establish structured relationships between two independent protein taxonomies using hierarchical cross training of classifiers for each taxonomy. previous studies have described classifiers developed for various protein taxonomies using a variety of features  <cit> . however, no attempt to cross train two taxonomies using the classes of one as a feature to train the classifier for the other taxonomy has been made so far. we demonstrated that strong semantic overlaps exist between scop and prosite, in spite of the independent classification schemes. it should be noted that scop is a manually annotated taxonomy, while in prosite annotation is automated. hierarchical cross training allows the knowledge of label assignment in one taxonomy to be used in another taxonomy and establish relationships between the two. this, therefore, is a novel attempt to link two widely used protein classification databases and find probabilistic relationships between the classes of either. scop and prosite have different taxonomical structures and different ways of static classification of proteins, having evolved entirely independently of each other. since scop is a structural classification and prosite is essentially a functional classification, our method also provides a non commutative map between functional and structural classes of proteins, rendering it the first datamining effort in this direction.

blocks and 2d elastic profile are novel features used to train the decision tree and are more informative than k-length subsequences. blocks resulted in reduced feature set, time complexity of svm without compromising performance. this may be because most of the k-length subsequences were not adding extra information and only a few were actually participating in classification. most of the other classifiers use the whole sequence or overlapping standard sized subsequences as features, rendering the feature set extremely large. the number of features used for training in our method is therefore small making the method fast yet effective. since the accuracy of the classifier for functional classes using structural classes as features is very high, we believe that these features could also be used as standard features for protein classification mechanisms. however, better and more informative features might be necessary to train structural classifier using functional classes as features. in addition, non linear svms  may be used to improve the accuracy of classifiers. though no such exercise has been performed using cross training on protein taxonomies, but we believe that other structural and functional protein databases can be cross trained using our method to generate more informative rules.

f-measure of certain classes is lower than other classes since proteins belonging to one prosite class may belong to multiple scop superfamilies. the extent of this mismatch is difficult to assess since large number of proteins are not known in their 3d structures. similarly, many proteins in the scop database do not have conserved sequence motifs identifiable in the prosite database, and thus can not be assigned to a prosite class. a probable reason is that prosite only collects well established sequence motifs with significant population in the sequence databases. in such cases, the method prediction here would provide lower confidence for prediction of relationships. hence, we neglected rules below a certain threshold probabilistic score.

in addition, it must be remembered that the cross training described here is aimed at showing the efficacy of the methodology, and hence is performed on partial taxonomies  of scop and prosite. many more rules can be generated if the method is applied to the complete taxonomies. it is unlikely that the presented rules would change appreciably since most of the remaining classes in scop and prosite are sparsely populated. further, it must be noted that the method is essentially a data mining effort, and reflects any inherent bias of the taxonomies on which it is conducted. such biases could occur due to the biased research in favor of proteins that are already discovered, are more relevant to human pathology, or biased evolution in proteomics in favor of certain classes of proteins. in addition, a repetition of hierarchical cross training for prosite and cath  <cit> , another hierarchical structural classification database may generate more informed relationships between functions and structures of proteins. it would be instructive to find out semantic overlaps and generate probabilistic maps between classes of taxonomies that are based on function, but different schemes, eg. prosite and pfam  <cit> . we would like to envisage the bigger goal to generate extensive "probabilistic linkage maps" between various prominent protein classification databases which can be updated in time. typically proteins are linked only through accession ids of databases and no static link can be developed between classes in different taxonomies  <cit> . therefore, a probabilistic linkage between classes of proteins in different databases would be a significant step forward to link the whole of proteomic data  <cit> .

