BACKGROUND
massively parallel dna sequencing technologies power many of today’s studies of genetic traits, including population diversity projects like the  <dig> genomes   <cit> , the sequencing-based successors to disease association studies  <cit> , and mutation discovery in tumors . the new data types they provide are far cheaper than traditional capillary gel electrophoresis data, with the reduction in cost enabling projects of unprecedented scale. however, current sequencing technologies such as illumina,  <dig>  solid and ion torrent have systematic shortcomings that limit utility of the data. each of these has its own complex context-specific error profile that results in false positive snp and indel calls. short read lengths can result in mismappings and misalignments  <cit>  that make some regions of the genome inaccessible. in addition, there are representational biases, where regions of certain base compositions  are underrepresented.

the pacific biosciences technology provides a fundamentally new data type that provides the potential to overcome these limitations by providing significantly longer reads , enabling more unique seeds for reference alignment. in addition, the lack of amplification in the library construction step avoids a common source of base composition bias. with these potential advantages in mind, we here evaluate the utility of the pacific biosciences rs platform for human medical amplicon resequencing projects by assessing the quality of the raw sequencing data, as well as its use for snp discovery and genotyping using the genome analysis toolkit  <cit> .

RESULTS
we first defined the basic performance parameters of the data, in terms of read length, base accuracy and error profile, and sequence composition-based representational bias. using a dataset of  <dig> runs of data  from human amplicons , we profiled read length, showing an average of  <dig> bases over a wide distribution, including 5% of reads > <dig> bases . errors were characterized by comparison to the known reference sequences , showing that the primary error mode was insertions, at 12%, followed by deletions, 2% and apparent mismatch errors at 1% . further, errors were randomly distributed across the read, rather than increasing in distal positions as is true for other data types . this property by which read length and base position do not affect the quality of the bases produced greatly facilitates alignment of reads despite their relatively high indel rate. finally, since extreme base composition is a source of representational bias in many sequence data types, we evaluated the performance of the pacific biosciences system using a dataset  derived from  <dig> microbial genomes that span a much wider range of base composition than the human genome . the average relative coverage across gc content levels fell into ranges narrow enough to have little impact on data utility: between 53% and 110% of mean coverage for p. falciparum, between 79% and 140% for e. coli, and between 64% and 120% for r. sphaeroides .

base quality scores are a critical tool for accurate snp calling, and are used by most analysis algorithms to help distinguish true variation from artifacts. indeed, the accuracy of the reported base quality scores has a significant impact on the correctness of variation detection <cit> . we have found that pacific biosciences data underreport true base qualities by on average  <dig> phred scaled points. for this reason we applied a method to generate empirical base quality scores for pacific biosciences data using the base quality score recalibration framework in the genome analysis toolkit  <cit> . empirical quality scores generated with gatk are on average q20-q <dig> for bases that are not insertions or deletions. we observed no relationship between the empirical quality scores and position in the read, similar to accuracy of base calls.

alignment is the process of mapping reads individually to a region in the reference sequence where each read can align with minimum number of mismatches and gap openings . because of the high base insertion and deletion rates, alignment of pacific biosciences data challenges standard approaches. to account for this, we set the gap open penalty to be lower than the base mismatch penalty  in order to maximize alignment performance. despite aligning most of the reads successfully, this creates the side effect that the aligner will sometimes prefer to “hide” a true snp inside an insertion. the result is that mapping is accurate, but the aligned sequence is biased toward the reference at some indel positions , although the “hidden” bases remain available for subsequent analysis. it is important to note however, that reference bias is an artifact of the alignment process, rather than of the data, and can be greatly reduced by locally realigning the reads based on the reference and the data. presently, the available software for local realignment is not compatible with the length and the high indel rate of pacific biosciences data, but we anticipate the development of new tools.

for all projects aimed at discovery of mutations or variation, it is critical to follow-up with validation of the variants called, either by sampling to determine the rate at which calls are correct, or to confirm which exact changes are real rather than art factual. extension is an approach similar to validation, but carried out as a discovery process on samples that have not been sequenced to determine the extent to which mutations are present at the same base or in the same gene in a large number of samples, rapidly and at relatively low cost. today, variants called by massively parallel sequencing are commonly validated using either sequenom genotyping, sanger sequencing or resequencing using an alternate massively parallel technology ; for examples see <cit> . each of these options has limitations. sequenom genotyping can validate only the specific mutation called, and so lacks the ability to identify base differences at sites that were not discovered , and is thus much less effective for extension. further, accurate interpretation of sequenom data requires manual review, with the potential to introduce human error. sanger sequencing operates at low throughput and also requires human interpretation of the sequencing results, making it only suitable for small validation assays. using alternate sequencing platforms may not provide the fast turnaround necessary  for validation studies or may suffer from other context specific error modes  that often further complicate the validation analysis. sequencing with an alternate technology is, nevertheless, the most statistically correct approach for validation, provided the alternate sequencing methodology employs a different approach from the original technology, with a different spectrum of biases, error modes or other limitations.

we designed two targeted sequencing experiments to evaluate the power of the pacific biosciences data type as a tool for validation and extension and as a tool for variant discovery. for both experiments we used the gatk to discover sites .

to evaluate pacific biosciences data for validation/extension, we sequenced pcr-amplicons spanning  <dig> variant calls based on illumina ga <dig> and ga <dig> data from the 1000 g project. these had been previously validated either as true de novo mutations  or false call artifacts , using solid,  <dig> and sanger sequencing chemistry <cit> . individual pcr amplicons spanning the test set variants were generated, sequenced with both the pacific biosciences rs and the illumina miseq, and the data were used to call snps. performance of data from the two platforms was similar by several metrics. pacific biosciences data showed 97% sensitivity and 98% specificity by correctly genotyping  <dig> of the  <dig> sites, with a negative predictive value of 98% and positive predictive value of 97%. illumina miseq data provided 100% sensitivity and 91% specificity, genotyping  <dig> out of  <dig> sites correctly with 100% negative predictive value and 88% positive predictive value . the miscalled sites from each data set were then manually inspected. one site was wrongly called monomorphic with the reference allele from pacific biosciences data due to reference bias. the one site wrongly called polymorphic from pacific biosciences data was similarly miscalled in miseq and in our gold standard hiseq whole genome dataset . from the  <dig> sites miscalled using data from illumina miseq,  <dig> were in agreement with pacific biosciences , and  <dig> sites were called polymorphic in error due to noise in the miseq data . pacific biosciences rs data performed well by all metrics, and at a similar quality to illumina data, demonstrating that the rs is a powerful tool for follow up validation or extension.

number of sites called polymorphic and monomorphic by pacific biosciences rs and illumina miseq in the validation experiment. datasets were sequenced from the same amplicons and were downsampled to 70x average coverage for comparison. pacific biosciences shows good accuracy with consistently high percentages in all metrics and making only  <dig> out  <dig> wrong calls, while miseq shows excellent sensitivity and negative predictive value but lower specificity and positive predictive value and  <dig> out of  <dig> wrong calls, all of the same class.

poly = polymorphic site; mono = monomorphic site.

ppv = positive predictive value; npv = negative predictive value.

to evaluate pacific biosciences data for variant discovery, we sequenced 177 kb in  <dig> amplicons from regions across human chromosome  <dig> using both pacific biosciences rs and illumina miseq. these amplicons contained  <dig> snps that had been validated in our gold standard deep whole genome call set , which includes  <dig> previously validated as high-confidence snps from hap map  <dig> . a single hap map site was called with very high confidence by amplicon-based data from both technologies to have a different alternate allele than hap map, and was similarly called with the whole genome shotgun dataset. thus, it likely reflects either a single base change in our dna sample source or an error in hap map rather than a miscalled snp. with pacific biosciences data we called  <dig> of the  <dig> gold standard sites ; with miseq data we called 222/ <dig> . we manually inspected the sites of all the discordant calls, which fell into two classes: 1) reference bias, where the correct call was obscured by reference bias in the alignment, and the alternate allele was present in the data but hidden by the alignment inside insertions; 2) low sequence coverage, where insufficient data were obtained to make a confident call, likely due to poor pcr amplification of the target. for the pacific biosciences data, the  <dig> sites missed from the gold standard call set included  <dig> missing due to reference bias and  <dig> due to lack of coverage. for miseq data, the three sites missed were all due to low sequence coverage.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, this first look at pacific biosciences rs sequencing data from human samples demonstrates that it is a promising platform for follow-up validation and extension studies. we have shown that the data type is largely free from context-specific error modes and is effective both for site-specific validation and variation discovery. despite its current error rate, the stochastic nature of the pacific biosciences error profile allows the standard bayesian variant calling algorithm used by the gatk to make robust calls without any technology-specific modifications. though pacific biosciences data are more expensive on a per base or per read basis than for miseq, for the experiments described herein, reagent costs are similar. we anticipate that future improvements in yield in the pacific biosciences technology and to the data processing tools in the gatk may overcome some of the remaining analytic challenges we found using pacific biosciences data which will further increase its utility in the field of human dna sequencing.

