BACKGROUND
in  <dig> the cultivation of transgenic plants has reached  <dig> million hectares, mainly concentrated in the us, argentina and brasil  <cit> . herbicide tolerance is the prevailing trait, with rr soybean varieties  being grown on about half of the global biotech area. the use of transgenic technology, and in particular of herbicide tolerant genotypes, requires seed with high trait purity: in the us, for instance, rr soybean lots must be at least 98% pure in terms of seeds tolerant to glyphosate. for this purpose seed companies carry out extensive quality checks, usually consisting of a bioassay in which either seeds are germinated on a substrate containing the herbicide, or seedlings are sprayed with it  <cit> . while bioassays are the most common practice to test herbicide tolerance, immunoassays like those in form of immunostrips or elisa are generally used for the detection of other traits, such as insect resistance  <cit> .

immunoassays and end-point pcr , targeted to transgene-specific proteins or dna sequences respectively, are currently widely utilized to detect the unintended, adventitious presence of genetically modified organisms  in conventional products  by analyzing bulk samples  <cit> . however, since these proteins or sequences are dominant markers they are not diagnostic of the presence of non-gm contaminants in gm materials. for this reason checking trait purity requires the analysis of individual seeds, thus raising the cost of testing, due to the laborious procedures involved and/or the use of expensive test kits.

real-time quantitative pcr  has found numerous applications in research and diagnostics, both in the animal and in the plant sciences  <cit> . for the plant biotech industry it represents a useful tool for the determination of copy number  <cit>  and zygosity  <cit>  of the inserted genes in the development of transgenic varieties. for regulatory purposes, this technology, in particular when associated with hydrolysis probes, is commonly utilized in the food/feed as well as in the seed sector for the detection and quantification of ap in conventional material   <cit> . as a matter of fact, for this purpose, rtqpcr methods are not only widely used, but they are also required by the eu gmo legislation. ec/787/ <dig> recommends the use of dna based quantification of the gmo content in seeds, food and feed and this has to be done by means of rtq-pcr. methods are submitted as a part of the authorization procedure to the community reference laboratory  which coordinates the validation process. despite the great abundance of publications  <cit>  and the availability of on-line databases  <cit>  largely dedicated to rtqpcr methods for ap testing, up to now there were no reports on the application of rtqpcr to assess the purity of gm seedlots or of derived agricultural products. in fact, due to the exponential nature of pcr, the rtqpcr assays designed so far, targeted to the amplification of the transgenic sequence, are not suitable for checking trait purity in gm seedlots. for example, in the case of a glyphosate tolerant soybean variety, assuming that all the seeds with the trait were homozygous, only one threshold cycle  difference would actually be expected between a perfectly pure  and a "very bad"  seedlot .

moreover, since seed and grain lots are made up of discrete particles, other strategies for the quantification of ap can be applied besides rtqpcr. seed companies currently check seedlot compliance with regulations through the qualitative determination of the presence of gm contaminants on a certain number of sub-samples, usually by immunoassay or eppcr  <cit> . for a given quality level and a desired statistical confidence, a lot is accepted or rejected if the number of positive sub-samples is either lower or higher than a defined cutoff point . however the detection of transgenic proteins or sequences is not suitable for assessing trait purity as all the sub-samples will be detected positive.

here we describe the development of a pcr system for the detection and quantification of conventional impurities in gm seedlots, based on the amplification of a wt allele-specific sequence at the gm locus. as a proof of concept, we applied this approach to purity testing of rr soybean by designing eppcr and rtqpcr assays that could be applied to the analysis of bulk samples.

RESULTS
the rationale underlying the development of this approach is shown in figure  <dig>  in parallel with the usual practice for the design of event-specific assays detecting gm contaminants. starting from the 5' or 3' sequence flanking the transgenic insert, usually already known as part of the molecular characterization of the event, the sequence of the site of insertion is obtained in a non-gm genotype using currently available strategies. in this way it is possible to reconstruct the wt sequence made up of the known flanking dna plus the newly sequenced region and hence to design oligonucleotides targeted to the specific amplification of the non-gm allele. similarly to the tests aimed at the quantification of ap, the wt assay could be utilized for assessing purity of gm materials, provided that the pcr target is widely conserved among non-gm genotypes and single copy.

molecular information regarding event gts 40-3- <dig> was obtained from previous work  <cit> . the plant genomic sequence adjacent to the 3' nos end of the inserted dna was used as a starting point of a pcr-walking procedure aimed at obtaining the wt sequence at the rr locus in non-gm material  <cit> . as inserted dna we considered the functional insert , an additional portion  of the cp4-epsps and a fragment  of rearranged soybean genomic dna  <cit> . molecular characterization of this event has shown several dna rearrangements at the point of integration, thus originating multiple insert/plant genome junctions, each of them a potential site for wt assay design.

genomic dna extracted from a conventional soybean genotype was digested with scai and ecorv for which the absence of restriction sites in the 3' genomic flanking sequence had been previously ascertained . dna fragments were subsequently blunt-ligated with adapters and pcr-walking reactions were performed using forward adapter primers and reverse primers specific for the known sequence flanking the 3' end of the rr insert. pcr products obtained by the nested amplification of the adapter-fragments were purified and characterized, providing sequences for the scai/plant dna and the ecorv/plant dna. by combining the two partially overlapping sequences, a  <dig> bp sequence characteristic of the non-gm genome at the rr insertion site was obtained . of this,  <dig> bp corresponded to the flanking region at the 3' end previously reported, whereas the remaining newly described  <dig> bp represented the wt sequence upstream of the rr insertion site  <cit> . however, no homology with the plant dna flanking the 5' end of the insert was found indicating that, following the integration of the transgene, major rearrangements had taken place  <cit> . in addition, no homology with other sequences in genbank was detected by blast analysis.

oligonucleotides for eppcr and rtqpcr were designed on the wt allelic sequence on both sides of the insertion site, in the region corresponding to the 3' rr insert/plant genome junction . in order to assess the risk of false negative results, we tested the ability of the eppcr and rtqpcr systems to detect the wt sequence at the rr locus in different genotypes by analyzing  <dig> conventional soybean varieties of different origin , that represented a very wide range of germplasm  <cit> . the expected amplicons were obtained in all genotypes , thus indicating a high degree of conservation of the wt sequence as well as the effectiveness of the assays in detecting non-trait soybean contaminants in rr seedlots. simultaneous real-time amplification of the wt sequence and the lectin gene , a soybean-specific single copy target, was also performed. interestingly, Δct values  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , suggesting that the copy number of the wt sequence is consistent across genotypes. on the other hand, the risk of false positive results was evaluated by verifying the absence of the wt target sequence in  <dig> rr varieties. since all of them turned out negative to this test , we concluded that the soybean genomic region where integration has occurred is characterized by a unique, non duplicated sequence. this specificity for the wt allele makes the assay applicable to the control of the purity of any gts 40-3- <dig> rr variety.

in order to assess the suitability of the real-time assay for the quantification of non-gm impurities, validation samples at different spiking levels  were analyzed in three different experiments. calibration curves of Δct values vs log  were obtained from the analysis of standard samples representing six non-gm contents . curves were characterized by slope values of - <dig> , - <dig> , and - <dig> , and r <dig> values of  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , for experiment  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively. these parameters were in line with the performance requirements defined for quantitative rtqpcr methods by the european network of gmo laboratories  <cit> . estimates of wt contamination obtained in repeated analyses  of the same validation samples showed cv values ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> % and were quite close to the expected values, with average absolute bias for each level lower than 25%, except for the 1% validation samples  .

nominal content
aactual wt soybean content calculated from weighed non-gm and gm leaf powder; bwt soybean content estimated from Δct analysis of samples; ccoefficient of variation among the three experiments; ddeviation from true value; eaverage absolute bias.

the absolute limit of detection , defined as the lowest concentration of wt sequence detectable in all the nine replicates, was estimated to be about  <dig> genome copies, corresponding approximately to  <dig> % wt, while the same target was detected in only six replicates when  <dig>  copies were present . the limit of quantification , i.e. the lowest level of wt sequence that can be reliably quantified, was assessed in three different ways. according to trueness, loq was determined to be  <dig> %, since below this level bias showed a drastic increase. when precision was considered, loq was defined at  <dig> %, as at lower levels variability among triplicate amplifications considerably raised. alternatively, as in common practice, loq can be fixed as lod *  <dig> producing the value of  <dig> % , intermediate between the previous ones. this preliminary evaluation may indicate that the method is suitable for the quantification of the wt sequence at the target concentration of 1–2%, corresponding to the level of trait purity that needs to be assessed. therefore this assay could be utilized to quantify wt contaminations in soybean seedlots harbouring the gts 40-3- <dig> event. moreover, the same assay, used in an end-point format in conjunction with subsampling strategies, could represent a lower-technology alternative for the quantification of non-trait contaminants, analogously to the case of ap testing.

aserial dilutions 1: <dig> of 5% wt soybean dna in rr soybean dna 

bproportion of pcr replicates yielding a positive signal

cmean of nine values

dcv calculated among pcr replicates

ebased on the calibration curve passing through the point corresponding to the 5% wt with the observed ct  and theoretical slope of - <dig> 

fdeviation  between estimated and expected wt dna content

discussion
compared to bioassays for herbicide tolerance where phenotypic misclassifications can easily occur, particularly in distinguishing non-trait seedlings from abnormal seedlings, pcr tests provide a more objective and reliable evaluation in less time . a relevant side-benefit of the adoption of rtqpcr is that no toxic chemicals are needed in the laboratory, while special safety precautions must be taken for herbicide tolerance testing. however the main advantage of performing pcr on bulks instead of bioassays or immunoassays on single seeds or plants is that it allows to consider larger samples, thus increasing precision of estimates. considering the standard 98% threshold of trait purity for rr soybean, the current practice of analyzing  <dig> individual seeds  provides estimates with a 95% confidence interval  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> %, if random sampling variability is taken into account and assuming no experimental error, i.e. no false positive/negative results   <cit> . under the same conditions and assuming only homozygous non-gm contaminants, it is expected that a similar precision  can be obtained with a subsampling strategy based on eppcr detection of the wt allele on  <dig> sub-samples of  <dig> seeds each. on the other hand, a considerably lower variability  would be expected with the rtqpcr analysis of a bulk of  <dig>  seeds, just as a consequence of the increased sample size.

among the limitations, it should be pointed out that since this approach is based on the detection of non-gm sequences in a bulk sample it can not account for the hemi- or homozygous state of individual seeds. in fact, as a consequence of the dominant inheritance of the novel trait, on one side, as well as that of the wt-marker, on the other, the level of non-gm impurities in gm material will tend to be overestimated with respect to the percentage of units that will not express the trait , whereas the latter is indeed the relevant issue for commercial seed. in autogamous species where varieties are often pure lines, like in soybean, cotton, rice and wheat, there could be lots 100% herbicide tolerant but containing hemizygous individuals in variable proportions. it follows that in these species this approach could be conveniently applied whenever the non-gm contamination consisted mainly of homozygous seeds, as expected in advanced generations of selfing or when contributions from outcrossing can be assumed negligible. for the same reason these assays are not applicable to the determination of purity of gm hybrids, as maize varieties, where the trait is usually in the hemizygous state.

like tests designed to evaluate zygosity  <cit> , the assays here described, when used on single seeds or plants, can be valuable tools in the conversion of conventional varieties  <cit>  by marker assisted backcrossing and in quality control at the early stages of seed increase, replacing laborious progeny testing. however, the rtqpcr format represents a true novelty since it provides an accurate estimate of the proportion of wt gametes that will contribute to the following generation, facilitating maintenance breeding of gm homozygous varieties and, in the case of hybrid crops, of inbred lines. moreover it is the only possible approach for the quantification of trait purity in materials not formed of discrete particles , as it could be in the next future for high value products derived from "pharma crops", or for the preparation of pure reference materials. as an obvious extension, this approach could be applied to the purity determination of any trait for which allelic discrimination is possible at a specific locus, like in the case of mutants or naturally occurring variants not strictly classifiable as gmos.

advantages and disadvantages of this approach compared to those of current strategies should be evaluated considering also the costs. at present, the average costs of trait purity tests by bioassays  or immunoassays  are roughly one-fifth or one-half of a rtqpcr analysis, respectively. nonetheless, a more appropriate comparison should be conducted considering samples of the same size. because the assessment of trait purity by rtqpcr can be conducted on bulk samples, the costs of testing are only partially affected by sample size, whereas in the case of bioassays or immunoassays they are essentially proportional to the number of seeds tested. as a consequence, rtqpcr is expected to become economically more convenient as the representativeness of the sample is increased.

CONCLUSIONS
the cultivation of biotech plants needs high purity levels of the novel traits, in particular in the case of herbicide tolerant varieties. current procedures for checking trait purity are applied to individual seeds or plants and require considerable time to complete. we have illustrated a new approach, based on pcr, to test genetic purity for biotech traits in seedlots and derived agricultural products that, applied to bulk samples, could potentially allow to increase the accuracy of results and lower the cost of analysis. we believe that these assay systems could be a useful tool for the breeding, maintenance and trade of transgenic varieties and hence represent a possible application in agricultural biotechnology and in particular in the seed business. a thorough comparison of the method here described with existing approaches to purity testing should be the object of further research.

