BACKGROUND
somatic cell nuclear transfer  has become widely used for the generation of genetically engineered large animals, especially since germ line competent pluripotent stem cells – the key to sophisticated reverse genetics in rodents – are not available in these species  <cit> . genetic modification of pigs by scnt facilitated gene targeting  <cit> , inducible transgene expression  <cit> , and the first successful examples of zinc finger nuclease mediated targeted gene modifications  <cit>  to generate tailored large animal models and donor animals for xenotransplantation.

during the last decade, transgenic pigs have gained importance in the field of biomedical research because of major anatomical and physiological similarities with humans  <cit>  as well as the need for non-rodent based studies to investigate disease mechanisms, the efficacy and safety of new therapies, and to identify biomarkers for companion diagnostics. genetically tailored pig models have already been developed to investigate cystic fibrosis  <cit> , diabetes mellitus  <cit> , and neurodegenerative diseases  <cit>  . multiple lines of genetically modified pigs have also been generated for xenotransplantation , most notably α <dig> -galactosyl transferase knockout pigs lacking α <dig> -gal, the major xeno-antigen  <cit> . scnt has facilitated the generation of donor pigs carrying multi-transgene combinations designed to overcome immune rejection and to ensure functional compatibility between xenograft and recipient, e.g. regulation of blood coagulation.

although the first successful scnt experiments using cultured porcine cells were performed more than a decade ago  <cit> , the efficiency of cloning  is still low, usually ranging from  <dig> to 5%, and cloned animals may suffer from various developmental defects.

genetic modification of nuclear donor cells necessarily involves a series of procedures, such as transfection or transduction, drug selection and extended growth in culture, which could possibly affect their ability to support normal development.

to date, several studies have reported key factors in the production of cloned pigs and suggested a number of approaches to improve efficiency. however, the majority of these studies have addressed only single factors, e.g. scnt procedure  <cit> , oocyte and embryo culture systems  <cit> , donor cell type  <cit> , and the method of genetic modification  <cit> . combined assessment of multiple factors and comparative analysis of their relative contribution to cloning efficiency have not yet been performed to our knowledge.

here, we investigate the impact of five factors on the crucial stages of a cloning experiment and ultimately the impact on cloning efficiency. we used a large data set comprising three years of porcine scnt experiments, during which more than  <dig> cloned pigs were generated using different genetically modified cell cultures. the data contains simultaneous variations in season, type of genetic modification , donor cell source , number of cloning rounds, and pre-selection of cloned embryos for early development. we assessed the impact pattern of the variable factors on pregnancy and delivery rates as well as the numbers of born, live and healthy offspring. cloning efficiency was calculated as the number of cloned piglets born relative to the number of scnt embryos transferred to recipients that gave birth.

RESULTS
general information
a total of  <dig>  scnt embryos were transferred into  <dig> recipients. the average number of embryos transferred per recipient was  <dig> .  <dig> recipients  became pregnant and  <dig>  of those gave birth to offspring. the pregnancy rate was significantly increased when more than  <dig> nt embryos were transferred to a recipient. experiments in which over  <dig> nt embryos were transferred resulted in the maximum overall pregnancy rate of  <dig> % . recipients that became pregnant displayed no tendency for delivering live offspring in dependence on the number of embryos transferred . of the  <dig> cloned piglets born,  <dig>  were alive, but only  <dig>  were clinically healthy, defined as the absence of any visible anatomical or physiological disturbance, and showed normal development. the proportion of stillborn piglets was 24% , and another 31%  of the cloned piglets died soon after birth. the major reason for early neonatal death within 2 weeks was underweight  and/or weakness of unknown causes, which was observed in several transgenic litters. in addition, we observed malformations such as oversized tongue , cleft palate  or atresia ani , abnormalities of the legs , patent urachus  and umbilical hernia . in  <dig> cases , piglets showed contracted tendons in the forelegs, which improved with increasing body weight and did not affect survival.  <dig> piglets  were lost for other reasons . the health status of the remaining  <dig> cloned piglets could not be estimated as they have been used for experiments immediately after birth. the overall cloning efficiency, defined as the number of offspring born per scnt embryos transferred, including only recipients that delivered, was  <dig> %. a detailed description of the data set is shown in table  <dig> 

 <dig> mesenchymal stem cells, postnatal fibroblasts, fetal fibroblasts, and kidney cells.

 <dig> see table  <dig> for details.

 <dig> see table  <dig> for details.

impact of individual factors
we assessed the influence on the cloning outcome of five factors: the season the embryo transfer  was performed in, the type of genetic modification, the donor cell source, the number of cloning rounds, and selection of scnt embryos for development before transfer to the recipient. the stratification and distribution of each varied factor is summarized in table  <dig> .

additional file  <dig> and additional file  <dig> show in more detail the distribution in season and embryo selection of specific scnt configurations with respect to genetic modification, donor cell source and number of cloning rounds.

 <dig> embryo transfer date.

 <dig> agt: additive gene transfer, hr: homologous recombination.

 <dig> mesenchymal stem cells , postnatal fibroblasts , fetal fibroblasts , and kidney cells .

 <dig> no selection: all scnt embryos transferred, selection for 1 day: 1-cell stage scnt embryos transferred, selection for 2 days: 2-cell to 4-cell stage scnt embryos transferred, mixed selection: mixed scnt embryos transferred .

season
the seasonal influence on the assessed parameters is presented in table  <dig>  spring was used as the reference category and statistically significant differences of results obtained in other seasons are indicated relative to the reference category. the oocyte maturation rate was highest in spring , slightly lower in autumn  and summer , and significantly decreased in winter . similarly, significantly fewer pregnancies were established in winter  than in spring . in contrast, the proportion of offspring per scnt embryos transferred  was highest when et was performed in winter , as compared to spring . similarly, the average number of live cloned offspring from et performed during winter  was significantly higher than during spring . the lowest number of healthy cloned piglets was observed if the et was done in summer .

spring was used as the reference category. for details on the statistical analysis and definition of the cloning benchmarks listed, please see methods.

* statistically significant differences .

 <dig> average temperature in munich during the experiments.

type of genetic modification
genetic modifications were categorized into three classes: additive gene transfer, homologous recombination, and replication of already existing transgenic pigs. the effects of these classes of genetic modification on outcome are summarized in table  <dig>  homologous recombination was used as the reference category. no significant difference was apparent between these three classes of modification with regard to cloning efficiency, pregnancy and delivery rate. however, the numbers of live and healthy cloned offspring per litter, respectively, were significantly higher  in the additive gene transfer group than in the homologous recombination group .

homologous recombination  was used as the reference category. for details on the statistical analysis and definition of the cloning benchmarks listed, please see methods.

* statistically significant differences .

1hr: homologous recombination, agt: additive gene transfer, replication of transgenic pigs: replication of already existing transgenic pig lines.

nuclear donor cell source
four different cell sources – mesenchymal stem cells, fetal fibroblasts, postnatal fibroblasts, and kidney cells – were used and their effect on cloning success was determined . mesenchymal stem cells were used as the reference category. the fusion rate of mesenchymal stem cells  was significantly  higher, while that of postnatal fibroblasts  was lower than those of other donor cells. the pregnancy rate was highest with fetal fibroblasts, and lowest with postnatal fibroblasts used as donor cells, but the differences between donor cell sources were not statistically significant. in contrast, the delivery rate was higher with mesenchymal stem cells than with fetal fibroblasts and kidney cells. the cloning efficiency was not affected by the source of donor cells. the proportion of live and healthy cloned offspring in the fetal fibroblast and kidney cell groups was higher than in the mesenchymal stem cell reference group.

mesenchymal stem cells  were used as the reference category. for details on the statistical analysis and definition of the cloning benchmarks listed, please see methods.

* statistically significant differences .

 <dig> mesenchymal stem cells , postnatal fibroblasts , fetal fibroblasts , and kidney cells .

number of cloning rounds
in this data set, up to three rounds of nuclear transfer were performed. one cloning round was used as the reference category . although no statistically significant difference was apparent in pregnancy and delivery rates, cloning efficiency decreased significantly  with cloning round . the number of live and healthy offspring after two rounds was significantly  lower than after the first cloning round . this effect was not seen after three rounds of scnt.

one cloning round was used as the reference category. for details on the statistical analysis and definition of the cloning benchmarks listed, please see methods.* statistically significant differences .

selection of cloned embryos for initiation of development
the effect of selection of scnt embryos on the cloning outcome is shown in table  <dig>  as reference category, we used the cases where no selection was performed. pregnancy and delivery rates were not significantly affected by in vitro culture of cloned embryos and selection for early development. however, transfer of in vitro cultured scnt embryos, which had developed to 2-cell to 4-cell stage, resulted in the highest proportion of offspring per embryos transferred . the numbers of live and healthy offspring were not affected by the pre-selection of cloned embryos for early development.

no selection was used as the reference category. for details on the statistical analysis and definition of the cloning benchmarks listed, please see methods.

* statistically significant differences .

 <dig> no selection: all scnt embryos transferred; selection for 1 day: 1-cell stage scnt embryos transferred; selection for 2 days: 2-cell to 4-cell stage scnt embryos transferred; mixed selection: mixed scnt embryos transferred 

statistically significant effects on different phases of development
from in vitro oocyte maturation to cloned offspring
as shown in figure  <dig>  the maturation of oocytes was significantly impaired in winter . we found high fusion rates to be associated with the use of mesenchymal stem cells . cloning efficiency and, thus, the chance for full term development was improved when 2-cell to 4-cell embryos, selected after 2 days in vitro culture, were transferred to the recipient. in contrast, the cloning efficiency was negatively affected by repeated scnt .

outcome stage of the recipients  and the offspring 
as illustrated in figure  <dig>  we frequently observed pregnant pigs in spring  was twice as high as the probability p ), whereas pigs hardly became pregnant in winter . in addition, delivering recipients occurred mostly when mesenchymal stem cells were used . most noteworthy, two cloning rounds significantly  increased the risk of both, pre- and post-natal death of cloned fetuses and offspring, respectively. post-natal death of offspring also frequently occurred when the embryo transfer was performed in summer and the piglets were therefore born in late autumn/early winter. on the other hand, statistically significant increases in the offspring outcome were observed for embryo transfer in winter, genetic modification by additive gene transfer, and the use of fetal fibroblasts or kidney cells as nuclear donors. these experimental settings yielded on average between one and two more live and healthy piglets than the corresponding reference category.

interestingly, we could confirm beneficial effects of cloning in winter, using additive gene transfer, and fetal fibroblasts or kidney cells, in an additional analysis , where we explicitly targeted the fraction of early neonatal death cases out of live piglets in experiments, which in principle could produce viable offspring . cloning in winter, using additive gene transfer, and fetal fibroblasts or kidney cells, resulted in  <dig> percentage points,  <dig> percentage points, and > <dig> percentage points less early neonatal death cases, as compared to the reference categories cloning in spring, using homologous recombination, and mesenchymal stem cells, respectively.

discussion
the outcome of somatic cell nuclear transfer is affected by complex interactions between multiple factors. while some of these are difficult to control, others – such as choice of nuclear donor cell source – may help increase the efficiency of cloning.

over a period of three years, we generated more than  <dig> genetically modified pigs by scnt using multiple donor cell sources. these cells were either de novo modified by additive gene transfer or gene targeting, or were derived from existing transgenic or knockout pig lines. all data were collected within our routine workflow for the production of genetically engineered pigs for biomedical research  <cit> . we used this large data set to identify factors that affect efficiency of cloning and at which stage they act.

we have employed robust linear models, requiring minimal distribution assumptions adjusted to the underlying empirical distribution of the cloning outcome, as a straightforward approach to determine the statistically significant part of the network of factors affecting pig cloning. as shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  network-based interpretation concepts were used to model and discriminate the major genetic, environmental and experimental factors.

the factors addressed by our study influenced the outcome of cloning for the production of genetically modified pigs on different levels.

the season affected in vitro maturation of oocytes, pregnancy rate, and survival of cloned piglets. even if the domestic pig shows an estrus cycle with fertility throughout the year, the reproductive performance in commercial pig breeding is notably reduced in late summer and early autumn  <cit> . bertoldo et al.  <cit>  have documented reduced developmental competence of oocytes during this period. in our data set, the best maturation rate of oocytes in vitro was observed in spring and the worst in winter. the latter may be caused, at least in part, by accidental exposure of oocytes to low temperatures during collection and transport. pig oocytes are very sensitive to low temperature due to high levels of cytoplasmic lipids  <cit> . during the time span between removal from the incubator and finished embryo transfer, maintenance of an optimal temperature cannot always been guaranteed. therefore, low temperatures might affect the developmental capability of the embryos and could be responsible for the lower pregnancy rate after ets in winter, compared to ets in spring. nevertheless, cloning efficiency was highest when scnt experiments and ets were performed in winter. this finding seems to be contradictory on a first view, but it has to be considered that the cloning efficiency was calculated only for cases in which the recipient delivered offspring. cases of unsuccessful transfers were not included into the calculation. therefore, if the embryos survived the negative environmental influences in winter and the recipients became pregnant, the natural high fertility period of the recipients might provide a favorable environment for embryos and fetuses to develop to term.

unexpectedly, the method of genetic modification had little effect on cloning efficiency in our data set. generally, genetic modification of donor cells requires prolonged in vitro culture for transfection and selection, which could induce cellular changes leading to a decrease in cloning efficiency. gene targeting by homologous recombination takes a particularly long time and multiple cell divisions to establish single cell clones with sufficient cell numbers for genetic analysis and nuclear transfer  <cit> . in contrast, our protocol for additive gene transfer uses pools of mixed cell clones, which have been maintained under selection for  <dig> to  <dig> days  <cit> . it might therefore be expected that extended in vitro culture of donor cells required for homologous recombination would negatively influence the cloning efficiency, compared to cells modified by additive gene transfer. however, our data showed no statistically significant difference in cloning efficiency between additive gene transfer, homologous recombination or replication of already existing transgenic pigs. it can be hypothesized that the conditions for transfection and selection did not adversely affect the developmental potential of donor cells, since we kept the passage numbers for scnt donor cells as low as possible - less than  <dig> passages for additive gene transfer and less than  <dig> passages for gene targeting. additionally, all wild-type primary cell lines used in this study were karyotyped and showed 68% to 90% normal karyotypes.

interestingly, our analysis indicated that the number of live and healthy offspring was decreased when nuclear donor cells had undergone homologous recombination. however, this may – at least in part – be explained by the fact that 65% of nuclear transfers, designed to generate gene-targeted pigs, were carried out using only  <dig> particular mesenchymal stem cell lines, which later on turned out to be consistently poor in producing live cloned offspring.

another important aspect to be considered in the context of genetic modification is the potential for lethal or toxic effects of modifications per se. for the experiments involving additive gene transfer this is unlikely, since live cloned piglets expressing the transgenes were obtained with all constructs. nevertheless, we cannot rule out that cloned fetuses or offspring died due to a detrimental random integration of the construct. of the gene targeting experiments, only mutation of the x-linked dystrophin  gene in male clones may cause a severe phenotype. in fact, dmd mutant male piglets showed severe muscular dystrophy already at birth, and a proportion died shortly later  <cit> . for all other target genes, the heterozygous knockout had either no specific phenotype or a phenotype that develops later in life.

a critical factor for the establishment of genetically engineered pig lines by scnt is the viability of the cloned founder animals up to sexual maturity. in our data set, more than half of cloned pigs were stillborn  or died soon after birth . associated pathological changes, such as underweight , which is one of the major causes of early neonatal death, or cleft palate, contracted tendons, or enlarged tongues, have also been observed by other groups  <cit> . we have the impression that the percentage of underweight piglets  is higher in cloned litters. however, we cannot prove this observation by statistical data, as the birth weights of naturally bred piglets are not routinely recorded in our facility. the average birth weight of healthy cloned pigs was higher than that of piglets that died in the neonatal period, or that of stillborn piglets . these abnormalities could not be associated with any particular parameter, like donor cell source or genetic modification, and might be a general side effect in pig cloning. previous studies reported that phenotypically abnormal cloned animals could produce normal offspring  <cit> , suggesting that phenotypic abnormalities of the clones were more likely due to epigenetic rather than to genetic alterations.

in our data set, cloned piglets with enlarged tongues were mainly observed in offspring cloned from bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells, originating from  <dig> different animals . however, this does not seem to be a general feature of mesenchymal stem cells, since in more recent cloning experiments with adipose tissue derived mesenchymal stem cells a high proportion of viable offspring without malformations was obtained . some groups reported that mesenchymal stem cells are superior to fibroblasts for scnt in pigs  <cit> , although this has not been generally observed  <cit> . our results did not show any differences in the cloning efficiency among the different cell sources tested, although there was a tendency for a higher pregnancy rate when mesenchymal stem cells were used. the observation that the numbers of live and healthy cloned piglets were significantly lower in the mesenchymal stem cells group than other donor cell sources may be due to the fact that mesenchymal stem cells were only used for gene targeting. thus, it cannot be distinguished at this stage, whether the low outcome of live and healthy piglets can be attributed to the cell source or type of genetic modification. in addition, different cell lines derived from the same cell source showed a considerable degree of variation in cloning efficiency .

re-cloning by using cells from a cloned animal for nt is a reasonable approach for the reproduction of specific transgenic animals, for example if animals of a defined genotype are required for an experiment or if the phenotype hinders natural breeding. however, the majority of studies on re-cloning have demonstrated that additional rounds of cloning lead to a decrease in cloning efficiency  <cit> . our data also showed that repeated cloning rounds significantly decreased cloning efficiency , and the number of live cloned offspring in the second round was in average one piglet less as compared to the initial cloning round. it should be mentioned that the lowest cloning efficiency for r <dig> may also be related to the high number of embryos transferred in these experiments. xing et al.  <cit>  recently demonstrated that reduced developmental potential of pig embryos generated by multiple rounds of cloning was associated with altered gene expression patterns, and a previous report stated that the reduction of cloning efficiency with additional rounds of cloning may be caused by accumulation of epigenetic errors  <cit> .

the last factor addressed by our study was in vitro culture of cloned embryos and selection for normal development before transfer to recipients. this is possible since the in vitro culture systems for pig embryos have been markedly improved within the last decade  <cit> . indeed, culture of embryos for two days and selection of 2-cell to 4-cell stage embryos for et resulted in the highest proportion of offspring per scnt embryos transferred. this suggests that scnt embryos, which undergo normal cleavage in vitro within the expected time frame, have a greater chance of full term development in vivo.

CONCLUSIONS
we have investigated the influence of important experimental and environmental factors on the cloning outcome in a considerably large data set comprising over  <dig> porcine nuclear transfer experiments. besides assessment of the cloning efficiency, we determined the respective steps of the cloning process from oocyte to offspring that are most critically influenced. we observed varying effects of individual factors, depending on the combination with other chosen factors and the parameters tested. most importantly, more live and healthy offspring were obtained when fetal fibroblasts or kidney cells were modified by additive gene transfer and the resulting scnt embryos were transferred in the winter period. although our results cannot be simply extrapolated to other cloning labs, the approach used in this study may help to identify and optimize the specific factors most critical to cloning success in programs aiming to generate genetically engineered pigs.

