BACKGROUND
molecular phylogenies based on a single or a few genes often lead to apparently conflicting signals. violation of orthology assumption, biases leading to non-phylogenetic signal, and stochastic error related to gene length might be problematic  <cit> . use of phylogenomics  has been thought to overcome these problems, and "ending incongruence" was in sight  <cit> . however, poor taxon sampling  <cit>  and systematic error that is positively misleading  <cit>  can cause phylogenomic analyses to yield incorrect trees with high support.

use of phylogenomic analyses to address deep metazoan relationships has recently increased. many of these analyses consist of concatenated sets of ribosomal proteins   <cit>  or of data sets dominated by rp data  <cit> . rp genes are highly expressed and therefore often outnumber other genes in est-data sets. they are assumed to be largely free of paralogy across metazoans  <cit>  and as such seem to represent good candidates for phylogenetic analyses.

the phylogenetic position of myzostomids, parasitic organisms typically found on echinoderms, has been highly disputed over centuries, and possible relationships with flatworms  <cit>  or syndermatans  <cit>  have been suggested by single gene analyses. however, analyses of mitochondrial gene order and sequence data show strong evidence that myzostomids are part of the annelid radiation  <cit> , a result that is congruent with morphological investigations  <cit> . these results are contrasted by phylogenomic analyses based on an est-borne  <dig> gene dataset  <cit>  that group myzostomids within a clade of platyzoan taxa including flatworms, rotifers, gnathostomulids, and gastrotrichs. nevertheless, the position of myzostomida, and some other taxa, has been regarded as unstable, and dunn et al.  <cit>  excluded these taxa from further analyses with these est data. taxa that defy robust phylogenetic placement are called "problematic taxa"  <cit> .

here we compare analyses of two independent datasets to elucidate the phylogenetic position of myzostomida: rp genes and mitochondrial genomes. we show that markers belonging to a single class of macromolecular complexes might bias the analysis and discuss implications for phylogenomic analyses in general.

RESULTS
analysing an alignment consisting of  <dig> rp genes, the best tree of the ml-analysis  supports monophyly of myzostomida  100%). they are recovered as sister group of the gastrotrich turbanella , and together placed in a clade containing platyzoan taxa with long branches, including syndermata  and platyhelminthes . annelids  are recovered as monophyletic . to test if this result is driven by only few genes, we performed two partition jackknifing analyses where we generated  <dig> concatenated datasets containing either  <dig> or  <dig> randomly drawn gene partitions. ml analyses of all these  <dig> newly generated datasets were conducted. we found by calculating the branch attachment frequency  for myzostomida using phyutilitly  <cit> , that myzostomids group with turbanella in 33% of the 35-gene datasets, and in 41% of the  <dig> gene dataset . alternatively, myzostomids grouped as sister to bilateria , with gnathostumulids , or with chaetognaths . interestingly, these taxa are suspected of having high rates of nucleotide substitution. in none of these analyses did myzostomids group with annelids. these analyses also shows that the high amount of missing data , seems to have no influence regarding the phylogenetic position of the myzostomids.

these results were additionally supported by a bayesian analysis under a site-heterogeneous model . congruent to the ml-analysis, myzostomids grouped with turbanella and cluster between long-branched platyzoan taxa. additionally, we performed hypothesis-testing to evaluate if single gene topologies are congruent with the best ml tree of the initial concatenated 77-rp analysis. for these analyses, we pruned taxa missing in single gene datasets from the best tree and used these trees as a constraint for ml-analyses. using au-tests as implemented in consel  <cit> , we found that all  <dig> single gene analyses are congruent with the best tree. moreover, the au-test significantly rejects monophyly of a clade consisting of myzostomida and annelida sensu lato  when analysing the complete dataset. summarising these analyses, the rp dataset weakly supports a platyzoan/myzostomid association, without any support for an annelid origin. this relationship was also suggested by earlier molecular analyses based on a few genes  <cit> .

for the second data set, we sequenced another nearly complete mitochondrial genome. within myzostomids, two major clades can be identified  <cit> , and both are represented by the available myzostomids mitochondrial genomes . the gene order  of the endoparasitic endomyzostoma species is similar to that of the ectocommensal myzostoma seymourcollegiorum and as such reveals an order of protein coding and rrna genes which is identical to the conserved pattern of  annelids, while no other animal taxon shares this pattern with myzostomids and annelids  <cit> .

ml-analysis of the 78-taxa mitochondrial genome dataset , including data for three myzostomids , recovers monophyletic myzostomida  as sister group to all other annelids . included platyzoan taxa  form a monophyletic group . very similar results are revealed by bayesian analysis under a site-heterogeneous model . here, a clade containing annelida s.l. and myzostomida is supported by a posterior probability of  <dig> .

using hypothesis testing, we were able to significantly reject monophyly of a clade containing platyzoan taxa  and myzostomida.

the conflict regarding the phylogenetic position of myzostomids between analyses of the rp and the mitochondrial dataset is obvious – but only one of these hypotheses can be true. consistent with the mitochondrial data, an annelid affinity is also supported by the nuclear myosin ii gene  <cit> , hox genes  <cit> , and is in line with morphological data  <cit> .

when accepting the results of the rp analyses, we have to assume convergent evolution of many morphological characters  and an exceptional case of convergence in mitochondrial gene order between annelids and myzostomids. in the other case, we have to assume that  <dig> rp genes are misleading phylogenetic analysis. reasons for incongruence between markers might be either biological , or methodological   <cit> . in the case of lineage sorting we would expect mixed signal when comparing the  <dig> rp genes. but this is not the case, as there is not any support for an annelid affinity in this dataset. due to lack of concordance in the taxon sampling we were not able to combine both sets of markers into a single supermatrix and as such methods estimating species trees from gene trees  were not applicable. however, ewing et al.  <cit>  found no evidence that lineage sorting is misleading phylogenetic reconstruction by analysing a  <dig> gene deep metazoan phylogeny dataset.

but it might not be far fetched that analyses of rp genes are misleading. it has been shown that phylogenetic analyses of rrna genes are affected by long-branch attraction regarding the position of myzostomids  <cit> , and co-evolution between ribosomal proteins and its rrna binding sites have been already demonstrated  <cit> . moreover, in a phylogenomic analysis regarding ecdysozoa, analysing different macromolecular complexes individually recover different hypotheses   <cit> . another study on the same topic found that ribosomal proteins might be misleading due to evolutionary biases  <cit> . the existence of systematic functional or structural signal that competes with ancestral signal has been recently demonstrated for phylogenetic datasets  <cit> .

analyses by rokas et al.  <cit>  suggested that combining many genes in large molecular datasets will overcome problems of single gene analyses and end incongruence  <cit> . despite these hopes, subsequent analysis using phylogenomic datasets  <cit>  largely supported the backbone of the "new animal phylogeny"  <cit> , but failed to resolve the phylogenetic position of many so-called problematic taxa  <cit> . moreover, such analyses disagree in resolving relationships at the base of the metazoan tree  <cit> .

in the case of myzostomids, our analyses show that different marker sets can resolve different topologies and usage of complete macromolecular complexes might bring conflicting signal into supermatrices and as such mislead analyses. interestingly, we do not find any conflict within our rp dataset, but all incongruence is between both sets of markers. as such, reliance on a set of sequences belonging to a single macromolecular complex might give a biased picture, as these genes might share a common evolutionary bias. this holds true for either mitochondrial or ribosomal proteins. for future work, we strongly recommend careful inspection of phylogenomic datasets for incongruent signals  <cit>  in order to refine phylogenomic analyses, as this might be the key for the placement of so-called problematic taxa.

CONCLUSIONS
analysing a  <dig> gene rp-dataset, we found that a grouping of myzostomids within platyzoan taxa is favoured. statistical tests have shown that this is congruent with every single gene partition of this dataset and jackknifing analysis with subsequent investigation of the branch attachment frequency of myzostomids revealed no sign of support for an annelid affinity. contrasting these results, analyses of mitochondrial sequences support an annelid affinity for myzostomids. this result is in line with some nuclear genes  and morphology, and is strongly supported by mitochondrial gene order and as such we consider this hypothesis more plausible than a possible platyzoan affinity.

irrespective of which hypothesis will confirmed by future analyses, we conclude  that reliance of a set of markers belonging to a single class of macromolecular complexes might bias the analysis, and  that concatenation of all data might introduce conflicting signal into the analyses. we therefore strongly recommend testing for data incongruence in phylogenomic analyses, as this might be the key for robust phylogenetic placement of problematic taxa.

